JACK LONDON

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Revolution, and Other Essays
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Revolution, and Other Essays

Author: Jack London

Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #4953]
                Most recently updated: July 11, 2007

Language: English

Credits: Transcribed from the 1910 Mills and Boon edition by David Price


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVOLUTION, AND OTHER ESSAYS ***



Transcribed from the 1910 Mills and Boon edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





REVOLUTION AND OTHER ESSAYS


                                    BY
                               JACK LONDON

    "History warns us that it is the customary fate of new truths to
    begin as heresies and to end as superstitions."

    HUXLEY.

                          MILLS & BOON, LIMITED
                             49 RUPERT STREET
                               LONDON, W.1

   _Copyright in the United States of America_, 1910, _by The Macmillan
                                Company_.

Contents:

   Revolution
   The Somnambulists
   The Dignity of Dollars
   Goliah
   The Golden Poppy
   The Shrinkage of the Planet
   The House Beautiful
   The Gold Hunters of the North
   Foma Gordyeeff
   These Bones shall Rise Again
   The Other Animals
   The Yellow Peril
   What Life Means to Me




REVOLUTION


    "The present is enough for common souls,
    Who, never looking forward, are indeed
    Mere clay, wherein the footprints of their age
    Are petrified for ever."

I received a letter the other day.  It was from a man in Arizona.  It
began, "Dear Comrade."  It ended, "Yours for the Revolution."  I replied
to the letter, and my letter began, "Dear Comrade."  It ended, "Yours for
the Revolution."  In the United States there are 400,000 men, of men and
women nearly 1,000,000, who begin their letters "Dear Comrade," and end
them "Yours for the Revolution."  In Germany there are 3,000,000 men who
begin their letters "Dear Comrade" and end them "Yours for the
Revolution"; in France, 1,000,000 men; in Austria, 800,000 men; in
Belgium, 300,000 men; in Italy, 250,000 men; in England, 100,000 men; in
Switzerland, 100,000 men; in Denmark, 55,000 men; in Sweden, 50,000 men;
in Holland, 40,000 men; in Spain, 30,000 men--comrades all, and
revolutionists.

These are numbers which dwarf the grand armies of Napoleon and Xerxes.
But they are numbers not of conquest and maintenance of the established
order, but of conquest and revolution.  They compose, when the roll is
called, an army of 7,000,000 men, who, in accordance with the conditions
of to-day, are fighting with all their might for the conquest of the
wealth of the world and for the complete overthrow of existing society.

There has never been anything like this revolution in the history of the
world.  There is nothing analogous between it and the American Revolution
or the French Revolution.  It is unique, colossal.  Other revolutions
compare with it as asteroids compare with the sun.  It is alone of its
kind, the first world-revolution in a world whose history is replete with
revolutions.  And not only this, for it is the first organized movement
of men to become a world movement, limited only by the limits of the
planet.

This revolution is unlike all other revolutions in many respects.  It is
not sporadic.  It is not a flame of popular discontent, arising in a day
and dying down in a day.  It is older than the present generation.  It
has a history and traditions, and a martyr-roll only less extensive
possibly than the martyr-roll of Christianity.  It has also a literature
a myriad times more imposing, scientific, and scholarly than the
literature of any previous revolution.

They call themselves "comrades," these men, comrades in the socialist
revolution.  Nor is the word empty and meaningless, coined of mere lip
service.  It knits men together as brothers, as men should be knit
together who stand shoulder to shoulder under the red banner of revolt.
This red banner, by the way, symbolizes the brotherhood of man, and does
not symbolize the incendiarism that instantly connects itself with the
red banner in the affrighted bourgeois mind.  The comradeship of the
revolutionists is alive and warm.  It passes over geographical lines,
transcends race prejudice, and has even proved itself mightier than the
Fourth of July, spread-eagle Americanism of our forefathers.  The French
socialist working-men and the German socialist working-men forget Alsace
and Lorraine, and, when war threatens, pass resolutions declaring that as
working-men and comrades they have no quarrel with each other.  Only the
other day, when Japan and Russia sprang at each other's throats, the
revolutionists of Japan addressed the following message to the
revolutionists of Russia: "Dear Comrades--Your government and ours have
recently plunged into war to carry out their imperialistic tendencies,
but for us socialists there are no boundaries, race, country, or
nationality.  We are comrades, brothers, and sisters, and have no reason
to fight.  Your enemies are not the Japanese people, but our militarism
and so-called patriotism.  Patriotism and militarism are our mutual
enemies."

In January 1905, throughout the United States the socialists held
mass-meetings to express their sympathy for their struggling comrades,
the revolutionists of Russia, and, more to the point, to furnish the
sinews of war by collecting money and cabling it to the Russian leaders.
The fact of this call for money, and the ready response, and the very
wording of the call, make a striking and practical demonstration of the
international solidarity of this world-revolution:

"Whatever may be the immediate results of the present revolt in Russia,
the socialist propaganda in that country has received from it an impetus
unparalleled in the history of modern class wars.  The heroic battle for
freedom is being fought almost exclusively by the Russian working-class
under the intellectual leadership of Russian socialists, thus once more
demonstrating the fact that the class-conscious working-men have become
the vanguard of all liberating movements of modern times."

Here are 7,000,000 comrades in an organized, international, world-wide,
revolutionary movement.  Here is a tremendous human force.  It must be
reckoned with.  Here is power.  And here is romance--romance so colossal
that it seems to be beyond the ken of ordinary mortals.  These
revolutionists are swayed by great passion.  They have a keen sense of
personal right, much of reverence for humanity, but little reverence, if
any at all, for the rule of the dead.  They refuse to be ruled by the
dead.  To the bourgeois mind their unbelief in the dominant conventions
of the established order is startling.  They laugh to scorn the sweet
ideals and dear moralities of bourgeois society.  They intend to destroy
bourgeois society with most of its sweet ideals and dear moralities, and
chiefest among these are those that group themselves under such heads as
private ownership of capital, survival of the fittest, and
patriotism--even patriotism.

Such an army of revolution, 7,000,000 strong, is a thing to make rulers
and ruling classes pause and consider.  The cry of this army is, "No
quarter!  We want all that you possess.  We will be content with nothing
less than all that you possess.  We want in our hands the reins of power
and the destiny of mankind.  Here are our hands.  They are strong hands.
We are going to take your governments, your palaces, and all your purpled
ease away from you, and in that day you shall work for your bread even as
the peasant in the field or the starved and runty clerk in your
metropolises.  Here are our hands.  They are strong hands."

Well may rulers and ruling classes pause and consider.  This is
revolution.  And, further, these 7,000,000 men are not an army on paper.
Their fighting strength in the field is 7,000,000.  To-day they cast
7,000,000 votes in the civilized countries of the world.

Yesterday they were not so strong.  To-morrow they will be still
stronger.  And they are fighters.  They love peace.  They are unafraid of
war.  They intend nothing less than to destroy existing capitalist
society and to take possession of the whole world.  If the law of the
land permits, they fight for this end peaceably, at the ballot-box.  If
the law of the land does not permit, and if they have force meted out to
them, they resort to force themselves.  They meet violence with violence.
Their hands are strong and they are unafraid.  In Russia, for instance,
there is no suffrage.  The government executes the revolutionists.  The
revolutionists kill the officers of the government.  The revolutionists
meet legal murder with assassination.

Now here arises a particularly significant phase which it would be well
for the rulers to consider.  Let me make it concrete.  I am a
revolutionist.  Yet I am a fairly sane and normal individual.  I speak,
and I _think_, of these assassins in Russia as "my comrades."  So do all
the comrades in America, and all the 7,000,000 comrades in the world.  Of
what worth an organized, international, revolutionary movement if our
comrades are not backed up the world over!  The worth is shown by the
fact that we do back up the assassinations by our comrades in Russia.
They are not disciples of Tolstoy, nor are we.  We are revolutionists.

Our comrades in Russia have formed what they call "The Fighting
Organization."  This Fighting Organization accused, tried, found guilty,
and condemned to death, one Sipiaguin, Minister of Interior.  On April 2
he was shot and killed in the Maryinsky Palace.  Two years later the
Fighting Organization condemned to death and executed another Minister of
Interior, Von Plehve.  Having done so, it issued a document, dated July
29, 1904, setting forth the counts of its indictment of Von Plehve and
its responsibility for the assassination.  Now, and to the point, this
document was sent out to the socialists of the world, and by them was
published everywhere in the magazines and newspapers.  The point is, not
that the socialists of the world were unafraid to do it, not that they
dared to do it, but that they did it as a matter of routine, giving
publication to what may be called an official document of the
international revolutionary movement.

These are high lights upon the revolution--granted, but they are also
facts.  And they are given to the rulers and the ruling classes, not in
bravado, not to frighten them, but for them to consider more deeply the
spirit and nature of this world-revolution.  The time has come for the
revolution to demand consideration.  It has fastened upon every civilized
country in the world.  As fast as a country becomes civilized, the
revolution fastens upon it.  With the introduction of the machine into
Japan, socialism was introduced.  Socialism marched into the Philippines
shoulder to shoulder with the American soldiers.  The echoes of the last
gun had scarcely died away when socialist locals were forming in Cuba and
Porto Rico.  Vastly more significant is the fact that of all the
countries the revolution has fastened upon, on not one has it relaxed its
grip.  On the contrary, on every country its grip closes tighter year by
year.  As an active movement it began obscurely over a generation ago.
In 1867, its voting strength in the world was 30,000.  By 1871 its vote
had increased to 1,000,000.  Not till 1884 did it pass the half-million
point.  By 1889 it had passed the million point, it had then gained
momentum.  In 1892 the socialist vote of the world was 1,798,391; in
1893, 2,585,898; in 1895, 3,033,718; in 1898, 4,515,591; in 1902,
5,253,054; in 1903, 6,285,374; and in the year of our Lord 1905 it passed
the seven-million mark.

Nor has this flame of revolution left the United States untouched.  In
1888 there were only 2,068 socialist votes.  In 1902 there were 127,713
socialist votes.  And in 1904 435,040 socialist votes were cast.  What
fanned this flame?  Not hard times.  The first four years of the
twentieth century were considered prosperous years, yet in that time more
than 300,000 men added themselves to the ranks of the revolutionists,
flinging their defiance in the teeth of bourgeois society and taking
their stand under the blood-red banner.  In the state of the writer,
California, one man in twelve is an avowed and registered revolutionist.

One thing must be clearly understood.  This is no spontaneous and vague
uprising of a large mass of discontented and miserable people--a blind
and instinctive recoil from hurt.  On the contrary, the propaganda is
intellectual; the movement is based upon economic necessity and is in
line with social evolution; while the miserable people have not yet
revolted.  The revolutionist is no starved and diseased slave in the
shambles at the bottom of the social pit, but is, in the main, a hearty,
well-fed working-man, who sees the shambles waiting for him and his
children and recoils from the descent.  The very miserable people are too
helpless to help themselves.  But they are being helped, and the day is
not far distant when their numbers will go to swell the ranks of the
revolutionists.

Another thing must be clearly understood.  In spite of the fact that
middle-class men and professional men are interested in the movement, it
is nevertheless a distinctly working-class revolt.  The world over, it is
a working-class revolt.  The workers of the world, as a class, are
fighting the capitalists of the world, as a class.  The so-called great
middle class is a growing anomaly in the social struggle.  It is a
perishing class (wily statisticians to the contrary), and its historic
mission of buffer between the capitalist and working-classes has just
about been fulfilled.  Little remains for it but to wail as it passes
into oblivion, as it has already begun to wail in accents Populistic and
Jeffersonian-Democratic.  The fight is on.  The revolution is here now,
and it is the world's workers that are in revolt.

Naturally the question arises: Why is this so?  No mere whim of the
spirit can give rise to a world-revolution.  Whim does not conduce to
unanimity.  There must be a deep-seated cause to make 7,000,000 men of
the one mind, to make them cast off allegiance to the bourgeois gods and
lose faith in so fine a thing as patriotism.  There are many counts of
the indictment which the revolutionists bring against the capitalist
class, but for present use only one need be stated, and it is a count to
which capital has never replied and can never reply.

The capitalist class has managed society, and its management has failed.
And not only has it failed in its management, but it has failed
deplorably, ignobly, horribly.  The capitalist class had an opportunity
such as was vouchsafed no previous ruling class in the history of the
world.  It broke away from the rule of the old feudal aristocracy and
made modern society.  It mastered matter, organized the machinery of
life, and made possible a wonderful era for mankind, wherein no creature
should cry aloud because it had not enough to eat, and wherein for every
child there would be opportunity for education, for intellectual and
spiritual uplift.  Matter being mastered, and the machinery of life
organized, all this was possible.  Here was the chance, God-given, and
the capitalist class failed.  It was blind and greedy.  It prattled sweet
ideals and dear moralities, rubbed its eyes not once, nor ceased one whit
in its greediness, and smashed down in a failure as tremendous only as
was the opportunity it had ignored.

But all this is like so much cobwebs to the bourgeois mind.  As it was
blind in the past, it is blind now and cannot see nor understand.  Well,
then, let the indictment be stated more definitely, in terms sharp and
unmistakable.  In the first place, consider the caveman.  He was a very
simple creature.  His head slanted back like an orang-outang's, and he
had but little more intelligence.  He lived in a hostile environment, the
prey of all manner of fierce life.  He had no inventions nor artifices.
His natural efficiency for food-getting was, say, 1.  He did not even
till the soil.  With his natural efficiency of 1, he fought off his
carnivorous enemies and got himself food and shelter.  He must have done
all this, else he would not have multiplied and spread over the earth and
sent his progeny down, generation by generation, to become even you and
me.

The caveman, with his natural efficiency of 1, got enough to eat most of
the time, and no caveman went hungry all the time.  Also, he lived a
healthy, open-air life, loafed and rested himself, and found plenty of
time in which to exercise his imagination and invent gods.  That is to
say, he did not have to work all his waking moments in order to get
enough to eat.  The child of the caveman (and this is true of the
children of all savage peoples) had a childhood, and by that is meant a
happy childhood of play and development.

And now, how fares modern man?  Consider the United States, the most
prosperous and most enlightened country of the world.  In the United
States there are 10,000,000 people living in poverty.  By poverty is
meant that condition in life in which, through lack of food and adequate
shelter, the mere standard of working efficiency cannot be maintained.
In the United States there are 10,000,000 people who have not enough to
eat.  In the United States, because they have not enough to eat, there
are 10,000,000 people who cannot keep the ordinary 1 measure of strength
in their bodies.  This means that these 10,000,000 people are perishing,
are dying, body and soul, slowly, because they have not enough to eat.
All over this broad, prosperous, enlightened land, are men, women, and
children who are living miserably.  In all the great cities, where they
are segregated in slum ghettos by hundreds of thousands and by millions,
their misery becomes beastliness.  No caveman ever starved as chronically
as they starve, ever slept as vilely as they sleep, ever festered with
rottenness and disease as they fester, nor ever toiled as hard and for as
long hours as they toil.

In Chicago there is a woman who toiled sixty hours per week.  She was a
garment worker.  She sewed buttons on clothes.  Among the Italian garment
workers of Chicago, the average weekly wage of the dressmakers is 90
cents, but they work every week in the year.  The average weekly wage of
the pants finishers is $1.31, and the average number of weeks employed in
the year is 27.85.  The average yearly earnings of the dressmakers is
$37; of the pants finishers, $42.41.  Such wages means no childhood for
the children, beastliness of living, and starvation for all.

Unlike the caveman, modern man cannot get food and shelter whenever he
feels like working for it.  Modern man has first to find the work, and in
this he is often unsuccessful.  Then misery becomes acute.  This acute
misery is chronicled daily in the newspapers.  Let several of the
countless instances be cited.

    In New York City lived a woman, Mary Mead.  She had three children:
    Mary, one year old; Johanna, two years old; Alice, four years old.
    Her husband could find no work.  They starved.  They were evicted
    from their shelter at 160 Steuben Street.  Mary Mead strangled her
    baby, Mary, one year old; strangled Alice, four years old; failed to
    strangle Johanna, two years old, and then herself took poison.  Said
    the father to the police: "Constant poverty had driven my wife
    insane.  We lived at No. 160 Steuben Street until a week ago, when we
    were dispossessed.  I could get no work.  I could not even make
    enough to put food into our mouths.  The babies grew ill and weak.
    My wife cried nearly all the time."

    "So overwhelmed is the Department of Charities with tens of thousands
    of applications from men out of work that it finds itself unable to
    cope with the situation."--_New York Commercial_, January 11, 1905.

In a daily paper, because he cannot get work in order to get something to
eat, modern man advertises as follows:

    "Young man, good education, unable to obtain employment, will sell to
    physician and bacteriologist for experimental purposes all right and
    title to his body.  Address for price, box 3466, _Examiner_."

    "Frank A. Mallin went to the central police station Wednesday night
    and asked to be locked up on a charge of vagrancy.  He said he had
    been conducting an unsuccessful search for work for so long that he
    was sure he must be a vagrant.  In any event, he was so hungry he
    must be fed.  Police Judge Graham sentenced him to ninety days'
    imprisonment."--_San Francisco Examiner_.

In a room at the Soto House, 32 Fourth Street, San Francisco, was found
the body of W. G. Robbins.  He had turned on the gas.  Also was found his
diary, from which the following extracts are made

    "_March_ 3.--No chance of getting anything here.  What will I do?

    "_March_ 7.--Cannot find anything yet.

    "_March_ 8.--Am living on doughnuts at five cents a day.

    "_March_ 9.--My last quarter gone for room rent.

    "_March_ 10.--God help me.  Have only five cents left.  Can get
    nothing to do.  What next?  Starvation or--?  I have spent my last
    nickel to-night.  What shall I do?  Shall it be steal, beg, or die?
    I have never stolen, begged, or starved in all my fifty years of
    life, but now I am on the brink--death seems the only refuge.

    "_March_ 11.--Sick all day--burning fever this afternoon.  Had
    nothing to eat to-day or since yesterday noon.  My head, my head.
    Good-bye, all."

How fares the child of modern man in this most prosperous of lands?  In
the city of New York 50,000 children go hungry to school every morning.
From the same city on January 12, a press despatch was sent out over the
country of a case reported by Dr. A. E. Daniel, of the New York Infirmary
for Women and Children.  The case was that of a babe, eighteen months
old, who earned by its labour fifty cents per week in a tenement
sweat-shop.

    "On a pile of rags in a room bare of furniture and freezing cold,
    Mrs. Mary Gallin, dead from starvation, with an emaciated baby four
    months old crying at her breast, was found this morning at 513 Myrtle
    Avenue, Brooklyn, by Policeman McConnon of the Flushing Avenue
    Station.  Huddled together for warmth in another part of the room
    were the father, James Gallin, and three children ranging from two to
    eight years of age.  The children gazed at the policeman much as
    ravenous animals might have done.  They were famished, and there was
    not a vestige of food in their comfortless home."--_New York
    Journal_, January 2, 1902.

In the United States 80,000 children are toiling out their lives in the
textile mills alone.  In the South they work twelve-hour shifts.  They
never see the day.  Those on the night shift are asleep when the sun
pours its life and warmth over the world, while those on the day shift
are at the machines before dawn and return to their miserable dens,
called "homes," after dark.  Many receive no more than ten cents a day.
There are babies who work for five and six cents a day.  Those who work
on the night shift are often kept awake by having cold water dashed in
their faces.  There are children six years of age who have already to
their credit eleven months' work on the night shift.  When they become
sick, and are unable to rise from their beds to go to work, there are men
employed to go on horseback from house to house, and cajole and bully
them into arising and going to work.  Ten per cent of them contract
active consumption.  All are puny wrecks, distorted, stunted, mind and
body.  Elbert Hubbard says of the child-labourers of the Southern
cotton-mills:

    "I thought to lift one of the little toilers to ascertain his weight.
    Straightaway through his thirty-five pounds of skin and bones there
    ran a tremor of fear, and he struggled forward to tie a broken
    thread.  I attracted his attention by a touch, and offered him a
    silver dime.  He looked at me dumbly from a face that might have
    belonged to a man of sixty, so furrowed, tightly drawn, and full of
    pain it was.  He did not reach for the money--he did not know what it
    was.  There were dozens of such children in this particular mill.  A
    physician who was with me said that they would all be dead probably
    in two years, and their places filled by others--there were plenty
    more.  Pneumonia carries off most of them.  Their systems are ripe
    for disease, and when it comes there is no rebound--no response.
    Medicine simply does not act--nature is whipped, beaten, discouraged,
    and the child sinks into a stupor and dies."

So fares modern man and the child of modern man in the United States,
most prosperous and enlightened of all countries on earth.  It must be
remembered that the instances given are instances only, but they can be
multiplied myriads of times.  It must also be remembered that what is
true of the United States is true of all the civilized world.  Such
misery was not true of the caveman.  Then what has happened?  Has the
hostile environment of the caveman grown more hostile for his
descendants?  Has the caveman's natural efficiency of 1 for food-getting
and shelter-getting diminished in modern man to one-half or one-quarter?

On the contrary, the hostile environment of the caveman has been
destroyed.  For modern man it no longer exists.  All carnivorous enemies,
the daily menace of the younger world, have been killed off.  Many of the
species of prey have become extinct.  Here and there, in secluded
portions of the world, still linger a few of man's fiercer enemies.  But
they are far from being a menace to mankind.  Modern man, when he wants
recreation and change, goes to the secluded portions of the world for a
hunt.  Also, in idle moments, he wails regretfully at the passing of the
"big game," which he knows in the not distant future will disappear from
the earth.

Nor since the day of the caveman has man's efficiency for food-getting
and shelter-getting diminished.  It has increased a thousandfold.  Since
the day of the caveman, matter has been mastered.  The secrets of matter
have been discovered.  Its laws have been formulated.  Wonderful
artifices have been made, and marvellous inventions, all tending to
increase tremendously man's natural efficiency of in every food-getting,
shelter-getting exertion, in farming, mining, manufacturing,
transportation, and communication.

From the caveman to the hand-workers of three generations ago, the
increase in efficiency for food- and shelter-getting has been very great.
But in this day, by machinery, the efficiency of the hand-worker of three
generations ago has in turn been increased many times.  Formerly it
required 200 hours of human labour to place 100 tons of ore on a railroad
car.  To-day, aided by machinery, but two hours of human labour is
required to do the same task.  The United States Bureau of Labour is
responsible for the following table, showing the comparatively recent
increase in man's food- and shelter-getting efficiency:

                        Machine Hours           Hand Hours
Barley (100 bushels)    9                       211
Corn (50 bushels        34                      228
shelled, stalks,
husks and blades cut
into fodder)
Oats (160 bushels)      28                      265
Wheat (50 bushels)      7                       160
Loading ore (loading    2                       200
100 tons iron ore on
cars)
Unloading coal          20                      240
(transferring 200
tons from canal-boats
to bins 400 feet
distant)
Pitchforks (50          12                      200
pitchforks, 12-inch
tines)
Plough (one landside    3                       118
plough, oak beams and
handles)

According to the same authority, under the best conditions for
organization in farming, labour can produce 20 bushels of wheat for 66
cents, or 1 bushel for 3.5 cents.  This was done on a bonanza farm of
10,000 acres in California, and was the average cost of the whole product
of the farm.  Mr. Carroll D. Wright says that to-day 4,500,000 men, aided
by machinery, turn out a product that would require the labour of
40,000,000 men if produced by hand.  Professor Herzog, of Austria, says
that 5,000,000 people with the machinery of to-day, employed at socially
useful labour, would be able to supply a population of 20,000,000 people
with all the necessaries and small luxuries of life by working 1.5 hours
per day.

This being so, matter being mastered, man's efficiency for food- and
shelter-getting being increased a thousandfold over the efficiency of the
caveman, then why is it that millions of modern men live more miserably
than lived the caveman?  This is the question the revolutionist asks, and
he asks it of the managing class, the capitalist class.  The capitalist
class does not answer it.  The capitalist class cannot answer it.

If modern man's food- and shelter-getting efficiency is a thousandfold
greater than that of the caveman, why, then, are there 10,000,000 people
in the United States to-day who are not properly sheltered and properly
fed?  If the child of the caveman did not have to work, why, then,
to-day, in the United States, are 80,000 children working out their lives
in the textile factories alone?  If the child of the caveman did not have
to work, why, then, to-day, in the United States, are there 1,752,187
child-labourers?

It is a true count in the indictment.  The capitalist class has
mismanaged, is to-day mismanaging.  In New York City 50,000 children go
hungry to school, and in New York City there are 1,320 millionaires.  The
point, however, is not that the mass of mankind is miserable because of
the wealth the capitalist class has taken to itself.  Far from it.  The
point really is that the mass of mankind is miserable, not for want of
the wealth taken by the capitalist class, _but for want of the wealth
that was never created_.  This wealth was never created because the
capitalist class managed too wastefully and irrationally.  The capitalist
class, blind and greedy, grasping madly, has not only not made the best
of its management, but made the worst of it.  It is a management
prodigiously wasteful.  This point cannot be emphasized too strongly.

In face of the facts that modern man lives more wretchedly than the
caveman, and that modern man's food- and shelter-getting efficiency is a
thousandfold greater than the caveman's, no other solution is possible
than that the management is prodigiously wasteful.

With the natural resources of the world, the machinery already invented,
a rational organization of production and distribution, and an equally
rational elimination of waste, the able-bodied workers would not have to
labour more than two or three hours per day to feed everybody, clothe
everybody, house everybody, educate everybody, and give a fair measure of
little luxuries to everybody.  There would be no more material want and
wretchedness, no more children toiling out their lives, no more men and
women and babes living like beasts and dying like beasts.  Not only would
matter be mastered, but the machine would be mastered.  In such a day
incentive would be finer and nobler than the incentive of to-day, which
is the incentive of the stomach.  No man, woman, or child, would be
impelled to action by an empty stomach.  On the contrary, they would be
impelled to action as a child in a spelling match is impelled to action,
as boys and girls at games, as scientists formulating law, as inventors
applying law, as artists and sculptors painting canvases and shaping
clay, as poets and statesmen serving humanity by singing and by
statecraft.  The spiritual, intellectual, and artistic uplift consequent
upon such a condition of society would be tremendous.  All the human
world would surge upward in a mighty wave.

This was the opportunity vouchsafed the capitalist class.  Less blindness
on its part, less greediness, and a rational management, were all that
was necessary.  A wonderful era was possible for the human race.  But the
capitalist class failed.  It made a shambles of civilization.  Nor can
the capitalist class plead not guilty.  It knew of the opportunity.  Its
wise men told of the opportunity, its scholars and its scientists told it
of the opportunity.  All that they said is there to-day in the books,
just so much damning evidence against it.  It would not listen.  It was
too greedy.  It rose up (as it rises up to-day), shamelessly, in our
legislative halls, and declared that profits were impossible without the
toil of children and babes.  It lulled its conscience to sleep with
prattle of sweet ideals and dear moralities, and allowed the suffering
and misery of mankind to continue and to increase, in short, the
capitalist class failed to take advantage of the opportunity.

But the opportunity is still here.  The capitalist class has been tried
and found wanting.  Remains the working-class to see what it can do with
the opportunity.  "But the working-class is incapable," says the
capitalist class.  "What do you know about it?" the working-class
replies.  "Because you have failed is no reason that we shall fail.
Furthermore, we are going to have a try at it, anyway.  Seven millions of
us say so.  And what have you to say to that?"

And what can the capitalist class say?  Grant the incapacity of the
working-class.  Grant that the indictment and the argument of the
revolutionists are all wrong.  The 7,000,000 revolutionists remain.
Their existence is a fact.  Their belief in their capacity, and in their
indictment and their argument, is a fact.  Their constant growth is a
fact.  Their intention to destroy present-day society is a fact, as is
also their intention to take possession of the world with all its wealth
and machinery and governments.  Moreover, it is a fact that the
working-class is vastly larger than the capitalist class.

The revolution is a revolution of the working-class.  How can the
capitalist class, in the minority, stem this tide of revolution?  What
has it to offer?  What does it offer?  Employers' associations,
injunctions, civil suits for plundering of the treasuries of the
labour-unions, clamour and combination for the open shop, bitter and
shameless opposition to the eight-hour day, strong efforts to defeat all
reform, child-labour bills, graft in every municipal council, strong
lobbies and bribery in every legislature for the purchase of capitalist
legislation, bayonets, machine-guns, policemen's clubs, professional
strike-breakers and armed Pinkertons--these are the things the capitalist
class is dumping in front of the tide of revolution, as though, forsooth,
to hold it back.

The capitalist class is as blind to-day to the menace of the revolution
as it was blind in the past to its own God-given opportunity.  It cannot
see how precarious is its position, cannot comprehend the power and the
portent of the revolution.  It goes on its placid way, prattling sweet
ideals and dear moralities, and scrambling sordidly for material
benefits.

No overthrown ruler or class in the past ever considered the revolution
that overthrew it, and so with the capitalist class of to-day.  Instead
of compromising, instead of lengthening its lease of life by conciliation
and by removal of some of the harsher oppressions of the working-class,
it antagonizes the working-class, drives the working-class into
revolution.  Every broken strike in recent years, every legally plundered
trades-union treasury, every closed shop made into an open shop, has
driven the members of the working-class directly hurt over to socialism
by hundreds and thousands.  Show a working-man that his union fails, and
he becomes a revolutionist.  Break a strike with an injunction or
bankrupt a union with a civil suit, and the working-men hurt thereby
listen to the siren song of the socialist and are lost for ever to the
_political capitalist_ parties.

Antagonism never lulled revolution, and antagonism is about all the
capitalist class offers.  It is true, it offers some few antiquated
notions which were very efficacious in the past, but which are no longer
efficacious.  Fourth-of-July liberty in terms of the Declaration of
Independence and of the French Encyclopaedists is scarcely apposite
to-day.  It does not appeal to the working-man who has had his head
broken by a policeman's club, his union treasury bankrupted by a court
decision, or his job taken away from him by a labour-saving invention.
Nor does the Constitution of the United States appear so glorious and
constitutional to the working-man who has experienced a bull-pen or been
unconstitutionally deported from Colorado.  Nor are this particular
working-man's hurt feelings soothed by reading in the newspapers that
both the bull-pen and the deportation were pre-eminently just, legal, and
constitutional.  "To hell, then, with the Constitution!" says he, and
another revolutionist has been made--by the capitalist class.

In short, so blind is the capitalist class that it does nothing to
lengthen its lease of life, while it does everything to shorten it.  The
capitalist class offers nothing that is clean, noble, and alive.  The
revolutionists offer everything that is clean, noble, and alive.  They
offer service, unselfishness, sacrifice, martyrdom--the things that sting
awake the imagination of the people, touching their hearts with the
fervour that arises out of the impulse toward good and which is
essentially religious in its nature.

But the revolutionists blow hot and blow cold.  They offer facts and
statistics, economics and scientific arguments.  If the working-man be
merely selfish, the revolutionists show him, mathematically demonstrate
to him, that his condition will be bettered by the revolution.  If the
working-man be the higher type, moved by impulses toward right conduct,
if he have soul and spirit, the revolutionists offer him the things of
the soul and the spirit, the tremendous things that cannot be measured by
dollars and cents, nor be held down by dollars and cents.  The
revolutionist cries out upon wrong and injustice, and preaches
righteousness.  And, most potent of all, he sings the eternal song of
human freedom--a song of all lands and all tongues and all time.

Few members of the capitalist class see the revolution.  Most of them are
too ignorant, and many are too afraid to see it.  It is the same old
story of every perishing ruling class in the world's history.  Fat with
power and possession, drunken with success, and made soft by surfeit and
by cessation of struggle, they are like the drones clustered about the
honey vats when the worker-bees spring upon them to end their rotund
existence.

President Roosevelt vaguely sees the revolution, is frightened by it, and
recoils from seeing it.  As he says: "Above all, we need to remember that
any kind of class animosity in the political world is, if possible, even
more wicked, even more destructive to national welfare, than sectional,
race, or religious animosity."

Class animosity in the political world, President Roosevelt maintains, is
wicked.  But class animosity in the political world is the preachment of
the revolutionists.  "Let the class wars in the industrial world
continue," they say, "but extend the class war to the political world."
As their leader, Eugene V. Debs says: "So far as this struggle is
concerned, there is no good capitalist and no bad working-man.  Every
capitalist is your enemy and every working-man is your friend."

Here is class animosity in the political world with a vengeance.  And
here is revolution.  In 1888 there were only 2,000 revolutionists of this
type in the United States; in 1900 there were 127,000 revolutionists; in
1904, 435,000 revolutionists.  Wickedness of the President Roosevelt
definition evidently flourishes and increases in the United States.
Quite so, for it is the revolution that flourishes and increases.

Here and there a member of the capitalist class catches a clear glimpse
of the revolution, and raises a warning cry.  But his class does not
heed.  President Eliot of Harvard raised such a cry:

"I am forced to believe there is a present danger of socialism never
before so imminent in America in so dangerous a form, because never
before imminent in so well organized a form.  The danger lies in the
obtaining control of the trades-unions by the socialists."  And the
capitalist employers, instead of giving heed to the warnings, are
perfecting their strike-breaking organization and combining more strongly
than ever for a general assault upon that dearest of all things to the
trades-unions--the closed shop.  In so far as this assault succeeds, by
just that much will the capitalist class shorten its lease of life.  It
is the old, old story, over again and over again.  The drunken drones
still cluster greedily about the honey vats.

Possibly one of the most amusing spectacles of to-day is the attitude of
the American press toward the revolution.  It is also a pathetic
spectacle.  It compels the onlooker to be aware of a distinct loss of
pride in his species.  Dogmatic utterance from the mouth of ignorance may
make gods laugh, but it should make men weep.  And the American editors
(in the general instance) are so impressive about it!  The old
"divide-up," "men-are-_not_-born-free-and-equal," propositions are
enunciated gravely and sagely, as things white-hot and new from the forge
of human wisdom.  Their feeble vapourings show no more than a schoolboy's
comprehension of the nature of the revolution.  Parasites themselves on
the capitalist class, serving the capitalist class by moulding public
opinion, they, too, cluster drunkenly about the honey vats.

Of course, this is true only of the large majority of American editors.
To say that it is true of all of them would be to cast too great obloquy
upon the human race.  Also, it would be untrue, for here and there an
occasional editor does see clearly--and in his case, ruled by
stomach-incentive, is usually afraid to say what he thinks about it.  So
far as the science and the sociology of the revolution are concerned, the
average editor is a generation or so behind the facts.  He is
intellectually slothful, accepts no facts until they are accepted by the
majority, and prides himself upon his conservatism.  He is an instinctive
optimist, prone to believe that what ought to be, is.  The revolutionist
gave this up long ago, and believes not that what ought to be, is, but
what is, is, and that it may not be what it ought to be at all.

Now and then, rubbing his eyes, vigorously, an editor catches a sudden
glimpse of the revolution and breaks out in naive volubility, as, for
instance, the one who wrote the following in the _Chicago Chronicle_:
"American socialists are revolutionists.  They know that they are
revolutionists.  It is high time that other people should appreciate the
fact."  A white-hot, brand-new discovery, and he proceeded to shout it
out from the housetops that we, forsooth, were revolutionists.  Why, it
is just what we have been doing all these years--shouting it out from the
housetops that we are revolutionists, and stop us who can.

The time should be past for the mental attitude: "Revolution is
atrocious.  Sir, there is no revolution."  Likewise should the time be
past for that other familiar attitude: "Socialism is slavery.  Sir, it
will never be."  It is no longer a question of dialectics, theories, and
dreams.  There is no question about it.  The revolution is a fact.  It is
here now.  Seven million revolutionists, organized, working day and
night, are preaching the revolution--that passionate gospel, the
Brotherhood of Man.  Not only is it a cold-blooded economic propaganda,
but it is in essence a religious propaganda with a fervour in it of Paul
and Christ.  The capitalist class has been indicted.  It has failed in
its management and its management is to be taken away from it.  Seven
million men of the working-class say that they are going to get the rest
of the working-class to join with them and take the management away.  The
revolution is here, now.  Stop it who can.

SACRAMENTO RIVER.
_March_ 1905.




THE SOMNAMBULISTS


    "'Tis only fools speak evil of the clay--
    The very stars are made of clay like mine."

The mightiest and absurdest sleep-walker on the planet!  Chained in the
circle of his own imaginings, man is only too keen to forget his origin
and to shame that flesh of his that bleeds like all flesh and that is
good to eat.  Civilization (which is part of the circle of his
imaginings) has spread a veneer over the surface of the soft-shelled
animal known as man.  It is a very thin veneer; but so wonderfully is man
constituted that he squirms on his bit of achievement and believes he is
garbed in armour-plate.

Yet man to-day is the same man that drank from his enemy's skull in the
dark German forests, that sacked cities, and stole his women from
neighbouring clans like any howling aborigine.  The flesh-and-blood body
of man has not changed in the last several thousand years.  Nor has his
mind changed.  There is no faculty of the mind of man to-day that did not
exist in the minds of the men of long ago.  Man has to-day no concept
that is too wide and deep and abstract for the mind of Plato or Aristotle
to grasp.  Give to Plato or Aristotle the same fund of knowledge that man
to-day has access to, and Plato and Aristotle would reason as profoundly
as the man of to-day and would achieve very similar conclusions.

It is the same old animal man, smeared over, it is true, with a veneer,
thin and magical, that makes him dream drunken dreams of self-exaltation
and to sneer at the flesh and the blood of him beneath the smear.  The
raw animal crouching within him is like the earthquake monster pent in
the crust of the earth.  As he persuades himself against the latter till
it arouses and shakes down a city, so does he persuade himself against
the former until it shakes him out of his dreaming and he stands
undisguised, a brute like any other brute.

Starve him, let him miss six meals, and see gape through the veneer the
hungry maw of the animal beneath.  Get between him and the female of his
kind upon whom his mating instinct is bent, and see his eyes blaze like
an angry cat's, hear in his throat the scream of wild stallions, and
watch his fists clench like an orang-outang's.  Maybe he will even beat
his chest.  Touch his silly vanity, which he exalts into high-sounding
pride--call him a liar, and behold the red animal in him that makes a
hand clutching that is quick like the tensing of a tiger's claw, or an
eagle's talon, incarnate with desire to rip and tear.

It is not necessary to call him a liar to touch his vanity.  Tell a
plains Indian that he has failed to steal horses from the neighbouring
tribe, or tell a man living in bourgeois society that he has failed to
pay his bills at the neighbouring grocer's, and the results are the same.
Each, plains Indian and bourgeois, is smeared with a slightly different
veneer, that is all.  It requires a slightly different stick to scrape it
off.  The raw animals beneath are identical.

But intrude not violently upon man, leave him alone in his somnambulism,
and he kicks out from under his feet the ladder of life up which he has
climbed, constitutes himself the centre of the universe, dreams sordidly
about his own particular god, and maunders metaphysically about his own
blessed immortality.

True, he lives in a real world, breathes real air, eats real food, and
sleeps under real blankets, in order to keep real cold away.  And there's
the rub.  He has to effect adjustments with the real world and at the
same time maintain the sublimity of his dream.  The result of this
admixture of the real and the unreal is confusion thrice confounded.  The
man that walks the real world in his sleep becomes such a tangled mass of
contradictions, paradoxes, and lies that he has to lie to himself in
order to stay asleep.

In passing, it may be noted that some men are remarkably constituted in
this matter of self-deception.  They excel at deceiving themselves.  They
believe, and they help others to believe.  It becomes their function in
society, and some of them are paid large salaries for helping their
fellow-men to believe, for instance, that they are not as other animals;
for helping the king to believe, and his parasites and drudges as well,
that he is God's own manager over so many square miles of earth-crust;
for helping the merchant and banking classes to believe that society
rests on their shoulders, and that civilization would go to smash if they
got out from under and ceased from their exploitations and petty
pilferings.

Prize-fighting is terrible.  This is the dictum of the man who walks in
his sleep.  He prates about it, and writes to the papers about it, and
worries the legislators about it.  There is nothing of the brute about
_him_.  He is a sublimated soul that treads the heights and breathes
refined ether--in self-comparison with the prize-fighter.  The man who
walks in his sleep ignores the flesh and all its wonderful play of
muscle, joint, and nerve.  He feels that there is something godlike in
the mysterious deeps of his being, denies his relationship with the
brute, and proceeds to go forth into the world and express by deeds that
something godlike within him.

He sits at a desk and chases dollars through the weeks and months and
years of his life.  To him the life godlike resolves into a problem
something like this: _Since the great mass of men toil at producing
wealth_, _how best can he get between the great mass of men and the
wealth they produce_, _and get a slice for himself_?  With tremendous
exercise of craft, deceit, and guile, he devotes his life godlike to this
purpose.  As he succeeds, his somnambulism grows profound.  He bribes
legislatures, buys judges, "controls" primaries, and then goes and hires
other men to tell him that it is all glorious and right.  And the
funniest thing about it is that this arch-deceiver believes all that they
tell him.  He reads only the newspapers and magazines that tell him what
he wants to be told, listens only to the biologists who tell him that he
is the finest product of the struggle for existence, and herds only with
his own kind, where, like the monkey-folk, they teeter up and down and
tell one another how great they are.

In the course of his life godlike he ignores the flesh--until he gets to
table.  He raises his hands in horror at the thought of the brutish
prize-fighter, and then sits down and gorges himself on roast beef, rare
and red, running blood under every sawing thrust of the implement called
a knife.  He has a piece of cloth which he calls a napkin, with which he
wipes from his lips, and from the hair on his lips, the greasy juices of
the meat.

He is fastidiously nauseated at the thought of two prize-fighters
bruising each other with their fists; and at the same time, because it
will cost him some money, he will refuse to protect the machines in his
factory, though he is aware that the lack of such protection every year
mangles, batters, and destroys out of all humanness thousands of
working-men, women, and children.  He will chatter about things refined
and spiritual and godlike like himself, and he and the men who herd with
him will calmly adulterate the commodities they put upon the market and
which annually kill tens of thousands of babies and young children.

He will recoil at the suggestion of the horrid spectacle of two men
confronting each other with gloved hands in the roped arena, and at the
same time he will clamour for larger armies and larger navies, for more
destructive war machines, which, with a single discharge, will disrupt
and rip to pieces more human beings than have died in the whole history
of prize-fighting.  He will bribe a city council for a franchise or a
state legislature for a commercial privilege; but he has never been
known, in all his sleep-walking history, to bribe any legislative body in
order to achieve any moral end, such as, for instance, abolition of
prize-fighting, child-labour laws, pure food bills, or old age pensions.

"Ah, but we do not stand for the commercial life," object the refined,
scholarly, and professional men.  They are also sleep-walkers.  They do
not stand for the commercial life, but neither do they stand against it
with all their strength.  They submit to it, to the brutality and carnage
of it.  They develop classical economists who announce that the only
possible way for men and women to get food and shelter is by the existing
method.  They produce university professors, men who claim the _role_ of
teachers, and who at the same time claim that the austere ideal of
learning is passionless pursuit of passionless intelligence.  They serve
the men who lead the commercial life, give to their sons somnambulistic
educations, preach that sleep-walking is the only way to walk, and that
the persons who walk otherwise are atavisms or anarchists.  They paint
pictures for the commercial men, write books for them, sing songs for
them, act plays for them, and dose them with various drugs when their
bodies have grown gross or dyspeptic from overeating and lack of
exercise.

Then there are the good, kind somnambulists who don't prize-fight, who
don't play the commercial game, who don't teach and preach somnambulism,
who don't do anything except live on the dividends that are coined out of
the wan, white fluid that runs in the veins of little children, out of
mothers' tears, the blood of strong men, and the groans and sighs of the
old.  The receiver is as bad as the thief--ay, and the thief is finer
than the receiver; he at least has the courage to run the risk.  But the
good, kind people who don't do anything won't believe this, and the
assertion will make them angry--for a moment.  They possess several magic
phrases, which are like the incantations of a voodoo doctor driving
devils away.  The phrases that the good, kind people repeat to themselves
and to one another sound like "abstinence," "temperance," "thrift,"
"virtue."  Sometimes they say them backward, when they sound like
"prodigality," "drunkenness," "wastefulness," and "immorality."  They do
not really know the meaning of these phrases, but they think they do, and
that is all that is necessary for somnambulists.  The calm repetition of
such phrases invariably drives away the waking devils and lulls to
slumber.

Our statesmen sell themselves and their country for gold.  Our municipal
servants and state legislators commit countless treasons.  The world of
graft!  The world of betrayal!  The world of somnambulism, whose exalted
and sensitive citizens are outraged by the knockouts of the prize-ring,
and who annually not merely knock out, but kill, thousands of babies and
children by means of child labour and adulterated food.  Far better to
have the front of one's face pushed in by the fist of an honest
prize-fighter than to have the lining of one's stomach corroded by the
embalmed beef of a dishonest manufacturer.

In a prize-fight men are classed.  A lightweight fights with a
light-weight; he never fights with a heavy-weight, and foul blows are not
allowed.  Yet in the world of the somnambulists, where soar the
sublimated spirits, there are no classes, and foul blows are continually
struck and never disallowed.  Only they are not called foul blows.  The
world of claw and fang and fist and club has passed away--so say the
somnambulists.  A rebate is not an elongated claw.  A Wall Street raid is
not a fang slash.  Dummy boards of directors and fake accountings are not
foul blows of the fist under the belt.  A present of coal stock by a mine
operator to a railroad official is not a claw rip to the bowels of a
rival mine operator.  The hundred million dollars with which a
combination beats down to his knees a man with a million dollars is not a
club.  The man who walks in his sleep says it is not a club.  So say all
of his kind with which he herds.  They gather together and solemnly and
gloatingly make and repeat certain noises that sound like "discretion,"
"acumen," "initiative," "enterprise."  These noises are especially
gratifying when they are made backward.  They mean the same things, but
they sound different.  And in either case, forward or backward, the
spirit of the dream is not disturbed.

When a man strikes a foul blow in the prize-ring the fight is immediately
stopped, he is declared the loser, and he is hissed by the audience as he
leaves the ring.  But when a man who walks in his sleep strikes a foul
blow he is immediately declared the victor and awarded the prize; and
amid acclamations he forthwith turns his prize into a seat in the United
States Senate, into a grotesque palace on Fifth Avenue, and into endowed
churches, universities and libraries, to say nothing of subsidized
newspapers, to proclaim his greatness.

The red animal in the somnambulist will out.  He decries the carnal
combat of the prize-ring, and compels the red animal to spiritual combat.
The poisoned lie, the nasty, gossiping tongue, the brutality of the
unkind epigram, the business and social nastiness and treachery of
to-day--these are the thrusts and scratches of the red animal when the
somnambulist is in charge.  They are not the upper cuts and short arm
jabs and jolts and slugging blows of the spirit.  They are the foul blows
of the spirit that have never been disbarred, as the foul blows of the
prize-ring have been disbarred.  (Would it not be preferable for a man to
strike one full on the mouth with his fist than for him to tell a lie
about one, or malign those that are nearest and dearest?)

For these are the crimes of the spirit, and, alas! they are so much more
frequent than blows on the mouth.  And whosoever exalts the spirit over
the flesh, by his own creed avers that a crime of the spirit is vastly
more terrible than a crime of the flesh.  Thus stand the somnambulists
convicted by their own creed--only they are not real men, alive and
awake, and they proceed to mutter magic phrases that dispel all doubt as
to their undiminished and eternal gloriousness.

It is well enough to let the ape and tiger die, but it is hardly fair to
kill off the natural and courageous apes and tigers and allow the spawn
of cowardly apes and tigers to live.  The prize-fighting apes and tigers
will die all in good time in the course of natural evolution, but they
will not die so long as the cowardly, somnambulistic apes and tigers club
and scratch and slash.  This is not a brief for the prize-fighter.  It is
a blow of the fist between the eyes of the somnambulists, teetering up
and down, muttering magic phrases, and thanking God that they are not as
other animals.

GLEN ELLEN, CALIFORNIA.
_June_ 1900.




THE DIGNITY OF DOLLARS


Man is a blind, helpless creature.  He looks back with pride upon his
goodly heritage of the ages, and yet obeys unwittingly every mandate of
that heritage; for it is incarnate with him, and in it are embedded the
deepest roots of his soul.  Strive as he will, he cannot escape
it--unless he be a genius, one of those rare creations to whom alone is
granted the privilege of doing entirely new and original things in
entirely new and original ways.  But the common clay-born man, possessing
only talents, may do only what has been done before him.  At the best, if
he work hard, and cherish himself exceedingly, he may duplicate any or
all previous performances of his kind; he may even do some of them
better; but there he stops, the composite hand of his whole ancestry
bearing heavily upon him.

And again, in the matter of his ideas, which have been thrust upon him,
and which he has been busily garnering from the great world ever since
the day when his eyes first focussed and he drew, startled, against the
warm breast of his mother--the tyranny of these he cannot shake off.
Servants of his will, they at the same time master him.  They may not
coerce genius, but they dictate and sway every action of the clay-born.
If he hesitate on the verge of a new departure, they whip him back into
the well-greased groove; if he pause, bewildered, at sight of some
unexplored domain, they rise like ubiquitous finger-posts and direct him
by the village path to the communal meadow.  And he permits these things,
and continues to permit them, for he cannot help them, and he is a slave.
Out of his ideas he may weave cunning theories, beautiful ideals; but he
is working with ropes of sand.  At the slightest stress, the last least
bit of cohesion flits away, and each idea flies apart from its fellows,
while all clamour that he do this thing, or think this thing, in the
ancient and time-honoured way.  He is only a clay-born; so he bends his
neck.  He knows further that the clay-born are a pitiful, pitiless
majority, and that he may do nothing which they do not do.

It is only in some way such as this that we may understand and explain
the dignity which attaches itself to dollars.  In the watches of the
night, we may assure ourselves that there is no such dignity; but
jostling with our fellows in the white light of day, we find that it does
exist, and that we ourselves measure ourselves by the dollars we happen
to possess.  They give us confidence and carriage and dignity--ay, a
personal dignity which goes down deeper than the garments with which we
hide our nakedness.  The world, when it knows nothing else of him,
measures a man by his clothes; but the man himself, if he be neither a
genius nor a philosopher, but merely a clay-born, measures himself by his
pocket-book.  He cannot help it, and can no more fling it from him than
can the bashful young man his self-consciousness when crossing a ballroom
floor.

I remember once absenting myself from civilization for weary months.
When I returned, it was to a strange city in another country.  The people
were but slightly removed from my own breed, and they spoke the same
tongue, barring a certain barbarous accent which I learned was far older
than the one imbibed by me with my mother's milk.  A fur cap, soiled and
singed by many camp-fires, half sheltered the shaggy tendrils of my uncut
hair.  My foot-gear was of walrus hide, cunningly blended with seal gut.
The remainder of my dress was as primal and uncouth.  I was a sight to
give merriment to gods and men.  Olympus must have roared at my coming.
The world, knowing me not, could judge me by my clothes alone.  But I
refused to be so judged.  My spiritual backbone stiffened, and I held my
head high, looking all men in the eyes.  And I did these things, not that
I was an egotist, not that I was impervious to the critical glances of my
fellows, but because of a certain hogskin belt, plethoric and
sweat-bewrinkled, which buckled next the skin above the hips.  Oh, it's
absurd, I grant, but had that belt not been so circumstanced, and so
situated, I should have shrunk away into side streets and back alleys,
walking humbly and avoiding all gregarious humans except those who were
likewise abroad without belts.  Why?  I do not know, save that in such
way did my fathers before me.

Viewed in the light of sober reason, the whole thing was preposterous.
But I walked down the gang-plank with the mien of a hero, of a barbarian
who knew himself to be greater than the civilization he invaded.  I was
possessed of the arrogance of a Roman governor.  At last I knew what it
was to be born to the purple, and I took my seat in the hotel carriage as
though it were my chariot about to proceed with me to the imperial
palace.  People discreetly dropped their eyes before my proud gaze, and
into their hearts I know I forced the query, What manner of man can this
mortal be?  I was superior to convention, and the very garb which
otherwise would have damned me tended toward my elevation.  And all this
was due, not to my royal lineage, nor to the deeds I had done and the
champions I had overthrown, but to a certain hogskin belt buckled next
the skin.  The sweat of months was upon it, toil had defaced it, and it
was not a creation such as would appeal to the aesthetic mind; but it was
plethoric.  There was the arcanum; each yellow grain conduced to my
exaltation, and the sum of these grains was the sum of my mightiness.
Had they been less, just so would have been my stature; more, and I
should have reached the sky.

And this was my royal progress through that most loyal city.  I purchased
a host of things from the tradespeople, and bought me such pleasures and
diversions as befitted one who had long been denied.  I scattered my gold
lavishly, nor did I chaffer over prices in mart or exchange.  And,
because of these things I did, I demanded homage.  Nor was it refused.  I
moved through wind-swept groves of limber backs; across sunny glades,
lighted by the beaming rays from a thousand obsequious eyes; and when I
tired of this, basked on the greensward of popular approval.  Money was
very good, I thought, and for the time was content.  But there rushed
upon me the words of Erasmus, "When I get some money I shall buy me some
Greek books, and afterwards some clothes," and a great shame wrapped me
around.  But, luckily for my soul's welfare, I reflected and was saved.
By the clearer vision vouchsafed me, I beheld Erasmus, fire-flashing,
heaven-born, while I--I was merely a clay-born, a son of earth.  For a
giddy moment I had forgotten this, and tottered.  And I rolled over on my
greensward, caught a glimpse of a regiment of undulating backs, and
thanked my particular gods that such moods of madness were passing brief.

But on another day, receiving with kingly condescension the service of my
good subjects' backs, I remembered the words of another man, long since
laid away, who was by birth a nobleman, by nature a philosopher and a
gentleman, and who by circumstance yielded up his head upon the block.
"That a man of lead," he once remarked, "who has no more sense than a log
of wood, and is as bad as he is foolish, should have many wise and good
men to serve him, only because he has a great heap of that metal; and
that if, by some accident or trick of law (which sometimes produces as
great changes as chance itself), all this wealth should pass from the
master to the meanest varlet of his whole family, he himself would very
soon become one of his servants, as if he were a thing that belonged to
his wealth, and so was bound to follow its fortune."

And when I had remembered this much, I unwisely failed to pause and
reflect.  So I gathered my belongings together, cinched my hogskin belt
tight about me, and went away to my own country.  It was a very foolish
thing to do.  I am sure it was.  But when I had recovered my reason, I
fell upon my particular gods and berated them mightily, and as penance
for their watchlessness placed them away amongst dust and cobwebs.  Oh
no, not for long.  They are again enshrined, as bright and polished as of
yore, and my destiny is once more in their keeping.

It is given that travail and vicissitude mark time to man's footsteps as
he stumbles onward toward the grave; and it is well.  Without the bitter
one may not know the sweet.  The other day--nay, it was but yesterday--I
fell before the rhythm of fortune.  The inexorable pendulum had swung the
counter direction, and there was upon me an urgent need.  The hogskin
belt was flat as famine, nor did it longer gird my loins.  From my window
I could descry, at no great distance, a very ordinary mortal of a man,
working industriously among his cabbages.  I thought: Here am I, capable
of teaching him much concerning the field wherein he labours--the
nitrogenic--why of the fertilizer, the alchemy of the sun, the
microscopic cell-structure of the plant, the cryptic chemistry of root
and runner--but thereat he straightened his work-wearied back and rested.
His eyes wandered over what he had produced in the sweat of his brow,
then on to mine.  And as he stood there drearily, he became reproach
incarnate.  "Unstable as water," he said (I am sure he did)--"unstable as
water, thou shalt not excel.  Man, where are _your_ cabbages?"

I shrank back.  Then I waxed rebellious.  I refused to answer the
question.  He had no right to ask it, and his presence was an affront
upon the landscape.  And a dignity entered into me, and my neck was
stiffened, my head poised.  I gathered together certain certificates of
goods and chattels, pointed my heel towards him and his cabbages, and
journeyed townward.  I was yet a man.  There was naught in those
certificates to be ashamed of.  But alack-a-day!  While my heels thrust
the cabbage-man beyond the horizon, my toes were drawing me, faltering,
like a timid old beggar, into a roaring spate of humanity--men, women,
and children without end.  They had no concern with me, nor I with them.
I knew it; I felt it.  Like She, after her fire-bath in the womb of the
world, I dwindled in my own sight.  My feet were uncertain and heavy, and
my soul became as a meal sack, limp with emptiness and tied in the
middle.  People looked upon me scornfully, pitifully, reproachfully.  (I
can swear they did.)  In every eye I read the question, Man, where are
your cabbages?

So I avoided their looks, shrinking close to the kerbstone and by furtive
glances directing my progress.  At last I came hard by the place, and
peering stealthily to the right and left that none who knew might behold
me, I entered hurriedly, in the manner of one committing an abomination.
'Fore God!  I had done no evil, nor had I wronged any man, nor did I
contemplate evil; yet was I aware of evil.  Why?  I do not know, save
that there goes much dignity with dollars, and being devoid of the one I
was destitute of the other.  The person I sought practised a profession
as ancient as the oracles but far more lucrative.  It is mentioned in
Exodus; so it must have been created soon after the foundations of the
world; and despite the thunder of ecclesiastics and the mailed hand of
kings and conquerors, it has endured even to this day.  Nor is it unfair
to presume that the accounts of this most remarkable business will not be
closed until the Trumps of Doom are sounded and all things brought to
final balance.

Wherefore it was in fear and trembling, and with great modesty of spirit,
that I entered the Presence.  To confess that I was shocked were to do my
feelings an injustice.  Perhaps the blame may be shouldered upon Shylock,
Fagin, and their ilk; but I had conceived an entirely different type of
individual.  This man--why, he was clean to look at, his eyes were blue,
with the tired look of scholarly lucubrations, and his skin had the
normal pallor of sedentary existence.  He was reading a book, sober and
leather-bound, while on his finely moulded, intellectual head reposed a
black skull-cap.  For all the world his look and attitude were those of a
college professor.  My heart gave a great leap.  Here was hope!  But no;
he fixed me with a cold and glittering eye, searching with the chill of
space till my financial status stood before him shivering and ashamed.  I
communed with myself: By his brow he is a thinker, but his intellect has
been prostituted to a mercenary exaction of toll from misery.  His nerve
centres of judgment and will have not been employed in solving the
problems of life, but in maintaining his own solvency by the insolvency
of others.  He trades upon sorrow and draws a livelihood from misfortune.
He transmutes tears into treasure, and from nakedness and hunger garbs
himself in clean linen and develops the round of his belly.  He is a
bloodsucker and a vampire.  He lays unholy hands on heaven and hell at
cent. per cent., and his very existence is a sacrilege and a blasphemy.
And yet here am I, wilting before him, an arrant coward, with no respect
for him and less for myself.  Why should this shame be?  Let me rouse in
my strength and smite him, and, by so doing, wipe clean one offensive
page.

But no.  As I said, he fixed me with a cold and glittering eye, and in it
was the aristocrat's undisguised contempt for the _canaille_.  Behind him
was the solid phalanx of a bourgeois society.  Law and order upheld him,
while I titubated, cabbageless, on the ragged edge.  Moreover, he was
possessed of a formula whereby to extract juice from a flattened lemon,
and he would do business with me.

I told him my desires humbly, in quavering syllables.  In return, he
craved my antecedents and residence, pried into my private life,
insolently demanded how many children had I and did I live in wedlock,
and asked divers other unseemly and degrading questions.  Ay, I was
treated like a thief convicted before the act, till I produced my
certificates of goods and chattels aforementioned.  Never had they
appeared so insignificant and paltry as then, when he sniffed over them
with the air of one disdainfully doing a disagreeable task.  It is said,
"Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of
victuals, usury of anything that is lent upon usury"; but he evidently
was not my brother, for he demanded seventy per cent.  I put my signature
to certain indentures, received my pottage, and fled from his presence.

Faugh!  I was glad to be quit of it.  How good the outside air was!  I
only prayed that neither my best friend nor my worst enemy should ever
become aware of what had just transpired.  Ere I had gone a block I
noticed that the sun had brightened perceptibly, the street become less
sordid, the gutter mud less filthy.  In people's eyes the cabbage
question no longer brooded.  And there was a spring to my body, an
elasticity of step as I covered the pavement.  Within me coursed an
unwonted sap, and I felt as though I were about to burst out into leaves
and buds and green things.  My brain was clear and refreshed.  There was
a new strength to my arm.  My nerves were tingling and I was a-pulse with
the times.  All men were my brothers.  Save one--yes, save one.  I would
go back and wreck the establishment.  I would disrupt that leather-bound
volume, violate that black skullcap, burn the accounts.  But before fancy
could father the act, I recollected myself and all which had passed.  Nor
did I marvel at my new-horn might, at my ancient dignity which had
returned.  There was a tinkling chink as I ran the yellow pieces through
my fingers, and with the golden music rippling round me I caught a deeper
insight into the mystery of things.

OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA.
_February_ 1900.




GOLIAH


In 1924--to be precise, on the morning of January 3--the city of San
Francisco awoke to read in one of its daily papers a curious letter,
which had been received by Walter Bassett and which had evidently been
written by some crank.  Walter Bassett was the greatest captain of
industry west of the Rockies, and was one of the small group that
controlled the nation in everything but name.  As such, he was the
recipient of lucubrations from countless cranks; but this particular
lucubration was so different from the average ruck of similar letters
that, instead of putting it into the waste-basket, he had turned it over
to a reporter.  It was signed "Goliah," and the superscription gave his
address as "Palgrave Island."  The letter was as follows:

    "MR. WALTER BASSETT,
    "DEAR SIR:

    "I am inviting you, with nine of your fellow-captains of industry, to
    visit me here on my island for the purpose of considering plans for
    the reconstruction of society upon a more rational basis.  Up to the
    present, social evolution has been a blind and aimless, blundering
    thing.  The time has come for a change.  Man has risen from the
    vitalized slime of the primeval sea to the mastery of matter; but he
    has not yet mastered society.  Man is to-day as much the slave to his
    collective stupidity, as a hundred thousand generations ago he was a
    slave to matter.

    "There are two theoretical methods whereby man may become the master
    of society, and make of society an intelligent and efficacious device
    for the pursuit and capture of happiness and laughter.  The first
    theory advances the proposition that no government can be wiser or
    better than the people that compose that government; that reform and
    development must spring from the individual; that in so far as the
    individuals become wiser and better, by that much will their
    government become wiser and better; in short, that the majority of
    individuals must become wiser and better, before their government
    becomes wiser and better.  The mob, the political convention, the
    abysmal brutality and stupid ignorance of all concourses of people,
    give the lie to this theory.  In a mob the collective intelligence
    and mercy is that of the least intelligent and most brutal members
    that compose the mob.  On the other hand, a thousand passengers will
    surrender themselves to the wisdom and discretion of the captain,
    when their ship is in a storm on the sea.  In such matter, he is the
    wisest and most experienced among them.

    "The second theory advances the proposition that the majority of the
    people are not pioneers, that they are weighted down by the inertia
    of the established; that the government that is representative of
    them represents only their feebleness, and futility, and brutishness;
    that this blind thing called government is not the serf of their
    wills, but that they are the serfs of it; in short, speaking always
    of the great mass, that they do not make government, but that
    government makes them, and that government is and has been a stupid
    and awful monster, misbegotten of the glimmerings of intelligence
    that come from the inertia-crushed mass.

    "Personally, I incline to the second theory.  Also, I am impatient.
    For a hundred thousand generations, from the first social groups of
    our savage forbears, government has remained a monster.  To-day, the
    inertia-crushed mass has less laughter in it than ever before.  In
    spite of man's mastery of matter, human suffering and misery and
    degradation mar the fair world.

    "Wherefore I have decided to step in and become captain of this
    world-ship for a while.  I have the intelligence and the wide vision
    of the skilled expert.  Also, I have the power.  I shall be obeyed.
    The men of all the world shall perform my bidding and make
    governments so that they shall become laughter-producers.  These
    modelled governments I have in mind shall not make the people happy,
    wise, and noble by decree; but they shall give opportunity for the
    people to become happy, wise, and noble.

    "I have spoken.  I have invited you, and nine of your
    fellow-captains, to confer with me.  On March third the yacht
    _Energon_ will sail from San Francisco.  You are requested to be on
    board the night before.  This is serious.  The affairs of the world
    must be handled for a time by a strong hand.  Mine is that strong
    hand.  If you fail to obey my summons, you will die.  Candidly, I do
    not expect that you will obey.  But your death for failure to obey
    will cause obedience on the part of those I subsequently summon.  You
    will have served a purpose.  And please remember that I have no
    unscientific sentimentality about the value of human life.  I carry
    always in the background of my consciousness the innumerable billions
    of lives that are to laugh and be happy in future aeons on the earth.

    "Yours for the reconstruction of society,

                                                                 "GOLIAH."

The publication of this letter did not cause even local amusement.  Men
might have smiled to themselves as they read it, but it was so palpably
the handiwork of a crank that it did not merit discussion.  Interest did
not arouse till next morning.  An Associated Press despatch to the
Eastern states, followed by interviews by eager-nosed reporters, had
brought out the names of the other nine captains of industry who had
received similar letters, but who had not thought the matter of
sufficient importance to be made public.  But the interest aroused was
mild, and it would have died out quickly had not Gabberton cartooned a
chronic presidential aspirant as "Goliah."  Then came the song that was
sung hilariously from sea to sea, with the refrain, "Goliah will catch
you if you don't watch out."

The weeks passed and the incident was forgotten.  Walter Bassett had
forgotten it likewise; but on the evening of February 22, he was called
to the telephone by the Collector of the Port.  "I just wanted to tell
you," said the latter, "that the yacht _Energon_ has arrived and gone to
anchor in the stream off Pier Seven."

What happened that night Walter Bassett has never divulged.  But it is
known that he rode down in his auto to the water front, chartered one of
Crowley's launches, and was put aboard the strange yacht.  It is further
known that when he returned to the shore, three hours later, he
immediately despatched a sheaf of telegrams to his nine fellow-captains
of industry who had received letters from Goliah.  These telegrams were
similarly worded, and read: "The yacht _Energon_ has arrived.  There is
something in this.  I advise you to come."

Bassett was laughed at for his pains.  It was a huge laugh that went up
(for his telegrams had been made public), and the popular song on Goliah
revived and became more popular than ever.  Goliah and Bassett were
cartooned and lampooned unmercifully, the former, as the Old Man of the
Sea, riding on the latter's neck.  The laugh tittered and rippled through
clubs and social circles, was restrainedly merry in the editorial
columns, and broke out in loud guffaws in the comic weeklies.  There was
a serious side as well, and Bassett's sanity was gravely questioned by
many, and especially by his business associates.

Bassett had ever been a short-tempered man, and after he sent the second
sheaf of telegrams to his brother captains, and had been laughed at
again, he remained silent.  In this second sheaf he had said: "Come, I
implore you.  As you value your life, come."  He arranged all his
business affairs for an absence, and on the night of March 2 went on
board the _Energon_.  The latter, properly cleared, sailed next morning.
And next morning the newsboys in every city and town were crying "Extra."

In the slang of the day, Goliah had delivered the goods.  The nine
captains of industry who had failed to accept his invitation were dead.
A sort of violent disintegration of the tissues was the report of the
various autopsies held on the bodies of the slain millionaires; yet the
surgeons and physicians (the most highly skilled in the land had
participated) would not venture the opinion that the men had been slain.
Much less would they venture the conclusion, "at the hands of parties
unknown."  It was all too mysterious.  They were stunned.  Their
scientific credulity broke down.  They had no warrant in the whole domain
of science for believing that an anonymous person on Palgrave Island had
murdered the poor gentlemen.

One thing was quickly learned, however; namely, that Palgrave Island was
no myth.  It was charted and well known to all navigators, lying on the
line of 160 west longitude, right at its intersection by the tenth
parallel north latitude, and only a few miles away from Diana Shoal.
Like Midway and Fanning, Palgrave Island was isolated, volcanic and coral
in formation.  Furthermore, it was uninhabited.  A survey ship, in 1887,
had visited the place and reported the existence of several springs and
of a good harbour that was very dangerous of approach.  And that was all
that was known of the tiny speck of land that was soon to have focussed
on it the awed attention of the world.

Goliah remained silent till March 24.  On the morning of that day, the
newspapers published his second letter, copies of which had been received
by the ten chief politicians of the United States--ten leading men in the
political world who were conventionally known as "statesmen."  The
letter, with the same superscription as before, was as follows:

    "DEAR SIR:

    "I have spoken in no uncertain tone.  I must be obeyed.  You may
    consider this an invitation or a summons; but if you still wish to
    tread this earth and laugh, you will be aboard the yacht _Energon_,
    in San Francisco harbour, not later than the evening of April 5.  It
    is my wish and my will that you confer with me here on Palgrave
    Island in the matter of reconstructing society upon some rational
    basis.

    "Do not misunderstand me, when I tell you that I am one with a
    theory.  I want to see that theory work, and therefore I call upon
    your cooperation.  In this theory of mine, lives are but pawns; I
    deal with quantities of lives.  I am after laughter, and those that
    stand in the way of laughter must perish.  The game is big.  There
    are fifteen hundred million human lives to-day on the planet.  What
    is your single life against them?  It is as naught, in my theory.
    And remember that mine is the power.  Remember that I am a scientist,
    and that one life, or one million of lives, mean nothing to me as
    arrayed against the countless billions of billions of the lives of
    the generations to come.  It is for their laughter that I seek to
    reconstruct society now; and against them your own meagre little life
    is a paltry thing indeed.

    "Whoso has power can command his fellows.  By virtue of that military
    device known as the phalanx, Alexander conquered his bit of the
    world.  By virtue of that chemical device, gunpowder, Cortes with his
    several hundred cut-throats conquered the empire of the Montezumas.
    Now I am in possession of a device that is all my own.  In the course
    of a century not more than half a dozen fundamental discoveries or
    inventions are made.  I have made such an invention.  The possession
    of it gives me the mastery of the world.  I shall use this invention,
    not for commercial exploitation, but for the good of humanity.  For
    that purpose I want help--willing agents, obedient hands; and I am
    strong enough to compel the service.  I am taking the shortest way,
    though I am in no hurry.  I shall not clutter my speed with haste.

    "The incentive of material gain developed man from the savage to the
    semi-barbarian he is to-day.  This incentive has been a useful device
    for the development of the human; but it has now fulfilled its
    function and is ready to be cast aside into the scrap-heap of
    rudimentary vestiges such as gills in the throat and belief in the
    divine right of kings.  Of course you do not think so; but I do not
    see that that will prevent you from aiding me to fling the
    anachronism into the scrap-heap.  For I tell you now that the time
    has come when mere food and shelter and similar sordid things shall
    be automatic, as free and easy and involuntary of access as the air.
    I shall make them automatic, what of my discovery and the power that
    discovery gives me.  And with food and shelter automatic, the
    incentive of material gain passes away from the world for ever.  With
    food and shelter automatic, the higher incentives will universally
    obtain--the spiritual, aesthetic, and intellectual incentives that
    will tend to develop and make beautiful and noble body, mind, and
    spirit.  Then all the world will be dominated by happiness and
    laughter.  It will be the reign of universal laughter.

    "Yours for that day,

                                                                 "GOLIAH."

Still the world would not believe.  The ten politicians were at
Washington, so that they did not have the opportunity of being convinced
that Bassett had had, and not one of them took the trouble to journey out
to San Francisco to make the opportunity.  As for Goliah, he was hailed
by the newspapers as another Tom Lawson with a panacea; and there were
specialists in mental disease who, by analysis of Goliah's letters,
proved conclusively that he was a lunatic.

The yacht _Energon_ arrived in the harbour of San Francisco on the
afternoon of April 5, and Bassett came ashore.  But the _Energon_ did not
sail next day, for not one of the ten summoned politicians had elected to
make the journey to Palgrave Island.  The newsboys, however, called
"Extra" that day in all the cities.  The ten politicians were dead.  The
yacht, lying peacefully at anchor in the harbour, became the centre of
excited interest.  She was surrounded by a flotilla of launches and
rowboats, and many tugs and steamboats ran excursions to her.  While the
rabble was firmly kept off, the proper authorities and even reporters
were permitted to board her.  The mayor of San Francisco and the chief of
police reported that nothing suspicious was to be seen upon her, and the
port authorities announced that her papers were correct and in order in
every detail.  Many photographs and columns of descriptive matter were
run in the newspapers.

The crew was reported to be composed principally of
Scandinavians--fair-haired, blue-eyed Swedes, Norwegians afflicted with
the temperamental melancholy of their race, stolid Russian Finns, and a
slight sprinkling of Americans and English.  It was noted that there was
nothing mercurial and flyaway about them.  They seemed weighty men,
oppressed by a sad and stolid bovine-sort of integrity.  A sober
seriousness and enormous certitude characterized all of them.  They
appeared men without nerves and without fear, as though upheld by some
overwhelming power or carried in the hollow of some superhuman hand.  The
captain, a sad-eyed, strong-featured American, was cartooned in the
papers as "Gloomy Gus" (the pessimistic hero of the comic supplement).

Some sea-captain recognized the _Energon_ as the yacht _Scud_, once owned
by Merrivale of the New York Yacht Club.  With this clue it was soon
ascertained that the _Scud_ had disappeared several years before.  The
agent who sold her reported the purchaser to be merely another agent, a
man he had seen neither before nor since.  The yacht had been
reconstructed at Duffey's Shipyard in New Jersey.  The change in her name
and registry occurred at that time and had been legally executed.  Then
the _Energon_ had disappeared in the shroud of mystery.

In the meantime, Bassett was going crazy--at least his friends and
business associates said so.  He kept away from his vast business
enterprises and said that he must hold his hands until the other masters
of the world could join with him in the reconstruction of society--proof
indubitable that Goliah's bee had entered his bonnet.  To reporters he
had little to say.  He was not at liberty, he said, to relate what he had
seen on Palgrave Island; but he could assure them that the matter was
serious, the most serious thing that had ever happened.  His final word
was that, the world was on the verge of a turnover, for good or ill he
did not know, but, one way or the other, he was absolutely convinced that
the turnover was coming.  As for business, business could go hang.  He
had seen things, he had, and that was all there was to it.

There was a great telegraphing, during this period, between the local
Federal officials and the state and war departments at Washington.  A
secret attempt was made late one afternoon to board the _Energon_ and
place the captain under arrest--the Attorney-General having given the
opinion that the captain could be held for the murder of the ten
"statesmen."  The government launch was seen to leave Meigg's Wharf and
steer for the _Energon_, and that was the last ever seen of the launch
and the men on board of it.  The government tried to keep the affair
hushed up, but the cat was slipped out of the bag by the families of the
missing men, and the papers were filled with monstrous versions of the
affair.

The government now proceeded to extreme measures.  The battleship
_Alaska_ was ordered to capture the strange yacht, or, failing that, to
sink her.  These were secret instructions; but thousands of eyes, from
the water front and from the shipping in the harbour, witnessed what
happened that afternoon.  The battleship got under way and steamed slowly
toward the _Energon_.  At half a mile distant the battleship blew
up--simply blew up, that was all, her shattered frame sinking to the
bottom of the bay, a riff-raff of wreckage and a few survivors strewing
the surface.  Among the survivors was a young lieutenant who had had
charge of the wireless on board the _Alaska_.  The reporters got hold of
him first, and he talked.  No sooner had the _Alaska_ got under way, he
said, than a message was received from the _Energon_.  It was in the
international code, and it was a warning to the _Alaska_ to come no
nearer than half a mile.  He had sent the message, through the speaking
tube, immediately to the captain.  He did not know anything more, except
that the _Energon_ twice repeated the message and that five minutes
afterward the explosion occurred.  The captain of the _Alaska_ had
perished with his ship, and nothing more was to be learned.

The _Energon_, however, promptly hoisted anchor and cleared out to sea.
A great clamour was raised by the papers; the government was charged with
cowardice and vacillation in its dealings with a mere pleasure yacht and
a lunatic who called himself "Goliah," and immediate and decisive action
was demanded.  Also, a great cry went up about the loss of life,
especially the wanton killing of the ten "statesmen."  Goliah promptly
replied.  In fact, so prompt was his reply that the experts in wireless
telegraphy announced that, since it was impossible to send wireless
messages so great a distance, Goliah was in their very midst and not on
Palgrave Island.  Goliah's letter was delivered to the Associated Press
by a messenger boy who had been engaged on the street.  The letter was as
follows:

    "What are a few paltry lives?  In your insane wars you destroy
    millions of lives and think nothing of it.  In your fratricidal
    commercial struggle you kill countless babes, women, and men, and you
    triumphantly call the shambles 'individualism.'  I call it anarchy.
    I am going to put a stop to your wholesale destruction of human
    beings.  I want laughter, not slaughter.  Those of you who stand in
    the way of laughter will get slaughter.

    "Your government is trying to delude you into believing that the
    destruction of the _Alaska_ was an accident.  Know here and now that
    it was by my orders that the _Alaska_ was destroyed.  In a few short
    months, all battleships on all seas will be destroyed or flung to the
    scrap-heap, and all nations shall disarm; fortresses shall be
    dismantled, armies disbanded, and warfare shall cease from the earth.
    Mine is the power.  I am the will of God.  The whole world shall be
    in vassalage to me, but it shall be a vassalage of peace.

                                                                     "I am
                                                                 "GOLIAH."

"Blow Palgrave Island out of the water!" was the head-line retort of the
newspapers.  The government was of the same frame of mind, and the
assembling of the fleets began.  Walter Bassett broke out in ineffectual
protest, but was swiftly silenced by the threat of a lunacy commission.
Goliah remained silent.  Against Palgrave Island five great fleets were
hurled--the Asiatic Squadron, the South Pacific Squadron, the North
Pacific Squadron, the Caribbean Squadron, and half of the North Atlantic
Squadron, the two latter coming through the Panama Canal.

"I have the honour to report that we sighted Palgrave Island on the
evening of April 29," ran the report of Captain Johnson, of the
battleship _North Dakota_, to the Secretary of the Navy.  "The Asiatic
Squadron was delayed and did not arrive until the morning of April 30.  A
council of the admirals was held, and it was decided to attack early next
morning.  The destroyer, _Swift VII_, crept in, unmolested, and reported
no warlike preparations on the island.  It noted several small merchant
steamers in the harbour, and the existence of a small village in a
hopelessly exposed position that could be swept by our fire.

"It had been decided that all the vessels should rush in, scattered, upon
the island, opening fire at three miles, and continuing to the edge of
the reef, there to retain loose formation and engage.  Palgrave Island
repeatedly warned us, by wireless, in the international code, to keep
outside the ten-mile limit; but no heed was paid to the warnings.

"The _North Dakota_ did not take part in the movement of the morning of
May 1.  This was due to a slight accident of the preceding night that
temporarily disabled her steering-gear.  The morning of May 1 broke clear
and calm.  There was a slight breeze from the south-west that quickly
died away.  The _North Dakota_ lay twelve miles off the island.  At the
signal the squadrons charged in upon the island, from all sides, at full
speed.  Our wireless receiver continued to tick off warnings from the
island.  The ten-mile limit was passed, and nothing happened.  I watched
through my glasses.  At five miles nothing happened; at four miles
nothing happened; at three miles, the _New York_, in the lead on our side
of the island, opened fire.  She fired only one shot.  Then she blew up.
The rest of the vessels never fired a shot.  They began to blow up,
everywhere, before our eyes.  Several swerved about and started back, but
they failed to escape.  The destroyer, _Dart XXX_, nearly made the
ten-mile limit when she blew up.  She was the last survivor.  No harm
came to the _North Dakota_, and that night, the steering-gear being
repaired, I gave orders to sail for San Francisco."

To say that the United States was stunned is but to expose the inadequacy
of language.  The whole world was stunned.  It confronted that blight of
the human brain, the unprecedented.  Human endeavour was a jest, a
monstrous futility, when a lunatic on a lonely island, who owned a yacht
and an exposed village, could destroy five of the proudest fleets of
Christendom.  And how had he done it?  Nobody knew.  The scientists lay
down in the dust of the common road and wailed and gibbered.  They did
not know.  Military experts committed suicide by scores.  The mighty
fabric of warfare they had fashioned was a gossamer veil rent asunder by
a miserable lunatic.  It was too much for their sanity.  Mere human
reason could not withstand the shock.  As the savage is crushed by the
sleight-of-hand of the witch doctor, so was the world crushed by the
magic of Goliah.  How did he do it?  It was the awful face of the Unknown
upon which the world gazed and by which it was frightened out of the
memory of its proudest achievements.

But all the world was not stunned.  There was the invariable
exception--the Island Empire of Japan.  Drunken with the wine of success
deep-quaffed, without superstition and without faith in aught but its own
ascendant star, laughing at the wreckage of science and mad with pride of
race, it went forth upon the way of war.  America's fleets had been
destroyed.  From the battlements of heaven the multitudinous ancestral
shades of Japan leaned down.  The opportunity, God-given, had come.  The
Mikado was in truth a brother to the gods.

The war-monsters of Japan were loosed in mighty fleets.  The Philippines
were gathered in as a child gathers a nosegay.  It took longer for the
battleships to travel to Hawaii, to Panama, and to the Pacific Coast.
The United States was panic-stricken, and there arose the powerful party
of dishonourable peace.  In the midst of the clamour the _Energon_
arrived in San Francisco Bay and Goliah spoke once more.  There was a
little brush as the _Energon_ came in, and a few explosions of magazines
occurred along the war-tunnelled hills as the coast defences went to
smash.  Also, the blowing up of the submarine mines in the Golden Gate
made a remarkably fine display.  Goliah's message to the people of San
Francisco, dated as usual from Palgrave Island, was published in the
papers.  It ran:

    "Peace?  Peace be with you.  You shall have peace.  I have spoken to
    this purpose before.  And give you me peace.  Leave my yacht
    _Energon_ alone.  Commit one overt act against her and not one stone
    in San Francisco shall stand upon another.

    "To-morrow let all good citizens go out upon the hills that slope
    down to the sea.  Go with music and laughter and garlands.  Make
    festival for the new age that is dawning.  Be like children upon your
    hills, and witness the passing of war.  Do not miss the opportunity.
    It is your last chance to behold what henceforth you will be
    compelled to seek in museums of antiquities.

                                               "I promise you a merry day,
                                                                 "GOLIAH."

The madness of magic was in the air.  With the people it was as if all
their gods had crashed and the heavens still stood.  Order and law had
passed away from the universe; but the sun still shone, the wind still
blew, the flowers still bloomed--that was the amazing thing about it.
That water should continue to run downhill was a miracle.  All the
stabilities of the human mind and human achievement were crumbling.  The
one stable thing that remained was Goliah, a madman on an island.  And so
it was that the whole population of San Francisco went forth next day in
colossal frolic upon the hills that overlooked the sea.  Brass bands and
banners went forth, brewery wagons and Sunday-school picnics--all the
strange heterogeneous groupings of swarming metropolitan life.

On the sea-rim rose the smoke from the funnels of a hundred hostile
vessels of war, all converging upon the helpless, undefended Golden Gate.
And not all undefended, for out through the Golden Gate moved the
_Energon_, a tiny toy of white, rolling like a straw in the stiff sea on
the bar where a strong ebb-tide ran in the teeth of the summer
sea-breeze.  But the Japanese were cautious.  Their thirty- and
forty-thousand-ton battleships slowed down half a dozen miles offshore
and manoeuvred in ponderous evolutions, while tiny scout-boats (lean,
six-funnelled destroyers) ran in, cutting blackly the flashing sea like
so many sharks.  But, compared with the _Energon_, they were leviathans.
Compared with them, the _Energon_ was as the sword of the arch-angel
Michael, and they the forerunners of the hosts of hell.

But the flashing of the sword, the good people of San Francisco, gathered
on her hills, never saw.  Mysterious, invisible, it cleaved the air and
smote the mightiest blows of combat the world had ever witnessed.  The
good people of San Francisco saw little and understood less.  They saw
only a million and a half tons of brine-cleaving, thunder-flinging
fabrics hurled skyward and smashed back in ruin to sink into the sea.  It
was all over in five minutes.  Remained upon the wide expanse of sea only
the _Energon_, rolling white and toylike on the bar.

Goliah spoke to the Mikado and the Elder Statesmen.  It was only an
ordinary cable message, despatched from San Francisco by the captain of
the _Energon_, but it was of sufficient moment to cause the immediate
withdrawal of Japan from the Philippines and of her surviving fleets from
the sea.  Japan the sceptical was converted.  She had felt the weight of
Goliah's arm.  And meekly she obeyed when Goliah commanded her to
dismantle her war vessels and to turn the metal into useful appliances
for the arts of peace.  In all the ports, navy-yards, machine-shops, and
foundries of Japan tens of thousands of brown-skinned artisans converted
the war-monsters into myriads of useful things, such as ploughshares
(Goliah insisted on ploughshares), gasolene engines, bridge-trusses,
telephone and telegraph wires, steel rails, locomotives, and rolling
stock for railways.  It was a world-penance for a world to see, and
paltry indeed it made appear that earlier penance, barefooted in the
snow, of an emperor to a pope for daring to squabble over temporal power.

Goliah's next summons was to the ten leading scientists of the United
States.  This time there was no hesitancy in obeying.  The savants were
ludicrously prompt, some of them waiting in San Francisco for weeks so as
not to miss the scheduled sailing-date.  They departed on the _Energon_
on June 15; and while they were on the sea, on the way to Palgrave
Island, Goliah performed another spectacular feat.  Germany and France
were preparing to fly at each other's throats.  Goliah commanded peace.
They ignored the command, tacitly agreeing to fight it out on land where
it seemed safer for the belligerently inclined.  Goliah set the date of
June 19 for the cessation of hostile preparations.  Both countries
mobilized their armies on June 18, and hurled them at the common
frontier.  And on June 19, Goliah struck.  All generals, war-secretaries,
and jingo-leaders in the two countries died on that day; and that day two
vast armies, undirected, like strayed sheep, walked over each other's
frontiers and fraternized.  But the great German war lord had escaped--it
was learned, afterward, by hiding in the huge safe where were stored the
secret archives of his empire.  And when he emerged he was a very
penitent war lord, and like the Mikado of Japan he was set to work
beating his sword-blades into ploughshares and pruning-hooks.

But in the escape of the German Emperor was discovered a great
significance.  The scientists of the world plucked up courage, got back
their nerve.  One thing was conclusively evident--Goliah's power was not
magic.  Law still reigned in the universe.  Goliah's power had
limitations, else had the German Emperor not escaped by secretly hiding
in a steel safe.  Many learned articles on the subject appeared in the
magazines.

The ten scientists arrived back from Palgrave Island on July 6.  Heavy
platoons of police protected them from the reporters.  No, they had not
see Goliah, they said in the one official interview that was vouchsafed;
but they had talked with him, and they had seen things.  They were not
permitted to state definitely all that they had seen and heard, but they
could say that the world was about to be revolutionized.  Goliah was in
the possession of a tremendous discovery that placed all the world at his
mercy, and it was a good thing for the world that Goliah was merciful.
The ten scientists proceeded directly to Washington on a special train,
where, for days, they were closeted with the heads of government, while
the nation hung breathless on the outcome.

But the outcome was a long time in arriving.  From Washington the
President issued commands to the masters and leading figures of the
nation.  Everything was secret.  Day by day deputations of bankers,
railway lords, captains of industry, and Supreme Court justices arrived;
and when they arrived they remained.  The weeks dragged on, and then, on
August 25, began the famous issuance of proclamations.  Congress and the
Senate co-operated with the President in this, while the Supreme Court
justices gave their sanction and the money lords and the captains of
industry agreed.  War was declared upon the capitalist masters of the
nation.  Martial law was declared over the whole United States.  The
supreme power was vested in the President.

In one day, child-labour in the whole country was abolished.  It was done
by decree, and the United States was prepared with its army to enforce
its decrees.  In the same day all women factory workers were dismissed to
their homes, and all the sweat-shops were closed.  "But we cannot make
profits!" wailed the petty capitalists.  "Fools!" was the retort of
Goliah.  "As if the meaning of life were profits!  Give up your
businesses and your profit-mongering."  "But there is nobody to buy our
business!" they wailed.  "Buy and sell--is that all the meaning life has
for you?" replied Goliah.  "You have nothing to sell.  Turn over your
little cut-throating, anarchistic businesses to the government so that
they may be rationally organized and operated."  And the next day, by
decree, the government began taking possession of all factories, shops,
mines, ships, railroads, and producing lands.

The nationalization of the means of production and distribution went on
apace.  Here and there were sceptical capitalists of moment.  They were
made prisoners and haled to Palgrave Island, and when they returned they
always acquiesced in what the government was doing.  A little later the
journey to Palgrave Island became unnecessary.  When objection was made,
the reply of the officials was "Goliah has spoken"--which was another way
of saying, "He must be obeyed."

The captains of industry became heads of departments.  It was found that
civil engineers, for instance, worked just as well in government employ
as before, they had worked in private employ.  It was found that men of
high executive ability could not violate their nature.  They could not
escape exercising their executive ability, any more than a crab could
escape crawling or a bird could escape flying.  And so it was that all
the splendid force of the men who had previously worked for themselves
was now put to work for the good of society.  The half-dozen great
railway chiefs co-operated in the organizing of a national system of
railways that was amazingly efficacious.  Never again was there such a
thing as a car shortage.  These chiefs were not the Wall Street railway
magnates, but they were the men who formerly had done the real work while
in the employ of the Wall Street magnates.

Wall Street was dead.  There was no more buying and selling and
speculating.  Nobody had anything to buy or sell.  There was nothing in
which to speculate.  "Put the stock gamblers to work," said Goliah; "give
those that are young, and that so desire, a chance to learn useful
trades."  "Put the drummers, and salesmen, and advertising agents, and
real estate agents to work," said Goliah; and by hundreds of thousands
the erstwhile useless middlemen and parasites went into useful
occupations.  The four hundred thousand idle gentlemen of the country who
had lived upon incomes were likewise put to work.  Then there were a lot
of helpless men in high places who were cleared out, the remarkable thing
about this being that they were cleared out by their own fellows.  Of
this class were the professional politicians, whose wisdom and power
consisted of manipulating machine politics and of grafting.  There was no
longer any graft.  Since there were no private interests to purchase
special privileges, no bribes were offered to legislators, and
legislators for the first time legislated for the people.  The result was
that men who were efficient, not in corruption, but in direction, found
their way into the legislatures.

With this rational organization of society amazing results were brought
about.  The national day's work was eight hours, and yet production
increased.  In spite of the great permanent improvements and of the
immense amount of energy consumed in systematizing the competitive chaos
of society, production doubled and tripled upon itself.  The standard of
living increased, and still consumption could not keep up with
production.  The maximum working age was decreased to fifty years, to
forty-nine years, and to forty-eight years.  The minimum working age went
up from sixteen years to eighteen years.  The eight-hour day became a
seven-hour day, and in a few months the national working day was reduced
to five hours.

In the meantime glimmerings were being caught, not of the identity of
Goliah, but of how he had worked and prepared for his assuming control of
the world.  Little things leaked out, clues were followed up, apparently
unrelated things were pieced together.  Strange stories of blacks stolen
from Africa were remembered, of Chinese and Japanese contract coolies who
had mysteriously disappeared, of lonely South Sea Islands raided and
their inhabitants carried away; stories of yachts and merchant steamers,
mysteriously purchased, that had disappeared and the descriptions of
which remotely tallied with the crafts that had carried the Orientals and
Africans and islanders away.  Where had Goliah got the sinews of war? was
the question.  And the surmised answer was: By exploiting these stolen
labourers.  It was they that lived in the exposed village on Palgrave
Island.  It was the product of their toil that had purchased the yachts
and merchant steamers and enabled Goliah's agents to permeate society and
carry out his will.  And what was the product of their toil that had
given Goliah the wealth necessary to realize his plans?  Commercial
radium, the newspapers proclaimed; and radiyte, and radiosole, and
argatium, and argyte, and the mysterious golyte (that had proved so
valuable in metallurgy).  These were the new compounds, discovered in the
first decade of the twentieth century, the commercial and scientific use
of which had become so enormous in the second decade.

The line of fruit boats that ran from Hawaii to San Francisco was
declared to be the property of Goliah.  This was a surmise, for no other
owner could be discovered, and the agents who handled the shipments of
the fruit boats were only agents.  Since no one else owned the fruit
boats, then Goliah must own them.  The point of which is: _that it leaked
out that the major portion of the world's supply in these precious
compounds was brought to San Francisco by those very fruit boats_.  That
the whole chain of surmise was correct was proved in later years when
Goliah's slaves were liberated and honourably pensioned by the
international government of the world.  It was at that time that the seal
of secrecy was lifted from the lips of his agents and higher emissaries,
and those that chose revealed much of the mystery of Goliah's
organization and methods.  His destroying angels, however, remained for
ever dumb.  Who the men were who went forth to the high places and killed
at his bidding will be unknown to the end of time--for kill they did, by
means of that very subtle and then-mysterious force that Goliah had
discovered and named "Energon."

But at that time Energon, the little giant that was destined to do the
work of the world, was unknown and undreamed of.  Only Goliah knew, and
he kept his secret well.  Even his agents, who were armed with it, and
who, in the case of the yacht _Energon_, destroyed a mighty fleet of
war-ships by exploding their magazines, knew not what the subtle and
potent force was, nor how it was manufactured.  They knew only one of its
many uses, and in that one use they had been instructed by Goliah.  It is
now well known that radium, and radiyte, and radiosole, and all the other
compounds, were by-products of the manufacture of Energon by Goliah from
the sunlight; but at that time nobody knew what Energon was, and Goliah
continued to awe and rule the world.

One of the uses of Energon was in wireless telegraphy.  It was by its
means that Goliah was able to communicate with his agents all over the
world.  At that time the apparatus required by an agent was so clumsy
that it could not be packed in anything less than a fair-sized steamer
trunk.  To-day, thanks to the improvements of Hendsoll, the perfected
apparatus can be carried in a coat pocket.

It was in December, 1924, that Goliah sent out his famous "Christmas
Letter," part of the text of which is here given:

    "So far, while I have kept the rest of the nations from each other's
    throats, I have devoted myself particularly to the United States.
    Now I have not given to the people of the United States a rational
    social organization.  What I have done has been to compel them to
    make that organization themselves.  There is more laughter in the
    United States these days, and there is more sense.  Food and shelter
    are no longer obtained by the anarchistic methods of so-called
    individualism but are now wellnigh automatic.  And the beauty of it
    is that the people of the United States have achieved all this for
    themselves.  I did not achieve it for them.  I repeat, they achieved
    it for themselves.  All that I did was to put the fear of death in
    the hearts of the few that sat in the high places and obstructed the
    coming of rationality and laughter.  The fear of death made those in
    the high places get out of the way, that was all, and gave the
    intelligence of man a chance to realize itself socially.

    "In the year that is to come I shall devote myself to the rest of the
    world.  I shall put the fear of death in the hearts of all that sit
    in the high places in all the nations.  And they will do as they have
    done in the United States--get down out of the high places and give
    the intelligence of man a chance for social rationality.  All the
    nations shall tread the path the United States is now on.

    "And when all the nations are well along on that path, I shall have
    something else for them.  But first they must travel that path for
    themselves.  They must demonstrate that the intelligence of mankind
    to-day, with the mechanical energy now at its disposal, is capable of
    organizing society so that food and shelter be made automatic, labour
    be reduced to a three-hour day, and joy and laughter be made
    universal.  And when that is accomplished, not by me but by the
    intelligence of mankind, then I shall make a present to the world of
    a new mechanical energy.  This is my discovery.  This Energon is
    nothing more nor less than the cosmic energy that resides in the
    solar rays.  When it is harnessed by mankind it will do the work of
    the world.  There will be no more multitudes of miners slaving out
    their lives in the bowels of the earth, no more sooty firemen and
    greasy engineers.  All may dress in white if they so will.  The work
    of life will have become play and young and old will be the children
    of joy, and the business of living will become joy; and they will
    compete, one with another, in achieving ethical concepts and
    spiritual heights, in fashioning pictures and songs, and stories, in
    statecraft and beauty craft, in the sweat and the endeavour of the
    wrestler and the runner and the player of games--all will compete,
    not for sordid coin and base material reward, but for the joy that
    shall be theirs in the development and vigour of flesh and in the
    development and keenness of spirit.  All will be joy-smiths, and
    their task shall be to beat out laughter from the ringing anvil of
    life.

    "And now one word for the immediate future.  On New Year's Day all
    nations shall disarm, all fortresses and war-ships shall be
    dismantled, and all armies shall be disbanded.

                                                                 "GOLIAH."

On New Year's Day all the world disarmed.  The millions of soldiers and
sailors and workmen in the standing armies, in the navies, and in the
countless arsenals, machine-shops, and factories for the manufacture of
war machinery, were dismissed to their homes.  These many millions of
men, as well as their costly war machinery, had hitherto been supported
on the back of labour.  They now went into useful occupations, and the
released labour giant heaved a mighty sigh of relief.  The policing of
the world was left to the peace officers and was purely social, whereas
war had been distinctly anti-social.

Ninety per cent. of the crimes against society had been crimes against
private property.  With the passing of private property, at least in the
means of production, and with the organization of industry that gave
every man a chance, the crimes against private property practically
ceased.  The police forces everywhere were reduced repeatedly and again
and again.  Nearly all occasional and habitual criminals ceased
voluntarily from their depredations.  There was no longer any need for
them to commit crime.  They merely changed with changing conditions.  A
smaller number of criminals was put into hospitals and cured.  And the
remnant of the hopelessly criminal and degenerate was segregated.  And
the courts in all countries were likewise decreased in number again and
again.  Ninety-five per cent. of all civil cases had been squabbles over
property, conflicts of property-rights, lawsuits, contests of wills,
breaches of contract, bankruptcies, etc.  With the passing of private
property, this ninety-five per cent. of the cases that cluttered the
courts also passed.  The courts became shadows, attenuated ghosts,
rudimentary vestiges of the anarchistic times that had preceded the
coming of Goliah.

The year 1925 was a lively year in the world's history.  Goliah ruled the
world with a strong hand.  Kings and emperors journeyed to Palgrave
Island, saw the wonders of Energon, and went away, with the fear of death
in their hearts, to abdicate thrones and crowns and hereditary licenses.
When Goliah spoke to politicians (so-called "statesmen"), they obeyed . . .
or died.  He dictated universal reforms, dissolved refractory
parliaments, and to the great conspiracy that was formed of mutinous
money lords and captains of industry he sent his destroying angels.  "The
time is past for fooling," he told them.  "You are anachronisms.  You
stand in the way of humanity.  To the scrap-heap with you."  To those
that protested, and they were many, he said: "This is no time for
logomachy.  You can argue for centuries.  It is what you have done in the
past.  I have no time for argument.  Get out of the way."

With the exception of putting a stop to war, and of indicating the broad
general plan, Goliah did nothing.  By putting the fear of death into the
hearts of those that sat in the high places and obstructed progress,
Goliah made the opportunity for the unshackled intelligence of the best
social thinkers of the world to exert itself.  Goliah left all the
multitudinous details of reconstruction to these social thinkers.  He
wanted them to prove that they were able to do it, and they proved it.
It was due to their initiative that the white plague was stamped out from
the world.  It was due to them, and in spite of a deal of protesting from
the sentimentalists, that all the extreme hereditary inefficients were
segregated and denied marriage.

Goliah had nothing whatever to do with the instituting of the colleges of
invention.  This idea originated practically simultaneously in the minds
of thousands of social thinkers.  The time was ripe for the realization
of the idea, and everywhere arose the splendid institutions of invention.
For the first time the ingenuity of man was loosed upon the problem of
simplifying life, instead of upon the making of money-earning devices.
The affairs of life, such as house-cleaning, dish and window-washing,
dust-removing, and scrubbing and clothes-washing, and all the endless
sordid and necessary details, were simplified by invention until they
became automatic.  We of to-day cannot realize the barbarously filthy and
slavish lives of those that lived prior to 1925.

The international government of the world was another idea that sprang
simultaneously into the minds of thousands.  The successful realization
of this idea was a surprise to many, but as a surprise it was nothing to
that received by the mildly protestant sociologists and biologists when
irrefutable facts exploded the doctrine of Malthus.  With leisure and joy
in the world; with an immensely higher standard of living; and with the
enormous spaciousness of opportunity for recreation, development, and
pursuit of beauty and nobility and all the higher attributes, the
birth-rate fell, and fell astoundingly.  People ceased breeding like
cattle.  And better than that, it was immediately noticeable that a
higher average of children was being born.  The doctrine of Malthus was
knocked into a cocked hat--or flung to the scrap-heap, as Goliah would
have put it.

All that Goliah had predicted that the intelligence of mankind could
accomplish with the mechanical energy at its disposal, came to pass.
Human dissatisfaction practically disappeared.  The elderly people were
the great grumblers; but when they were honourably pensioned by society,
as they passed the age limit for work, the great majority ceased
grumbling.  They found themselves better off in their idle old days under
the new regime, enjoying vastly more pleasure and comforts than they had
in their busy and toilsome youth under the old regime.  The younger
generation had easily adapted itself too the changed order, and the very
young had never known anything else.  The sum of human happiness had
increased enormously.  The world had become gay and sane.  Even the old
fogies of professors of sociology, who had opposed with might and main
the coming of the new regime, made no complaint.  They were a score of
times better remunerated than in the old days, and they were not worked
nearly so hard.  Besides, they were busy revising sociology and writing
new text-books on the subject.  Here and there, it is true, there were
atavisms, men who yearned for the flesh-pots and cannibal-feasts of the
old alleged "individualism," creatures long of teeth and savage of claw
who wanted to prey upon their fellow-men; but they were looked upon as
diseased, and were treated in hospitals.  A small remnant, however,
proved incurable, and was confined in asylums and denied marriage.  Thus
there was no progeny to inherit their atavistic tendencies.

As the years went by, Goliah dropped out of the running of the world.
There was nothing for him to run.  The world was running itself, and
doing it smoothly and beautifully.  In 1937, Goliah made his
long-promised present of Energon to the world.  He himself had devised a
thousand ways in which the little giant should do the work of the
world--all of which he made public at the same time.  But instantly the
colleges of invention seized upon Energon and utilized it in a hundred
thousand additional ways.  In fact, as Goliah confessed in his letter of
March 1938, the colleges of invention cleared up several puzzling
features of Energon that had baffled him during the preceding years.
With the introduction of the use of Energon the two-hour work-day was cut
down almost to nothing.  As Goliah had predicted, work indeed became
play.  And, so tremendous was man's productive capacity, due to Energon
and the rational social utilization of it, that the humblest citizen
enjoyed leisure and time and opportunity for an immensely greater
abundance of living than had the most favoured under the old anarchistic
system.

Nobody had ever seen Goliah, and all peoples began to clamour for their
saviour to appear.  While the world did not minimize his discovery of
Energon, it was decided that greater than that was his wide social
vision.  He was a superman, a scientific superman; and the curiosity of
the world to see him had become wellnigh unbearable.  It was in 1941,
after much hesitancy on his part, that he finally emerged from Palgrave
Island.  He arrived on June 6 in San Francisco, and for the first time,
since his retirement to Palgrave Island, the world looked upon his face.
And the world was disappointed.  Its imagination had been touched.  An
heroic figure had been made out of Goliah.  He was the man, or the
demi-god, rather, who had turned the planet over.  The deeds of
Alexander, Caesar, Genghis Khan, and Napoleon were as the play of babes
alongside his colossal achievements.

And ashore in San Francisco and through its streets stepped and rode a
little old man, sixty-five years of age, well preserved, with a
pink-and-white complexion and a bald spot on his head the size of an
apple.  He was short-sighted and wore spectacles.  But when the
spectacles were removed, his were quizzical blue eyes like a child's,
filled with mild wonder at the world.  Also his eyes had a way of
twinkling, accompanied by a screwing up of the face, as if he laughed at
the huge joke he had played upon the world, trapping it, in spite of
itself, into happiness and laughter.

For a scientific superman and world tyrant, he had remarkable weaknesses.
He loved sweets, and was inordinately fond of salted almonds and salted
pecans, especially of the latter.  He always carried a paper bag of them
in his pocket, and he had a way of saying frequently that the chemism of
his nature demanded such fare.  Perhaps his most astonishing failing was
cats.  He had an ineradicable aversion to that domestic animal.  It will
be remembered that he fainted dead away with sudden fright, while
speaking in Brotherhood Palace, when the janitor's cat walked out upon
the stage and brushed against his legs.

But no sooner had he revealed himself to the world than he was
identified.  Old-time friends had no difficulty in recognizing him as
Percival Stultz, the German-American who, in 1898, had worked in the
Union Iron Works, and who, for two years at that time, had been secretary
of Branch 369 of the International Brotherhood of Machinists.  It was in
1901, then twenty-five years of age, that he had taken special scientific
courses at the University of California, at the same time supporting
himself by soliciting what was then known as "life insurance."  His
records as a student are preserved in the university museum, and they are
unenviable.  He is remembered by the professors he sat under chiefly for
his absent-mindedness.  Undoubtedly, even then, he was catching glimpses
of the wide visions that later were to be his.

His naming himself "Goliah" and shrouding himself in mystery was his
little joke, he later explained.  As Goliah, or any other thing like
that, he said, he was able to touch the imagination of the world and turn
it over; but as Percival Stultz, wearing side-whiskers and spectacles,
and weighing one hundred and eighteen pounds, he would have been unable
to turn over a pecan--"not even a salted pecan."

But the world quickly got over its disappointment in his personal
appearance and antecedents.  It knew him and revered him as the
master-mind of the ages; and it loved him for himself, for his quizzical
short-sighted eyes and the inimitable way in which he screwed up his face
when he laughed; it loved him for his simplicity and comradeship and warm
humanness, and for his fondness for salted pecans and his aversion to
cats.  And to-day, in the wonder-city of Asgard, rises in awful beauty
that monument to him that dwarfs the pyramids and all the monstrous
blood-stained monuments of antiquity.  And on that monument, as all know,
is inscribed in imperishable bronze the prophecy and the fulfilment: "ALL
WILL BE JOY-SMITHS, AND THEIR TASK SHALL BE TO BEAT OUT LAUGHTER FROM THE
RINGING ANVIL OF LIFE."

[EDITORIAL NOTE.--This remarkable production is the work of Harry
Beckwith, a student in the Lowell High School of San Francisco, and it is
here reproduced chiefly because of the youth of its author.  Far be it
from our policy to burden our readers with ancient history; and when it
is known that Harry Beckwith was only fifteen when the fore-going was
written, our motive will be understood.  "Goliah" won the Premier for
high school composition in 2254, and last year Harry Beckwith took
advantage of the privilege earned, by electing to spend six months in
Asgard.  The wealth of historical detail, the atmosphere of the times,
and the mature style of the composition are especially noteworthy in one
so young.]




THE GOLDEN POPPY


I have a poppy field.  That is, by the grace of God and the good-nature
of editors, I am enabled to place each month divers gold pieces into a
clerical gentleman's hands, and in return for said gold pieces I am each
month reinvested with certain proprietary-rights in a poppy field.  This
field blazes on the rim of the Piedmont Hills.  Beneath lies all the
world.  In the distance, across the silver sweep of bay, San Francisco
smokes on her many hills like a second Rome.  Not far away, Mount
Tamalpais thrusts a rugged shoulder into the sky; and midway between is
the Golden Gate, where sea mists love to linger.  From the poppy field we
often see the shimmering blue of the Pacific beyond, and the busy ships
that go for ever out and in.

"We shall have great joy in our poppy field," said Bess.  "Yes," said I;
"how the poor city folk will envy when they come to see us, and how we
will make all well again when we send them off with great golden
armfuls!"

"But those things will have to come down," I added, pointing to numerous
obtrusive notices (relics of the last tenant) displayed conspicuously
along the boundaries, and bearing, each and all, this legend:

    "_Private Grounds_.  _No Trespassing_."

"Why should we refuse the poor city folk a ramble over our field,
because, forsooth, they have not the advantage of our acquaintance?"

"How I abhor such things," said Bess; "the arrogant symbols of power."

"They disgrace human nature," said I.

"They shame the generous landscape," she said, "and they are abominable."

"Piggish!" quoth I, hotly.  "Down with them!"

We looked forward to the coming of the poppies, did Bess and I, looked
forward as only creatures of the city may look who have been long denied.
I have forgotten to mention the existence of a house above the poppy
field, a squat and wandering bungalow in which we had elected to forsake
town traditions and live in fresher and more vigorous ways.  The first
poppies came, orange-yellow and golden in the standing grain, and we went
about gleefully, as though drunken with their wine, and told each other
that the poppies were there.  We laughed at unexpected moments, in the
midst of silences, and at times grew ashamed and stole forth secretly to
gaze upon our treasury.  But when the great wave of poppy-flame finally
spilled itself down the field, we shouted aloud, and danced, and clapped
our hands, freely and frankly mad.

And then came the Goths.  My face was in a lather, the time of the first
invasion, and I suspended my razor in mid-air to gaze out on my beloved
field.  At the far end I saw a little girl and a little boy, their arms
filled with yellow spoil.  Ah, thought I, an unwonted benevolence
burgeoning, what a delight to me is their delight!  It is sweet that
children should pick poppies in my field.  All summer shall they pick
poppies in my field.  But they must be little children, I added as an
afterthought, and they must pick from the lower end--this last prompted
by a glance at the great golden fellows nodding in the wheat beneath my
window.  Then the razor descended.  Shaving was always an absorbing task,
and I did not glance out of the window again until the operation was
completed.  And then I was bewildered.  Surely this was not my poppy
field.  No--and yes, for there were the tall pines clustering austerely
together on one side, the magnolia tree burdened with bloom, and the
Japanese quinces splashing the driveway hedge with blood.  Yes, it was
the field, but no wave of poppy-flame spilled down it, nor did the great
golden fellows nod in the wheat beneath my window.  I rushed into a
jacket and out of the house.  In the far distance were disappearing two
huge balls of colour, orange and yellow, for all the world like
perambulating poppies of cyclopean breed.

"Johnny," said I to the nine-year-old son of my sister, "Johnny, whenever
little girls come into our field to pick poppies, you must go down to
them, and in a very quiet and gentlemanly manner, tell them it is not
allowed."

Warm days came, and the sun drew another blaze from the free-bosomed
earth.  Whereupon a neighbour's little girl, at the behest of her mother,
duly craved and received permission from Bess to gather a few poppies for
decorative purposes.  But of this I was uninformed, and when I descried
her in the midst of the field I waved my arms like a semaphore against
the sky.

"Little girl!" called I.  "Little girl!"

The little girl's legs blurred the landscape as she fled, and in high
elation I sought Bess to tell of the potency of my voice.  Nobly she came
to the rescue, departing forthwith on an expedition of conciliation and
explanation to the little girl's mother.  But to this day the little girl
seeks cover at sight of me, and I know the mother will never be as
cordial as she would otherwise have been.

Came dark, overcast days, stiff, driving winds, and pelting rains, day on
day, without end, and the city folk cowered in their dwelling-places like
flood-beset rats; and like rats, half-drowned and gasping, when the
weather cleared they crawled out and up the green Piedmont slopes to bask
in the blessed sunshine.  And they invaded my field in swarms and droves,
crushing the sweet wheat into the earth and with lustful hands ripping
the poppies out by the roots.

"I shall put up the warnings against trespassing," I said.

"Yes," said Bess, with a sigh.  "I'm afraid it is necessary."

The day was yet young when she sighed again:

"I'm afraid, O Man, that your signs are of no avail.  People have
forgotten how to read, these days."

I went out on the porch.  A city nymph, in cool summer gown and picture
hat, paused before one of my newly reared warnings and read it through
with care.  Profound deliberation characterized her movements.  She was
statuesquely tall, but with a toss of the head and a flirt of the skirt
she dropped on hands and knees, crawled under the fence, and came to her
feet on the inside with poppies in both her hands.  I walked down the
drive and talked ethically to her, and she went away.  Then I put up more
signs.

At one time, years ago, these hills were carpeted with poppies.  As
between the destructive forces and the will "to live," the poppies
maintained an equilibrium with their environment.  But the city folk
constituted a new and terrible destructive force, the equilibrium was
overthrown, and the poppies wellnigh perished.  Since the city folk
plucked those with the longest stems and biggest bowls, and since it is
the law of kind to procreate kind, the long-stemmed, big-bowled poppies
failed to go to seed, and a stunted, short-stemmed variety remained to
the hills.  And not only was it stunted and short-stemmed, but sparsely
distributed as well.  Each day and every day, for years and years, the
city folk swarmed over the Piedmont Hills, and only here and there did
the genius of the race survive in the form of miserable little flowers,
close-clinging and quick-blooming, like children of the slums dragged
hastily and precariously through youth to a shrivelled and futile
maturity.

On the other hand, the poppies had prospered in my field; and not only
had they been sheltered from the barbarians, but also from the birds.
Long ago the field was sown in wheat, which went to seed unharvested each
year, and in the cool depths of which the poppy seeds were hidden from
the keen-eyed songsters.  And further, climbing after the sun through the
wheat stalks, the poppies grew taller and taller and more royal even than
the primordial ones of the open.

So the city folk, gazing from the bare hills to my blazing, burning
field, were sorely tempted, and, it must be told, as sorely fell.  But no
sorer was their fall than that of my beloved poppies.  Where the grain
holds the dew and takes the bite from the sun the soil is moist, and in
such soil it is easier to pull the poppies out by the roots than to break
the stalk.  Now the city folk, like other folk, are inclined to move
along the line of least resistance, and for each flower they gathered,
there were also gathered many crisp-rolled buds and with them all the
possibilities and future beauties of the plant for all time to come.

One of the city folk, a middle-aged gentleman, with white hands and
shifty eyes, especially made life interesting for me.  We called him the
"Repeater," what of his ways.  When from the porch we implored him to
desist, he was wont slowly and casually to direct his steps toward the
fence, simulating finely the actions of a man who had not heard, but
whose walk, instead, had terminated of itself or of his own volition.  To
heighten this effect, now and again, still casually and carelessly, he
would stoop and pluck another poppy.  Thus did he deceitfully save
himself the indignity of being put out, and rob us of the satisfaction of
putting him out, but he came, and he came often, each time getting away
with an able-bodied man's share of plunder.

It is not good to be of the city folk.  Of this I am convinced.  There is
something in the mode of life that breeds an alarming condition of
blindness and deafness, or so it seems with the city folk that come to my
poppy field.  Of the many to whom I have talked ethically not one has
been found who ever saw the warnings so conspicuously displayed, while of
those called out to from the porch, possibly one in fifty has heard.
Also, I have discovered that the relation of city folk to country flowers
is quite analogous to that of a starving man to food.  No more than the
starving man realizes that five pounds of meat is not so good as an
ounce, do they realize that five hundred poppies crushed and bunched are
less beautiful than two or three in a free cluster, where the green
leaves and golden bowls may expand to their full loveliness.

Less forgivable than the unaesthetic are the mercenary.  Hordes of young
rascals plunder me and rob the future that they may stand on street
corners and retail "California poppies, only five cents a bunch!"  In
spite of my precautions some of them made a dollar a day out of my field.
One horde do I remember with keen regret.  Reconnoitring for a possible
dog, they applied at the kitchen door for "a drink of water, please."
While they drank they were besought not to pick any flowers.  They
nodded, wiped their mouths, and proceeded to take themselves off by the
side of the bungalow.  They smote the poppy field beneath my windows,
spread out fan-shaped six wide, picking with both hands, and ripped a
swath of destruction through the very heart of the field.  No cyclone
travelled faster or destroyed more completely.  I shouted after them, but
they sped on the wings of the wind, great regal poppies, broken-stalked
and mangled, trailing after them or cluttering their wake--the most
high-handed act of piracy, I am confident, ever committed off the high
seas.

One day I went a-fishing, and on that day a woman entered the field.
Appeals and remonstrances from the porch having no effect upon her, Bess
despatched a little girl to beg of her to pick no more poppies.  The
woman calmly went on picking.  Then Bess herself went down through the
heat of the day.  But the woman went on picking, and while she picked she
discussed property and proprietary rights, denying Bess's sovereignty
until deeds and documents should be produced in proof thereof.  And all
the time she went on picking, never once overlooking her hand.  She was a
large woman, belligerent of aspect, and Bess was only a woman and not
prone to fisticuffs.  So the invader picked until she could pick no more,
said "Good-day," and sailed majestically away.

"People have really grown worse in the last several years, I think," said
Bess to me in a tired sort of voice that night, as we sat in the library
after dinner.

Next day I was inclined to agree with her.  "There's a woman and a little
girl heading straight for the poppies," said May, a maid about the
bungalow.  I went out on the porch and waited their advent.  They plunged
through the pine trees and into the fields, and as the roots of the first
poppies were pulled I called to them.  They were about a hundred feet
away.  The woman and the little girl turned to the sound of my voice and
looked at me.  "Please do not pick the poppies," I pleaded.  They
pondered this for a minute; then the woman said something in an undertone
to the little girl, and both backs jack-knifed as the slaughter
recommenced.  I shouted, but they had become suddenly deaf.  I screamed,
and so fiercely that the little girl wavered dubiously.  And while the
woman went on picking I could hear her in low tones heartening the little
girl.

I recollected a siren whistle with which I was wont to summon Johnny, the
son of my sister.  It was a fearsome thing, of a kind to wake the dead,
and I blew and blew, but the jack-knifed backs never unclasped.  I do not
mind with men, but I have never particularly favoured physical encounters
with women; yet this woman, who encouraged a little girl in iniquity,
tempted me.

I went into the bungalow and fetched my rifle.  Flourishing it in a
sanguinary manner and scowling fearsomely, I charged upon the invaders.
The little girl fled, screaming, to the shelter of the pines, but the
woman calmly went on picking.  She took not the least notice.  I had
expected her to run at sight of me, and it was embarrassing.  There was
I, charging down the field like a wild bull upon a woman who would not
get out of the way.  I could only slow down, supremely conscious of how
ridiculous it all was.  At a distance of ten feet she straightened up and
deigned to look at me.  I came to a halt and blushed to the roots of my
hair.  Perhaps I really did frighten her (I sometimes try to persuade
myself that this is so), or perhaps she took pity on me; but, at any
rate, she stalked out of my field with great composure, nay, majesty, her
arms brimming with orange and gold.

Nevertheless, thenceforward I saved my lungs and flourished my rifle.
Also, I made fresh generalizations.  To commit robbery women take
advantage of their sex.  Men have more respect for property than women.
Men are less insistent in crime than women.  And women are less afraid of
guns than men.  Likewise, we conquer the earth in hazard and battle by
the virtues of our mothers.  We are a race of land-robbers and
sea-robbers, we Anglo-Saxons, and small wonder, when we suckle at the
breasts of a breed of women such as maraud my poppy field.

Still the pillage went on.  Sirens and gun-flourishings were without
avail.  The city folk were great of heart and undismayed, and I noted the
habit of "repeating" was becoming general.  What booted it how often they
were driven forth if each time they were permitted to carry away their
ill-gotten plunder?  When one has turned the same person away twice and
thrice an emotion arises somewhat akin to homicide.  And when one has
once become conscious of this sanguinary feeling his whole destiny seems
to grip hold of him and drag him into the abyss.  More than once I found
myself unconsciously pulling the rifle into position to get a sight on
the miserable trespassers.  In my sleep I slew them in manifold ways and
threw their carcasses into the reservoir.  Each day the temptation to
shoot them in the legs became more luring, and every day I felt my fate
calling to me imperiously.  Visions of the gallows rose up before me, and
with the hemp about my neck I saw stretched out the pitiless future of my
children, dark with disgrace and shame.  I became afraid of myself, and
Bess went about with anxious face, privily beseeching my friends to
entice me into taking a vacation.  Then, and at the last gasp, came the
thought that saved me: _Why not confiscate_?  If their forays were
bootless, in the nature of things their forays would cease.

The first to enter my field thereafter was a man.

I was waiting for him--And, oh joy! it was the "Repeater" himself, smugly
complacent with knowledge of past success.  I dropped the rifle
negligently across the hollow of my arm and went down to him.

"I am sorry to trouble you for those poppies," I said in my oiliest
tones; "but really, you know, I must have them."

He regarded me speechlessly.  It must have made a great picture.  It
surely was dramatic.  With the rifle across my arm and my suave request
still ringing in my ears, I felt like Black Bart, and Jesse James, and
Jack Sheppard, and Robin Hood, and whole generations of highwaymen.

"Come, come," I said, a little sharply and in what I imagined was the
true fashion; "I am sorry to inconvenience you, believe me, but I must
have those poppies."

I absently shifted the gun and smiled.  That fetched him.  Without a word
he passed them over and turned his toes toward the fence, but no longer
casual and careless was his carriage, I nor did he stoop to pick the
occasional poppy by the way.  That was the last of the "Repeater."  I
could see by his eyes that he did not like me, and his back reproached me
all the way down the field and out of sight.

From that day the bungalow has been flooded with poppies.  Every vase and
earthen jar is filled with them.  They blaze on every mantel and run riot
through all the rooms.  I present them to my friends in huge bunches, and
still the kind city folk come and gather more for me.  "Sit down for a
moment," I say to the departing guest.  And there we sit in the shade of
the porch while aspiring city creatures pluck my poppies and sweat under
the brazen sun.  And when their arms are sufficiently weighted with my
yellow glories, I go down with the rifle over my arm and disburden them.
Thus have I become convinced that every situation has its compensations.

Confiscation was successful, so far as it went; but I had forgotten one
thing; namely, the vast number of the city folk.  Though the old
transgressors came no more, new ones arrived every day, and I found
myself confronted with the titanic task of educating a whole cityful to
the inexpediency of raiding my poppy field.  During the process of
disburdening them I was accustomed to explaining my side of the case, but
I soon gave this over.  It was a waste of breath.  They could not
understand.  To one lady, who insinuated that I was miserly, I said:

"My dear madam, no hardship is worked upon you.  Had I not been
parsimonious yesterday and the day before, these poppies would have been
picked by the city hordes of that day and the day before, and your eyes,
which to-day have discovered this field, would have beheld no poppies at
all.  The poppies you may not pick to-day are the poppies I did not
permit to be picked yesterday and the day before.  Therefore, believe me,
you are denied nothing."

"But the poppies are here to-day," she said, glaring carnivorously upon
their glow and splendour.

"I will pay you for them," said a gentleman, at another time.  (I had
just relieved him of an armful.)  I felt a sudden shame, I know not why,
unless it be that his words had just made clear to me that a monetary as
well as an aesthetic value was attached to my flowers.  The apparent
sordidness of my position overwhelmed me, and I said weakly: "I do not
sell my poppies.  You may have what you have picked."  But before the
week was out I confronted the same gentleman again.  "I will pay you for
them," he said.  "Yes," I said, "you may pay me for them.  Twenty
dollars, please."  He gasped, looked at me searchingly, gasped again, and
silently and sadly put the poppies down.  But it remained, as usual, for
a woman to attain the sheerest pitch of audacity.  When I declined
payment and demanded my plucked beauties, she refused to give them up.
"I picked these poppies," she said, "and my time is worth money.  When
you have paid me for my time you may have them."  Her cheeks flamed
rebellion, and her face, withal a pretty one, was set and determined.
Now, I was a man of the hill tribes, and she a mere woman of the city
folk, and though it is not my inclination to enter into details, it is my
pleasure to state that that bunch of poppies subsequently glorified the
bungalow and that the woman departed to the city unpaid.  Anyway, they
were my poppies.

"They are God's poppies," said the Radiant Young Radical, democratically
shocked at sight of me turning city folk out of my field.  And for two
weeks she hated me with a deathless hatred.  I sought her out and
explained.  I explained at length.  I told the story of the poppy as
Maeterlinck has told the life of the bee.  I treated the question
biologically, psychologically, and sociologically, I discussed it
ethically and aesthetically.  I grew warm over it, and impassioned; and
when I had done, she professed conversion, but in my heart of hearts I
knew it to be compassion.  I fled to other friends for consolation.  I
retold the story of the poppy.  They did not appear supremely interested.
I grew excited.  They were surprised and pained.  They looked at me
curiously.  "It ill-befits your dignity to squabble over poppies," they
said.  "It is unbecoming."

I fled away to yet other friends.  I sought vindication.  The thing had
become vital, and I needs must put myself right.  I felt called upon to
explain, though well knowing that he who explains is lost.  I told the
story of the poppy over again.  I went into the minutest details.  I
added to it, and expanded.  I talked myself hoarse, and when I could talk
no more they looked bored.  Also, they said insipid things, and soothful
things, and things concerning other things, and not at all to the point.
I was consumed with anger, and there and then I renounced them all.

At the bungalow I lie in wait for chance visitors.  Craftily I broach the
subject, watching their faces closely the while to detect first signs of
disapprobation, whereupon I empty long-stored vials of wrath upon their
heads.  I wrangle for hours with whosoever does not say I am right.  I am
become like Guy de Maupassant's old man who picked up a piece of string.
I am incessantly explaining, and nobody will understand.  I have become
more brusque in my treatment of the predatory city folk.  No longer do I
take delight in their disburdenment, for it has become an onerous duty, a
wearisome and distasteful task.  My friends look askance and murmur
pityingly on the side when we meet in the city.  They rarely come to see
me now.  They are afraid.  I am an embittered and disappointed man, and
all the light seems to have gone out of my life and into my blazing
field.  So one pays for things.

PIEDMONT, CALIFORNIA.
_April_ 1902.




THE SHRINKAGE OF THE PLANET


What a tremendous affair it was, the world of Homer, with its
indeterminate boundaries, vast regions, and immeasurable distances.  The
Mediterranean and the Euxine were illimitable stretches of ocean waste
over which years could be spent in endless wandering.  On their
mysterious shores were the improbable homes of impossible peoples.  The
Great Sea, the Broad Sea, the Boundless Sea; the Ethiopians, "dwelling
far away, the most distant of men," and the Cimmerians, "covered with
darkness and cloud," where "baleful night is spread over timid mortals."
Phoenicia was a sore journey, Egypt simply unattainable, while the
Pillars of Hercules marked the extreme edge of the universe.  Ulysses was
nine days in sailing from Ismarus the city of the Ciconians, to the
country of the Lotus-eaters--a period of time which to-day would breed
anxiety in the hearts of the underwriters should it be occupied by the
slowest tramp steamer in traversing the Mediterranean and Black Seas from
Gibraltar to Sebastopol.

Homer's world, restricted to less than a drummer's circuit, was
nevertheless immense, surrounded by a thin veneer of universe--the Stream
of Ocean.  But how it has shrunk!  To-day, precisely charted, weighed,
and measured, a thousand times larger than the world of Homer, it is
become a tiny speck, gyrating to immutable law through a universe the
bounds of which have been pushed incalculably back.  The light of Algol
shines upon it--a light which travels at one hundred and ninety thousand
miles per second, yet requires forty-seven years to reach its
destination.  And the denizens of this puny ball have come to know that
Algol possesses an invisible companion, three and a quarter millions of
miles away, and that the twain move in their respective orbits at rates
of fifty-five and twenty-six miles per second.  They also know that
beyond it are great chasms of space, innumerable worlds, and vast star
systems.

While much of the shrinkage to which the planet has been subjected is due
to the increased knowledge of mathematics and physics, an equal, if not
greater, portion may be ascribed to the perfection of the means of
locomotion and communication.  The enlargement of stellar space,
demonstrating with stunning force the insignificance of the earth, has
been negative in its effect; but the quickening of travel and
intercourse, by making the earth's parts accessible and knitting them
together, has been positive.

The advantage of the animal over the vegetable kingdom is obvious.  The
cabbage, should its environment tend to become worse, must live it out,
or die; the rabbit may move on in quest of a better.  But, after all, the
swift-footed creatures are circumscribed in their wanderings.  The first
large river almost inevitably bars their way, and certainly the first
salt sea becomes an impassable obstacle.  Better locomotion may be
classed as one of the prime aims of the old natural selection; for in
that primordial day the race was to the swift as surely as the battle to
the strong.  But man, already pre-eminent in the common domain because of
other faculties, was not content with the one form of locomotion afforded
by his lower limbs.  He swam in the sea, and, still better, becoming
aware of the buoyant virtues of wood, learned to navigate its surface.
Likewise, from among the land animals he chose the more likely to bear
him and his burdens.  The next step was the domestication of these useful
aids.  Here, in its organic significance, natural selection ceased to
concern itself with locomotion.  Man had displayed his impatience at her
tedious methods and his own superiority in the hastening of affairs.
Thenceforth he must depend upon himself, and faster-swimming or
faster-running men ceased to be bred.  The one, half-amphibian, breasting
the water with muscular arms, could not hope to overtake or escape an
enemy who propelled a fire-hollowed tree trunk by means of a wooden
paddle; nor could the other, trusting to his own nimbleness, compete with
a foe who careered wildly across the plain on the back of a half-broken
stallion.

So, in that dim day, man took upon himself the task of increasing his
dominion over space and time, and right nobly has he acquitted himself.
Because of it he became a road builder and a bridge builder; likewise, he
wove clumsy sails of rush and matting.  At a very remote period he must
also have recognized that force moves along the line of least resistance,
and in virtue thereof, placed upon his craft rude keels which enabled him
to beat to windward in a seaway.  As he excelled in these humble arts,
just so did he add to his power over his less progressive fellows and lay
the foundations for the first glimmering civilizations--crude they were
beyond conception, sporadic and ephemeral, but each formed a necessary
part of the groundwork upon which was to rise the mighty civilization of
our latter-day world.

Divorced from the general history of man's upward climb, it would seem
incredible that so long a time should elapse between the moment of his
first improvements over nature in the matter of locomotion and that of
the radical changes he was ultimately to compass.  The principles which
were his before history was, were his, neither more nor less, even to the
present century.  He utilized improved applications, but the principles
of themselves were ever the same, whether in the war chariots of Achilles
and Pharaoh or the mail-coach and diligence of the European traveller,
the cavalry of the Huns or of Prince Rupert, the triremes and galleys of
Greece and Rome or the East India-men and clipper ships of the last
century.  But when the moment came to alter the methods of travel, the
change was so sweeping that it may be safely classed as a revolution.
Though the discovery of steam attaches to the honour of the last century,
the potency of the new power was not felt till the beginning of this.  By
1800 small steamers were being used for coasting purposes in England;
1830 witnessed the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway; while
it was not until 1838 that the Atlantic was first crossed by the
steamships _Great Western_ and _Sirius_.  In 1869 the East was made
next-door neighbour to the West.  Over almost the same ground where had
toiled the caravans of a thousand generations, the Suez Canal was dug.
Clive, during his first trip, was a year and a half _en route_ from
England to India; were he alive to-day he could journey to Calcutta in
twenty-two days.  After reading De Quincey's hyperbolical description of
the English mail-coach, one cannot down the desire to place that
remarkable man on the pilot of the White Mail or of the Twentieth
Century.

But this tremendous change in the means of locomotion meant far more than
the mere rapid transit of men from place to place.  Until then, though
its influence and worth cannot be overestimated, commerce had eked out a
precarious and costly existence.  The fortuitous played too large a part
in the trade of men.  The mischances by land and sea, the mistakes and
delays, were adverse elements of no mean proportions.  But improved
locomotion meant improved carrying, and commerce received an impetus as
remarkable as it was unexpected.  In his fondest fancies James Watt could
not have foreseen even the approximate result of his invention, the
Hercules which was to spring from the puny child of his brain and hands.
An illuminating spectacle, were it possible, would be afforded by
summoning him from among the Shades to a place in the engine-room of an
ocean greyhound.  The humblest trimmer would treat him with the
indulgence of a child; while an oiler, a greasy nimbus about his head and
in his hand, as sceptre, a long-snouted can, would indeed appear to him a
demigod and ruler of forces beyond his ken.

It has ever been the world's dictum that empire and commerce go hand in
hand.  In the past the one was impossible without the other.  Rome
gathered to herself the wealth of the Mediterranean nations, and it was
only by an unwise distribution of it that she became emasculated and lost
both power and trade.  With a just system of economics it is highly
probable that for centuries she could have held back the welling tide of
the Germanic peoples.  When upon her ruins rose the institutions of the
conquering Teutons, commerce slipped away, and with it empire.  In the
present, empire and commerce have become interdependent.  Such wonders
has the industrial revolution wrought in a few swift decades, and so
great has been the shrinkage of the planet, that the industrial nations
have long since felt the imperative demand for foreign markets.  The
favoured portions of the earth are occupied.  From their seats in the
temperate zones the militant commercial nations proceed to the
exploitation of the tropics, and for the possession of these they rush to
war hot-footed.  Like wolves at the end of a gorge, they wrangle over the
fragments.  There are no more planets, no more fragments, and they are
yet hungry.  There are no longer Cimmerians and Ethiopians, in
wide-stretching lands, awaiting them.  On either hand they confront the
naked poles, and they recoil from unnavigable space to an intenser
struggle among themselves.  And all the while the planet shrinks beneath
their grasp.

Of this struggle one thing may be safely predicated; a commercial power
must be a sea power.  Upon the control of the sea depends the control of
trade.  Carthage threatened Rome till she lost her navy; and then for
thirteen days the smoke of her burning rose to the skies, and the ground
was ploughed and sown with salt on the site of her most splendid
edifices.  The cities of Italy were the world's merchants till new trade
routes were discovered and the dominion of the sea passed on to the west
and fell into other hands.  Spain and Portugal, inaugurating an era of
maritime discovery, divided the new world between them, but gave way
before a breed of sea-rovers, who, after many generations of attachment
to the soil, had returned to their ancient element.  With the destruction
of her Armada Spain's colossal dream of colonial empire passed away.
Against the new power Holland strove in vain, and when France
acknowledged the superiority of the Briton upon the sea, she at the same
time relinquished her designs upon the world.  Hampered by her feeble
navy, her contest for supremacy upon the land was her last effort and
with the passing of Napoleon she retired within herself to struggle with
herself as best she might.  For fifty years England held undisputed sway
upon the sea, controlled markets, and domineered trade, laying, during
that period, the foundations of her empire.  Since then other naval
powers have arisen, their attitudes bearing significantly upon the
future; for they have learned that the mastery of the world belongs to
the masters of the sea.

That many of the phases of this world shrinkage are pathetic, goes
without question.  There is much to condemn in the rise of the economic
over the imaginative spirit, much for which the energetic Philistine can
never atone.  Perhaps the deepest pathos of all may be found in the
spectacle of John Ruskin weeping at the profanation of the world by the
vandalism of the age.  Steam launches violate the sanctity of the
Venetian canals; where Xerxes bridged the Hellespont ply the filthy
funnels of our modern shipping; electric cars run in the shadow of the
pyramids; and it was only the other day that Lord Kitchener was in a
railroad wreck near the site of ancient Luxor.  But there is always the
other side.  If the economic man has defiled temples and despoiled
nature, he has also preserved.  He has policed the world and parked it,
reduced the dangers of life and limb, made the tenure of existence less
precarious, and rendered a general relapse of society impossible.  There
can never again be an intellectual holocaust, such as the burning of the
Alexandrian library.  Civilizations may wax and wane, but the totality of
knowledge cannot decrease.  With the possible exception of a few trade
secrets, arts and sciences may be discarded, but they can never be lost.
And these things must remain true until the end of man's time upon the
earth.

Up to yesterday communication for any distance beyond the sound of the
human voice or the sight of the human eye was bound up with locomotion.
A letter presupposed a carrier.  The messenger started with the message,
and he could not but avail himself of the prevailing modes of travel.  If
the voyage to Australia required four months, four months were required
for communication; by no known means could this time be lessened.  But
with the advent of the telegraph and telephone, communication and
locomotion were divorced.  In a few hours, at most, there could be
performed what by the old way would have required months.  In 1837 the
needle telegraph was invented, and nine years later the Electric
Telegraph Company was formed for the purpose of bringing it into general
use.  Government postal systems also came into being, later to
consolidate into an international union and to group the nations of the
earth into a local neighbourhood.  The effects of all this are obvious,
and no fitter illustration may be presented than the fact that to-day, in
the matter of communication, the Klondike is virtually nearer to Boston
than was Bunker Hill in the time of Warren.

A contemporaneous and remarkable shrinkage of a vast stretch of territory
may be instanced in the Northland.  From its rise at Lake Linderman the
Yukon runs twenty-five hundred miles to Bering Sea, traversing an almost
unknown region, the remote recesses of which had never felt the
moccasined foot of the pathfinder.  At occasional intervals men wallowed
into its dismal fastnesses, or emerged gaunt and famine-worn.  But in the
fall of 1896 a great gold strike was made--greater than any since the
days of California and Australia; yet, so rude were the means of
communication, nearly a year elapsed before the news of it reached the
eager ear of the world.  Passionate pilgrims disembarked their outfits at
Dyea.  Over the terrible Chilcoot Pass the trail led to the lakes, thirty
miles away.  Carriage was yet in its most primitive stage, the road
builder and bridge builder unheard of.  With heavy packs upon their backs
men plunged waist-deep into hideous quagmires, bridged mountain torrents
by felling trees across them, toiled against the precipitous slopes of
the ice-worn mountains, and crossed the dizzy faces of innumerable
glaciers.  When, after incalculable toil they reached the lakes, they
went into the woods, sawed pine trees into lumber by hand, and built it
into boats.  In these, overloaded, unseaworthy, they battled down the
long chain of lakes.  Within the memory of the writer there lingers the
picture of a sheltered nook on the shores of Lake Le Barge, in which half
a thousand gold seekers lay storm-bound.  Day after day they struggled
against the seas in the teeth of a northerly gale, and night after night
returned to their camps, repulsed but not disheartened.  At the rapids
they ran their boats through, hit or miss, and after infinite toil and
hardship, on the breast of a jarring ice flood, arrived at the Klondike.
From the beach at Dyea to the eddy below the Barracks at Dawson, they had
paid for their temerity the tax of human life demanded by the elements.
A year later, so greatly had the country shrunk, the tourist, on
disembarking from the ocean steamship, took his seat in a modern railway
coach.  A few hours later, at Lake Bennet, he stepped aboard a commodious
river steamer.  At the rapids he rode around on a tramway to take passage
on another steamer below.  And in a few hours more he was in Dawson,
without having once soiled the lustre of his civilized foot-gear.  Did he
wish to communicate with the outside world, he strolled into the
telegraph office.  A few short months before he would have written a
letter and deemed himself favoured above mortals were it delivered within
the year.

From man's drawing the world closer and closer together, his own affairs
and institutions have consolidated.  Concentration may typify the chief
movement of the age--concentration, classification, order; the reduction
of friction between the parts of the social organism.  The urban tendency
of the rural populations led to terrible congestion in the great cities.
There was stifling and impure air, and lo, rapid transit at once attacked
the evil.  Every great city has become but the nucleus of a greater city
which surrounds it; the one the seat of business, the other the seat of
domestic happiness.  Between the two, night and morning, by electric
road, steam railway, and bicycle path, ebbs and flows the middle-class
population.  And in the same direction lies the remedy for the tenement
evil.  In the cleansing country air the slum cannot exist.  Improvement
in road-beds and the means of locomotion, a tremor of altruism, a little
legislation, and the city by day will sleep in the country by night.

What a play-ball has this planet of ours become!  Steam has made its
parts accessible and drawn them closer together.  The telegraph
annihilates space and time.  Each morning every part knows what every
other part is thinking, contemplating, or doing.  A discovery in a German
laboratory is being demonstrated in San Francisco within twenty-four
hours.  A book written in South Africa is published by simultaneous
copyright in every English-speaking country, and on the following day is
in the hands of the translators.  The death of an obscure missionary in
China, or of a whisky smuggler in the South Seas, is served up, the world
over, with the morning toast.  The wheat output of Argentine or the gold
of Klondike is known wherever men meet and trade.  Shrinkage or
centralization has been such that the humblest clerk in any metropolis
may place his hand on the pulse of the world.  And because of all this,
everywhere is growing order and organization.  The church, the state;
men, women, and children; the criminal and the law, the honest man and
the thief, industry and commerce, capital and labour, the trades and the
professions, the arts and the sciences--all are organizing for pleasure,
profit, policy, or intellectual pursuit.  They have come to know the
strength of numbers, solidly phalanxed and driving onward with singleness
of purpose.  These purposes may be various and many, but one and all,
ever discovering new mutual interests and objects, obeying a law which is
beyond them, these petty aggregations draw closer together, forming
greater aggregations and congeries of aggregations.  And these, in turn,
vaguely merging each into each, present glimmering adumbrations of the
coming human solidarity which shall be man's crowning glory.

OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA.
_January_ 1900.




THE HOUSE BEAUTIFUL


Speaking of homes, I am building one now, and I venture to assert that
very few homes have received more serious thought in the planning.  Let
me tell you about it.  In the first place, there will be no grounds
whatever, no fences, lawns, nor flowers.  Roughly, the dimensions will be
forty-five feet by fifteen.  That is, it will be fifteen feet wide at its
widest--and, if you will pardon the bull, it will be narrower than it is
wide.

The details must submit to the general plan of economy.  There will be no
veranda, no porch entrances, no grand staircases.  I'm ashamed to say how
steep the stairways are going to be.  The bedrooms will be seven by
seven, and one will be even smaller.  A bedroom is only good to sleep in,
anyway.  There will be no hallway, thank goodness.  Rooms were made to go
through.  Why a separate passage for traffic?

The bath-room will be a trifle larger than the size of the smallest
bath-tub--it won't require so much work to keep in order.  The kitchen
won't be very much larger, but this will make it easy for the cook.  In
place of a drawing-room, there will be a large living-room--fourteen by
six.  The walls of this room will be covered with books, and it can serve
as library and smoking-room as well.  Then, the floor-space not being
occupied, we shall use the room as a dining-room.  Incidentally, such a
room not being used after bedtime, the cook and the second boy can sleep
in it.  One thing that I am temperamentally opposed to is waste, and why
should all this splendid room be wasted at night when we do not occupy
it?

My ideas are cramped, you say?--Oh, I forgot to tell you that this home I
am describing is to be a floating home, and that my wife and I are to
journey around the world in it for the matter of seven years or more.  I
forgot also to state that there will be an engine-room in it for a
seventy-horse-power engine, a dynamo, storage batteries, etc.; tanks for
water to last long weeks at sea; space for fifteen hundred gallons of
gasolene, fire extinguishers, and life-preservers; and a great store-room
for food, spare sails, anchors, hawsers, tackles, and a thousand and one
other things.

Since I have not yet built my land house, I haven't got beyond a few
general ideas, and in presenting them I feel as cocksure as the unmarried
woman who writes the column in the Sunday supplement on how to rear
children.  My first idea about a house is that it should be built to live
in.  Throughout the house, in all the building of it, this should be the
paramount idea.  It must be granted that this idea is lost sight of by
countless persons who build houses apparently for every purpose under the
sun except to live in them.

Perhaps it is because of the practical life I have lived that I worship
utility and have come to believe that utility and beauty should be one,
and that there is no utility that need not be beautiful.  What finer
beauty than strength--whether it be airy steel, or massive masonry, or a
woman's hand?  A plain black leather strap is beautiful.  It is all
strength and all utility, and it is beautiful.  It efficiently performs
work in the world, and it is good to look upon.  Perhaps it is because it
is useful that it is beautiful.  I do not know.  I sometimes wonder.

A boat on the sea is beautiful.  Yet it is not built for beauty.  Every
graceful line of it is a utility, is designed to perform work.  It is
created for the express purpose of dividing the water in front of it, of
gliding over the water beneath it, of leaving the water behind it--and
all with the least possible wastage of stress and friction.  It is not
created for the purpose of filling the eye with beauty.  It is created
for the purpose of moving through the sea and over the sea with the
smallest resistance and the greatest stability; yet, somehow, it does
fill the eye with its beauty.  And in so far as a boat fails in its
purpose, by that much does it diminish in beauty.

I am still a long way from the house I have in my mind some day to build,
yet I have arrived somewhere.  I have discovered, to my own satisfaction
at any rate, that beauty and utility should be one.  In applying this
general idea to the building of a house, it may be stated, in another and
better way; namely, construction and decoration must be one.  This idea
is more important than the building of the house, for without the idea
the house so built is certain to be an insult to intelligence and
beauty-love.

I bought a house in a hurry in the city of Oakland some time ago.  I do
not live in it.  I sleep in it half a dozen times a year.  I do not love
the house.  I am hurt every time I look at it.  No drunken rowdy or
political enemy can insult me so deeply as that house does.  Let me tell
you why.  It is an ordinary two-storey frame house.  After it was built,
the criminal that constructed it nailed on, at the corners
perpendicularly, some two-inch fluted planks.  These planks rise the
height of the house, and to a drunken man have the appearance of fluted
columns.  To complete the illusion in the eyes of the drunken man, the
planks are topped with wooden Ionic capitals, nailed on, and in, I may
say, bas-relief.

When I analyze the irritation these fluted planks cause in me, I find the
reason in the fact that the first rule for building a house has been
violated.  These decorative planks are no part of the construction.  They
have no use, no work to perform.  They are plastered gawds that tell lies
that nobody believes.  A column is made for the purpose of supporting
weight; this is its use.  A column, when it is a utility, is beautiful.
The fluted wooden columns nailed on outside my house are not utilities.
They are not beautiful.  They are nightmares.  They not only support no
weight, but they themselves are a weight that drags upon the supports of
the house.  Some day, when I get time, one of two things will surely
happen.  Either I'll go forth and murder the man who perpetrated the
atrocity, or else I'll take an axe and chop off the lying, fluted planks.

A thing must be true, or it is not beautiful, any more than a painted
wanton is beautiful, any more than a sky-scraper is beautiful that is
intrinsically and structurally light and that has a false massiveness of
pillars plastered on outside.  The true sky-scraper _is_ beautiful--and
this is the reluctant admission of a man who dislikes humanity-festering
cities.  The true sky-scraper is beautiful, and it is beautiful in so far
as it is true.  In its construction it is light and airy, therefore in
its appearance it must be light and airy.  It dare not, if it wishes to
be beautiful, lay claim to what it is not.  And it should not bulk on the
city-scape like Leviathan; it should rise and soar, light and airy and
fairylike.

Man is an ethical animal--or, at least, he is more ethical than any other
animal.  Wherefore he has certain yearnings for honesty.  And in no way
can these yearnings be more thoroughly satisfied than by the honesty of
the house in which he lives and passes the greater part of his life.

They that dwelt in San Francisco were dishonest.  They lied and cheated
in their business life (like the dwellers in all cities), and because
they lied and cheated in their business life, they lied and cheated in
the buildings they erected.  Upon the tops of the simple, severe walls of
their buildings they plastered huge projecting cornices.  These cornices
were not part of the construction.  They made believe to be part of the
construction, and they were lies.  The earth wrinkled its back for
twenty-eight seconds, and the lying cornices crashed down as all lies are
doomed to crash down.  In this particular instance, the lies crashed down
upon the heads of the people fleeing from their reeling habitations, and
many were killed.  They paid the penalty of dishonesty.

Not alone should the construction of a house be truthful and honest, but
the material must be honest.  They that lived in San Francisco were
dishonest in the material they used.  They sold one quality of material
and delivered another quality of material.  They always delivered an
inferior quality.  There is not one case recorded in the business history
of San Francisco where a contractor or builder delivered a quality
superior to the one sold.  A seven-million-dollar city hall became thirty
cents in twenty-eight seconds.  Because the mortar was not honest, a
thousand walls crashed down and scores of lives were snuffed out.  There
is something, after all, in the contention of a few religionists that the
San Francisco earthquake was a punishment for sin.  It was a punishment
for sin; but it was not for sin against God.  The people of San Francisco
sinned against themselves.

An honest house tells the truth about itself.  There is a house here in
Glen Ellen.  It stands on a corner.  It is built of beautiful red stone.
Yet it is not beautiful.  On three sides the stone is joined and pointed.
The fourth side is the rear.  It faces the back yard.  The stone is not
pointed.  It is all a smudge of dirty mortar, with here and there bricks
worked in when the stone gave out.  The house is not what it seems.  It
is a lie.  All three of the walls spend their time lying about the fourth
wall.  They keep shouting out that the fourth wall is as beautiful as
they.  If I lived long in that house I should not be responsible for my
morals.  The house is like a man in purple and fine linen, who hasn't had
a bath for a month.  If I lived long in that house I should become a
dandy and cut out bathing--for the same reason, I suppose, that an
African is black and that an Eskimo eats whale-blubber.  I shall not
build a house like that house.

Last year I started to build a barn.  A man who was a liar undertook to
do the stonework and concrete work for me.  He could not tell the truth
to my face; he could not tell the truth in his work.  I was building for
posterity.  The concrete foundations were four feet wide and sunk three
and one-half feet into the earth.  The stone walls were two feet thick
and nine feet high.  Upon them were to rest the great beams that were to
carry all the weight of hay and the forty tons of the roof.  The man who
was a liar made beautiful stone walls.  I used to stand alongside of them
and love them.  I caressed their massive strength with my hands.  I
thought about them in bed, before I went to sheep.  And they were lies.

Came the earthquake.  Fortunately the rest of the building of the barn
had been postponed.  The beautiful stone walls cracked in all directions.
I started, to repair, and discovered the whole enormous lie.  The walls
were shells.  On each face were beautiful, massive stones--on edge.  The
inside was hollow.  This hollow in some places was filled with clay and
loose gravel.  In other places it was filled with air and emptiness, with
here and there a piece of kindling-wood or dry-goods box, to aid in the
making of the shell.  The walls were lies.  They were beautiful, but they
were not useful.  Construction and decoration had been divorced.  The
walls were all decoration.  They hadn't any construction in them.  "As
God lets Satan live," I let that lying man live, but--I have built new
walls from the foundation up.

And now to my own house beautiful, which I shall build some seven or ten
years from now.  I have a few general ideas about it.  It must be honest
in construction, material, and appearance.  If any feature of it, despite
my efforts, shall tell lies, I shall remove that feature.  Utility and
beauty must be indissolubly wedded.  Construction and decoration must be
one.  If the particular details keep true to these general ideas, all
will be well.

I have not thought of many details.  But here are a few.  Take the
bath-room, for instance.  It shall be as beautiful as any room in the
house, just as it will be as useful.  The chance is, that it will be the
most expensive room in the house.  Upon that we are resolved--even if we
are compelled to build it first, and to live in a tent till we can get
more money to go on with the rest of the house.  In the bath-room no
delights of the bath shall be lacking.  Also, a large part of the
expensiveness will be due to the use of material that will make it easy
to keep the bathroom clean and in order.  Why should a servant toil
unduly that my body may be clean?  On the other hand, the honesty of my
own flesh, and the square dealing I give it, are more important than all
the admiration of my friends for expensive decorative schemes and
magnificent trivialities.  More delightful to me is a body that sings
than a stately and costly grand staircase built for show.  Not that I
like grand staircases less, but that I like bath-rooms more.

I often regret that I was born in this particular period of the world.
In the matter of servants, how I wish I were living in the golden future
of the world, where there will be no servants--naught but service of
love.  But in the meantime, living here and now, being practical,
understanding the rationality and the necessity of the division of
labour, I accept servants.  But such acceptance does not justify me in
lack of consideration for them.  In my house beautiful their rooms shall
not be dens and holes.  And on this score I foresee a fight with the
architect.  They shall have bath-rooms, toilet conveniences, and comforts
for their leisure time and human life--if I have to work Sundays to pay
for it.  Even under the division of labour I recognize that no man has a
right to servants who will not treat them as humans compounded of the
same clay as himself, with similar bundles of nerves and desires,
contradictions, irritabilities, and lovablenesses.  Heaven in the
drawing-room and hell in the kitchen is not the atmosphere for a growing
child to breathe--nor an adult either.  One of the great and selfish
objections to chattel slavery was the effect on the masters themselves.

And because of the foregoing, one chief aim in the building of my house
beautiful will be to have a house that will require the minimum of
trouble and work to keep clean and orderly.  It will be no spick and span
and polished house, with an immaculateness that testifies to the tragedy
of drudge.  I live in California where the days are warm.  I'd prefer
that the servants had three hours to go swimming (or hammocking) than be
compelled to spend those three hours in keeping the house spick and span.
Therefore it devolves upon me to build a house that can be kept clean and
orderly without the need of those three hours.

But underneath the spick and span there is something more dreadful than
the servitude of the servants.  This dreadful thing is the philosophy of
the spick and span.  In Korea the national costume is white.  Nobleman
and coolie dress alike in white.  It is hell on the women who do the
washing, but there is more in it than that.  The coolie cannot keep his
white clothes clean.  He toils and they get dirty.  The dirty white of
his costume is the token of his inferiority.  The nobleman's dress is
always spotless white.  It means that he doesn't have to work.  But it
means, further, that somebody else has to work for him.  His superiority
is not based upon song-craft nor state-craft, upon the foot-races he has
run nor the wrestlers he has thrown.  His superiority is based upon the
fact that he doesn't have to work, and that others are compelled to work
for him.  And so the Korean drone flaunts his clean white clothes, for
the same reason that the Chinese flaunts his monstrous finger-nails, and
the white man and woman flaunt the spick-and-spanness of their spotless
houses.

There will be hardwood floors in my house beautiful.  But these floors
will not be polished mirrors nor skating-rinks.  They will be just plain
and common hardwood floors.  Beautiful carpets are not beautiful to the
mind that knows they are filled with germs and bacilli.  They are no more
beautiful than the hectic flush of fever, or the silvery skin of leprosy.
Besides, carpets enslave.  A thing that enslaves is a monster, and
monsters are not beautiful.

The fireplaces in my house will be many and large.  Small fires and cold
weather mean hermetically-sealed rooms and a jealous cherishing of heated
and filth-laden air.  With large fire-places and generous heat, some
windows may be open all the time, and without hardship all the windows
can be opened every little while and the rooms flushed with clean pure
air.  I have nearly died in the stagnant, rotten air of other people's
houses--especially in the Eastern states.  In Maine I have slept in a
room with storm-windows immovable, and with one small pane five inches by
six, that could be opened.  Did I say slept?  I panted with my mouth in
the opening and blasphemed till I ruined all my chances of heaven.

For countless thousands of years my ancestors have lived and died and
drawn all their breaths in the open air.  It is only recently that we
have begun to live in houses.  The change is a hardship, especially on
the lungs.  I've got only one pair of lungs, and I haven't the address of
any repair-shop.  Wherefore I stick by the open air as much as possible.
For this reason my house will have large verandas, and, near to the
kitchen, there will be a veranda dining-room.  Also, there will be a
veranda fireplace, where we can breathe fresh air and be comfortable when
the evenings are touched with frost.

I have a plan for my own bedroom.  I spend long hours in bed, reading,
studying, and working.  I have tried sleeping in the open, but the lamp
attracts all the creeping, crawling, butting, flying, fluttering things
to the pages of my book, into my ears and blankets, and down the back of
my neck.  So my bedroom shall be indoors.

But it will be, not be of, indoors.  Three sides of it will be open.  The
fourth side will divide it from the rest of the house.  The three sides
will be screened against the creeping, fluttering things, but not against
the good fresh air and all the breezes that blow.  For protection against
storm, to keep out the driving rain, there will be a sliding glass, so
made that when not in use it will occupy small space and shut out very
little air.

There is little more to say about this house.  I am to build seven or ten
years from now.  There is plenty of time in which to work up all the
details in accord with the general principles I have laid down.  It will
be a usable house and a beautiful house, wherein the aesthetic guest can
find comfort for his eyes as well as for his body.  It will be a happy
house--or else I'll burn it down.  It will be a house of air and sunshine
and laughter.  These three cannot be divorced.  Laughter without air and
sunshine becomes morbid, decadent, demoniac.  I have in me a thousand
generations.  Laughter that is decadent is not good for these thousand
generations.

GLEN ELLEN, CALIFORNIA.
_July_ 1906.




THE GOLD HUNTERS OF THE NORTH


    "Where the Northern Lights come down a' nights to dance on the
    houseless snow."

"Ivan, I forbid you to go farther in this undertaking.  Not a word about
this, or we are all undone.  Let the Americans and the English know that
we have gold in these mountains, then we are ruined.  They will rush in
on us by thousands, and crowd us to the wall--to the death."

So spoke the old Russian governor, Baranov, at Sitka, in 1804, to one of
his Slavonian hunters, who had just drawn from his pocket a handful of
golden nuggets.  Full well Baranov, fur trader and autocrat, understood
and feared the coming of the sturdy, indomitable gold hunters of
Anglo-Saxon stock.  And thus he suppressed the news, as did the governors
that followed him, so that when the United States bought Alaska in 1867,
she bought it for its furs and fisheries, without a thought of its
treasures underground.

No sooner, however, had Alaska become American soil than thousands of our
adventurers were afoot and afloat for the north.  They were the men of
"the days of gold," the men of California, Fraser, Cassiar, and Cariboo.
With the mysterious, infinite faith of the prospector, they believed that
the gold streak, which ran through the Americas from Cape Horn to
California, did not "peter out" in British Columbia.  That it extended
farther north, was their creed, and "Farther North" became their cry.  No
time was lost, and in the early seventies, leaving the Treadwell and the
Silver Bow Basin to be discovered by those who came after, they went
plunging on into the white unknown.  North, farther north, they
struggled, till their picks rang in the frozen beaches of the Arctic
Ocean, and they shivered by driftwood fires on the ruby sands of Nome.

But first, in order that this colossal adventure may be fully grasped,
the recentness and the remoteness of Alaska must be emphasized.  The
interior of Alaska and the contiguous Canadian territory was a vast
wilderness.  Its hundreds of thousands of square miles were as dark and
chartless as Darkest Africa.  In 1847, when the first Hudson Bay Company
agents crossed over the Rockies from the Mackenzie to poach on the
preserves of the Russian Bear, they thought that the Yukon flowed north
and emptied into the Arctic Ocean.  Hundreds of miles below, however,
were the outposts of the Russian traders.  They, in turn, did not know
where the Yukon had its source, and it was not till later that Russ and
Saxon learned that it was the same mighty stream they were occupying.
And a little over ten years later, Frederick Whymper voyaged up the Great
Bend to Fort Yukon under the Arctic Circle.

From fort to fort, from York Factory on Hudson's Bay to Fort Yukon in
Alaska, the English traders transported their goods--a round trip
requiring from a year to a year and a half.  It was one of their
deserters, in 1867, escaping down the Yukon to Bering Sea, who was the
first white man to make the North-west Passage by land from the Atlantic
to the Pacific.  It was at this time that the first accurate description
of a fair portion of the Yukon was given by Dr. W. H. Ball, of the
Smithsonian Institution.  But even he had never seen its source, and it
was not given him to appreciate the marvel of that great natural highway.

No more remarkable river in this one particular is there in the world;
taking its rise in Crater Lake, thirty miles from the ocean, the Yukon
flows for twenty-five hundred miles, through the heart of the continent,
ere it empties into the sea.  A portage of thirty miles, and then a
highway for traffic one tenth the girth of the earth!

As late as 1869, Frederick Whymper, fellow of the Royal Geographical
Society, stated on hearsay that the Chilcat Indians were believed
occasionally to make a short portage across the Coast Range from salt
water to the head-reaches of the Yukon.  But it remained for a gold
hunter, questing north, ever north, to be first of all white men to cross
the terrible Chilcoot Pass, and tap the Yukon at its head.  This happened
only the other day, but the man has become a dim legendary hero.  Holt
was his name, and already the mists of antiquity have wrapped about the
time of his passage.  1872, 1874, and 1878 are the dates variously
given--a confusion which time will never clear.

Holt penetrated as far as the Hootalinqua, and on his return to the coast
reported coarse gold.  The next recorded adventurer is one Edward Bean,
who in 1880 headed a party of twenty-five miners from Sitka into the
uncharted land.  And in the same year, other parties (now forgotten, for
who remembers or ever hears the wanderings of the gold hunters?) crossed
the Pass, built boats out of the standing timber, and drifted down the
Yukon and farther north.

And then, for a quarter of a century, the unknown and unsung heroes
grappled with the frost, and groped for the gold they were sure lay
somewhere among the shadows of the Pole.  In the struggle with the
terrifying and pitiless natural forces, they returned to the primitive,
garmenting themselves in the skins of wild beasts, and covering their
feet with the walrus _mucluc_ and the moosehide moccasin.  They forgot
the world and its ways, as the world had forgotten them; killed their
meat as they found it; feasted in plenty and starved in famine, and
searched unceasingly for the yellow lure.  They crisscrossed the land in
every direction, threaded countless unmapped rivers in precarious
birch-bark canoes, and with snowshoes and dogs broke trail through
thousands of miles of silent white, where man had never been.  They
struggled on, under the aurora borealis or the midnight sun, through
temperatures that ranged from one hundred degrees above zero to eighty
degrees below, living, in the grim humour of the land, on "rabbit tracks
and salmon bellies."

To-day, a man may wander away from the trail for a hundred days, and just
as he is congratulating himself that at last he is treading virgin soil,
he will come upon some ancient and dilapidated cabin, and forget his
disappointment in wonder at the man who reared the logs.  Still, if one
wanders from the trail far enough and deviously enough, he may chance
upon a few thousand square miles which he may have all to himself.  On
the other hand, no matter how far and how deviously he may wander, the
possibility always remains that he may stumble, not alone upon a deserted
cabin, but upon an occupied one.

As an instance of this, and of the vastness of the land, no better case
need be cited than that of Harry Maxwell.  An able seaman, hailing from
New Bedford, Massachusetts, his ship, the brig _Fannie E. Lee_, was
pinched in the Arctic ice.  Passing from whaleship to whaleship, he
eventually turned up at Point Barrow in the summer of 1880.  He was
_north_ of the Northland, and from this point of vantage he determined to
pull south of the interior in search of gold.  Across the mountains from
Fort Macpherson, and a couple of hundred miles eastward from the
Mackenzie, he built a cabin and established his headquarters.  And here,
for nineteen continuous years, he hunted his living and prospected.  He
ranged from the never opening ice to the north as far south as the Great
Slave Lake.  Here he met Warburton Pike, the author and explorer--an
incident he now looks back upon as chief among the few incidents of his
solitary life.

When this sailor-miner had accumulated $20,000 worth of dust he concluded
that civilization was good enough for him, and proceeded "to pull for the
outside."  From the Mackenzie he went up the Little Peel to its
headwaters, found a pass through the mountains, nearly starved to death
on his way across to the Porcupine Hills, and eventually came out on the
Yukon River, where he learned for the first time of the Yukon gold
hunters and their discoveries.  Yet for twenty years they had been
working there, his next-door neighbours, virtually, in a land of such
great spaces.  At Victoria, British Columbia, previous to his going east
over the Canadian Pacific (the existence of which he had just learned),
he pregnantly remarked that he had faith in the Mackenzie watershed, and
that he was going back after he had taken in the World's Fair and got a
whiff or two of civilization.

Faith!  It may or may not remove mountains, but it has certainly made the
Northland.  No Christian martyr ever possessed greater faith than did the
pioneers of Alaska.  They never doubted the bleak and barren land.  Those
who came remained, and more ever came.  They could not leave.  They
"knew" the gold was there, and they persisted.  Somehow, the romance of
the land and the quest entered into their blood, the spell of it gripped
hold of them and would not let them go.  Man after man of them, after the
most terrible privation and suffering, shook the muck of the country from
his moccasins and departed for good.  But the following spring always
found him drifting down the Yukon on the tail of the ice jams.

Jack McQuestion aptly vindicates the grip of the North.  After a
residence of thirty years he insists that the climate is delightful, and
declares that whenever he makes a trip to the States he is afflicted with
home-sickness.  Needless to say, the North still has him and will keep
tight hold of him until he dies.  In fact, for him to die elsewhere would
be inartistic and insincere.  Of three of the "pioneer" pioneers, Jack
McQuestion alone survives.  In 1871, from one to seven years before Holt
went over Chilcoot, in the company of Al Mayo and Arthur Harper,
McQuestion came into the Yukon from the North-west over the Hudson Bay
Company route from the Mackenzie to Fort Yukon.  The names of these three
men, as their lives, are bound up in the history of the country, and so
long as there be histories and charts, that long will the Mayo and
McQuestion rivers and the Harper and Ladue town site of Dawson be
remembered.  As an agent of the Alaska Commercial Company, in 1873,
McQuestion built Fort Reliance, six miles below the Klondike River.  In
1898 the writer met Jack McQuestion at Minook, on the Lower Yukon.  The
old pioneer, though grizzled, was hale and hearty, and as optimistic as
when he first journeyed into the land along the path of the Circle.  And
no man more beloved is there in all the North.  There will be great
sadness there when his soul goes questing on over the Last
Divide--"farther north," perhaps--who can tell?

Frank Dinsmore is a fair sample of the men who made the Yukon country.  A
Yankee, born, in Auburn, Maine, the _Wanderlust_ early laid him by the
heels, and at sixteen he was heading west on the trail that led "farther
north."  He prospected in the Black Hills, Montana, and in the Coeur
d'Alene, then heard a whisper of the North, and went up to Juneau on the
Alaskan Panhandle.  But the North still whispered, and more insistently,
and he could not rest till he went over Chilcoot, and down into the
mysterious Silent Land.  This was in 1882, and he went down the chain of
lakes, down the Yukon, up the Pelly, and tried his luck on the bars of
McMillan River.  In the fall, a perambulating skeleton, he came back over
the Pass in a blizzard, with a rag of shirt, tattered overalls, and a
handful of raw flour.

But he was unafraid.  That winter he worked for a grubstake in Juneau,
and the next spring found the heels of his moccasins turned towards salt
water and his face toward Chilcoot.  This was repeated the next spring,
and the following spring, and the spring after that, until, in 1885, he
went over the Pass for good.  There was to be no return for him until he
found the gold he sought.

The years came and went, but he remained true to his resolve.  For eleven
long years, with snow-shoe and canoe, pickaxe and gold-pan, he wrote out
his life on the face of the land.  Upper Yukon, Middle Yukon, Lower
Yukon--he prospected faithfully and well.  His bed was anywhere.  Winter
or summer he carried neither tent nor stove, and his six-pound
sleeping-robe of Arctic hare was the warmest covering he was ever known
to possess.  Rabbit tracks and salmon bellies were his diet with a
vengeance, for he depended largely on his rifle and fishing-tackle.  His
endurance equalled his courage.  On a wager he lifted thirteen
fifty-pound sacks of flour and walked off with them.  Winding up a
seven-hundred-mile trip on the ice with a forty-mile run, he came into
camp at six o'clock in the evening and found a "squaw dance" under way.
He should have been exhausted.  Anyway, his _muclucs_ were frozen stiff.
But he kicked them off and danced all night in stocking-feet.

At the last fortune came to him.  The quest was ended, and he gathered up
his gold and pulled for the outside.  And his own end was as fitting as
that of his quest.  Illness came upon him down in San Francisco, and his
splendid life ebbed slowly out as he sat in his big easy-chair, in the
Commercial Hotel, the "Yukoner's home."  The doctors came, discussed,
consulted, the while he matured more plans of Northland adventure; for
the North still gripped him and would not let him go.  He grew weaker day
by day, but each day he said, "To-morrow I'll be all right."  Other
old-timers, "out on furlough,", came to see him.  They wiped their eyes
and swore under their breaths, then entered and talked largely and
jovially about going in with him over the trail when spring came.  But
there in the big easy-chair it was that his Long Trail ended, and the
life passed out of him still fixed on "farther north."

From the time of the first white man, famine loomed black and gloomy over
the land.  It was chronic with the Indians and Eskimos; it became chronic
with the gold hunters.  It was ever present, and so it came about that
life was commonly expressed in terms of "grub"--was measured by cups of
flour.  Each winter, eight months long, the heroes of the frost faced
starvation.  It became the custom, as fall drew on, for partners to cut
the cards or draw straws to determine which should hit the hazardous
trail for salt water, and which should remain and endure the hazardous
darkness of the Arctic night.

There was never food enough to winter the whole population.  The A. C.
Company worked hard to freight up the grub, but the gold hunters came
faster and dared more audaciously.  When the A. C. Company added a new
stern-wheeler to its fleet, men said, "Now we shall have plenty."  But
more gold hunters poured in over the passes to the south, more
_voyageurs_ and fur traders forced a way through the Rockies from the
east, more seal hunters and coast adventurers poled up from Bering Sea on
the west, more sailors deserted from the whale-ships to the north, and
they all starved together in right brotherly fashion.  More steamers were
added, but the tide of prospectors welled always in advance.  Then the N.
A. T. & T.  Company came upon the scene, and both companies added
steadily to their fleets.  But it was the same old story; famine would
not depart.  In fact, famine grew with the population, till, in the
winter of 1897-1898, the United States government was forced to equip a
reindeer relief expedition.  As of old, that winter partners cut the
cards and drew straws, and remained or pulled for salt water as chance
decided.  They were wise of old time, and had learned never to figure on
relief expeditions.  They had heard of such things, but no mortal man of
them had ever laid eyes on one.

The hard luck of other mining countries pales into insignificance before
the hard luck of the North.  And as for the hardship, it cannot be
conveyed by printed page or word of mouth.  No man may know who has not
undergone.  And those who have undergone, out of their knowledge, claim
that in the making of the world God grew tired, and when He came to the
last barrowload, "just dumped it anyhow," and that was how Alaska
happened to be.  While no adequate conception of the life can be given to
the stay-at-home, yet the men themselves sometimes give a clue to its
rigours.  One old Minook miner testified thus: "Haven't you noticed the
expression on the faces of us fellows?  You can tell a new-comer the
minute you see him; he looks alive, enthusiastic, perhaps jolly.  We old
miners are always grave, unless were drinking."

Another old-timer, out of the bitterness of a "home-mood," imagined
himself a Martian astronomer explaining to a friend, with the aid of a
powerful telescope, the institutions of the earth.  "There are the
continents," he indicated; "and up there near the polar cap is a country,
frigid and burning and lonely and apart, called Alaska.  Now, in other
countries and states there are great insane asylums, but, though crowded,
they are insufficient; so there is Alaska given over to the worst cases.
Now and then some poor insane creature comes to his senses in those awful
solitudes, and, in wondering joy, escapes from the land and hastens back
to his home.  But most cases are incurable.  They just suffer along, poor
devils, forgetting their former life quite, or recalling it like a
dream."  Again the grip of the North, which will not let one go--for
"_most cases are incurable_."

For a quarter of a century the battle with frost and famine went on.  The
very severity of the struggle with Nature seemed to make the gold hunters
kindly toward one another.  The latch-string was always out, and the open
hand was the order of the day.  Distrust was unknown, and it was no
hyperbole for a man to take the last shirt off his back for a comrade.
Most significant of all, perhaps, in this connection, was the custom of
the old days, that when August the first came around, the prospectors who
had failed to locate "pay dirt" were permitted to go upon the ground of
their more fortunate comrades and take out enough for the next year's
grub-stake.

In 1885 rich bar-washing was done on the Stewart River, and in 1886
Cassiar Bar was struck just below the mouth of the Hootalinqua.  It was
at this time that the first moderate strike was made on Forty Mile Creek,
so called because it was judged to be that distance below Fort Reliance
of Jack McQuestion fame.  A prospector named Williams started for the
outside with dogs and Indians to carry the news, but suffered such
hardship on the summit of Chilcoot that he was carried dying into the
store of Captain John Healy at Dyea.  But he had brought the news
through--_coarse gold_!  Within three months more than two hundred miners
had passed in over Chilcoot, stampeding for Forty Mile.  Find followed
find--Sixty Mile, Miller, Glacier, Birch, Franklin, and the Koyokuk.  But
they were all moderate discoveries, and the miners still dreamed and
searched for the fabled stream, "Too Much Gold," where gold was so
plentiful that gravel had to be shovelled into the sluice-boxes in order
to wash it.

And all the time the Northland was preparing to play its own huge joke.
It was a great joke, albeit an exceeding bitter one, and it has led the
old-timers to believe that the land is left in darkness the better part
of the year because God goes away and leaves it to itself.  After all the
risk and toil and faithful endeavour, it was destined that few of the
heroes should be in at the finish when Too Much Gold turned its
yellow-treasure to the stars.

First, there was Robert Henderson--and this is true history.  Henderson
had faith in the Indian River district.  For three years, by himself,
depending mainly on his rifle, living on straight meat a large portion of
the time, he prospected many of the Indian River tributaries, just missed
finding the rich creeks, Sulphur and Dominion, and managed to make grub
(poor grub) out of Quartz Creek and Australia Creek.  Then he crossed the
divide between Indian River and the Klondike, and on one of the "feeders"
of the latter found eight cents to the pan.  This was considered
excellent in those simple days.  Naming the creek "Gold Bottom," he
recrossed the divide and got three men, Munson, Dalton, and Swanson, to
return with him.  The four took out $750.  And be it emphasized, and
emphasized again, _that this was the first Klondike gold ever shovelled
in and washed out_.  And be it also emphasized, _that Robert Henderson
was the discoverer of Klondike_, _all lies and hearsay tales to the
contrary_.

Running out of grub, Henderson again recrossed the divide, and went down
the Indian River and up the Yukon to Sixty Mile.  Here Joe Ladue ran the
trading post, and here Joe Ladue had originally grub-staked Henderson.
Henderson told his tale, and a dozen men (all it contained) deserted the
Post for the scene of his find.  Also, Henderson persuaded a party of
prospectors bound for Stewart River, to forgo their trip and go down and
locate with him.  He loaded his boat with supplies, drifted down the
Yukon to the mouth of the Klondike, and towed and poled up the Klondike
to Gold Bottom.  But at the mouth of the Klondike he met George Carmack,
and thereby hangs the tale.

Carmack was a squawman.  He was familiarly known as "Siwash" George--a
derogatory term which had arisen out of his affinity for the Indians.  At
the time Henderson encountered him he was catching salmon with his Indian
wife and relatives on the site of what was to become Dawson, the Golden
City of the Snows.  Henderson, bubbling over with good-will, open-handed,
told Carmack of his discovery.  But Carmack was satisfied where he was.
He was possessed by no overweening desire for the strenuous life.  Salmon
were good enough for him.  But Henderson urged him to come on and locate,
until, when he yielded, he wanted to take the whole tribe along.
Henderson refused to stand for this, said that he must give the
preference over Siwashes to his old Sixty Mile friends, and, it is
rumoured, said some things about Siwashes that were not nice.

The next morning Henderson went on alone up the Klondike to Gold Bottom.
Carmack, by this time aroused, took a short cut afoot for the same place.
Accompanied by his two Indian brothers-in-law, Skookum Jim and Tagish
Charley, he went up Rabbit Creek (now Bonanza), crossed into Gold Bottom,
and staked near Henderson's discovery.  On the way up he had panned a few
shovels on Rabbit Creek, and he showed Henderson "colours" he had
obtained.  Henderson made him promise, if he found anything on the way
back, that he would send up one of the Indians with the news.  Henderson
also agreed to pay for his service, for he seemed to feel that they were
on the verge of something big, and he wanted to make sure.

Carmack returned down Rabbit Creek.  While he was taking a sleep on the
bank about half a mile below the mouth of what was to be known as
Eldorado, Skookum Jim tried his luck, and from surface prospects got from
ten cents to a dollar to the pan.  Carmack and his brother-in-law staked
and hit "the high places" for Forty Mile, where they filed on the claims
before Captain Constantine, and renamed the creek Bonanza.  And Henderson
was forgotten.  No word of it reached him.  Carmack broke his promise.

Weeks afterward, when Bonanza and Eldorado were staked from end to end
and there was no more room, a party of late comers pushed over the divide
and down to Gold Bottom, where they found Henderson still at work.  When
they told him they were from Bonanza, he was nonplussed.  He had never
heard of such a place.  But when they described it, he recognized it as
Rabbit Creek.  Then they told him of its marvellous richness, and, as
Tappan Adney relates, when Henderson realized what he had lost through
Carmack's treachery, "he threw down his shovel and went and sat on the
bank, so sick at heart that it was some time before he could speak."

Then there were the rest of the old-timers, the men of Forty Mile and
Circle City.  At the time of the discovery, nearly all of them were over
to the west at work in the old diggings or prospecting for new ones.  As
they said of themselves, they were the kind of men who are always caught
out with forks when it rains soup.  In the stampede that followed the
news of Carmack's strike very few old miners took part.  They were not
there to take part.  But the men who did go on the stampede were mainly
the worthless ones, the new-comers, and the camp hangers on.  And while
Bob Henderson plugged away to the east, and the heroes plugged away to
the west, the greenhorns and rounders went up and staked Bonanza.

But the Northland was not yet done with its joke.  When fall came on and
the heroes returned to Forty Mile and to Circle City, they listened
calmly to the up-river tales of Siwash discoveries and loafers'
prospects, and shook their heads.  They judged by the calibre of the men
interested, and branded it a bunco game.  But glowing reports continued
to trickle down the Yukon, and a few of the old-timers went up to see.
They looked over the ground--the unlikeliest place for gold in all their
experience--and they went down the river again, "leaving it to the
Swedes."

Again the Northland turned the tables.  The Alaskan gold hunter is
proverbial, not so much for his unveracity, as for his inability to tell
the precise truth.  In a country of exaggerations, he likewise is prone
to hyperbolic description of things actual.  But when it came to
Klondike, he could not stretch the truth as fast as the truth itself
stretched.  Carmack first got a dollar pan.  He lied when he said it was
two dollars and a half.  And when those who doubted him did get
two-and-a-half pans, they said they were getting an ounce, and lo! ere
the lie had fairly started on its way, they were getting, not one ounce,
but five ounces.  This they claimed was six ounces; but when they filled
a pan of dirt to prove the lie, they washed out twelve ounces.  And so it
went.  They continued valiantly to lie, but the truth continued to outrun
them.

But the Northland's hyperborean laugh was not yet ended.  When Bonanza
was staked from mouth to source, those who had failed to "get in,"
disgruntled and sore, went up the "pups" and feeders.  Eldorado was one
of these feeders, and many men, after locating on it, turned their backs
upon their claims and never gave them a second thought.  One man sold a
half-interest in five hundred feet of it for a sack of flour.  Other
owners wandered around trying to bunco men into buying them out for a
song.  And then Eldorado "showed up."  It was far, far richer than
Bonanza, with an average value of a thousand dollars a foot to every foot
of it.

A Swede named Charley Anderson had been at work on Miller Creek the year
of the strike, and arrived in Dawson with a few hundred dollars.  Two
miners, who had staked No. 29 Eldorado, decided that he was the proper
man upon whom to "unload."  He was too canny to approach sober, so at
considerable expense they got him drunk.  Even then it was hard work, but
they kept him befuddled for several days, and finally, inveigled him into
buying No. 29 for $750.  When Anderson sobered up, he wept at his folly,
and pleaded to have his money back.  But the men who had duped him were
hard-hearted.  They laughed at him, and kicked themselves for not having
tapped him for a couple of hundred more.  Nothing remained for Anderson
but to work the worthless ground.  This he did, and out of it he took
over three-quarters of a million of dollars.

It was not till Frank Dinsmore, who already had big holdings on Birch
Creek, took a hand, that the old-timers developed faith in the new
diggings.  Dinsmore received a letter from a man on the spot, calling it
"the biggest thing in the world," and harnessed his dogs and went up to
investigate.  And when he sent a letter back, saying that he had never
seen "anything like it," Circle City for the first time believed, and at
once was precipitated one of the wildest stampedes the country had ever
seen or ever will see.  Every dog was taken, many went without dogs, and
even the women and children and weaklings hit the three hundred miles of
ice through the long Arctic night for the biggest thing in the world.  It
is related that but twenty people, mostly cripples and unable to travel,
were left in Circle City when the smoke of the last sled disappeared up
the Yukon.

Since that time gold has been discovered in all manner of places, under
the grass roots of the hill-side benches, in the bottom of Monte Cristo
Island, and in the sands of the sea at Nome.  And now the gold hunter who
knows his business shuns the "favourable looking" spots, confident in his
hard-won knowledge that he will find the most gold in the least likely
place.  This is sometimes adduced to support the theory that the gold
hunters, rather than the explorers, are the men who will ultimately win
to the Pole.  Who knows?  It is in their blood, and they are capable of
it.

PIEDMONT, CALIFORNIA.
_February_ 1902.




FOMA GORDYEEFF


    "What, without asking, hither hurried _Whence_?
    And, without asking, _Whither_ hurried hence!
    Oh, many a Cup of this forbidden Wine
    Must drown the memory of that insolence!"

"Foma Gordyeeff" is a big book--not only is the breadth of Russia in it,
but the expanse of life.  Yet, though in each land, in this world of
marts and exchanges, this age of trade and traffic, passionate figures
rise up and demand of life what its fever is, in "Foma Gordyeeff" it is a
Russian who so rises up and demands.  For Gorky, the Bitter One, is
essentially a Russian in his grasp on the facts of life and in his
treatment.  All the Russian self-analysis and insistent introspection are
his.  And, like all his brother Russians, ardent, passionate protest
impregnates his work.  There is a purpose to it.  He writes because he
has something to say which the world should hear.  From that clenched
fist of his, light and airy romances, pretty and sweet and beguiling, do
not flow, but realities--yes, big and brutal and repulsive, but real.

He raises the cry of the miserable and the despised, and in a masterly
arraignment of commercialism, protests against social conditions, against
the grinding of the faces of the poor and weak, and the self-pollution of
the rich and strong, in their mad lust for place and power.  It is to be
doubted strongly if the average bourgeois, smug and fat and prosperous,
can understand this man Foma Gordyeeff.  The rebellion in his blood is
something to which their own does not thrill.  To them it will be
inexplicable that this man, with his health and his millions, could not
go on living as his class lived, keeping regular hours at desk and stock
exchange, driving close contracts, underbidding his competitors, and
exulting in the business disasters of his fellows.  It would appear so
easy, and, after such a life, well appointed and eminently respectable,
he could die.  "Ah," Foma will interrupt rudely--he is given to rude
interruptions--"if to die and disappear is the end of these
money-grubbing years, why money-grub?"  And the bourgeois whom he rudely
interrupted will not understand.  Nor did Mayakin understand as he
laboured holily with his wayward godson.

"Why do you brag?"  Foma, bursts out upon him.  "What have you to brag
about?  Your son--where is he?  Your daughter--what is she?  Ekh, you
manager of life!  Come, now, you're clever, you know everything--tell me,
why do you live?  Why do you accumulate money?  Aren't you going to die?
Well, what then?"  And Mayakin finds himself speechless and without
answer, but unshaken and unconvinced.

Receiving by heredity the fierce, bull-like nature of his father plus the
passive indomitableness and groping spirit of his mother, Foma, proud and
rebellious, is repelled by the selfish, money-seeking environment into
which he is born.  Ignat, his father, and Mayakin, the godfather, and all
the horde of successful merchants singing the paean of the strong and the
praises of merciless, remorseless _laissez faire_, cannot entice him.
Why? he demands.  This is a nightmare, this life!  It is without
significance!  What does it all mean?  What is there underneath?  What is
the meaning of that which is underneath?

"You do well to pity people," Ignat tells Foma, the boy, "only you must
use judgment with your pity.  First consider the man, find out what he is
like, what use can be made of him; and if you see that he is a strong and
capable man, help him if you like.  But if a man is weak, not inclined to
work--spit upon him and go your way.  And you must know that when a man
complains about everything, and cries out and groans--he is not worth
more than two kopeks, he is not worthy of pity, and will be of no use to
you if you do help him."

Such the frank and militant commercialism, bellowed out between glasses
of strong liquor.  Now comes Mayakin, speaking softly and without satire:

"Eh, my boy, what is a beggar?  A beggar is a man who is forced, by fate,
to remind us of Christ; he is Christ's brother; he is the bell of the
Lord, and rings in life for the purpose of awakening our conscience, of
stirring up the satiety of man's flesh.  He stands under the window and
sings, 'For Christ's sa-ake!' and by that chant he reminds us of Christ,
of His holy command to help our neighbour.  But men have so ordered their
lives that it is utterly impossible for them to act in accordance with
Christ's teaching, and Jesus Christ has become entirely superfluous to
us.  Not once, but, in all probability, a thousand times, we have given
Him over to be crucified, but still we cannot banish Him from our lives
so long as His poor brethren sing His name in the streets and remind us
of Him.  And so now we have hit upon the idea of shutting up the beggars
in such special buildings, so that they may not roam about the streets
and stir up our consciences."

But Foma will have none of it.  He is neither to be enticed nor cajoled.
The cry of his nature is for light.  He must have light.  And in burning
revolt he goes seeking the meaning of life.  "His thoughts embraced all
those petty people who toiled at hard labour.  It was strange--why did
they live?  What satisfaction was it to them to live on the earth?  All
they did was to perform their dirty, arduous toil, eat poorly; they were
miserably clad, addicted to drunkenness.  One was sixty years old, but he
still toiled side by side with young men.  And they all presented
themselves to Foma's imagination as a huge heap of worms, who were
swarming over the earth merely to eat."

He becomes the living interrogation of life.  He cannot begin living
until he knows what living means, and he seeks its meaning vainly.  "Why
should I try to live life when I do not know what life is?" he objects
when Mayakin strives with him to return and manage his business.  Why
should men fetch and carry for him? be slaves to him and his money?

"Work is not everything to a man," he says; "it is not true that
justification lies in work . . . Some people never do any work at all,
all their lives long--yet they live better than the toilers.  Why is
that?  And what justification have I?  And how will all the people who
give their orders justify themselves?  What have they lived for?  But my
idea is that everybody ought, without fail, to know solidly what he is
living for.  Is it possible that a man is born to toil, accumulate money,
build a house, beget children, and--die?  No; life means something in
itself. . . .  A man has been born, has lived, has died--why?  All of us
must consider why we are living, by God, we must!  There is no sense in
our life--there is no sense at all.  Some are rich--they have money
enough for a thousand men all to themselves--and they live without
occupation; others bow their backs in toil all their life, and they
haven't a penny."

But Foma can only be destructive.  He is not constructive.  The dim
groping spirit of his mother and the curse of his environment press too
heavily upon him, and he is crushed to debauchery and madness.  He does
not drink because liquor tastes good in his mouth.  In the vile
companions who purvey to his baser appetites he finds no charm.  It is
all utterly despicable and sordid, but thither his quest leads him and he
follows the quest.  He knows that everything is wrong, but he cannot
right it, cannot tell why.  He can only attack and demolish.  "What
justification have you all in the sight of God?  Why do you live?" he
demands of the conclave of merchants, of life's successes.  "You have not
constructed life--you have made a cesspool!  You have disseminated filth
and stifling exhalations by your deeds.  Have you any conscience?  Do you
remember God?  A five-kopek piece--that is your God!  But you have
expelled your conscience!"

Like the cry of Isaiah, "Go to, now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your
misfortunes that shall come upon you," is Foma's: "You blood-suckers!
You live on other people's strength; you work with other people's hands!
For all this you shall be made to pay!  You shall perish--you shall be
called to account for all!  For all--to the last little tear-drop!"

Stunned by this puddle of life, unable to make sense of it, Foma
questions, and questions vainly, whether of Sofya Medynsky in her
drawing-room of beauty, or in the foulest depths of the first chance
courtesan's heart.  Linboff, whose books contradict one another, cannot
help him; nor can the pilgrims on crowded steamers, nor the verse writers
and harlots in dives and boozingkens.  And so, wondering, pondering,
perplexed, amazed, whirling through the mad whirlpool of life, dancing
the dance of death, groping for the nameless, indefinite something, the
magic formula, the essence, the intrinsic fact, the flash of light
through the murk and dark--the rational sanction for existence, in
short--Foma Gordyeeff goes down to madness and death.

It is not a pretty book, but it is a masterful interrogation of life--not
of life universal, but of life particular, the social life of to-day.  It
is not nice; neither is the social life of to-day nice.  One lays the
book down sick at heart--sick for life with all its "lyings and its
lusts."  But it is a healthy book.  So fearful is its portrayal of social
disease, so ruthless its stripping of the painted charms from vice, that
its tendency cannot but be strongly for good.  It is a goad, to prick
sleeping human consciences awake and drive them into the battle for
humanity.

But no story is told, nothing is finished, some one will object.  Surely,
when Sasha leaped overboard and swam to Foma, something happened.  It was
pregnant with possibilities.  Yet it was not finished, was not decisive.
She left him to go with the son of a rich vodka-maker.  And all that was
best in Sofya Medynsky was quickened when she looked upon Foma with the
look of the Mother-Woman.  She might have been a power for good in his
life, she might have shed light into it and lifted him up to safety and
honour and understanding.  Yet she went away next day, and he never saw
her again.  No story is told, nothing is finished.

Ah, but surely the story of Foma Gordyeeff is told; his life is finished,
as lives are being finished each day around us.  Besides, it is the way
of life, and the art of Gorky is the art of realism.  But it is a less
tedious realism than that of Tolstoy or Turgenev.  It lives and breathes
from page to page with a swing and dash and go that they rarely attain.
Their mantle has fallen on his young shoulders, and he promises to wear
it royally.

Even so, but so helpless, hopeless, terrible is this life of Foma
Gordyeeff that we would be filled with profound sorrow for Gorky did we
not know that he has come up out of the Valley of Shadow.  That he hopes,
we know, else would he not now be festering in a Russian prison because
he is brave enough to live the hope he feels.  He knows life, why and how
it should be lived.  And in conclusion, this one thing is manifest: Foma
Gordyeeff is no mere statement of an intellectual problem.  For as he
lived and interrogated living, so in sweat and blood and travail has
Gorky lived.

PIEDMONT, CALIFORNIA.
_November_ 1901.




THESE BONES SHALL RISE AGAIN


Rudyard Kipling, "prophet of blood and vulgarity, prince of ephemerals
and idol of the unelect"--as a Chicago critic chortles--is dead.  It is
true.  He is dead, dead and buried.  And a fluttering, chirping host of
men, little men and unseeing men, have heaped him over with the uncut
leaves of _Kim_, wrapped him in _Stalky & Co._, for winding sheet, and
for headstone reared his unconventional lines, _The Lesson_.  It was very
easy.  The simplest thing in the world.  And the fluttering, chirping
gentlemen are rubbing their hands in amaze and wondering why they did not
do it long ago, it was so very, very simple.

But the centuries to come, of which the fluttering, chirping gentlemen
are prone to talk largely, will have something to say in the matter.  And
when they, the future centuries, quest back to the nineteenth century to
find what manner of century it was--to find, not what the people of the
nineteenth century thought they thought, but what they really thought,
not what they thought they ought to do, but what they really did do, then
a certain man, Kipling, will be read--and read with understanding.  "They
thought they read him with understanding, those people of the nineteenth
century," the future centuries will say; "and then they thought there was
no understanding in him, and after that they did not know what they
thought."

But this is over-severe.  It applies only to that class which serves a
function somewhat similar to that served by the populace of old time in
Rome.  This is the unstable, mob-minded mass, which sits on the fence,
ever ready to fall this side or that and indecorously clamber back again;
which puts a Democratic administration into office one election, and a
Republican the next; which discovers and lifts up a prophet to-day that
it may stone him to-morrow; which clamours for the book everybody else is
reading, for no reason under the sun save that everybody else is reading
it.  This is the class of whim and caprice, of fad and vogue, the
unstable, incoherent, mob-mouthed, mob-minded mass, the "monkey-folk," if
you please, of these latter days.  Now it may be reading _The Eternal
City_.  Yesterday it was reading _The Master Christian_, and some several
days before that it was reading Kipling.  Yes, almost to his shame be it,
these folk were reading him.  But it was not his fault.  If he depended
upon them he well deserves to be dead and buried and never to rise again.
But to them, let us be thankful, he never lived.  They thought he lived,
but he was as dead then as he is now and as he always will be.

He could not help it because he became the vogue, and it is easily
understood.  When he lay ill, fighting with close grapples with death,
those who knew him were grieved.  They were many, and in many voices, to
the rim of the Seven Seas, they spoke their grief.  Whereupon, and with
celerity, the mob-minded mass began to inquire as to this man whom so
many mourned.  If everybody else mourned, it were fit that they mourn
too.  So a vast wail went up.  Each was a spur to the other's grief, and
each began privately to read this man they had never read and publicly to
proclaim this man they had always read.  And straightaway next day they
drowned their grief in a sea of historical romance and forgot all about
him.  The reaction was inevitable.  Emerging from the sea into which they
had plunged, they became aware that they had so soon forgotten him, and
would have been ashamed, had not the fluttering, chirping men said,
"Come, let us bury him."  And they put him in a hole, quickly, out of
their sight.

And when they have crept into their own little holes, and smugly laid
themselves down in their last long sleep, the future centuries will roll
the stone away and he will come forth again.  For be it known: _That man
of us is imperishable who makes his century imperishable_.  That man of
us who seizes upon the salient facts of our life, who tells what we
thought, what we were, and for what we stood--that man shall be the
mouthpiece to the centuries, and so long as they listen he shall endure.

We remember the caveman.  We remember him because he made his century
imperishable.  But, unhappily, we remember him dimly, in a collective
sort of way, because he memorialized his century dimly, in a collective
sort of way.  He had no written speech, so he left us rude scratchings of
beasts and things, cracked marrow-bones, and weapons of stone.  It was
the best expression of which he was capable.  Had he scratched his own
particular name with the scratchings of beasts and things, stamped his
cracked marrowbones with his own particular seal, trade-marked his
weapons of stone with his own particular device, that particular man
would we remember.  But he did the best he could, and we remember him as
best we may.

Homer takes his place with Achilles and the Greek and Trojan heroes.
Because he remembered them, we remember him.  Whether he be one or a
dozen men, or a dozen generations of men, we remember him.  And so long
as the name of Greece is known on the lips of men, so long will the name
of Homer be known.  There are many such names, linked with their times,
which have come down to us, many more which will yet go down; and to
them, in token that we have lived, must we add some few of our own.

Dealing only with the artist, be it understood, only those artists will
go down who have spoken true of us.  Their truth must be the deepest and
most significant, their voices clear and strong, definite and coherent.
Half-truths and partial-truths will not do, nor will thin piping voices
and quavering lays.  There must be the cosmic quality in what they sing.
They must seize upon and press into enduring art-forms the vital facts of
our existence.  They must tell why we have lived, for without any reason
for living, depend upon it, in the time to come, it will be as though we
had never lived.  Nor are the things that were true of the people a
thousand years or so ago true of us to-day.  The romance of Homer's
Greece is the romance of Homer's Greece.  That is undeniable.  It is not
our romance.  And he who in our time sings the romance of Homer's Greece
cannot expect to sing it so well as Homer did, nor will he be singing
about us or our romance at all.  A machine age is something quite
different from an heroic age.  What is true of rapid-fire guns,
stock-exchanges, and electric motors, cannot possibly be true of
hand-flung javelins and whirring chariot wheels.  Kipling knows this.  He
has been telling it to us all his life, living it all his life in the
work he has done.

What the Anglo-Saxon has done, he has memorialized.  And by Anglo-Saxon
is not meant merely the people of that tight little island on the edge of
the Western Ocean.  Anglo-Saxon stands for the English-speaking people of
all the world, who, in forms and institutions and traditions, are more
peculiarly and definitely English than anything else.  This people
Kipling has sung.  Their sweat and blood and toil have been the motives
of his songs; but underlying all the motives of his songs is the motive
of motives, the sum of them all and something more, which is one with
what underlies all the Anglo-Saxon sweat and blood and toil; namely, the
genius of the race.  And this is the cosmic quality.  Both that which is
true of the race for all time, and that which is true of the race for all
time applied to this particular time, he has caught up and pressed into
his art-forms.  He has caught the dominant note of the Anglo-Saxon and
pressed it into wonderful rhythms which cannot be sung out in a day and
which will not be sung out in a day.

The Anglo-Saxon is a pirate, a land robber and a sea robber.  Underneath
his thin coating of culture, he is what he was in Morgan's time, in
Drake's time, in William's time, in Alfred's time.  The blood and the
tradition of Hengist and Horsa are in his veins.  In battle he is subject
to the blood-lusts of the Berserkers of old.  Plunder and booty fascinate
him immeasurably.  The schoolboy of to-day dreams the dream of Clive and
Hastings.  The Anglo-Saxon is strong of arm and heavy of hand, and he
possesses a primitive brutality all his own.  There is a discontent in
his blood, an unsatisfaction that will not let him rest, but sends him
adventuring over the sea and among the lands in the midst of the sea.  He
does not know when he is beaten, wherefore the term "bulldog" is attached
to him, so that all may know his unreasonableness.  He has "some care as
to the purity of his ways, does not wish for strange gods, nor juggle
with intellectual phantasmagoria."  He loves freedom, but is dictatorial
to others, is self-willed, has boundless energy, and does things for
himself.  He is also a master of matter, an organizer of law, and an
administrator of justice.

And in the nineteenth century he has lived up to his reputation.  Being
the nineteenth century and no other century, and in so far different from
all other centuries, he has expressed himself differently.  But blood
will tell, and in the name of God, the Bible, and Democracy, he has gone
out over the earth, possessing himself of broad lands and fat revenues,
and conquering by virtue of his sheer pluck and enterprise and superior
machinery.

Now the future centuries, seeking to find out what the nineteenth century
Anglo-Saxon was and what were his works, will have small concern with
what he did not do and what he would have liked to do.  These things he
did do, and for these things will he be remembered.  His claim on
posterity will be that in the nineteenth century he mastered matter; his
twentieth-century claim will be, in the highest probability, that he
organized life--but that will be sung by the twentieth-century Kiplings
or the twenty-first-century Kiplings.  Rudyard Kipling of the nineteenth
century has sung of "things as they are."  He has seen life as it is,
"taken it up squarely," in both his hands, and looked upon it.  What
better preachment upon the Anglo-Saxon and what he has done can be had
than _The Bridge Builders_? what better appraisement than _The White
Man's Burden_?  As for faith and clean ideals--not of "children and gods,
but men in a world of men"--who has preached them better than he?

Primarily, Kipling has stood for the doer as opposed to the dreamer--the
doer, who lists not to idle songs of empty days, but who goes forth and
does things, with bended back and sweated brow and work-hardened hands.
The most characteristic thing about Kipling is his lover of actuality,
his intense practicality, his proper and necessary respect for the
hard-headed, hard-fisted fact.  And, above all, he has preached the
gospel of work, and as potently as Carlyle ever preached.  For he has
preached it not only to those in the high places, but to the common men,
to the great sweating thong of common men who hear and understand yet
stand agape at Carlyle's turgid utterance.  Do the thing to your hand,
and do it with all your might.  Never mind what the thing is; so long as
it is something.  Do it.  Do it and remember Tomlinson, sexless and
soulless Tomlinson, who was denied at Heaven's gate.

The blundering centuries have perseveringly pottered and groped through
the dark; but it remained for Kipling's century to roll in the sun, to
formulate, in other words, the reign of law.  And of the artists in
Kipling's century, he of them all has driven the greater measure of law
in the more consummate speech:

    Keep ye the Law--be swift in all obedience.
    Clear the land of evil, drive the road and bridge the ford.
       Make ye sure to each his own
       That he reap what he hath sown;
    By the peace among Our peoples let men know we serve the Lord.

--And so it runs, from McAndrew's _Law_, _Order_, _Duty_, _and
Restraint_, to his last least line, whether of _The Vampire_ or _The
Recessional_.  And no prophet out of Israel has cried out more loudly the
sins of the people, nor called them more awfully to repent.

"But he is vulgar, he stirs the puddle of life," object the fluttering,
chirping gentlemen, the Tomlinsonian men.  Well, and isn't life vulgar?
Can you divorce the facts of life?  Much of good is there, and much of
ill; but who may draw aside his garment and say, "I am none of them"?
Can you say that the part is greater than the whole? that the whole is
more or less than the sum of the parts?  As for the puddle of life, the
stench is offensive to you?  Well, and what then?  Do you not live in it?
Why do you not make it clean?  Do you clamour for a filter to make clean
only your own particular portion?  And, made clean, are you wroth because
Kipling has stirred it muddy again?  At least he has stirred it
healthily, with steady vigour and good-will.  He has not brought to the
surface merely its dregs, but its most significant values.  He has told
the centuries to come of our lyings and our lusts, but he has also told
the centuries to come of the seriousness which is underneath our lyings
and our lusts.  And he has told us, too, and always has he told us, to be
clean and strong and to walk upright and manlike.

"But he has no sympathy," the fluttering gentlemen chirp.  "We admire his
art and intellectual brilliancy, we all admire his art and intellectual
brilliancy, his dazzling technique and rare rhythmical sense; but . . .
he is totally devoid of sympathy."  Dear!  Dear!  What is to be
understood by this?  Should he sprinkle his pages with sympathetic
adjectives, so many to the paragraph, as the country compositor sprinkles
commas?  Surely not.  The little gentlemen are not quite so infinitesimal
as that.  There have been many tellers of jokes, and the greater of them,
it is recorded, never smiled at their own, not even in the crucial moment
when the audience wavered between laughter and tears.

And so with Kipling.  Take _The Vampire_, for instance.  It has been
complained that there is no touch of pity in it for the man and his ruin,
no sermon on the lesson of it, no compassion for the human weakness, no
indignation at the heartlessness.  But are we kindergarten children that
the tale be told to us in words of one syllable?  Or are we men and
women, able to read between the lines what Kipling intended we should
read between the lines?  "For some of him lived, but the most of him
died."  Is there not here all the excitation in the world for our sorrow,
our pity, our indignation?  And what more is the function of art than to
excite states of consciousness complementary to the thing portrayed?  The
colour of tragedy is red.  Must the artist also paint in the watery tears
and wan-faced grief?  "For some of him lived, but the most of him
died"--can the heartache of the situation be conveyed more achingly?  Or
were it better that the young man, some of him alive but most of him
dead, should come out before the curtain and deliver a homily to the
weeping audience?

The nineteenth century, so far as the Anglo-Saxon is concerned, was
remarkable for two great developments: the mastery of matter and the
expansion of the race.  Three great forces operated in it: nationalism,
commercialism, democracy--the marshalling of the races, the merciless,
remorseless _laissez faire_ of the dominant bourgeoisie, and the
practical, actual working government of men within a very limited
equality.  The democracy of the nineteenth century is not the democracy
of which the eighteenth century dreamed.  It is not the democracy of the
Declaration, but it is what we have practised and lived that reconciles
it to the fact of the "lesser breeds without the Law."

It is of these developments and forces of the nineteenth century that
Kipling has sung.  And the romance of it he has sung, that which
underlies and transcends objective endeavour, which deals with race
impulses, race deeds, and race traditions.  Even into the steam-laden
speech of his locomotives has he breathed our life, our spirit, our
significance.  As he is our mouthpiece, so are they his mouthpieces.  And
the romance of the nineteenth-century man as he has thus expressed
himself in the nineteenth century, in shaft and wheel, in steel and
steam, in far journeying and adventuring, Kipling has caught up in
wondrous songs for the future centuries to sing.

If the nineteenth century is the century of the Hooligan, then is Kipling
the voice of the Hooligan as surely as he is the voice of the nineteenth
century.  Who is more representative?  Is _David Harum_ more
representative of the nineteenth century?  Is Mary Johnston, Charles
Major, or Winston Churchill?  Is Bret Harte?  William Dean Howells?
Gilbert Parker?  Who of them all is as essentially representative of
nineteenth-century life?  When Kipling is forgotten, will Robert Louis
Stevenson be remembered for his _Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde_, his
_Kidnapped_ and his _David Balfour_?  Not so.  His _Treasure Island_ will
be a classic, to go down with _Robinson Crusoe_, _Through the
Looking-Glass_, and _The Jungle Books_.  He will be remembered for his
essays, for his letters, for his philosophy of life, for himself.  He
will be the well beloved, as he has been the well beloved.  But his will
be another claim upon posterity than what we are considering.  For each
epoch has its singer.  As Scott sang the swan song of chivalry and
Dickens the burgher-fear of the rising merchant class, so Kipling, as no
one else, has sung the hymn of the dominant bourgeoisie, the war march of
the white man round the world, the triumphant paean of commercialism and
imperialism.  For that will he be remembered.

OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA.
_October_ 1901.




THE OTHER ANIMALS


American journalism has its moments of fantastic hysteria, and when it is
on the rampage the only thing for a rational man to do is to climb a tree
and let the cataclysm go by.  And so, some time ago, when the word
_nature-faker_ was coined, I, for one, climbed into my tree and stayed
there.  I happened to be in Hawaii at the time, and a Honolulu reporter
elicited the sentiment from me that I thanked God I was not an authority
on anything.  This sentiment was promptly cabled to America in an
Associated Press despatch, whereupon the American press (possibly annoyed
because I had not climbed down out of my tree) charged me with paying for
advertising by cable at a dollar per word--the very human way of the
American press, which, when a man refuses to come down and be licked,
makes faces at him.

But now that the storm is over, let us come and reason together.  I have
been guilty of writing two animal-stories--two books about dogs.  The
writing of these two stories, on my part, was in truth a protest against
the "humanizing" of animals, of which it seemed to me several "animal
writers" had been profoundly guilty.  Time and again, and many times, in
my narratives, I wrote, speaking of my dog-heroes: "He did not think
these things; he merely did them," etc.  And I did this repeatedly, to
the clogging of my narrative and in violation of my artistic canons; and
I did it in order to hammer into the average human understanding that
these dog-heroes of mine were not directed by abstract reasoning, but by
instinct, sensation, and emotion, and by simple reasoning.  Also, I
endeavoured to make my stories in line with the facts of evolution; I
hewed them to the mark set by scientific research, and awoke, one day, to
find myself bundled neck and crop into the camp of the nature-fakers.

President Roosevelt was responsible for this, and he tried to condemn me
on two counts.  (1) I was guilty of having a big, fighting bull-dog whip
a wolf-dog.  (2) I was guilty of allowing a lynx to kill a wolf-dog in a
pitched battle.  Regarding the second count, President Roosevelt was
wrong in his field observations taken while reading my book.  He must
have read it hastily, for in my story I had the wolf-dog kill the lynx.
Not only did I have my wolf-dog kill the lynx, but I made him eat the
body of the lynx as well.  Remains only the first count on which to
convict me of nature-faking, and the first count does not charge me with
diverging from ascertained facts.  It is merely a statement of a
difference of opinion.  President Roosevelt does not think a bull-dog can
lick a wolf-dog.  I think a bull-dog can lick a wolf-dog.  And there we
are.  Difference of opinion may make, and does make, horse-racing.  I can
understand that difference of opinion can make dog-fighting.  But what
gets me is how difference of opinion regarding the relative fighting
merits of a bull-dog and a wolf-dog makes me a nature-faker and President
Roosevelt a vindicated and triumphant scientist.

Then entered John Burroughs to clinch President Roosevelt's judgments.
In this alliance there is no difference of opinion.  That Roosevelt can
do no wrong is Burroughs's opinion; and that Burroughs is always right is
Roosevelt's opinion.  Both are agreed that animals do not reason.  They
assert that all animals below man are automatons and perform actions only
of two sorts--mechanical and reflex--and that in such actions no
reasoning enters at all.  They believe that man is the only animal
capable of reasoning and that ever does reason.  This is a view that
makes the twentieth-century scientist smile.  It is not modern at all.
It is distinctly mediaeval.  President Roosevelt and John Burroughs, in
advancing such a view, are homocentric in the same fashion that the
scholastics of earlier and darker centuries were homocentric.  Had the
world not been discovered to be round until after the births of President
Roosevelt and John Burroughs, they would have been geocentric as well in
their theories of the Cosmos.  They could not have believed otherwise.
The stuff of their minds is so conditioned.  They talk the argot of
evolution, while they no more understand the essence and the import of
evolution than does a South Sea Islander or Sir Oliver Lodge understand
the noumena of radio-activity.

Now, President Roosevelt is an amateur.  He may know something of
statecraft and of big-game shooting; he may be able to kill a deer when
he sees it and to measure it and weigh it after he has shot it; he may be
able to observe carefully and accurately the actions and antics of
tomtits and snipe, and, after he has observed it, definitely and
coherently to convey the information of when the first chipmunk, in a
certain year and a certain latitude and longitude, came out in the spring
and chattered and gambolled--but that he should be able, as an individual
observer, to analyze all animal life and to synthetize and develop all
that is known of the method and significance of evolution, would require
a vaster credulity for you or me to believe than is required for us to
believe the biggest whopper ever told by an unmitigated nature-faker.
No, President Roosevelt does not understand evolution, and he does not
seem to have made much of an attempt to understand evolution.

Remains John Burroughs, who claims to be a thorough-going evolutionist.
Now, it is rather hard for a young man to tackle an old man.  It is the
nature of young men to be more controlled in such matters, and it is the
nature of old men, presuming upon the wisdom that is very often
erroneously associated with age, to do the tackling.  In this present
question of nature-faking, the old men did the tackling, while I, as one
young man, kept quiet a long time.  But here goes at last.  And first of
all let Mr. Burroughs's position be stated, and stated in his words.

"Why impute reason to an animal if its behaviour can be explained on the
theory of instinct?"  Remember these words, for they will be referred to
later.  "A goodly number of persons seem to have persuaded themselves
that animals do reason."  "But instinct suffices for the animals . . .
they get along very well without reason."  "Darwin tried hard to convince
himself that animals do at times reason in a rudimentary way; but Darwin
was also a much greater naturalist than psychologist."  The preceding
quotation is tantamount, on Mr. Burroughs's part, to a flat denial that
animals reason even in a rudimentary way.  And when Mr. Burrough denies
that animals reason even in a rudimentary way, it is equivalent to
affirming, in accord with the first quotation in this paragraph, that
instinct will explain every animal act that might be confounded with
reason by the unskilled or careless observer.

Having bitten off this large mouthful, Mr. Burroughs proceeds with serene
and beautiful satisfaction to masticate it in the following fashion.  He
cites a large number of instances of purely instinctive actions on the
part of animals, and triumphantly demands if they are acts of reason.  He
tells of the robin that fought day after day its reflected image in a
window-pane; of the birds in South America that were guilty of drilling
clear through a mud wall, which they mistook for a solid clay bank: of
the beaver that cut down a tree four times because it was held at the top
by the branches of other trees; of the cow that licked the skin of her
stuffed calf so affectionately that it came apart, whereupon she
proceeded to eat the hay with which it was stuffed.  He tells of the
phoebe-bird that betrays her nest on the porch by trying to hide it with
moss in similar fashion to the way all phoebe-birds hide their nests when
they are built among rocks.  He tells of the highhole that repeatedly
drills through the clap-boards of an empty house in a vain attempt to
find a thickness of wood deep enough in which to build its nest.  He
tells of the migrating lemmings of Norway that plunge into the sea and
drown in vast numbers because of their instinct to swim lakes and rivers
in the course of their migrations.  And, having told a few more instances
of like kidney, he triumphantly demands: "Where now is your much-vaunted
reasoning of the lower animals?"

No schoolboy in a class debate could be guilty of unfairer argument.  It
is equivalent to replying to the assertion that 2+2=4, by saying: "No;
because 12/4=3; I have demonstrated my honourable opponent's error."
When a man attacks your ability as a foot-racer, promptly prove to him
that he was drunk the week before last, and the average man in the crowd
of gaping listeners will believe that you have convincingly refuted the
slander on your fleetness of foot.  On my honour, it will work.  Try it
some time.  It is done every day.  Mr. Burroughs has done it himself,
and, I doubt not, pulled the sophistical wool over a great many pairs of
eyes.  No, no, Mr. Burroughs; you can't disprove that animals reason by
proving that they possess instincts.  But the worst of it is that you
have at the same time pulled the wool over your own eyes.  You have set
up a straw man and knocked the stuffing out of him in the complacent
belief that it was the reasoning of lower animals you were knocking out
of the minds of those who disagreed with you.  When the highhole
perforated the icehouse and let out the sawdust, you called him a lunatic
. . .

But let us be charitable--and serious.  What Mr. Burroughs instances as
acts of instinct certainly are acts of instincts.  By the same method of
logic one could easily adduce a multitude of instinctive acts on the part
of man and thereby prove that man is an unreasoning animal.  But man
performs actions of both sorts.  Between man and the lower animals Mr.
Burroughs finds a vast gulf.  This gulf divides man from the rest of his
kin by virtue of the power of reason that he alone possesses.  Man is a
voluntary agent.  Animals are automatons.  The robin fights its
reflection in the window-pane because it is his instinct to fight and
because he cannot reason out the physical laws that make this reflection
appear real.  An animal is a mechanism that operates according to
fore-ordained rules.  Wrapped up in its heredity, and determined long
before it was born, is a certain limited capacity of ganglionic response
to eternal stimuli.  These responses have been fixed in the species
through adaptation to environment.  Natural selection has compelled the
animal automatically to respond in a fixed manner and a certain way to
all the usual external stimuli it encounters in the course of a usual
life.  Thus, under usual circumstances, it does the usual thing.  Under
unusual circumstances it still does the usual thing, wherefore the
highhole perforating the ice-house is guilty of lunacy--of unreason, in
short.  To do the unusual thing under unusual circumstances, successfully
to adjust to a strange environment for which his heredity has not
automatically fitted an adjustment, Mr. Burroughs says is impossible.  He
says it is impossible because it would be a non-instinctive act, and, as
is well known animals act only through instinct.  And right here we catch
a glimpse of Mr. Burroughs's cart standing before his horse.  He has a
thesis, and though the heavens fall he will fit the facts to the thesis.
Agassiz, in his opposition to evolution, had a similar thesis, though
neither did he fit the facts to it nor did the heavens fall.  Facts are
very disagreeable at times.

But let us see.  Let us test Mr. Burroughs's test of reason and instinct.
When I was a small boy I had a dog named Rollo.  According to Mr.
Burroughs, Rollo was an automaton, responding to external stimuli
mechanically as directed by his instincts.  Now, as is well known, the
development of instinct in animals is a dreadfully slow process.  There
is no known case of the development of a single instinct in domestic
animals in all the history of their domestication.  Whatever instincts
they possess they brought with them from the wild thousands of years ago.
Therefore, all Rollo's actions were ganglionic discharges mechanically
determined by the instincts that had been developed and fixed in the
species thousands of years ago.  Very well.  It is clear, therefore, that
in all his play with me he would act in old-fashioned ways, adjusting
himself to the physical and psychical factors in his environment
according to the rules of adjustment which had obtained in the wild and
which had become part of his heredity.

Rollo and I did a great deal of rough romping.  He chased me and I chased
him.  He nipped my legs, arms, and hands, often so hard that I yelled,
while I rolled him and tumbled him and dragged him about, often so
strenuously as to make him yelp.  In the course of the play many
variations arose.  I would make believe to sit down and cry.  All
repentance and anxiety, he would wag his tail and lick my face, whereupon
I would give him the laugh.  He hated to be laughed at, and promptly he
would spring for me with good-natured, menacing jaws, and the wild romp
would go on.  I had scored a point.  Then he hit upon a trick.  Pursuing
him into the woodshed, I would find him in a far corner, pretending to
sulk.  Now, he dearly loved the play, and never got enough of it.  But at
first he fooled me.  I thought I had somehow hurt his feelings and I came
and knelt before him, petting him, and speaking lovingly.  Promptly, in a
wild outburst, he was up and away, tumbling me over on the floor as he
dashed out in a mad skurry around the yard.  He had scored a point.

After a time, it became largely a game of wits.  I reasoned my acts, of
course, while his were instinctive.  One day, as he pretended to sulk in
the corner, I glanced out of the woodshed doorway, simulated pleasure in
face, voice, and language, and greeted one of my schoolboy friends.
Immediately Rollo forgot to sulk, rushed out to see the newcomer, and saw
empty space.  The laugh was on him, and he knew it, and I gave it to him,
too.  I fooled him in this way two or three times; then be became wise.
One day I worked a variation.  Suddenly looking out the door, making
believe that my eyes had been attracted by a moving form, I said coldly,
as a child educated in turning away bill-collectors would say: "No my
father is not at home."  Like a shot, Rollo was out the door.  He even
ran down the alley to the front of the house in a vain attempt to find
the man I had addressed.  He came back sheepishly to endure the laugh and
resume the game.

And now we come to the test.  I fooled Rollo, but how was the fooling
made possible?  What precisely went on in that brain of his?  According
to Mr. Burroughs, who denies even rudimentary reasoning to the lower
animals, Rollo acted instinctively, mechanically responding to the
external stimulus, furnished by me, which led him to believe that a man
was outside the door.

Since Rollo acted instinctively, and since all instincts are very
ancient, tracing back to the pre-domestication period, we can conclude
only that Rollo's wild ancestors, at the time this particular instinct
was fixed into the heredity of the species, must have been in close,
long-continued, and vital contact with man, the voice of man, and the
expressions on the face of man.  But since the instinct must have been
developed during the pre-domestication period, how under the sun could
his wild, undomesticated ancestors have experienced the close,
long-continued, and vital contact with man?

Mr. Burroughs says that "instinct suffices for the animals," that "they
get along very well without reason."  But I say, what all the poor
nature-fakers will say, that Rollo reasoned.  He was born into the world
a bundle of instincts and a pinch of brain-stuff, all wrapped around in a
framework of bone, meat, and hide.  As he adjusted to his environment he
gained experiences.  He remembered these experiences.  He learned that he
mustn't chase the cat, kill chickens, nor bite little girls' dresses.  He
learned that little boys had little boy playmates.  He learned that men
came into back yards.  He learned that the animal man, on meeting with
his own kind, was given to verbal and facial greeting.  He learned that
when a boy greeted a playmate he did it differently from the way he
greeted a man.  All these he learned and remembered.  They were so many
observations--so many propositions, if you please.  Now, what went on
behind those brown eyes of his, inside that pinch of brain-stuff, when I
turned suddenly to the door and greeted an imaginary person outside?
Instantly, out of the thousands of observations stored in his brain, came
to the front of his consciousness the particular observations connected
with this particular situation.  Next, he established a relation between
these observations.  This relation was his conclusion, achieved, as every
psychologist will agree, by a definite cell-action of his grey matter.
From the fact that his master turned suddenly toward the door, and from
the fact that his master's voice, facial expression, and whole demeanour
expressed surprise and delight, he concluded that a friend was outside.
He established a relation between various things, and the act of
establishing relations between things is an act of reason--of rudimentary
reason, granted, but none the less of reason.

Of course Rollo was fooled.  But that is no call for us to throw chests
about it.  How often has every last one of us been fooled in precisely
similar fashion by another who turned and suddenly addressed an imaginary
intruder?  Here is a case in point that occurred in the West.  A robber
had held up a railroad train.  He stood in the aisle between the seats,
his revolver presented at the head of the conductor, who stood facing
him.  The conductor was at his mercy.

But the conductor suddenly looked over the robber's shoulder, at the same
time saying aloud to an imaginary person standing at the robber's back:
"Don't shoot him."  Like a flash the robber whirled about to confront
this new danger, and like a flash the conductor shot him down.  Show me,
Mr. Burroughs, where the mental process in the robber's brain was a shade
different from the mental processes in Rollo's brain, and I'll quit
nature-faking and join the Trappists.  Surely, when a man's mental
process and a dog's mental process are precisely similar, the
much-vaunted gulf of Mr. Burroughs's fancy has been bridged.

I had a dog in Oakland.  His name was Glen.  His father was Brown, a
wolf-dog that had been brought down from Alaska, and his mother was a
half-wild mountain shepherd dog.  Neither father nor mother had had any
experience with automobiles.  Glen came from the country, a half-grown
puppy, to live in Oakland.  Immediately he became infatuated with an
automobile.  He reached the culmination of happiness when he was
permitted to sit up in the front seat alongside the chauffeur.  He would
spend a whole day at a time on an automobile debauch, even going without
food.  Often the machine started directly from inside the barn, dashed
out the driveway without stopping, and was gone.  Glen got left behind
several times.  The custom was established that whoever was taking the
machine out should toot the horn before starting.  Glen learned the
signal.  No matter where he was or what he was doing, when that horn
tooted he was off for the barn and up into the front seat.

One morning, while Glen was on the back porch eating his breakfast of
mush and milk, the chauffeur tooted.  Glen rushed down the steps, into
the barn, and took his front seat, the mush and milk dripping down his
excited and happy chops.  In passing, I may point out that in thus
forsaking his breakfast for the automobile he was displaying what is
called the power of choice--a peculiarly lordly attribute that, according
to Mr. Burroughs, belongs to man alone.  Yet Glen made his choice between
food and fun.

It was not that Glen wanted his breakfast less, but that he wanted his
ride more.  The toot was only a joke.  The automobile did not start.
Glen waited and watched.  Evidently he saw no signs of an immediate
start, for finally he jumped out of the seat and went back to his
breakfast.  He ate with indecent haste, like a man anxious to catch a
train.  Again the horn tooted, again he deserted his breakfast, and again
he sat in the seat and waited vainly for the machine to go.

They came close to spoiling Glen's breakfast for him, for he was kept on
the jump between porch and barn.  Then he grew wise.  They tooted the
horn loudly and insistently, but he stayed by his breakfast and finished
it.  Thus once more did he display power of choice, incidentally of
control, for when that horn tooted it was all he could do to refrain from
running for the barn.

The nature-faker would analyze what went on in Glen's brain somewhat in
the following fashion.  He had had, in his short life, experiences that
not one of all his ancestors had ever had.  He had learned that
automobiles went fast, that once in motion it was impossible for him to
get on board, that the toot of the horn was a noise that was peculiar to
automobiles.  These were so many propositions.  Now reasoning can be
defined as the act or process of the brain by which, from propositions
known or assumed, new propositions are reached.  Out of the propositions
which I have shown were Glen's, and which had become his through the
medium of his own observation of the phenomena of life, he made the new
proposition that when the horn tooted it was time for him to get on
board.

But on the morning I have described, the chauffeur fooled Glen.  Somehow
and much to his own disgust, his reasoning was erroneous.  The machine
did not start after all.  But to reason incorrectly is very human.  The
great trouble in all acts of reasoning is to include all the propositions
in the problem.  Glen had included every proposition but one, namely, the
human proposition, the joke in the brain of the chauffeur.  For a number
of times Glen was fooled.  Then he performed another mental act.  In his
problem he included the human proposition (the joke in the brain of the
chauffeur), and he reached the new conclusion that when the horn tooted
the automobile was _not_ going to start.  Basing his action on this
conclusion, he remained on the porch and finished his breakfast.  You and
I, and even Mr. Burroughs, perform acts of reasoning precisely similar to
this every day in our lives.  How Mr. Burroughs will explain Glen's
action by the instinctive theory is beyond me.  In wildest fantasy, even,
my brain refuses to follow Mr. Burroughs into the primeval forest where
Glen's dim ancestors, to the tooting of automobile horns, were fixing
into the heredity of the breed the particular instinct that would enable
Glen, a few thousand years later, capably to cope with automobiles.

Dr. C. J. Romanes tells of a female chimpanzee who was taught to count
straws up to five.  She held the straws in her hand, exposing the ends to
the number requested.  If she were asked for three, she held up three.
If she were asked for four, she held up four.  All this is a mere matter
of training.  But consider now, Mr. Burroughs, what follows.  When she
was asked for five straws and she had only four, she doubled one straw,
exposing both its ends and thus making up the required number.  She did
not do this only once, and by accident.  She did it whenever more straws
were asked for than she possessed.  Did she perform a distinctly
reasoning act? or was her action the result of blind, mechanical
instinct?  If Mr. Burroughs cannot answer to his own satisfaction, he may
call Dr. Romanes a nature-faker and dismiss the incident from his mind.

The foregoing is a trick of erroneous human reasoning that works very
successfully in the United States these days.  It is certainly a trick of
Mr. Burroughs, of which he is guilty with distressing frequency.  When a
poor devil of a writer records what he has seen, and when what he has
seen does not agree with Mr. Burroughs's mediaeval theory, he calls said
writer a nature-faker.  When a man like Mr. Hornaday comes along, Mr.
Burroughs works a variation of the trick on him.  Mr. Hornaday has made a
close study of the orang in captivity and of the orang in its native
state.  Also, he has studied closely many other of the higher animal
types.  Also, in the tropics, he has studied the lower types of man.  Mr.
Hornaday is a man of experience and reputation.  When he was asked if
animals reasoned, out of all his knowledge on the subject he replied that
to ask him such a question was equivalent to asking him if fishes swim.
Now Mr. Burroughs has not had much experience in studying the lower human
types and the higher animal types.  Living in a rural district in the
state of New York, and studying principally birds in that limited
habitat, he has been in contact neither with the higher animal types nor
the lower human types.  But Mr. Hornaday's reply is such a facer to him
and his homocentric theory that he has to do something.  And he does it.
He retorts: "I suspect that Mr. Hornaday is a better naturalist than he
is a comparative psychologist."  Exit Mr. Hornaday.  Who the devil is Mr.
Hornaday, anyway?  The sage of Slabsides has spoken.  When Darwin
concluded that animals were capable of reasoning in a rudimentary way,
Mr. Burroughs laid him out in the same fashion by saying: "But Darwin was
also a much greater naturalist than psychologist"--and this despite
Darwin's long life of laborious research that was not wholly confined to
a rural district such as Mr. Burroughs inhabits in New York.  Mr.
Burroughs's method of argument is beautiful.  It reminds one of the man
whose pronunciation was vile, but who said: "Damn the dictionary; ain't I
here?"

And now we come to the mental processes of Mr. Burroughs--to the
psychology of the ego, if you please.  Mr. Burroughs has troubles of his
own with the dictionary.  He violates language from the standpoint both
of logic and science.  Language is a tool, and definitions embodied in
language should agree with the facts and history of life.  But Mr.
Burroughs's definitions do not so agree.  This, in turn, is not the fault
of his education, but of his ego.  To him, despite his well-exploited and
patronizing devotion to them, the lower animals are disgustingly low.  To
him, affinity and kinship with the other animals is a repugnant thing.
He will have none of it.  He is too glorious a personality not to have
between him and the other animals a vast and impassable gulf.  The cause
of Mr. Burroughs's mediaeval view of the other animals is to be found,
not in his knowledge of those other animals, but in the suggestion of his
self-exalted ego.  In short, Mr. Burroughs's homocentric theory has been
developed out of his homocentric ego, and by the misuse of language he
strives to make the facts of life agree with his theory.

After the instances I have cited of actions of animals which are
impossible of explanation as due to instinct, Mr. Burroughs may reply:
"Your instances are easily explained by the simple law of association."
To this I reply, first, then why did you deny rudimentary reason to
animals? and why did you state flatly that "instinct suffices for the
animals"?  And, second, with great reluctance and with overwhelming
humility, because of my youth, I suggest that you do not know exactly
what you do mean by that phrase "the simple law of association."  Your
trouble, I repeat, is with definitions.  You have grasped that man
performs what is called _abstract_ reasoning, you have made a definition
of abstract reason, and, betrayed by that great maker of theories, the
ego, you have come to think that all reasoning is abstract and that what
is not abstract reason is not reason at all.  This is your attitude
toward rudimentary reason.  Such a process, in one of the other animals,
must be either abstract or it is not a reasoning process.  Your
intelligence tells you that such a process is not abstract reasoning, and
your homocentric thesis compels you to conclude that it can be only a
mechanical, instinctive process.

Definitions must agree, not with egos, but with life.  Mr. Burroughs goes
on the basis that a definition is something hard and fast, absolute and
eternal.  He forgets that all the universe is in flux; that definitions
are arbitrary and ephemeral; that they fix, for a fleeting instant of
time, things that in the past were not, that in the future will be not,
that out of the past become, and that out of the present pass on to the
future and become other things.  Definitions cannot rule life.
Definitions cannot be made to rule life.  Life must rule definitions or
else the definitions perish.

Mr. Burroughs forgets the evolution of reason.  He makes a definition of
reason without regard to its history, and that definition is of reason
purely abstract.  Human reason, as we know it to-day, is not a creation,
but a growth.  Its history goes back to the primordial slime that was
quick with muddy life; its history goes back to the first vitalized
inorganic.  And here are the steps of its ascent from the mud to man:
simple reflex action, compound reflex action, memory, habit, rudimentary
reason, and abstract reason.  In the course of the climb, thanks to
natural selection, instinct was evolved.  Habit is a development in the
individual.  Instinct is a race-habit.  Instinct is blind, unreasoning,
mechanical.  This was the dividing of the ways in the climb of aspiring
life.  The perfect culmination of instinct we find in the ant-heap and
the beehive.  Instinct proved a blind alley.  But the other path, that of
reason, led on and on even to Mr. Burroughs and you and me.

There are no impassable gulfs, unless one chooses, as Mr. Burroughs does,
to ignore the lower human types and the higher animal types, and to
compare human mind with bird mind.  It was impossible for life to reason
abstractly until speech was developed.  Equipped with swords, with tools
of thought, in short, the slow development of the power to reason in the
abstract went on.  The lowest human types do little or no reasoning in
the abstract.  With every word, with every increase in the complexity of
thought, with every ascertained fact so gained, went on action and
reaction in the grey matter of the speech discoverer, and slowly, step by
step, through hundreds of thousands of years, developed the power of
reason.

Place a honey-bee in a glass bottle.  Turn the bottom of the bottle
toward a lighted lamp so that the open mouth is away from the lamp.
Vainly, ceaselessly, a thousand times, undeterred by the bafflement and
the pain, the bee will hurl himself against the bottom of the bottle as
he strives to win to the light.  That is instinct.  Place your dog in a
back yard and go away.  He is your dog.  He loves you.  He yearns toward
you as the bee yearns toward the light.  He listens to your departing
footsteps.  But the fence is too high.  Then he turns his back upon the
direction in which you are departing, and runs around the yard.  He is
frantic with affection and desire.  But he is not blind.  He is
observant.  He is looking for a hole under the fence, or through the
fence, or for a place where the fence is not so high.  He sees a
dry-goods box standing against the fence.  Presto!  He leaps upon it,
goes over the barrier, and tears down the street to overtake you.  Is
that instinct?

Here, in the household where I am writing this, is a little Tahitian
"feeding-child."  He believes firmly that a tiny dwarf resides in the box
of my talking-machine and that it is the tiny dwarf who does the singing
and the talking.  Not even Mr. Burroughs will affirm that the child has
reached this conclusion by an instinctive process.  Of course, the child
reasons the existence of the dwarf in the box.  How else could the box
talk and sing?  In that child's limited experience it has never
encountered a single instance where speech and song were produced
otherwise than by direct human agency.  I doubt not that the dog is
considerably surprised when he hears his master's voice coming out of a
box.

The adult savage, on his first introduction to a telephone, rushes around
to the adjoining room to find the man who is talking through the
partition.  Is this act instinctive?  No.  Out of his limited experience,
out of his limited knowledge of physics, he reasons that the only
explanation possible is that a man is in the other room talking through
the partition.

But that savage cannot be fooled by a hand-mirror.  We must go lower down
in the animal scale, to the monkey.  The monkey swiftly learns that the
monkey it sees is not in the glass, wherefore it reaches craftily behind
the glass.  Is this instinct?  No.  It is rudimentary reasoning.  Lower
than the monkey in the scale of brain is the robin, and the robin fights
its reflection in the window-pane.  Now climb with me for a space.  From
the robin to the monkey, where is the impassable gulf? and where is the
impassable gulf between the monkey and the feeding-child? between the
feeding-child and the savage who seeks the man behind the partition? ay,
and between the savage and the astute financiers Mrs. Chadwick fooled and
the thousands who were fooled by the Keeley Motor swindle?

Let us be very humble.  We who are so very human are very animal.
Kinship with the other animals is no more repugnant to Mr. Burroughs than
was the heliocentric theory to the priests who compelled Galileo to
recant.  Not correct human reason, not the evidence of the ascertained
fact, but pride of ego, was responsible for the repugnance.

In his stiff-necked pride, Mr. Burroughs runs a hazard more humiliating
to that pride than any amount of kinship with the other animals.  When a
dog exhibits choice, direction, control, and reason; when it is shown
that certain mental processes in that dog's brain are precisely
duplicated in the brain of man; and when Mr. Burroughs convincingly
proves that every action of the dog is mechanical and automatic--then, by
precisely the same arguments, can it be proved that the similar actions
of man are mechanical and automatic.  No, Mr. Burroughs, though you stand
on the top of the ladder of life, you must not kick out that ladder from
under your feet.  You must not deny your relatives, the other animals.
Their history is your history, and if you kick them to the bottom of the
abyss, to the bottom of the abyss you go yourself.  By them you stand or
fall.  What you repudiate in them you repudiate in yourself--a pretty
spectacle, truly, of an exalted animal striving to disown the stuff of
life out of which it is made, striving by use of the very reason that was
developed by evolution to deny the possession of evolution that developed
it.  This may be good egotism, but it is not good science.

PAPEETE, TAHITI.
_March_ 1908.




THE YELLOW PERIL


No more marked contrast appears in passing from our Western land to the
paper houses and cherry blossoms of Japan than appears in passing from
Korea to China.  To achieve a correct appreciation of the Chinese the
traveller should first sojourn amongst the Koreans for several months,
and then, one fine day, cross over the Yalu into Manchuria.  It would be
of exceptional advantage to the correctness of appreciation did he cross
over the Yalu on the heels of a hostile and alien army.

War is to-day the final arbiter in the affairs of men, and it is as yet
the final test of the worth-whileness of peoples.  Tested thus, the
Korean fails.  He lacks the nerve to remain when a strange army crosses
his land.  The few goods and chattels he may have managed to accumulate
he puts on his back, along with his doors and windows, and away he heads
for his mountain fastnesses.  Later he may return, sans goods, chattels,
doors, and windows, impelled by insatiable curiosity for a "look see."
But it is curiosity merely--a timid, deerlike curiosity.  He is prepared
to bound away on his long legs at the first hint of danger or trouble.

Northern Korea was a desolate land when the Japanese passed through.
Villages and towns were deserted.  The fields lay untouched.  There was
no ploughing nor sowing, no green things growing.  Little or nothing was
to be purchased.  One carried one's own food with him and food for horses
and servants was the anxious problem that waited at the day's end.  In
many a lonely village not an ounce nor a grain of anything could be
bought, and yet there might be standing around scores of white-garmented,
stalwart Koreans, smoking yard-long pipes and chattering,
chattering--ceaselessly chattering.  Love, money, or force could not
procure from them a horseshoe or a horseshoe nail.

"Upso," was their invariable reply.  "Upso," cursed word, which means
"Have not got."

They had tramped probably forty miles that day, down from their
hiding-places, just for a "look see," and forty miles back they would
cheerfully tramp, chattering all the way over what they had seen.  Shake
a stick at them as they stand chattering about your camp-fire, and the
gloom of the landscape will be filled with tall, flitting ghosts,
bounding like deer, with great springy strides which one cannot but envy.
They have splendid vigour and fine bodies, but they are accustomed to
being beaten and robbed without protest or resistance by every chance
foreigner who enters their country.

From this nerveless, forsaken Korean land I rode down upon the sandy
islands of the Yalu.  For weeks these islands had been the dread
between-the-lines of two fighting armies.  The air above had been rent by
screaming projectiles.  The echoes of the final battle had scarcely died
away.  The trains of Japanese wounded and Japanese dead were trailing by.

On the conical hill, a quarter of a mile away, the Russian dead were
being buried in their trenches and in the shell holes made by the
Japanese.  And here, in the thick of it all, a man was ploughing.  Green
things were growing--young onions--and the man who was weeding them
paused from his labour long enough to sell me a handful.  Near by was the
smoke-blackened ruin of the farmhouse, fired by the Russians when they
retreated from the riverbed.  Two men were removing the debris, cleaning
the confusion, preparatory to rebuilding.  They were clad in blue.
Pigtails hung down their backs.  I was in China!

I rode to the shore, into the village of Kuelian-Ching.  There were no
lounging men smoking long pipes and chattering.  The previous day the
Russians had been there, a bloody battle had been fought, and to-day the
Japanese were there--but what was that to talk about?  Everybody was
busy.  Men were offering eggs and chickens and fruit for sale upon the
street, and bread, as I live, bread in small round loaves or buns.  I
rode on into the country.  Everywhere a toiling population was in
evidence.  The houses and walls were strong and substantial.  Stone and
brick replaced the mud walls of the Korean dwellings.  Twilight fell and
deepened, and still the ploughs went up and down the fields, the sowers
following after.  Trains of wheelbarrows, heavily loaded, squeaked by,
and Pekin carts, drawn by from four to six cows, horses, mules, ponies,
or jackasses--cows even with their newborn calves tottering along on puny
legs outside the traces.  Everybody worked.  Everything worked.  I saw a
man mending the road.  I was in China.

I came to the city of Antung, and lodged with a merchant.  He was a grain
merchant.  Corn he had, hundreds of bushels, stored in great bins of
stout matting; peas and beans in sacks, and in the back yard his
millstones went round and round, grinding out meal.  Also, in his back
yard, were buildings containing vats sunk into the ground, and here the
tanners were at work making leather.  I bought a measure of corn from
mine host for my horses, and he overcharged me thirty cents.  I was in
China.  Antung was jammed with Japanese troops.  It was the thick of war.
But it did not matter.  The work of Antung went on just the same.  The
shops were wide open; the streets were lined with pedlars.  One could buy
anything; get anything made.  I dined at a Chinese restaurant, cleansed
myself at a public bath in a private tub with a small boy to assist in
the scrubbing.  I bought condensed milk, bitter, canned vegetables,
bread, and cake.  I repeat it, cake--good cake.  I bought knives, forks,
and spoons, granite-ware dishes and mugs.  There were horseshoes and
horseshoers.  A worker in iron realized for me new designs of mine for my
tent poles.  My shoes were sent out to be repaired.  A barber shampooed
my hair.  A servant returned with corn-beef in tins, a bottle of port,
another of cognac, and beer, blessed beer, to wash out from my throat the
dust of an army.  It was the land of Canaan.  I was in China.

The Korean is the perfect type of inefficiency--of utter worthlessness.
The Chinese is the perfect type of industry.  For sheer work no worker in
the world can compare with him.  Work is the breath of his nostrils.  It
is his solution of existence.  It is to him what wandering and fighting
in far lands and spiritual adventure have been to other peoples.  Liberty
to him epitomizes itself in access to the means of toil.  To till the
soil and labour interminably with rude implements and utensils is all he
asks of life and of the powers that be.  Work is what he desires above
all things, and he will work at anything for anybody.

During the taking of the Taku forts he carried scaling ladders at the
heads of the storming columns and planted them against the walls.  He did
this, not from a sense of patriotism, but for the invading foreign devils
because they paid him a daily wage of fifty cents.  He is not frightened
by war.  He accepts it as he does rain and sunshine, the changing of the
seasons, and other natural phenomena.  He prepares for it, endures it,
and survives it, and when the tide of battle sweeps by, the thunder of
the guns still reverberating in the distant canyons, he is seen calmly
bending to his usual tasks.  Nay, war itself bears fruits whereof he may
pick.  Before the dead are cold or the burial squads have arrived he is
out on the field, stripping the mangled bodies, collecting the shrapnel,
and ferreting in the shell holes for slivers and fragments of iron.

The Chinese is no coward.  He does not carry away his doors amid windows
to the mountains, but remains to guard them when alien soldiers occupy
his town.  He does not hide away his chickens and his eggs, nor any other
commodity he possesses.  He proceeds at once to offer them for sale.  Nor
is he to be bullied into lowering his price.  What if the purchaser be a
soldier and an alien made cocky by victory and confident by overwhelming
force?  He has two large pears saved over from last year which he will
sell for five sen, or for the same price three small pears.  What if one
soldier persist in taking away with him three large pears?  What if there
be twenty other soldiers jostling about him?  He turns over his sack of
fruit to another Chinese and races down the street after his pears and
the soldier responsible for their flight, and he does not return till he
has wrenched away one large pear from that soldier's grasp.

Nor is the Chinese the type of permanence which he has been so often
designated.  He is not so ill-disposed toward new ideas and new methods
as his history would seem to indicate.  True, his forms, customs, and
methods have been permanent these many centuries, but this has been due
to the fact that his government was in the hands of the learned classes,
and that these governing scholars found their salvation lay in
suppressing all progressive ideas.  The ideas behind the Boxer troubles
and the outbreaks over the introduction of railroad and other foreign
devil machinations have emanated from the minds of the literati, and been
spread by their pamphlets and propagandists.

Originality and enterprise have been suppressed in the Chinese for scores
of generations.  Only has remained to him industry, and in this has he
found the supreme expression of his being.  On the other hand, his
susceptibility to new ideas has been well demonstrated wherever he has
escaped beyond the restrictions imposed upon him by his government.  So
far as the business man is concerned he has grasped far more clearly the
Western code of business, the Western ethics of business, than has the
Japanese.  He has learned, as a matter of course, to keep his word or his
bond.  As yet, the Japanese business man has failed to understand this.
When he has signed a time contract and when changing conditions cause him
to lose by it, the Japanese merchant cannot understand why he should live
up to his contract.  It is beyond his comprehension and repulsive to his
common sense that he should live up to his contract and thereby lose
money.  He firmly believes that the changing conditions themselves
absolve him.  And in so far adaptable as he has shown himself to be in
other respects, he fails to grasp a radically new idea where the Chinese
succeeds.

Here we have the Chinese, four hundred millions of him, occupying a vast
land of immense natural resources--resources of a twentieth-century age,
of a machine age; resources of coal and iron, which are the backbone of
commercial civilization.  He is an indefatigable worker.  He is not dead
to new ideas, new methods, new systems.  Under a capable management he
can be made to do anything.  Truly would he of himself constitute the
much-heralded Yellow Peril were it not for his present management.  This
management, his government, is set, crystallized.  It is what binds him
down to building as his fathers built.  The governing class, entrenched
by the precedent and power of centuries and by the stamp it has put upon
his mind, will never free him.  It would be the suicide of the governing
class, and the governing class knows it.

Comes now the Japanese.  On the streets of Antung, of Feng-Wang-Chang, or
of any other Manchurian city, the following is a familiar scene: One is
hurrying home through the dark of the unlighted streets when he comes
upon a paper lantern resting on the ground.  On one side squats a Chinese
civilian on his hams, on the other side squats a Japanese soldier.  One
dips his forefinger in the dust and writes strange, monstrous characters.
The other nods understanding, sweeps the dust slate level with his hand,
and with his forefinger inscribes similar characters.  They are talking.
They cannot speak to each other, but they can write.  Long ago one
borrowed the other's written language, and long before that, untold
generations ago, they diverged from a common root, the ancient Mongol
stock.

There have been changes, differentiations brought about by diverse
conditions and infusions of other blood; but down at the bottom of their
being, twisted into the fibres of them, is a heritage in common--a
sameness in kind which time has not obliterated.  The infusion of other
blood, Malay, perhaps, has made the Japanese a race of mastery and power,
a fighting race through all its history, a race which has always despised
commerce and exalted fighting.

To-day, equipped with the finest machines and systems of destruction the
Caucasian mind has devised, handling machines and systems with remarkable
and deadly accuracy, this rejuvenescent Japanese race has embarked on a
course of conquest the goal of which no man knows.  The head men of Japan
are dreaming ambitiously, and the people are dreaming blindly, a
Napoleonic dream.  And to this dream the Japanese clings and will cling
with bull-dog tenacity.  The soldier shouting "Nippon, Banzai!" on the
walls of Wiju, the widow at home in her paper house committing suicide so
that her only son, her sole support, may go to the front, are both
expressing the unanimity of the dream.

The late disturbance in the Far East marked the clashing of the dreams,
for the Slav, too, is dreaming greatly.  Granting that the Japanese can
hurl back the Slav and that the two great branches of the Anglo-Saxon
race do not despoil him of his spoils, the Japanese dream takes on
substantiality.  Japan's population is no larger because her people have
continually pressed against the means of subsistence.  But given poor,
empty Korea for a breeding colony and Manchuria for a granary, and at
once the Japanese begins to increase by leaps and bounds.

Even so, he would not of himself constitute a Brown Peril.  He has not
the time in which to grow and realize the dream.  He is only forty-five
millions, and so fast does the economic exploitation of the planet hurry
on the planet's partition amongst the Western peoples that, before he
could attain the stature requisite to menace, he would see the Western
giants in possession of the very stuff of his dream.

The menace to the Western world lies, not in the little brown man, but in
the four hundred millions of yellow men should the little brown man
undertake their management.  The Chinese is not dead to new ideas; he is
an efficient worker; makes a good soldier, and is wealthy in the
essential materials of a machine age.  Under a capable management he will
go far.  The Japanese is prepared and fit to undertake this management.
Not only has he proved himself an apt imitator of Western material
progress, a sturdy worker, and a capable organizer, but he is far more
fit to manage the Chinese than are we.  The baffling enigma of the
Chinese character is no baffling enigma to him.  He understands as we
could never school ourselves nor hope to understand.  Their mental
processes are largely the same.  He thinks with the same thought-symbols
as does the Chinese, and he thinks in the same peculiar grooves.  He goes
on where we are balked by the obstacles of incomprehension.  He takes the
turning which we cannot perceive, twists around the obstacle, and,
presto! is out of sight in the ramifications of the Chinese mind where we
cannot follow.

The Chinese has been called the type of permanence, and well he has
merited it, dozing as he has through the ages.  And as truly was the
Japanese the type of permanence up to a generation ago, when he suddenly
awoke and startled the world with a rejuvenescence the like of which the
world had never seen before.  The ideas of the West were the leaven which
quickened the Japanese; and the ideas of the West, transmitted by the
Japanese mind into ideas Japanese, may well make the leaven powerful
enough to quicken the Chinese.

We have had Africa for the Afrikander, and at no distant day we shall
hear "Asia for the Asiatic!"  Four hundred million indefatigable workers
(deft, intelligent, and unafraid to die), aroused and rejuvenescent,
managed and guided by forty-five million additional human beings who are
splendid fighting animals, scientific and modern, constitute that menace
to the Western world which has been well named the "Yellow Peril."  The
possibility of race adventure has not passed away.  We are in the midst
of our own.  The Slav is just girding himself up to begin.  Why may not
the yellow and the brown start out on an adventure as tremendous as our
own and more strikingly unique?

The ultimate success of such an adventure the Western mind refuses to
consider.  It is not the nature of life to believe itself weak.  There is
such a thing as race egotism as well as creature egotism, and a very good
thing it is.  In the first place, the Western world will not permit the
rise of the yellow peril.  It is firmly convinced that it will not permit
the yellow and the brown to wax strong and menace its peace and comfort.
It advances this idea with persistency, and delivers itself of long
arguments showing how and why this menace will not be permitted to arise.
To-day, far more voices are engaged in denying the yellow peril than in
prophesying it.  The Western world is warned, if not armed, against the
possibility of it.

In the second place, there is a weakness inherent in the brown man which
will bring his adventure to naught.  From the West he has borrowed all
our material achievement and passed our ethical achievement by.  Our
engines of production and destruction he has made his.  What was once
solely ours he now duplicates, rivalling our merchants in the commerce of
the East, thrashing the Russian on sea and land.  A marvellous imitator
truly, but imitating us only in things material.  Things spiritual cannot
be imitated; they must be felt and lived, woven into the very fabric of
life, and here the Japanese fails.

It required no revolution of his nature to learn to calculate the range
and fire a field gun or to march the goose-step.  It was a mere matter of
training.  Our material achievement is the product of our intellect.  It
is knowledge, and knowledge, like coin, is interchangeable.  It is not
wrapped up in the heredity of the new-born child, but is something to be
acquired afterward.  Not so with our soul stuff, which is the product of
an evolution which goes back to the raw beginnings of the race.  Our soul
stuff is not a coin to be pocketed by the first chance comer.  The
Japanese cannot pocket it any more than he can thrill to short Saxon
words or we can thrill to Chinese hieroglyphics.  The leopard cannot
change its spots, nor can the Japanese, nor can we.  We are thumbed by
the ages into what we are, and by no conscious inward effort can we in a
day rethumb ourselves.  Nor can the Japanese in a day, or a generation,
rethumb himself in our image.

Back of our own great race adventure, back of our robberies by sea and
land, our lusts and violences and all the evil things we have done, there
is a certain integrity, a sternness of conscience, a melancholy
responsibility of life, a sympathy and comradeship and warm human feel,
which is ours, indubitably ours, and which we cannot teach to the
Oriental as we would teach logarithms or the trajectory of projectiles.
That we have groped for the way of right conduct and agonized over the
soul betokens our spiritual endowment.  Though we have strayed often and
far from righteousness, the voices of the seers have always been raised,
and we have harked back to the bidding of conscience.  The colossal fact
of our history is that we have made the religion of Jesus Christ our
religion.  No matter how dark in error and deed, ours has been a history
of spiritual struggle and endeavour.  We are pre-eminently a religious
race, which is another way of saying that we are a right-seeking race.

"What do you think of the Japanese?" was asked an American woman after
she had lived some time in Japan.  "It seems to me that they have no
soul," was her answer.

This must not be taken to mean that the Japanese is without soul.  But it
serves to illustrate the enormous difference between their souls and this
woman's soul.  There was no feel, no speech, no recognition.  This
Western soul did not dream that the Eastern soul existed, it was so
different, so totally different.

Religion, as a battle for the right in our sense of right, as a yearning
and a strife for spiritual good and purity, is unknown to the Japanese.

Measured by what religion means to us, the Japanese is a race without
religion.  Yet it has a religion, and who shall say that it is not as
great a religion as ours, nor as efficacious?  As one Japanese has
written:

"Our reflection brought into prominence not so much the moral as the
national consciousness of the individual. . . . To us the country is more
than land and soil from which to mine gold or reap grain--it is the
sacred abode of the gods, the spirit of our forefathers; to us the
Emperor is more than the Arch Constable of a Reichsstaat, or even the
Patron of a Kulturstaat; he is the bodily representative of heaven on
earth, blending in his person its power and its mercy."

The religion of Japan is practically a worship of the State itself.
Patriotism is the expression of this worship.  The Japanese mind does not
split hairs as to whether the Emperor is Heaven incarnate or the State
incarnate.  So far as the Japanese are concerned, the Emperor lives, is
himself deity.  The Emperor is the object to live for and to die for.
The Japanese is not an individualist.  He has developed national
consciousness instead of moral consciousness.  He is not interested in
his own moral welfare except in so far as it is the welfare of the State.
The honour of the individual, _per se_, does not exist.  Only exists the
honour of the State, which is his honour.  He does not look upon himself
as a free agent, working out his own personal salvation.  Spiritual
agonizing is unknown to him.  He has a "sense of calm trust in fate, a
quiet submission to the inevitable, a stoic composure in sight of danger
or calamity, a disdain of life and friendliness with death."  He relates
himself to the State as, amongst bees, the worker is related to the hive;
himself nothing, the State everything; his reasons for existence the
exaltation and glorification of the State.

The most admired quality to-day of the Japanese is his patriotism.  The
Western world is in rhapsodies over it, unwittingly measuring the
Japanese patriotism by its own conceptions of patriotism.  "For God, my
country, and the Czar!" cries the Russian patriot; but in the Japanese
mind there is no differentiation between the three.  The Emperor is the
Emperor, and God and country as well.  The patriotism of the Japanese is
blind and unswerving loyalty to what is practically an absolutism.  The
Emperor can do no wrong, nor can the five ambitious great men who have
his ear and control the destiny of Japan.

No great race adventure can go far nor endure long which has no deeper
foundation than material success, no higher prompting than conquest for
conquest's sake and mere race glorification.  To go far and to endure, it
must have behind it an ethical impulse, a sincerely conceived
righteousness.  But it must be taken into consideration that the above
postulate is itself a product of Western race-egotism, urged by our
belief in our own righteousness and fostered by a faith in ourselves
which may be as erroneous as are most fond race fancies.  So be it.  The
world is whirling faster to-day than ever before.  It has gained impetus.
Affairs rush to conclusion.  The Far East is the point of contact of the
adventuring Western people as well as of the Asiatic.  We shall not have
to wait for our children's time nor our children's children.  We shall
ourselves see and largely determine the adventure of the Yellow and the
Brown.

FENG-WANG-CHENG, MANCHURIA.
_June_ 1904,




WHAT LIFE MEANS TO ME


I was born in the working-class.  Early I discovered enthusiasm,
ambition, and ideals; and to satisfy these became the problem of my
child-life.  My environment was crude and rough and raw.  I had no
outlook, but an uplook rather.  My place in society was at the bottom.
Here life offered nothing but sordidness and wretchedness, both of the
flesh and the spirit; for here flesh and spirit were alike starved and
tormented.

Above me towered the colossal edifice of society, and to my mind the only
way out was up.  Into this edifice I early resolved to climb.  Up above,
men wore black clothes and boiled shirts, and women dressed in beautiful
gowns.  Also, there were good things to eat, and there was plenty to eat.
This much for the flesh.  Then there were the things of the spirit.  Up
above me, I knew, were unselfishnesses of the spirit, clean and noble
thinking, keen intellectual living.  I knew all this because I read
"Seaside Library" novels, in which, with the exception of the villains
and adventuresses, all men and women thought beautiful thoughts, spoke a
beautiful tongue, and performed glorious deeds.  In short, as I accepted
the rising of the sun, I accepted that up above me was all that was fine
and noble and gracious, all that gave decency and dignity to life, all
that made life worth living and that remunerated one for his travail and
misery.

But it is not particularly easy for one to climb up out of the
working-class--especially if he is handicapped by the possession of
ideals and illusions.  I lived on a ranch in California, and was hard put
to find the ladder whereby to climb.  I early inquired the rate of
interest on invested money, and worried my child's brain into an
understanding of the virtues and excellences of that remarkable invention
of man, compound interest.  Further, I ascertained the current rates of
wages for workers of all ages, and the cost of living.  From all this
data I concluded that if I began immediately and worked and saved until I
was fifty years of age, I could then stop working and enter into
participation in a fair portion of the delights and goodnesses that would
then be open to me higher up in society.  Of course, I resolutely
determined not to marry, while I quite forgot to consider at all that
great rock of disaster in the working-class world--sickness.

But the life that was in me demanded more than a meagre existence of
scraping and scrimping.  Also, at ten years of age, I became a newsboy on
the streets of a city, and found myself with a changed uplook.  All about
me were still the same sordidness and wretchedness, and up above me was
still the same paradise waiting to be gained; but the ladder whereby to
climb was a different one.  It was now the ladder of business.  Why save
my earnings and invest in government bonds, when, by buying two
newspapers for five cents, with a turn of the wrist I could sell them for
ten cents and double my capital?  The business ladder was the ladder for
me, and I had a vision of myself becoming a bald-headed and successful
merchant prince.

Alas for visions!  When I was sixteen I had already earned the title of
"prince."  But this title was given me by a gang of cut-throats and
thieves, by whom I was called "The Prince of the Oyster Pirates."  And at
that time I had climbed the first rung of the business ladder.  I was a
capitalist.  I owned a boat and a complete oyster-pirating outfit.  I had
begun to exploit my fellow-creatures.  I had a crew of one man.  As
captain and owner I took two-thirds of the spoils, and gave the crew
one-third, though the crew worked just as hard as I did and risked just
as much his life and liberty.

This one rung was the height I climbed up the business ladder.  One night
I went on a raid amongst the Chinese fishermen.  Ropes and nets were
worth dollars and cents.  It was robbery, I grant, but it was precisely
the spirit of capitalism.  The capitalist takes away the possessions of
his fellow-creatures by means of a rebate, or of a betrayal of trust, or
by the purchase of senators and supreme-court judges.  I was merely
crude.  That was the only difference.  I used a gun.

But my crew that night was one of those inefficients against whom the
capitalist is wont to fulminate, because, forsooth, such inefficients
increase expenses and reduce dividends.  My crew did both.  What of his
carelessness he set fire to the big mainsail and totally destroyed it.
There weren't any dividends that night, and the Chinese fishermen were
richer by the nets and ropes we did not get.  I was bankrupt, unable just
then to pay sixty-five dollars for a new mainsail.  I left my boat at
anchor and went off on a bay-pirate boat on a raid up the Sacramento
River.  While away on this trip, another gang of bay pirates raided my
boat.  They stole everything, even the anchors; and later on, when I
recovered the drifting hulk, I sold it for twenty dollars.  I had slipped
back the one rung I had climbed, and never again did I attempt the
business ladder.

From then on I was mercilessly exploited by other capitalists.  I had the
muscle, and they made money out of it while I made but a very indifferent
living out of it.  I was a sailor before the mast, a longshoreman, a
roustabout; I worked in canneries, and factories, and laundries; I mowed
lawns, and cleaned carpets, and washed windows.  And I never got the full
product of my toil.  I looked at the daughter of the cannery owner, in
her carriage, and knew that it was my muscle, in part, that helped drag
along that carriage on its rubber tyres.  I looked at the son of the
factory owner, going to college, and knew that it was my muscle that
helped, in part, to pay for the wine and good fellowship he enjoyed.

But I did not resent this.  It was all in the game.  They were the
strong.  Very well, I was strong.  I would carve my way to a place
amongst them and make money out of the muscles of other men.  I was not
afraid of work.  I loved hard work.  I would pitch in and work harder
than ever and eventually become a pillar of society.

And just then, as luck would have it, I found an employer that was of the
same mind.  I was willing to work, and he was more than willing that I
should work.  I thought I was learning a trade.  In reality, I had
displaced two men.  I thought he was making an electrician out of me; as
a matter of fact, he was making fifty dollars per month out of me.  The
two men I had displaced had received forty dollars each per month; I was
doing the work of both for thirty dollars per month.

This employer worked me nearly to death.  A man may love oysters, but too
many oysters will disincline him toward that particular diet.  And so
with me.  Too much work sickened me.  I did not wish ever to see work
again.  I fled from work.  I became a tramp, begging my way from door to
door, wandering over the United States and sweating bloody sweats in
slums and prisons.

I had been born in the working-class, and I was now, at the age of
eighteen, beneath the point at which I had started.  I was down in the
cellar of society, down in the subterranean depths of misery about which
it is neither nice nor proper to speak.  I was in the pit, the abyss, the
human cesspool, the shambles and the charnel-house of our civilization.
This is the part of the edifice of society that society chooses to
ignore.  Lack of space compels me here to ignore it, and I shall say only
that the things I there saw gave me a terrible scare.

I was scared into thinking.  I saw the naked simplicities of the
complicated civilization in which I lived.  Life was a matter of food and
shelter.  In order to get food and shelter men sold things.  The merchant
sold shoes, the politician sold his manhood, and the representative of
the people, with exceptions, of course, sold his trust; while nearly all
sold their honour.  Women, too, whether on the street or in the holy bond
of wedlock, were prone to sell their flesh.  All things were commodities,
all people bought and sold.  The one commodity that labour had to sell
was muscle.  The honour of labour had no price in the marketplace.
Labour had muscle, and muscle alone, to sell.

But there was a difference, a vital difference.  Shoes and trust and
honour had a way of renewing themselves.  They were imperishable stocks.
Muscle, on the other hand, did not renew.  As the shoe merchant sold
shoes, he continued to replenish his stock.  But there was no way of
replenishing the labourer's stock of muscle.  The more he sold of his
muscle, the less of it remained to him.  It was his one commodity, and
each day his stock of it diminished.  In the end, if he did not die
before, he sold out and put up his shutters.  He was a muscle bankrupt,
and nothing remained to him but to go down into the cellar of society and
perish miserably.

I learned, further, that brain was likewise a commodity.  It, too, was
different from muscle.  A brain seller was only at his prime when he was
fifty or sixty years old, and his wares were fetching higher prices than
ever.  But a labourer was worked out or broken down at forty-five or
fifty.  I had been in the cellar of society, and I did not like the place
as a habitation.  The pipes and drains were unsanitary, and the air was
bad to breathe.  If I could not live on the parlour floor of society, I
could, at any rate, have a try at the attic.  It was true, the diet there
was slim, but the air at least was pure.  So I resolved to sell no more
muscle, and to become a vendor of brains.

Then began a frantic pursuit of knowledge.  I returned to California and
opened the books.  While thus equipping myself to become a brain
merchant, it was inevitable that I should delve into sociology.  There I
found, in a certain class of books, scientifically formulated, the simple
sociological concepts I had already worked out for myself.  Other and
greater minds, before I was born, had worked out all that I had thought
and a vast deal more.  I discovered that I was a socialist.

The socialists were revolutionists, inasmuch as they struggled to
overthrow the society of the present, and out of the material to build
the society of the future.  I, too, was a socialist and a revolutionist.
I joined the groups of working-class and intellectual revolutionists, and
for the first time came into intellectual living.  Here I found
keen-flashing intellects and brilliant wits; for here I met strong and
alert-brained, withal horny-handed, members of the working-class;
unfrocked preachers too wide in their Christianity for any congregation
of Mammon-worshippers; professors broken on the wheel of university
subservience to the ruling class and flung out because they were quick
with knowledge which they strove to apply to the affairs of mankind.

Here I found, also, warm faith in the human, glowing idealism,
sweetnesses of unselfishness, renunciation, and martyrdom--all the
splendid, stinging things of the spirit.  Here life was clean, noble, and
alive.  Here life rehabilitated itself, became wonderful and glorious;
and I was glad to be alive.  I was in touch with great souls who exalted
flesh and spirit over dollars and cents, and to whom the thin wail of the
starved slum child meant more than all the pomp and circumstance of
commercial expansion and world empire.  All about me were nobleness of
purpose and heroism of effort, and my days and nights were sunshine and
starshine, all fire and dew, with before my eyes, ever burning and
blazing, the Holy Grail, Christ's own Grail, the warm human,
long-suffering and maltreated, but to be rescued and saved at the last.

And I, poor foolish I, deemed all this to be a mere foretaste of the
delights of living I should find higher above me in society.  I had lost
many illusions since the day I read "Seaside Library" novels on the
California ranch.  I was destined to lose many of the illusions I still
retained.

As a brain merchant I was a success.  Society opened its portals to me.
I entered right in on the parlour floor, and my disillusionment proceeded
rapidly.  I sat down to dinner with the masters of society, and with the
wives and daughters of the masters of society.  The women were gowned
beautifully, I admit; but to my naive surprise I discovered that they
were of the same clay as all the rest of the women I had known down below
in the cellar.  "The colonel's lady and Judy O'Grady were sisters under
their skins"--and gowns.

It was not this, however, so much as their materialism, that shocked me.
It is true, these beautifully gowned, beautiful women prattled sweet
little ideals and dear little moralities; but in spite of their prattle
the dominant key of the life they lived was materialistic.  And they were
so sentimentally selfish!  They assisted in all kinds of sweet little
charities, and informed one of the fact, while all the time the food they
ate and the beautiful clothes they wore were bought out of dividends
stained with the blood of child labour, and sweated labour, and of
prostitution itself.  When I mentioned such facts, expecting in my
innocence that these sisters of Judy O'Grady would at once strip off
their blood-dyed silks and jewels, they became excited and angry, and
read me preachments about the lack of thrift, the drink, and the innate
depravity that caused all the misery in society's cellar.  When I
mentioned that I couldn't quite see that it was the lack of thrift, the
intemperance, and the depravity of a half-starved child of six that made
it work twelve hours every night in a Southern cotton mill, these sisters
of Judy O'Grady attacked my private life and called me an "agitator"--as
though that, forsooth, settled the argument.

Nor did I fare better with the masters themselves.  I had expected to
find men who were clean, noble, and alive, whose ideals were clean,
noble, and alive.  I went about amongst the men who sat in the high
places--the preachers, the politicians, the business men, the professors,
and the editors.  I ate meat with them, drank wine with them, automobiled
with them, and studied them.  It is true, I found many that were clean
and noble; but with rare exceptions, they were not _alive_.  I do verily
believe I could count the exceptions on the fingers of my two hands.
Where they were not alive with rottenness, quick with unclean life, there
were merely the unburied dead--clean and noble, like well-preserved
mummies, but not alive.  In this connection I may especially mention the
professors I met, the men who live up to that decadent university ideal,
"the passionless pursuit of passionless intelligence."

I met men who invoked the name of the Prince of Peace in their diatribes
against war, and who put rifles in the hands of Pinkertons with which to
shoot down strikers in their own factories.  I met men incoherent with
indignation at the brutality of prize-fighting, and who, at the same
time, were parties to the adulteration of food that killed each year more
babies than even red-handed Herod had killed.

I talked in hotels and clubs and homes and Pullmans, and steamer-chairs
with captains of industry, and marvelled at how little travelled they
were in the realm of intellect.  On the other hand, I discovered that
their intellect, in the business sense, was abnormally developed.  Also,
I discovered that their morality, where business was concerned, was nil.

This delicate, aristocratic-featured gentleman, was a dummy director and
a tool of corporations that secretly robbed widows and orphans.  This
gentleman, who collected fine editions and was an especial patron of
literature, paid blackmail to a heavy-jowled, black-browed boss of a
municipal machine.  This editor, who published patent medicine
advertisements and did not dare print the truth in his paper about said
patent medicines for fear of losing the advertising, called me a
scoundrelly demagogue because I told him that his political economy was
antiquated and that his biology was contemporaneous with Pliny.

This senator was the tool and the slave, the little puppet of a gross,
uneducated machine boss; so was this governor and this supreme court
judge; and all three rode on railroad passes.  This man, talking soberly
and earnestly about the beauties of idealism and the goodness of God, had
just betrayed his comrades in a business deal.  This man, a pillar of the
church and heavy contributor to foreign missions, worked his shop girls
ten hours a day on a starvation wage and thereby directly encouraged
prostitution.  This man, who endowed chairs in universities, perjured
himself in courts of law over a matter of dollars and cents.  And this
railroad magnate broke his word as a gentleman and a Christian when he
granted a secret rebate to one of two captains of industry locked
together in a struggle to the death.

It was the same everywhere, crime and betrayal, betrayal and crime--men
who were alive, but who were neither clean nor noble, men who were clean
and noble, but who were not alive.  Then there was a great, hopeless
mass, neither noble nor alive, but merely clean.  It did not sin
positively nor deliberately; but it did sin passively and ignorantly by
acquiescing in the current immorality and profiting by it.  Had it been
noble and alive it would not have been ignorant, and it would have
refused to share in the profits of betrayal and crime.

I discovered that I did not like to live on the parlour floor of society.
Intellectually I was as bored.  Morally and spiritually I was sickened.
I remembered my intellectuals and idealists, my unfrocked preachers,
broken professors, and clean-minded, class-conscious working-men.  I
remembered my days and nights of sunshine and starshine, where life was
all a wild sweet wonder, a spiritual paradise of unselfish adventure and
ethical romance.  And I saw before me, ever blazing and burning, the Holy
Grail.

So I went back to the working-class, in which I had been born and where I
belonged.  I care no longer to climb.  The imposing edifice of society
above my head holds no delights for me.  It is the foundation of the
edifice that interests me.  There I am content to labour, crowbar in
hand, shoulder to shoulder with intellectuals, idealists, and
class-conscious working-men, getting a solid pry now and again and
setting the whole edifice rocking.  Some day, when we get a few more
hands and crowbars to work, we'll topple it over, along with all its
rotten life and unburied dead, its monstrous selfishness and sodden
materialism.  Then we'll cleanse the cellar and build a new habitation
for mankind, in which there will be no parlour floor, in which all the
rooms will be bright and airy, and where the air that is breathed will be
clean, noble, and alive.

Such is my outlook.  I look forward to a time when man shall progress
upon something worthier and higher than his stomach, when there will be a
finer incentive to impel men to action than the incentive of to-day,
which is the incentive of the stomach.  I retain my belief in the
nobility and excellence of the human.  I believe that spiritual sweetness
and unselfishness will conquer the gross gluttony of to-day.  And last of
all, my faith is in the working-class.  As some Frenchman has said, "The
stairway of time is ever echoing with the wooden shoe going up, the
polished boot descending."

NEWTON, IOWA.
_November_ 1905.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVOLUTION, AND OTHER ESSAYS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Cruise of the Dazzler
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Cruise of the Dazzler

Author: Jack London

Release date: February 1, 2004 [eBook #11051]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Justin Gillbank and PG Distributed Proofreaders


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CRUISE OF THE DAZZLER ***

THE CRUISE OF THE DAZZLER

by

JACK LONDON


1902




FOREWORD


Tempting boys to be what they should be--giving them in wholesome form
what they want--that is the purpose and power of Scouting. To help parents
and leaders of youth secure _books boys like best_ that are also best for
boys, the Boy Scouts of America organized EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY. The books
included, formerly sold at prices ranging from $1.50 to $2.00 but, by
special arrangement with the several publishers interested, are now sold
in the EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY Edition at $1.00 per volume.

The books of EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY were selected by the Library Commission
of the Boy Scouts of America, consisting of George F. Bowerman, Librarian,
Public Library of the District of Columbia; Harrison W. Craver, Director,
Engineering Societies Library, New York City; Claude G. Leland,
Superintendent, Bureau of Libraries, Board of Education, New York City;
Edward F. Stevens, Librarian, Pratt Institute Free Library, Brooklyn, N.Y.,
and Franklin K. Mathiews, Chief Scout Librarian. Only such books were
chosen by the Commission as proved to be, by _a nation wide canvas_, most
in demand by the boys themselves. Their popularity is further attested by
the fact that in the EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY Edition, more than a million and
a quarter copies of these books have already been sold.

We know so well, are reminded so often of the worth of the good book and
great, that too often we fail to observe or understand the influence for
good of a boy's recreational reading. Such books may influence him for
good or ill as profoundly as his play activities, of which they are a
vital part. The needful thing is to find stories in which the heroes have
the characteristics boys so much admire--unquenchable courage, immense
resourcefulness, absolute fidelity, conspicuous greatness. We believe the
books of EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY measurably well meet this challenge.

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA,

James E. West

Chief Scout Executive.




CONTENTS

     I  BROTHER AND SISTER

    II  "THE DRACONIAN REFORMS"

   III  "BRICK," "SORREL-TOP," AND "REDDY"

    IV  THE BITER BITTEN

     V  HOME AGAIN

    VI  EXAMINATION DAY

   VII  FATHER AND SON

  VIII  'FRISCO KID AND THE NEW BOY

    IX  ABOARD THE DAZZLER

     X  WITH THE BAY PIRATES

    XI  CAPTAIN AND CREW

   XII  JOE TRIES TO TAKE FRENCH LEAVE

  XIII  BEFRIENDING EACH OTHER

   XIV  AMONG THE OYSTER-BEDS

    XV  GOOD SAILORS IN A WILD ANCHORAGE

   XVI  'FRISCO KID'S DITTY-BOX

  XVII  'FRISCO KID TELLS HIS STORY

 XVIII  A NEW RESPONSIBILITY FOR JOE

   XIX  THE BOYS PLAN AN ESCAPE

    XX  PERILOUS HOURS

   XXI  JOE AND HIS FATHER




PART I




CHAPTER I

BROTHER AND SISTER


They ran across the shining sand, the Pacific thundering its long surge
at their backs, and when they gained the roadway leaped upon bicycles and
dived at faster pace into the green avenues of the park. There were three
of them, three boys, in as many bright-colored sweaters, and they
"scorched" along the cycle-path as dangerously near the speed-limit as is
the custom of boys in bright-colored sweaters to go. They may have exceeded
the speed-limit. A mounted park policeman thought so, but was not sure,
and contented himself with cautioning them as they flashed by. They
acknowledged the warning promptly, and on the next turn of the path as
promptly forgot it, which is also a custom of boys in bright-colored
sweaters.

Shooting out through the entrance to Golden Gate Park, they turned into
San Francisco, and took the long sweep of the descending hills at a rate
that caused pedestrians to turn and watch them anxiously. Through the
city streets the bright sweaters flew, turning and twisting to escape
climbing the steeper hills, and, when the steep hills were unavoidable,
doing stunts to see which would first gain the top.

The boy who more often hit up the pace, led the scorching, and instituted
the stunts was called Joe by his companions. It was "follow the leader,"
and he led, the merriest and boldest in the bunch. But as they pedaled
into the Western Addition, among the large and comfortable residences,
his laughter became less loud and frequent, and he unconsciously lagged
in the rear. At Laguna and Vallejo streets his companions turned off to
the right.

"So long, Fred," he called as he turned his wheel to the left. "So long,
Charley."

"See you to-night!" they called back.

"No--I can't come," he answered.

"Aw, come on," they begged.

"No, I've got to dig.--So long!"

As he went on alone, his face grew grave and a vague worry came into his
eyes. He began resolutely to whistle, but this dwindled away till it was
a thin and very subdued little sound, which ceased altogether as he rode
up the driveway to a large two-storied house.

"Oh, Joe!"

He hesitated before the door to the library. Bessie was there, he knew,
studiously working up her lessons. She must be nearly through with them,
too, for she was always done before dinner, and dinner could not be many
minutes away. As for his lessons, they were as yet untouched. The thought
made him angry. It was bad enough to have one's sister--and two years
younger at that--in the same grade, but to have her continually head and
shoulders above him in scholarship was a most intolerable thing. Not that
he was dull. No one knew better than himself that he was not dull. But
somehow--he did not quite know how--his mind was on other things and he
was usually unprepared.

"Joe--please come here." There was the slightest possible plaintive note
in her voice this time.

"Well?" he said, thrusting aside the portire with an impetuous movement.

He said it gruffly, but he was half sorry for it the next instant when he
saw a slender little girl regarding him with wistful eyes across the big
reading-table heaped with books. She was curled up, with pencil and pad,
in an easy-chair of such generous dimensions that it made her seem more
delicate and fragile than she really was.

"What is it, Sis?" he asked more gently, crossing over to her side.

She took his hand in hers and pressed it against her cheek, and as he
stood beside her came closer to him with a nestling movement.

"What is the matter, Joe dear?" she asked softly. "Won't you tell me?"

He remained silent. It struck him as ridiculous to confess his troubles
to a little sister, even if her reports _were_ higher than his. And the
little sister struck him as ridiculous to demand his troubles of him.
"What a soft cheek she has!" he thought as she pressed her face gently
against his hand. If he could but tear himself away--it was all so
foolish! Only he might hurt her feelings, and, in his experience, girls'
feelings were very easily hurt.

She opened his fingers and kissed the palm of his hand. It was like a
rose-leaf falling; it was also her way of asking her question over again.

"Nothing 's the matter," he said decisively. And then, quite
inconsistently, he blurted out, "Father!"

His worry was now in her eyes. "But father is so good and kind, Joe," she
began. "Why don't you try to please him? He does n't ask much of you, and
it 's all for your own good. It 's not as though you were a fool, like some
boys. If you would only study a little bit--"

"That 's it! Lecturing!" he exploded, tearing his hand roughly away. "Even
you are beginning to lecture me now. I suppose the cook and the stable-boy
will be at it next."

He shoved his hands into his pockets and looked forward into a melancholy
and desolate future filled with interminable lectures and lecturers
innumerable.

"Was that what you wanted me for?" he demanded, turning to go.

She caught at his hand again. "No, it wasn't; only you looked so worried
that I thought--I--" Her voice broke, and she began again freshly. "What
I wanted to tell you was that we're planning a trip across the bay to
Oakland, next Saturday, for a tramp in the hills."

"Who 's going?"

"Myrtle Hayes--"

"What! That little softy?" he interrupted.

"I don't think she is a softy," Bessie answered with spirit. "She 's one
of the sweetest girls I know."

"Which is n't saying much, considering the girls you know. But go on. Who
are the others?"

"Pearl Sayther, and her sister Alice, and Jessie Hilborn, and Sadie French,
and Edna Crothers. That 's all the girls."

Joe sniffed disdainfully. "Who are the fellows, then?"

"Maurice and Felix Clement, Dick Schofield, Burt Layton, and--"

"That 's enough. Milk-and-water chaps, all of them."

"I--I wanted to ask you and Fred and Charley," she said in a quavering
voice. "That 's what I called you in for--to ask you to come."

"And what are you going to do?" he asked.

"Walk, gather wild flowers,--the poppies are all out now,--eat luncheon
at some nice place, and--and--"

"Come home," he finished for her.

Bessie nodded her head. Joe put his hands in his pockets again, and
walked up and down.

"A sissy outfit, that 's what it is," he said abruptly; "and a sissy
program. None of it in mine, please."

She tightened her trembling lips and struggled on bravely. "What would
you rather do?" she asked.

"I 'd sooner take Fred and Charley and go off somewhere and do
something--well, anything."

He paused and looked at her. She was waiting patiently for him to proceed.
He was aware of his inability to express in words what he felt and wanted,
and all his trouble and general dissatisfaction rose up and gripped hold
of him.

"Oh, you can't understand!" he burst out. "You can't understand. You 're
a girl. You like to be prim and neat, and to be good in deportment and
ahead in your studies. You don't care for danger and adventure and such
things, and you don't care for boys who are rough, and have life and go
in them, and all that. You like good little boys in white collars, with
clothes always clean and hair always combed, who like to stay in at
recess and be petted by the teacher and told how they're always up in
their studies; nice little boys who never get into scrapes--who are too
busy walking around and picking flowers and eating lunches with girls,
to get into scrapes. Oh, I know the kind--afraid of their own shadows,
and no more spunk in them than in so many sheep. That 's what they
are--sheep. Well, I 'm not a sheep, and there 's no more to be said.
And I don't want to go on your picnic, and, what 's more, I 'm not going."

The tears welled up in Bessie's brown eyes, and her lips were trembling.
This angered him unreasonably. What were girls good for, anyway?--always
blubbering, and interfering, and carrying on. There was no sense in them.

"A fellow can't say anything without making you cry," he began, trying to
appease her. "Why, I did n't mean anything, Sis. I did n't, sure. I--"

He paused helplessly and looked down at her. She was sobbing, and at the
same time shaking with the effort to control her sobs, while big tears
were rolling down her cheeks.

"Oh, you--you girls!" he cried, and strode wrathfully out of the room.




CHAPTER II

"THE DRACONIAN REFORMS"


A few minutes later, and still wrathful, Joe went in to dinner. He ate
silently, though his father and mother and Bessie kept up a genial flow
of conversation. There she was, he communed savagely with his plate,
crying one minute, and the next all smiles and laughter. Now that was
n't his way. If _he_ had anything sufficiently important to cry about,
rest assured he would n't get over it for days. Girls were hypocrites,
that was all there was to it. They did n't feel one hundredth part of all
that they said when they cried. It stood to reason that they did n't. It
must be that they just carried on because they enjoyed it. It made them
feel good to make other people miserable, especially boys. That was why
they were always interfering.

Thus reflecting sagely, he kept his eyes on his plate and did justice
to the fare; for one cannot scorch from the Cliff House to the Western
Addition via the park without being guilty of a healthy appetite.

Now and then his father directed a glance at him in a certain mildly
anxious way. Joe did not see these glances, but Bessie saw them, every
one. Mr. Bronson was a middle-aged man, well developed and of heavy
build, though not fat. His was a rugged face, square-jawed and
stern-featured, though his eyes were kindly and there were lines about
the mouth that betokened laughter rather than severity. A close
examination was not required to discover the resemblance between him
and Joe. The same broad forehead and strong jaw characterized them both,
and the eyes, taking into consideration the difference of age, were as
like as peas from one pod.

"How are you getting on, Joe?" Mr. Bronson asked finally. Dinner was
over and they were about to leave the table.

"Oh, I don't know," Joe answered carelessly, and then added: "We have
examinations to-morrow. I'll know then."

"Whither bound?" his mother questioned, as he turned to leave the room.
She was a slender, willowy woman, whose brown eyes Bessie's were, and
likewise her tender ways.

"To my room," Joe answered. "To work," he supplemented.

She rumpled his hair affectionately, and bent and kissed him. Mr. Bronson
smiled approval at him as he went out, and he hurried up the stairs,
resolved to dig hard and pass the examinations of the coming day.

Entering his room, he locked the door and sat down at a desk most
comfortably arranged for a boy's study. He ran his eye over his
text-books. The history examination came the first thing in the morning,
so he would begin on that. He opened the book where a page was turned
down, and began to read:

  Shortly after the Draconian reforms, a war
  broke out between Athens and Megara respecting
  the island of Salamis, to which both cities
  laid claim.

That was easy; but what were the Draconian reforms? He must look them up.
He felt quite studious as he ran over the back pages, till he chanced to
raise his eyes above the top of the book and saw on a chair a baseball
mask and a catcher's glove. They should n't have lost that game last
Saturday, he thought, and they would n't have, either, if it had n't been
for Fred. He wished Fred would n't fumble so. He could hold a hundred
difficult balls in succession, but when a critical point came, he 'd let
go of even a dewdrop. He 'd have to send him out in the field and bring
in Jones to first base. Only Jones was so excitable. He could hold any
kind of a ball, no matter how critical the play was, but there was no
telling what he would do with the ball after he got it.

Joe came to himself with a start. A pretty way of studying history! He
buried his head in his book and began:

  Shortly after the Draconian reforms--

He read the sentence through three times, and then recollected that he
had not looked up the Draconian reforms.

A knock came at the door. He turned the pages over with a noisy flutter,
but made no answer.

The knock was repeated, and Bessie's "Joe, dear" came to his ears.

"What do you want?" he demanded. But before she could answer he hurried
on: "No admittance. I 'm busy."

"I came to see if I could help you," she pleaded. "I 'm all done, and I
thought--"

"Of course you 're all done!" he shouted. "You always are!"

He held his head in both his hands to keep his eyes on the book. But
the baseball mask bothered him. The more he attempted to keep his mind
on the history the more in his mind's eye he saw the mask resting on the
chair and all the games in which it had played its part.

This would never do. He deliberately placed the book face downward on the
desk and walked over to the chair. With a swift sweep he sent both mask
and glove hurtling under the bed, and so violently that he heard the mask
rebound from the wall.

  Shortly after the Draconian reforms, a war
  broke out between Athens and Megara--

The mask had rolled back from the wall. He wondered if it had rolled back
far enough for him to see it. No, he would n't look. What did it matter if
it had rolled out? That was n't history. He wondered--

He peered over the top of the book, and there was the mask peeping out at
him from under the edge of the bed. This was not to be borne. There was
no use attempting to study while that mask was around. He went over and
fished it out, crossed the room to the closet, and tossed it inside, then
locked the door. That was settled, thank goodness! Now he could do some
work.

He sat down again.

  Shortly after the Draconian reforms, a war
  broke out between Athens and Megara respecting
  the island of Salamis, to which, both cities
  laid claim.

Which was all very well, if he had only found out what the Draconian
reforms were. A soft glow pervaded the room, and he suddenly became
aware of it. What could cause it? He looked out of the window. The
setting sun was slanting its long rays against low-hanging masses of
summer clouds, turning them to warm scarlet and rosy red; and it was
from them that the red light, mellow and glowing, was flung earthward.

His gaze dropped from the clouds to the bay beneath. The sea-breeze was
dying down with the day, and off Fort Point a fishing-boat was creeping
into port before the last light breeze. A little beyond, a tug was
sending up a twisted pillar of smoke as it towed a three-masted schooner
to sea. His eyes wandered over toward the Marin County shore. The line
where land and water met was already in darkness, and long shadows were
creeping up the hills toward Mount Tamalpais, which was sharply
silhouetted against the western sky.

Oh, if he, Joe Bronson, were only on that fishing-boat and sailing in
with a deep-sea catch! Or if he were on that schooner, heading out into
the sunset, into the world! That was life, that was living, doing
something and being something in the world. And, instead, here he was,
pent up in a close room, racking his brains about people dead and gone
thousands of years before he was born.

He jerked himself away from the window as though held there by some
physical force, and resolutely carried his chair and history into the
farthest corner of the room, where he sat down with his back to the
window.

An instant later, so it seemed to him, he found himself again staring
out of the window and dreaming. How he had got there he did not know.
His last recollection was the finding of a subheading on a page on the
right-hand side of the book which read: "The Laws and Constitution of
Draco." And then, evidently like walking in one's sleep, he had come
to the window. How long had he been there? he wondered. The fishing-boat
which he had seen off Fort Point was now crawling into Meiggs's Wharf.
This denoted nearly an hour's lapse of time. The sun had long since set;
a solemn grayness was brooding over the water, and the first faint stars
were beginning to twinkle over the crest of Mount Tamalpais.

He turned, with a sigh, to go back into his corner, when a long whistle,
shrill and piercing, came to his ears. That was Fred. He sighed again.
The whistle repeated itself. Then another whistle joined it. That was
Charley. They were waiting on the corner--lucky fellows!

Well, they would n't see him this night. Both whistles arose in duet. He
writhed in his chair and groaned. No, they would n't see him this night,
he reiterated, at the same time rising to his feet. It was certainly
impossible for him to join them when he had not yet learned about the
Draconian reforms. The same force which had held him to the window now
seemed drawing him across the room to the desk. It made him put the
history on top of his school-books, and he had the door unlocked and
was half-way into the hall before he realized it. He started to return,
but the thought came to him that he could go out for a little while and
then come back and do his work.

A very little while, he promised himself, as he went down-stairs. He
went down faster and faster, till at the bottom he was going three
steps at a time. He popped his cap on his head and went out of the
side entrance in a rush; and ere he reached the corner the reforms of
Draco were as far away in the past as Draco himself, while the examinations
on the morrow were equally far away in the future.




CHAPTER III

"BRICK," "SORREL-TOP," AND "REDDY"


"What 's up?" Joe asked, as he joined Fred and Charley.

"Kites," Charley answered. "Come on. We 're tired out waiting for you."

The three set off down the street to the brow of the hill, where they
looked down upon Union Street, far below and almost under their feet.
This they called the Pit, and it was well named. Themselves they called
the Hill-dwellers, and a descent into the Pit by the Hill-dwellers was
looked upon by them as a great adventure.

Scientific kite-flying was one of the keenest pleasures of these three
particular Hill-dwellers, and six or eight kites strung out on a mile
of twine and soaring into the clouds was an ordinary achievement for
them. They were compelled to replenish their kite-supply often; for
whenever an accident occurred, and the string broke, or a ducking kite
dragged down the rest, or the wind suddenly died out, their kites fell
into the Pit, from which place they were unrecoverable. The reason for
this was the young people of the Pit were a piratical and robber race
with peculiar ideas of ownership and property rights.

On a day following an accident to a kite of one of the Hill-dwellers,
the self-same kite could be seen riding the air attached to a string
which led down into the Pit to the lairs of the Pit People. So it came
about that the Pit People, who were a poor folk and unable to afford
scientific kite-flying, developed great proficiency in the art when
their neighbors the Hill-dwellers took it up.

There was also an old sailorman who profited by this recreation of the
Hill-dwellers; for he was learned in sails and air-currents, and being
deft of hand and cunning, he fashioned the best-flying kites that could
be obtained. He lived in a rattletrap shanty close to the water, where
he could still watch with dim eyes the ebb and flow of the tide, and the
ships pass out and in, and where he could revive old memories of the days
when he, too, went down to the sea in ships.

To reach his shanty from the Hill one had to pass through the Pit, and
thither the three boys were bound. They had often gone for kites in the
daytime, but this was their first trip after dark, and they felt it to
be, as it indeed was, a hazardous adventure.

In simple words, the Pit was merely the cramped and narrow quarters
of the poor, where many nationalities crowded together in cosmopolitan
confusion, and lived as best they could, amid much dirt and squalor.
It was still early evening when the boys passed through on their way
to the sailorman's shanty, and no mishap befell them, though some of
the Pit boys stared at them savagely and hurled a taunting remark after
them, now and then.

The sailorman made kites which were not only splendid fliers but which
folded up and were very convenient to carry. Each of the boys bought a
few, and, with them wrapped in compact bundles and under their arms,
started back on the return journey.

"Keep a sharp lookout for the b'ys," the kite-maker cautioned them.
"They 're like to be cruisin' round after dark."

"We 're not afraid," Charley assured him; "and we know how to take care
of ourselves."

Used to the broad and quiet streets of the Hill, the boys were shocked
and stunned by the life that teemed in the close-packed quarter. It
seemed some thick and monstrous growth of vegetation, and that they
were wading through it. They shrank closely together in the tangle of
narrow streets as though for protection, conscious of the strangeness
of it all, and how unrelated they were to it.

Children and babies sprawled on the sidewalk and under their feet.
Bareheaded and unkempt women gossiped in the doorways or passed back
and forth with scant marketings in their arms. There was a general
odor of decaying fruit and fish, a smell of staleness and putridity.
Big hulking men slouched by, and ragged little girls walked gingerly
through the confusion with foaming buckets of beer in their hands.
There was a clatter and garble of foreign tongues and brogues, shrill
cries, quarrels and wrangles, and the Pit pulsed with a great and
steady murmur, like the hum of the human hive that it was.

"Phew! I 'll be glad when we 're out of it," Fred said.

He spoke in a whisper, and Joe and Charley nodded grimly that they agreed
with him. They were not inclined to speech, and they walked as rapidly as
the crowd permitted, with much the same feelings as those of travelers in
a dangerous and hostile jungle.

And danger and hostility stalked in the Pit. The inhabitants seemed to
resent the presence of these strangers from the Hill. Dirty little urchins
abused them as they passed, snarling with assumed bravery, and prepared
to run away at the first sign of attack. And still other little urchins
formed a noisy parade at the heels of the boys, and grew bolder with
increasing numbers.

"Don't mind them," Joe cautioned. "Take no notice, but keep right on.
We 'll soon be out of it."

"No; we 're in for it," said Fred, in an undertone. "Look there!"

On the corner they were approaching, four or five boys of about their
own age were standing. The light from a street-lamp fell upon them and
disclosed one with vivid red hair. It could be no other than "Brick"
Simpson, the redoubtable leader of a redoubtable gang. Twice within
their memory he had led his gang up the Hill and spread panic and
terror among the Hill-dwelling young folk, who fled wildly to their
homes, while their fathers and mothers hurriedly telephoned for the
police.

At sight of the group on the corner, the rabble at the heels of the
three boys melted away on the instant with like manifestations of
fear. This but increased the anxiety of the boys, though they held
boldly on their way.

The red-haired boy detached himself from the group, and stepped before
them, blocking their path. They essayed to go around him, but he stretched
out his arm.

"Wot yer doin' here?" he snarled. "Why don't yer stay where yer b'long?"

"We 're just going home," Fred said mildly.

Brick looked at Joe. "Wot yer got under yer arm?" he demanded.

Joe contained himself and took no heed of him. "Come on," he said to Fred
and Charley, at the same time starting to brush past the gang-leader.

But with a quick blow Brick Simpson struck him in the face, and with
equal quickness snatched the bundle of kites from under his arm.

Joe uttered an inarticulate cry of rage, and, all caution flung to the
winds, sprang at his assailant.

This was evidently a surprise to the gang-leader, who expected least of
all to be attacked in his own territory. He retreated backward, still
clutching the kites, and divided between desire to fight and desire to
retain his capture.

The latter desire dominated him, and he turned and fled swiftly down
the narrow side-street into a labyrinth of streets and alleys. Joe knew
that he was plunging into the wilderness of the enemy's country, but
his sense of both property and pride had been offended, and he took up
the pursuit hot-footed.

Fred and Charley followed after, though he outdistanced them, and behind
came the three other members of the gang, emitting a whistling call while
they ran which was evidently intended for the assembling of the rest of
the band. As the chase proceeded, these whistles were answered from many
different directions, and soon a score of dark figures were tagging at
the heels of Fred and Charley, who, in turn, were straining every muscle
to keep the swifter-footed Joe in sight.

Brick Simpson darted into a vacant lot, aiming for a "slip," as such
things are called which are prearranged passages through fences and
over sheds and houses and around dark holes and corners, where the
unfamiliar pursuer must go more carefully and where the chances are
many that he will soon lose the track.

But Joe caught Brick before he could attain his end, and together they
rolled over and over in the dirt, locked in each other's arms. By the
time Fred and Charley and the gang had come up, they were on their feet,
facing each other.

"Wot d' ye want, eh?" the red-headed gang-leader was saying in a bullying
tone. "Wot d' ye want? That 's wot I wanter know."

"I want my kites," Joe answered.

Brick Simpson's eyes sparkled at the intelligence. Kites were something
he stood in need of himself.

"Then you 've got to fight fer 'em," he announced.

"Why should I fight for them?" Joe demanded indignantly. "They 're mine."
Which went to show how ignorant he was of the ideas of ownership and
property rights which obtained among the People of the Pit.

A chorus of jeers and catcalls went up from the gang, which clustered
behind its leader like a pack of wolves.

"Why should I fight for them?" Joe reiterated.

"'Cos I say so," Simpson replied. "An' wot I say goes. Understand?"

But Joe did not understand. He refused to understand that Brick Simpson's
word was law in San Francisco, or any part of San Francisco. His love of
honesty and right dealing was offended, and all his fighting blood was up.

"You give those kites to me, right here and now," he threatened, reaching
out his hand for them.

But Simpson jerked them away. "D' ye know who I am?" he demanded. "I
'm Brick Simpson, an' I don't 'low no one to talk to me in that tone
of voice."

"Better leave him alone," Charley whispered in Joe's ear. "What are a
few kites? Leave him alone and let 's get out of this."

"They 're my kites," Joe said slowly in a dogged manner. "They 're my
kites, and I 'm going to have them."

"You can't fight the crowd," Fred interfered; "and if you do get the
best of him they 'll all pile on you."

The gang, observing this whispered colloquy, and mistaking it for
hesitancy on the part of Joe, set up its wolf-like howling again.

"Afraid! afraid!" the young roughs jeered and taunted. "He 's too
high-toned, he is! Mebbe he 'll spoil his nice clean shirt, and then
what 'll mama say?"

"Shut up!" their leader snapped authoritatively, and the noise obediently
died away.

"Will you give me those kites?" Joe demanded, advancing determinedly.

"Will you fight for 'em?" was Simpson's counter-demand.

"Yes," Joe answered.

"Fight! fight!" the gang began to howl again.

"And it 's me that 'll see fair play," said a man's heavy voice.

All eyes were instantly turned upon the man who had approached unseen and
made this announcement. By the electric light, shining brightly on them
from the corner, they made him out to be a big, muscular fellow, clad in
a working-man's garments. His feet were incased in heavy brogans, a narrow
strap of black leather held his overalls about his waist, and a black and
greasy cap was on his head. His face was grimed with coal-dust, and a
coarse blue shirt, open at the neck, revealed a wide throat and massive
chest.

"An' who 're you?" Simpson snarled, angry at the interruption.

"None of yer business," the newcomer retorted tartly. "But, if it 'll
do you any good, I 'm a fireman on the China steamers, and, as I said,
I 'm goin' to see fair play. That 's my business. Your business is to
give fair play. So pitch in, and don't be all night about it."

The three boys were as pleased by the appearance of the fireman as Simpson
and his followers were displeased. They conferred together for several
minutes, when Simpson deposited the bundle of kites in the arms of one
of his gang and stepped forward.

"Come on, then," he said, at the same time pulling off his coat.

Joe handed his to Fred, and sprang toward Brick. They put up their fists
and faced each other. Almost instantly Simpson drove in a fierce blow and
ducked cleverly away and out of reach of the blow which Joe returned. Joe
felt a sudden respect for the abilities of his antagonist, but the only
effect upon him was to arouse all the doggedness of his nature and make
him utterly determined to win.

Awed by the presence of the fireman, Simpson's followers confined
themselves to cheering Brick and jeering Joe. The two boys circled
round and round, attacking, feinting, and guarding, and now one and
then the other getting in a telling blow. Their positions were in marked
contrast. Joe stood erect, planted solidly on his feet, with legs wide
apart and head up. On the other hand, Simpson crouched till his head was
nearly lost between his shoulders, and all the while he was in constant
motion, leaping and springing and manoeuvering in the execution of a
score or more of tricks quite new and strange to Joe.

At the end of a quarter of an hour, both were very tired, though Joe was
much fresher. Tobacco, ill food, and unhealthy living were telling on
the gang-leader, who was panting and sobbing for breath. Though at first
(and because of superior skill) he had severely punished Joe, he was now
weak and his blows were without force. Growing desperate, he adopted
what might be called not an unfair but a mean method of attack: he would
manoeuver, leap in and strike swiftly, and then, ducking forward, fall
to the ground at Joe's feet. Joe could not strike him while he was down,
and so would step back until he could get on his feet again, when the
thing would be repeated.

But Joe grew tired of this, and prepared for him. Timing his blow with
Simpson's attack, he delivered it just as Simpson was ducking forward
to fall. Simpson fell, but he fell over on one side, whither he had
been driven by the impact of Joe's fist upon his head. He rolled over
and got half-way to his feet, where he remained, crying and gasping.
His followers called upon him to get up, and he tried once or twice,
but was too exhausted and stunned.

"I give in," he said. "I 'm licked."

The gang had become silent and depressed at its leader's defeat.

Joe stepped forward.

"I 'll trouble you for those kites," he said to the boy who was
holding them.

"Oh, I dunno," said another member of the gang, shoving in between
Joe and his property. His hair was also a vivid red. "You 've got
to lick me before you kin have 'em."

"I don't see that," Joe said bluntly. "I 've fought and I 've won,
and there 's nothing more to it."

"Oh, yes, there is," said the other. "I 'm 'Sorrel-top' Simpson.
Brick 's my brother. See?"

And so, in this fashion, Joe learned another custom of the Pit People
of which he had been ignorant.

"All right," he said, his fighting blood more fully aroused than ever
by the unjustness of the proceeding. "Come on."

Sorrel-top Simpson, a year younger than his brother, proved to be a
most unfair fighter, and the good-natured fireman was compelled to
interfere several times before the second of the Simpson clan lay on
the ground and acknowledged defeat.

This time Joe reached for his kites without the slightest doubt that
he was to get them. But still another lad stepped in between him and
his property. The telltale hair, vividly red, sprouted likewise on
this lad's head, and Joe knew him at once for what he was, another
member of the Simpson clan. He was a younger edition of his brothers,
somewhat less heavily built, with a face covered with a vast quantity
of freckles, which showed plainly under the electric light.

"You don't git them there kites till you git me," he challenged in
a piping little voice. "I 'm 'Reddy' Simpson, an' you ain't licked
the fambly till you 've licked me."

The gang cheered admiringly, and Reddy stripped a tattered jacket
preparatory for the fray.

"Git ready," he said to Joe.

Joe's knuckles were torn, his nose was bleeding, his lip was cut and
swollen, while his shirt had been ripped down from throat to waist.
Further, he was tired, and breathing hard.

"How many more are there of you Simpsons?" he asked. "I 've got to
get home, and if your family 's much larger this thing is liable
to keep on all night."

"I 'm the last an' the best," Reddy replied. "You gits me an' you
gits the kites. Sure."

"All right," Joe sighed. "Come on."

While the youngest of the clan lacked the strength and skill of his
elders, he made up for it by a wildcat manner of fighting that taxed
Joe severely. Time and again it seemed to him that he must give in
to the little whirlwind; but each time he pulled himself together
and went doggedly on. For he felt that he was fighting for principle,
as his forefathers had fought for principle; also, it seemed to him that
the honor of the Hill was at stake, and that he, as its representative,
could do nothing less than his very best.

So he held on and managed to endure his opponent's swift and continuous
rushes till that young and less experienced person at last wore himself
out with his own exertions, and from the ground confessed that, for the
first time in its history, the "Simpson fambly was beat."




CHAPTER IV

THE BITER BITTEN


But life in the Pit at best was a precarious affair, as the three
Hill-dwellers were quickly to learn. Before Joe could even possess
himself of his kites, his astonished eyes were greeted with the
spectacle of all his enemies, the fireman included, taking to their
heels in wild flight. As the little girls and urchins had melted away
before the Simpson gang, so was melting away the Simpson gang before
some new and correspondingly awe-inspiring group of predatory creatures.

Joe heard terrified cries of "Fish gang!" "Fish gang!" from those who
fled, and he would have fled himself from this new danger, only he was
breathless from his last encounter, and knew the impossibility of
escaping whatever threatened. Fred and Charley felt mighty longings
to run away from a danger great enough to frighten the redoubtable
Simpson gang and the valorous fireman, but they could not desert
their comrade.

Dark forms broke into the vacant lot, some surrounding the boys and
others dashing after the fugitives. That the laggards were overtaken
was evidenced by the cries of distress that went up, and when later
the pursuers returned, they brought with them the luckless and snarling
Brick, still clinging fast to the bundle of kites.

Joe looked curiously at this latest band of marauders. They were young
men of from seventeen and eighteen to twenty-three and -four years of
age, and bore the unmistakable stamp of the hoodlum class. There were
vicious faces among them--faces so vicious as to make Joe's flesh creep
as he looked at them. A couple grasped him tightly by the arms, and
Fred and Charley were similarly held captive.

"Look here, you," said one who spoke with the authority of leader,
"we 've got to inquire into this. Wot 's be'n goin' on here? Wot 're
you up to, Red-head? Wot you be'n doin'?"

"Ain't be'n doin' nothin'," Simpson whined.

"Looks like it." The leader turned up Brick's face to the electric
light. "Who 's been paintin' you up like that?" he demanded.

Brick pointed at Joe, who was forthwith dragged to the front.

"Wot was you scrappin' about?"

"Kites--my kites," Joe spoke up boldly. "That fellow tried to take them
away from me. He 's got them under his arm now."

"Oh, he has, has he? Look here, you Brick, we don't put up with stealin'
in this territory. See? You never rightly owned nothin'. Come, fork over
the kites. Last call."

The leader tightened his grasp threateningly, and Simpson, weeping tears
of rage, surrendered the plunder.

"Wot yer got under yer arm?" the leader demanded abruptly of Fred, at the
same time jerking out the bundle. "More kites, eh? Reg'lar kite-factory
gone and got itself lost," he remarked finally, when he had appropriated
Charley's bundle. "Now, wot I wants to know is wot we 're goin' to do to
you t'ree chaps?" he continued in a judicial tone.

"What for?" Joe demanded hotly. "For being robbed of our kites?"

"Not at all, not at all," the leader responded politely; "but for luggin'
kites round these quarters an' causin' all this unseemly disturbance.
It 's disgraceful; that 's wot it is--disgraceful."

At this juncture, when the Hill-dwellers were the center of attraction,
Brick suddenly wormed out of his jacket, squirmed away from his captors,
and dashed across the lot to the slip for which he had been originally
headed when overtaken by Joe. Two or three of the gang shot over the
fence after him in noisy pursuit. There was much barking and howling of
back-yard dogs and clattering of shoes over sheds and boxes. Then there
came a splashing of water, as though a barrel of it had been precipitated
to the ground. Several minutes later the pursuers returned, very sheepish
and very wet from the deluge presented them by the wily Brick, whose
voice, high up in the air from some friendly housetop, could be heard
defiantly jeering them.

This event apparently disconcerted the leader of the gang, and just as
he turned to Joe and Fred and Charley, a long and peculiar whistle came
to their ears from the street--the warning signal, evidently, of a scout
posted to keep a lookout. The next moment the scout himself came flying
back to the main body, which was already beginning to retreat.

"Cops!" he panted.

Joe looked, and he saw two helmeted policemen approaching, with bright
stars shining on their breasts.

"Let 's get out of this," he whispered to Fred and Charley.

The gang had already taken to flight, and they blocked the boys' retreat
in one quarter, and in another they saw the policemen advancing. So they
took to their heels in the direction of Brick Simpson's slip, the policemen
hot after them and yelling bravely for them to halt.

But young feet are nimble, and young feet when frightened become something
more than nimble, and the boys were first over the fence and plunging
wildly through a maze of back yards. They soon found that the policemen
were discreet. Evidently they had had experiences in slips, and they were
satisfied to give over the chase at the first fence.

No street-lamps shed their light here, and the boys blundered along
through the blackness with their hearts in their mouths. In one yard,
filled with mountains of crates and fruit-boxes, they were lost for a
quarter of an hour. Feel and quest about as they would, they encountered
nothing but endless heaps of boxes. From this wilderness they finally
emerged by way of a shed roof, only to fall into another yard, cumbered
with countless empty chicken-coops.

Farther on they came upon the contrivance which had soaked Brick Simpson's
pursuers with water. It was a cunning arrangement. Where the slip led
through a fence with a board missing, a long slat was so arranged that
the ignorant wayfarer could not fail to strike against it. This slat
was the spring of the trap. A light touch upon it was sufficient to
disconnect a heavy stone from a barrel perched overhead and nicely
balanced. The disconnecting of the stone permitted the barrel to turn
over and spill its contents on the one beneath who touched the slat.

The boys examined the arrangement with keen appreciation. Luckily for
them, the barrel was overturned, or they too would have received a
ducking, for Joe, who was in advance, had blundered against the slat.

"I wonder if this is Simpson's back yard?" he queried softly.

"It must be," Fred concluded, "or else the back yard of some member
of his gang."

Charley put his hands warningly on both their arms.

"Hist! What 's that?" he whispered.

They crouched down on the ground. Not far away was the sound of some
one moving about. Then they heard a noise of falling water, as from
a faucet into a bucket. This was followed by steps boldly approaching.
They crouched lower, breathless with apprehension.

A dark form passed by within arm's reach and mounted on a box to the
fence. It was Brick himself, resetting the trap. They heard him arrange
the slat and stone, then right the barrel and empty into it a couple of
buckets of water. As he came down from the box to go after more water,
Joe sprang upon him, tripped him up, and held him to the ground.

"Don't make any noise," he said. "I want you to listen to me."

"Oh, it 's you, is it?" Simpson replied, with such obvious relief in
his voice as to make them feel relieved also. "Wot d' ye want here?"

"We want to get out of here," Joe said, "and the shortest way 's the
best. There 's three of us, and you 're only one--"

"That 's all right, that 's all right," the gang-leader interrupted.
"I 'd just as soon show you the way out as not. I ain't got nothin'
'gainst you. Come on an' follow me, an' don't step to the side, an'
I 'll have you out in no time."

Several minutes later they dropped from the top of a high fence into
a dark alley.

"Follow this to the street," Simpson directed; "turn to the right two
blocks, turn to the right again for three, an' yer on Union. Tra-la-loo."

They said good-by, and as they started down the alley received the
following advice:

"Nex' time you bring kites along, you 'd best leave 'em to home."




CHAPTER V

HOME AGAIN


Following Brick Simpson's directions, they came into Union Street, and
without further mishap gained the Hill. From the brow they looked down
into the Pit, whence arose that steady, indefinable hum which comes
from crowded human places.

"I 'll never go down there again, not as long as I live," Fred said
with a great deal of savagery in his voice. "I wonder what became of
the fireman."

"We 're lucky to get back with whole skins," Joe cheered them
philosophically.

"I guess we left our share, and you more than yours," laughed Charley.

"Yes," Joe answered. "And I 've got more trouble to face when I get
home. Good night, fellows."

As he expected, the door on the side porch was locked, and he went
around to the dining-room and entered like a burglar through a window.
As he crossed the wide hall, walking softly toward the stairs, his
father came out of the library. The surprise was mutual, and each
halted aghast.

Joe felt a hysterical desire to laugh, for he thought that he knew
precisely how he looked. In reality he looked far worse than he
imagined. What Mr. Bronson saw was a boy with hat and coat covered
with dirt, his whole face smeared with the stains of conflict, and,
in particular, a badly swollen nose, a bruised eyebrow, a cut and
swollen lip, a scratched cheek, knuckles still bleeding, and a shirt
torn open from throat to waist.

"What does this mean, sir?" Mr. Bronson finally managed to articulate.

Joe stood speechless. How could he tell, in one brief sentence, all
the whole night's happenings?--for all that must be included in the
explanation of what his luckless disarray meant.

"Have you lost your tongue?" Mr. Bronson demanded with an appearance
of impatience.

"I 've--I 've--"

"Yes, yes," his father encouraged.

"I 've--well, I 've been down in the Pit," Joe succeeded in blurting out.

"I must confess that you look like it--very much like it indeed."
Mr. Bronson spoke severely, but if ever by great effort he conquered
a smile, that was the time. "I presume," he went on, "that you do not
refer to the abiding-place of sinners, but rather to some definite
locality in San Francisco. Am I right?"

Joe swept his arm in a descending gesture toward Union Street, and said:
"Down there, sir."

"And who gave it that name?"

"I did," Joe answered, as though confessing to a specified crime.

"It 's most appropriate, I 'm sure, and denotes imagination. It could n't
really be bettered. You must do well at school, sir, with your English."

This did not increase Joe's happiness, for English was the only study of
which he did not have to feel ashamed.

And, while he stood thus a silent picture of misery and disgrace,
Mr. Bronson looked upon him through the eyes of his own boyhood with
an understanding which Joe could not have believed possible.

"However, what you need just now is not a discourse, but a bath and
court-plaster and witch-hazel and cold-water bandages," Mr. Bronson
said; "so to bed with you. You 'll need all the sleep you can get,
and you 'll feel stiff and sore to-morrow morning, I promise you."

The clock struck one as Joe pulled the bedclothes around him; and the
next he knew he was being worried by a soft, insistent rapping, which
seemed to continue through several centuries, until at last, unable to
endure it longer, he opened his eyes and sat up.

The day was streaming in through the window--bright and sunshiny day.
He stretched his arms to yawn; but a shooting pain darted through all
the muscles, and his arms came down more rapidly than they had gone up.
He looked at them with a bewildered stare, till suddenly the events of
the night rushed in upon him, and he groaned.

The rapping still persisted, and he cried: "Yes, I hear. What time is it?"

"Eight o'clock," Bessie's voice came to him through the door. "Eight
o'clock, and you 'll have to hurry if you don't want to be late for
school."

"Goodness!" He sprang out of bed precipitately, groaned with the pain
from all his stiff muscles, and collapsed slowly and carefully on a
chair. "Why did n't you call me sooner?" he growled.

"Father said to let you sleep."

Joe groaned again, in another fashion Then his history-book caught his
eye, and he groaned yet again and in still another fashion.

"All right," he called. "Go on. I 'll be down in a jiffy."

He did come down in fairly brief order; but if Bessie had watched him
descend the stairs she would have been astounded at the remarkable
caution he observed and at the twinges of pain that every now and then
contorted his face. As it was, when she came upon him in the dining-room
she uttered a frightened cry and ran over to him.

"What 's the matter, Joe?" she asked tremulously. "What has happened?"

"Nothing," he grunted, putting sugar on his porridge.

"But surely--" she began.

"Please don't bother me," he interrupted. "I 'm late, and I want to
eat my breakfast."

And just then Mrs. Bronson caught Bessie's eye, and that young lady,
still mystified, made haste to withdraw herself.

Joe was thankful to his mother for that, and thankful that she refrained
from remarking upon his appearance. Father had told her; that was one
thing sure. He could trust her not to worry him; it was never her way.

And, meditating in this way, he hurried through with his solitary
breakfast, vaguely conscious in an uncomfortable way that his mother
was fluttering anxiously about him. Tender as she always was, he noticed
that she kissed him with unusual tenderness as he started out with his
books swinging at the end of a strap; and he also noticed, as he turned
the corner, that she was still looking after him through the window.

But of more vital importance than that, to him, was his stiffness and
soreness. As he walked along, each step was an effort and a torment.
Severely as the reflected sunlight from the cement sidewalk hurt his
bruised eye, and severely as his various wounds pained him, still more
severely did he suffer from his muscles and joints. He had never imagined
such stiffness. Each individual muscle in his whole body protested when
called upon to move. His fingers were badly swollen, and it was agony to
clasp and unclasp them; while his arms were sore from wrist to elbow.
This, he said to himself, was caused by the many blows which he had
warded off from his face and body. He wondered if Brick Simpson was in
similar plight, and the thought of their mutual misery made him feel a
certain kinship for that redoubtable young ruffian.

When he entered the school-yard he quickly became aware that he was
the center of attraction for all eyes. The boys crowded around in an
awe-stricken way, and even his classmates and those with whom he was
well acquainted looked at him with a certain respect he had never
seen before.




CHAPTER VI

EXAMINATION DAY


It was plain that Fred and Charley had spread the news of their descent
into the Pit, and of their battle with the Simpson clan and the Fishes.
He heard the nine-o'clock bell with feelings of relief, and passed into
the school, a mark for admiring glances from all the boys. The girls,
too, looked at him in a timid and fearful way--as they might have looked
at Daniel when he came out of the lions' den, Joe thought, or at David
after his battle with Goliath. It made him uncomfortable and painfully
self-conscious, this hero-worshiping, and he wished heartily that they
would look in some other direction for a change.

Soon they did look in another direction. While big sheets of foolscap
were being distributed to every desk, Miss Wilson, the teacher (an
austere-looking young woman who went through the world as though it
were a refrigerator, and who, even on the warmest days in the classroom,
was to be found with a shawl or cape about her shoulders), arose, and
on the blackboard where all could see wrote the Roman numeral "I." Every
eye, and there were fifty pairs of them, hung with expectancy upon her
hand, and in the pause that followed the room was quiet as the grave.

Underneath the Roman numeral "I" she wrote: "_(a) What were the laws
of Draco? (b) Why did an Athenian orator say that they were written
'not in ink, but in blood'?_"

Forty-nine heads bent down and forty-nine pens scratched lustily across
as many sheets of foolscap. Joe's head alone remained up, and he regarded
the blackboard with so blank a stare that Miss Wilson, glancing over her
shoulder after having written "II," stopped to look at him. Then she
wrote:

"_(a) How did the war between Athens and Megara, respecting the island
of Salamis, bring about the reforms of Solon? (b) In what way did they
differ from the laws of Draco?_"

She turned to look at Joe again. He was staring as blankly as ever.

"What is the matter, Joe?" she asked. "Have you no paper?"

"Yes, I have, thank you," he answered, and began moodily to sharpen
a lead-pencil.

He made a fine point to it. Then he made a very fine point. Then, and
with infinite patience, he proceeded to make it very much finer. Several
of his classmates raised their heads inquiringly at the noise. But he
did not notice. He was too absorbed in his pencil-sharpening and in
thinking thoughts far away from both pencil-sharpening and Greek history.

"Of course you all understand that the examination papers are to be
written with ink."

Miss Wilson addressed the class in general, but her eyes rested on Joe.

Just as it was about as fine as it could possibly be the point broke,
and Joe began over again.

"I am afraid, Joe, that you annoy the class," Miss Wilson said in final
desperation.

He put the pencil down, closed the knife with a snap, and returned to
his blank staring at the blackboard. What did he know about Draco? or
Solon? or the rest of the Greeks? It was a flunk, and that was all there
was to it. No need for him to look at the rest of the questions, and even
if he did know the answers to two or three, there was no use in writing
them down. It would not prevent the flunk. Besides, his arm hurt him too
much to write. It hurt his eyes to look at the blackboard, and his eyes
hurt even when they were closed; and it seemed positively to hurt him
to think.

So the forty-nine pens scratched on in a race after Miss Wilson, who was
covering the blackboard with question after question; and he listened to
the scratching, and watched the questions growing under her chalk, and
was very miserable indeed. His head seemed whirling around. It ached
inside and was sore outside, and he did not seem to have any control
of it at all.

He was beset with memories of the Pit, like scenes from some monstrous
nightmare, and, try as he would, he could not dispel them. He would fix
his mind and eyes on Miss Wilson's face, who was now sitting at her desk,
and even as he looked at her the face of Brick Simpson, impudent and
pugnacious, would arise before him. It was of no use. He felt sick and
sore and tired and worthless. There was nothing to be done but flunk.
And when, after an age of waiting, the papers were collected, his went
in a blank, save for his name, the name of the examination, and the date,
which were written across the top.

After a brief interval, more papers were given out, and the examination
in arithmetic began. He did not trouble himself to look at the questions.
Ordinarily he might have pulled through such an examination, but in his
present state of mind and body he knew it was impossible. He contented
himself with burying his face in his hands and hoping for the noon hour.
Once, lifting his eyes to the clock, he caught Bessie looking anxiously at
him across the room from the girls' side. This but added to his discomfort.
Why was she bothering him? No need for her to trouble. She was bound to
pass. Then why could n't she leave him alone? So he gave her a particularly
glowering look and buried his face in his hands again. Nor did he lift it
till the twelve-o'clock gong rang, when he handed in a second blank paper
and passed out with the boys.

Fred and Charley and he usually ate lunch in a corner of the yard which
they had arrogated to themselves; but this day, by some remarkable
coincidence, a score of other boys had elected to eat their lunches on
the same spot. Joe surveyed them with disgust. In his present condition
he did not feel inclined to receive hero-worship. His head ached too
much, and he was troubled over his failure in the examinations; and
there were more to come in the afternoon.

He was angry with Fred and Charley. They were chattering like magpies
over the adventures of the night (in which, however, they did not fail
to give him chief credit), and they conducted themselves in quite a
patronizing fashion toward their awed and admiring schoolmates. But
every attempt to make Joe talk was a failure. He grunted and gave short
answers, and said "yes" and "no" to questions asked with the intention
of drawing him out.

He was longing to get away somewhere by himself, to throw himself down
some place on the green grass and forget his aches and pains and troubles.
He got up to go and find such a place, and found half a dozen of his
following tagging after him. He wanted to turn around and scream at them
to leave him alone, but his pride restrained him. A great wave of disgust
and despair swept over him, and then an idea flashed through his mind.
Since he was sure to flunk in his examinations, why endure the afternoon's
torture, which could not but be worse than the morning's? And on the
impulse of the moment he made up his mind.

He walked straight on to the schoolyard gate and passed out. Here his
worshipers halted in wonderment, but he kept on to the corner and out of
sight. For some time he wandered along aimlessly, till he came to the
tracks of a cable road. A down-town car happening to stop to let off
passengers, he stepped aboard and ensconced himself in an outside corner
seat. The next thing he was aware of, the car was swinging around on its
turn-table and he was hastily scrambling off. The big ferry building stood
before him. Seeing and hearing nothing, he had been carried through the
heart of the business section of San Francisco.

He glanced up at the tower clock on top of the ferry building. It was
ten minutes after one--time enough to catch the quarter-past-one boat.
That decided him, and without the least idea in the world as to where he
was going, he paid ten cents for a ticket, passed through the gate, and
was soon speeding across the bay to the pretty city of Oakland.

In the same aimless and unwitting fashion, he found himself, an hour
later, sitting on the string-piece of the Oakland city wharf and leaning
his aching head against a friendly timber. From where he sat he could
look down upon the decks of a number of small sailing-craft. Quite a
crowd of curious idlers had collected to look at them, and Joe found
himself growing interested.

There were four boats, and from where he sat he could make out their
names. The one directly beneath him had the name _Ghost_ painted in large
green letters on its stern. The other three, which lay beyond, were called
respectively _La Caprice_, the _Oyster Queen_, and the _Flying Dutchman_.

Each of these boats had cabins built amidships, with short stovepipes
projecting through the roofs, and from the pipe of the _Ghost_ smoke
was ascending. The cabin doors were open and the roof-slide pulled
back, so that Joe could look inside and observe the inmate, a young
fellow of nineteen or twenty who was engaged just then in cooking. He
was clad in long sea-boots which reached the hips, blue overalls, and
dark woolen shirt. The sleeves, rolled back to the elbows, disclosed
sturdy, sun-bronzed arms, and when the young fellow looked up his face
proved to be equally bronzed and tanned.

The aroma of coffee arose to Joe's nose, and from a light iron pot came
the unmistakable smell of beans nearly done. The cook placed a frying-pan
on the stove, wiped it around with a piece of suet when it had heated,
and tossed in a thick chunk of beefsteak. While he worked he talked with
a companion on deck, who was busily engaged in filling a bucket overside
and flinging the salt water over heaps of oysters that lay on the deck.
This completed, he covered the oysters with wet sacks, and went into the
cabin, where a place was set for him on a tiny table, and where the cook
served the dinner and joined him in eating it.

All the romance of Joe's nature stirred at the sight. That was life. They
were living, and gaining their living, out in the free open, under the sun
and sky, with the sea rocking beneath them, and the wind blowing on them,
or the rain falling on them, as the chance might be. Each day and every
day he sat in a room, pent up with fifty more of his kind, racking his
brains and cramming dry husks of knowledge, while they were doing all
this, living glad and careless and happy, rowing boats and sailing, and
cooking their own food, and certainly meeting with adventures such as one
only dreams of in the crowded school-room.

Joe sighed. He felt that he was made for this sort of life and not for
the life of a scholar. As a scholar he was undeniably a failure. He had
flunked in his examinations, while at that very moment, he knew, Bessie
was going triumphantly home, her last examination over and done, and with
credit. Oh, it was not to be borne! His father was wrong in sending him
to school. That might be well enough for boys who were inclined to study,
but it was manifest that he was not so inclined. There were more careers
in life than that of the schools. Men had gone down to the sea in the
lowest capacity, and risen in greatness, and owned great fleets, and done
great deeds, and left their names on the pages of time. And why not he,
Joe Bronson?

He closed his eyes and felt immensely sorry for himself; and when he
opened his eyes again he found that he had been asleep, and that the
sun was sinking fast.

It was after dark when he arrived home, and he went straight to his room
and to bed without meeting any one. He sank down between the cool sheets
with a sigh of satisfaction at the thought that, come what would, he need
no longer worry about his history. Then another and unwelcome thought
obtruded itself, and he knew that the next school term would come, and
that six months thereafter, another examination in the same history
awaited him.




CHAPTER VII

FATHER AND SON


On the following morning, after breakfast, Joe was summoned to the
library by his father, and he went in almost with a feeling of gladness
that the suspense of waiting was over. Mr. Bronson was standing by the
window. A great chattering of sparrows outside seemed to have attracted
his attention. Joe joined him in looking out, and saw a fledgeling sparrow
on the grass, tumbling ridiculously about in its efforts to stand on its
feeble baby legs. It had fallen from the nest in the rose-bush that climbed
over the window, and the two parent sparrows were wild with anxiety over
its plight.

"It 's a way young birds have," Mr. Bronson remarked, turning to Joe
with a serious smile; "and I dare say you are on the verge of a somewhat
similar predicament, my boy," he went on. "I am afraid things have
reached a crisis, Joe. I have watched it coming on for a year now--your
poor scholarship, your carelessness and inattention, your constant
desire to be out of the house and away in search of adventures of one
sort or another."

He paused, as though expecting a reply; but Joe remained silent.

"I have given you plenty of liberty. I believe in liberty. The finest
souls grow in such soil. So I have not hedged you in with endless rules
and irksome restrictions. I have asked little of you, and you have come
and gone pretty much as you pleased. In a way, I have put you on your
honor, made you largely your own master, trusting to your sense of right
to restrain you from going wrong and at least to keep you up in your
studies. And you have failed me. What do you want me to do? Set you
certain bounds and time-limits? Keep a watch over you? Compel you by
main strength to go through your books?

"I have here a note," Mr. Bronson said after another pause, in which he
picked up an envelop from the table and drew forth a written sheet.

Joe recognized the stiff and uncompromising scrawl of Miss Wilson, and
his heart sank.

His father began to read:

  "Listlessness and carelessness have characterized
  his term's work, so that when the examinations
  came he was wholly unprepared. In neither history
  nor arithmetic did he attempt to answer a question,
  passing in his papers perfectly blank. These
  examinations took place in the morning. In the
  afternoon he did not take the trouble even to
  appear for the remainder."

Mr. Bronson ceased reading and looked up.

"Where were you in the afternoon?" he asked.

"I went across on the ferry to Oakland," Joe answered, not caring to offer
his aching head and body in extenuation.

"That is what is called 'playing hooky,' is it not?"

"Yes, sir," Joe answered.

"The night before the examinations, instead of studying, you saw fit to
wander away and involve yourself in a disgraceful fight with hoodlums.
I did not say anything at the time. In my heart I think I might almost
have forgiven you that, if you had done well in your school-work."

Joe had nothing to say. He knew that there was his side to the story, but
he felt that his father did not understand, and that there was little use
of telling him.

"The trouble with you, Joe, is carelessness and lack of concentration.
What you need is what I have not given you, and that is rigid discipline.
I have been debating for some time upon the advisability of sending you
to some military school, where your tasks will be set for you, and what
you do every moment in the twenty-four hours will be determined for you--"

"Oh, father, you don't understand, you can't understand!" Joe broke forth
at last. "I try to study--I honestly try to study; but somehow--I don't
know how--I can't study. Perhaps I am a failure. Perhaps I am not made
for study. I want to go out into the world. I want to see life--to live.
I don't want any military academy; I 'd sooner go to sea--anywhere where
I can do something and be something."

Mr. Bronson looked at him kindly. "It is only through study that you can
hope to do something and be something in the world," he said.

Joe threw up his hand with a gesture of despair.

"I know how you feel about it," Mr. Bronson went on; "but you are only a
boy, very much like that young sparrow we were watching. If at home you
have not sufficient control over yourself to study, then away from home,
out in the world which you think is calling to you, you will likewise
not have sufficient control over yourself to do the work of that world.

"But I am willing, Joe, I am willing, after you have finished high school
and before you go into the university, to let you out into the world for
a time."

"Let me go now?" Joe asked impulsively.

"No; it is too early. You have n't your wings yet. You are too unformed,
and your ideals and standards are not yet thoroughly fixed."

"But I shall not be able to study," Joe threatened. "I know I shall not
be able to study."

Mr. Bronson consulted his watch and arose to go. "I have not made up my
mind yet," he said. "I do not know what I shall do--whether I shall give
you another trial at the public school or send you to a military academy."

He stopped a moment at the door and looked back. "But remember this, Joe,"
he said. "I am not angry with you; I am more grieved and hurt. Think it
over, and tell me this evening what you intend to do."

His father passed out, and Joe heard the front door close after him. He
leaned back in the big easy-chair and closed his eyes. A military school!
He feared such an institution as the animal fears a trap. No, he would
certainly never go to such a place. And as for public school--He sighed
deeply at the thought of it. He was given till evening to make up his
mind as to what he intended to do. Well, he knew what he would do, and
he did not have to wait till evening to find it out.

He got up with a determined look on his face, put on his hat, and went
out the front door. He would show his father that he could do his share
of the world's work, he thought as he walked along--he would show him.

By the time he reached the school he had his whole plan worked out
definitely. Nothing remained but to put it through. It was the noon
hour, and he passed in to his room and packed up his books unnoticed.
Coming out through the yard, he encountered Fred and Charley.

"What 's up?" Charley asked.

"Nothing," Joe grunted.

"What are you doing there?"

"Taking my books home, of course. What did you suppose I was doing?"

"Come, come," Fred interposed. "Don't be so mysterious. I don't see why
you can't tell us what has happened."

"You 'll find out soon enough," Joe said significantly--more significantly
than he had intended.

And, for fear that he might say more, he turned his back on his astonished
chums and hurried away. He went straight home and to his room, where he
busied himself at once with putting everything in order. His clothes
he hung carefully away, changing the suit he had on for an older one.
From his bureau he selected a couple of changes of underclothing, a
couple of cotton shirts, and half a dozen pairs of socks. To these he
added as many handkerchiefs, a comb, and a tooth-brush.

When he had bound the bundle in stout wrapping-paper he contemplated it
with satisfaction. Then he went over to his desk and took from a small
inner compartment his savings for some months, which amounted to several
dollars. This sum he had been keeping for the Fourth of July, but he thrust
it into his pocket with hardly a regret. Then he pulled a writing-pad over
to him, sat down and wrote:

  Don't look for me. I am a failure and I am
  going away to sea. Don't worry about me. I
  am all right and able to take care of myself.
  I shall come back some day, and then you will
  all be proud of me. Good-by, papa, and mama,
  and Bessie.
                                        JOE.

This he left lying on his desk where it could easily be seen. He tucked
the bundle under his arm, and, with a last farewell look at the room,
stole out.




PART II




CHAPTER VIII

'FRISCO KID AND THE NEW BOY


'Frisco Kid was discontented--discontented and disgusted. This would have
seemed impossible to the boys who fished from the dock above and envied
him greatly. True, they wore cleaner and better clothes, and were blessed
with fathers and mothers; but his was the free floating life of the bay,
the domain of moving adventure, and the companionship of men--theirs the
rigid discipline and dreary sameness of home life. They did not dream that
'Frisco Kid ever looked up at them from the cockpit of the _Dazzler_
and in turn envied them just those things which sometimes were the most
distasteful to them and from which they suffered to repletion. Just as the
romance of adventure sang its siren song in their ears and whispered vague
messages of strange lands and lusty deeds, so the delicious mysteries of
home enticed 'Frisco Kid's roving fancies, and his brightest day-dreams
were of the thing's he knew not--brothers, sisters, a father's counsel,
a mother's kiss.

He frowned, got up from where he had been sunning himself on top of
the _Dazzler's_ cabin, and kicked off his heavy rubber boots. Then
he stretched himself on the narrow side-deck and dangled his feet in
the cool salt water.

"Now that 's freedom," thought the boys who watched him. Besides, those
long sea-boots, reaching to the hips and buckled to the leather strap
about the waist, held a strange and wonderful fascination for them. They
did not know that 'Frisco Kid did not possess such things as shoes--that
the boots were an old pair of Pete Le Maire's and were three sizes too
large for him. Nor could they guess how uncomfortable they were to wear
on a hot summer day.

The cause of 'Frisco Kid's discontent was those very boys who sat on
the string-piece and admired him; but his disgust was the result of
quite another event. The _Dazzler_ was short one in its crew, and he
had to do more work than was justly his share. He did not mind the
cooking, nor the washing down of the decks and the pumping; but when
it came to the paint-scrubbing and dishwashing he rebelled. He felt
that he had earned the right to be exempt from such scullion work.
That was all the green boys were fit for, while he could make or take
in sail, lift anchor, steer, and make landings.

"Stan' from un'er!" Pete Le Maire or "French Pete," captain of the
_Dazzler_ and lord and master of 'Frisco Kid, threw a bundle into the
cockpit and came aboard by the starboard rigging.

"Come! Queeck!" he shouted to the boy who owned the bundle and who now
hesitated on the dock. It was a good fifteen feet to the deck of the
sloop, and he could not reach the steel stay by which he must descend.

"Now! One, two, three!" the Frenchman counted good-naturedly, after the
manner of captains when their crews are short-handed.

The boy swung his body into space and gripped the rigging. A moment later
he struck the deck, his hands tingling warmly from the friction.

"Kid, dis is ze new sailor. I make your acquaintance." French Pete
smirked and bowed, and stood aside. "Mistaire Sho Bronson," he added
as an afterthought.

The two boys regarded each other silently for a moment. They were evidently
about the same age, though the stranger looked the heartier and stronger
of the two. 'Frisco Kid put out his hand, and they shook.

"So you 're thinking of tackling the water, eh?" he said.

Joe Bronson nodded and glanced curiously about him before answering:
"Yes; I think the bay life will suit me for a while, and then, when I 've
got used to it, I 'm going to sea in the forecastle."

"In the what?"

"In the forecastle--the place where the sailors live," he explained,
flushing and feeling doubtful of his pronunciation.

"Oh, the fo'c'sle. Know anything about going to sea?"

"Yes--no; that is, except what I 've read."

'Frisco Kid whistled, turned on his heel in a lordly manner, and went
into the cabin.

"Going to sea," he chuckled to himself as he built the fire and set about
cooking supper; "in the 'forecastle,' too; and thinks he 'll like it."

In the meanwhile French Pete was showing the newcomer about the sloop
as though he were a guest. Such affability and charm did he display
that 'Frisco Kid, popping his head up through the scuttle to call them
to supper, nearly choked in his effort to suppress a grin.

Joe Bronson enjoyed that supper. The food was rough but good, and the
smack of the salt air and the sea-fittings around him gave zest to his
appetite. The cabin was clean and snug, and, though not large, the
accommodations surprised him. Every bit of space was utilized. The table
swung to the centerboard-case on hinges, so that when not in use it
actually occupied no room at all. On either side and partly under the
deck were two bunks. The blankets were rolled back, and the boys sat on
the well-scrubbed bunk boards while they ate. A swinging sea-lamp of
brightly polished brass gave them light, which in the daytime could be
obtained through the four deadeyes, or small round panes of heavy glass
which were fitted into the walls of the cabin. On one side of the door
was the stove and wood-box, on the other the cupboard. The front end
of the cabin was ornamented with a couple of rifles and a shot-gun,
while exposed by the rolled-back blankets of French Pete's bunk was a
cartridge-lined belt carrying a brace of revolvers.

It all seemed like a dream to Joe. Countless times he had imagined scenes
somewhat similar to this; but here he was right in the midst of it, and
already it seemed as though he had known his two companions for years.
French Pete was smiling genially at him across the board. It really was a
villainous countenance, but to Joe it seemed only weather-beaten. 'Frisco
Kid was describing to him, between mouthfuls, the last sou'easter the
_Dazzler_ had weathered, and Joe experienced an increasing awe for this
boy who had lived so long upon the water and knew so much about it.

The captain, however, drank a glass of wine, and topped it off with a
second and a third, and then, a vicious flush lighting his swarthy face,
stretched out on top of his blankets, where he soon was snoring loudly.

"Better turn in and get a couple of hours' sleep," 'Frisco Kid said
kindly, pointing Joe's bunk out to him. "We 'll most likely be up the
rest of the night."

Joe obeyed, but he could not fall asleep so readily as the others. He
lay with his eyes wide open, watching the hands of the alarm-clock that
hung in the cabin, and thinking how quickly event had followed event in
the last twelve hours. Only that very morning he had been a school-boy,
and now he was a sailor, shipped on the _Dazzler_ and bound he knew not
whither. His fifteen years increased to twenty at the thought of it, and
he felt every inch a man--a sailorman at that. He wished Charley and
Fred could see him now. Well, they would hear of it soon enough. He could
see them talking it over, and the other boys crowding around. "Who?" "Oh,
Joe Bronson; he 's gone to sea. Used to chum with us."

Joe pictured the scene proudly. Then he softened at the thought of his
mother worrying, but hardened again at the recollection of his father.
Not that his father was not good and kind; but he did not understand boys,
Joe thought. That was where the trouble lay. Only that morning he had
said that the world was n't a play-ground, and that the boys who thought
it was were liable to make sore mistakes and be glad to get home again.
Well, _he_ knew that there was plenty of hard work and rough experience
in the world; but _he_ also thought boys had some rights. He 'd show him
he could take care of himself; and, anyway, he could write home after he
got settled down to his new life.




CHAPTER IX

ABOARD THE DAZZLER


A skiff grazed the side of the _Dazzler_ softly and interrupted Joe's
reveries. He wondered why he had not heard the sound of the oars in
the rowlocks. Then two men jumped over the cockpit-rail and came into
the cabin.

"Bli' me, if 'ere they ain't snoozin'," said the first of the newcomers,
deftly rolling 'Frisco Kid out of his blankets with one hand and reaching
for the wine-bottle with the other.

French Pete put his head up on the other side of the centerboard, his eyes
heavy with sleep, and made them welcome.

"'Oo 's this?" asked the Cockney, as he was called, smacking his lips over
the wine and rolling Joe out upon the floor. "Passenger?"

"No, no," French Pete made haste to answer. "Ze new sailorman. Vaire
good boy."

"Good boy or not, he 's got to keep his tongue atween his teeth," growled
the second newcomer, who had not yet spoken, glaring fiercely at Joe.

"I say," queried the other man, "'ow does 'e whack up on the loot? I 'ope
as me and Bill 'ave a square deal."

"Ze _Dazzler_ she take one share--what you call--one third; den we split
ze rest in five shares. Five men, five shares. Vaire good."

French Pete insisted in excited gibberish that the _Dazzler_ had the
right to have three men in its crew, and appealed to 'Frisco Kid to
bear him out. But the latter left them to fight it over by themselves,
and proceeded to make hot coffee.

It was all Greek to Joe, except he knew that he was in some way the cause
of the quarrel. In the end French Pete had his way, and the newcomers gave
in after much grumbling. After they had drunk their coffee, all hands went
on deck.

"Just stay in the cockpit and keep out of their way," 'Frisco Kid whispered
to Joe. "I 'll teach you about the ropes and everything when we ain't in a
hurry."

Joe's heart went out to him in sudden gratitude, for the strange feeling
came to him that of those on board, to 'Frisco Kid, and to 'Frisco Kid
only, could he look for help in time of need. Already a dislike for
French Pete was growing up within him. Why, he could not say; he just
simply felt it.

A creaking of blocks for'ard, and the huge mainsail loomed above him
in the night. Bill cast off the bowline, the Cockney followed suit with
the stern, 'Frisco Kid gave her the jib as French Pete jammed up the
tiller, and the _Dazzler_ caught the breeze, heeling over for mid-channel.
Joe heard talk of not putting up the side-lights, and of keeping a sharp
lookout, though all he could comprehend was that some law of navigation
was being violated.

The water-front lights of Oakland began to slip past. Soon the stretches
of docks and the shadowy ships began to be broken by dim sweeps of
marshland, and Joe knew that they were heading out for San Francisco Bay.
The wind was blowing from the north in mild squalls, and the _Dazzler_ cut
noiselessly through the landlocked water.

"Where are we going?" Joe asked the Cockney, in an endeavor to be friendly
and at the same time satisfy his curiosity.

"Oh, my pardner 'ere, Bill, we 're goin' to take a cargo from 'is factory,"
that worthy airily replied.

Joe thought he was rather a funny-looking individual to own a factory;
but, conscious that even stranger things might be found in this new
world he was entering, he said nothing. He had already exposed himself
to 'Frisco Kid in the matter of his pronunciation of "fo'c'sle," and
he had no desire further to advertise his ignorance.

A little after that he was sent in to blow out the cabin lamp. The
_Dazzler_ tacked about and began to work in toward the north shore.
Everybody kept silent, save for occasional whispered questions and
answers which passed between Bill and the captain. Finally the sloop
was run into the wind, and the jib and mainsail lowered cautiously.

"Short hawse," French Pete whispered to 'Frisco Kid, who went for'ard
and dropped the anchor, paying out the slightest quantity of slack.

The _Dazzler's_ skiff was brought alongside, as was also the small boat
in which the two strangers had come aboard.

"See that that cub don't make a fuss," Bill commanded in an undertone,
as he joined his partner in his own boat.

"Can you row?" 'Frisco Kid asked as they got into the other boat.

Joe nodded his head.

"Then take these oars, and don't make a racket."

'Frisco Kid took the second pair, while French Pete steered. Joe noticed
that the oars were muffled with sennit, and that even the rowlock sockets
were protected with leather. It was impossible to make a noise except by
a mis-stroke, and Joe had learned to row on Lake Merrit well enough to
avoid that. They followed in the wake of the first boat, and, glancing
aside, he saw they were running along the length of a pier which jutted
out from the land. A couple of ships, with riding-lanterns burning
brightly, were moored to it, but they kept just beyond the edge of the
light. He stopped rowing at the whispered command of 'Frisco Kid. Then
the boats grounded like ghosts on a tiny beach, and they clambered out.

Joe followed the men, who picked their way carefully up a twenty-foot
bank. At the top he found himself on a narrow railway track which ran
between huge piles of rusty scrap-iron. These piles, separated by tracks,
extended in every direction he could not tell how far, though in the
distance he could see the vague outlines of some great factory-like
building. The men began to carry loads of the iron down to the beach,
and French Pete, gripping him by the arm and again warning him not to
make any noise, told him to do likewise. At the beach they turned their
burdens over to 'Frisco Kid, who loaded them, first in the one skiff and
then in the other. As the boats settled under the weight, he kept pushing
them farther and farther out, in order that they should keep clear of
the bottom.

Joe worked away steadily, though he could not help marveling at the
queerness of the whole business. Why should there be such a mystery
about it? and why such care taken to maintain silence? He had just
begun to ask himself these questions, and a horrible suspicion was
forming itself in his mind, when he heard the hoot of an owl from the
direction of the beach. Wondering at an owl being in so unlikely a
place, he stooped to gather a fresh load of iron. But suddenly a man
sprang out of the gloom, flashing a dark lantern full upon him. Blinded
by the light, he staggered back. Then a revolver in the man's hand went
off like the roar of a cannon. All Joe realized was that he was being
shot at, while his legs manifested an overwhelming desire to get away.
Even if he had so wished, he could not very well have stayed to explain
to the excited man with the smoking revolver. So he took to his heels
for the beach, colliding with another man with a dark lantern who came
running around the end of one of the piles of iron. This second man
quickly regained his feet, and peppered away at Joe as he flew down
the bank.

He dashed out into the water for the boat. French Pete at the bow-oars and
'Frisco Kid at the stroke had the skiff's nose pointed seaward and were
calmly awaiting his arrival. They had their oars ready for the start, but
they held them quietly at rest, for all that both men on the bank had begun
to fire at them. The other skiff lay closer inshore, partially aground.
Bill was trying to shove it off, and was calling on the Cockney to lend a
hand; but that gentleman had lost his head completely, and came floundering
through the water hard after Joe. No sooner had Joe climbed in over the
stern than he followed him. This extra weight on the stern of the heavily
loaded craft nearly swamped them. As it was, a dangerous quantity of water
was shipped. In the meantime the men on the bank had reloaded their pistols
and opened fire again, this time with better aim. The alarm had spread.
Voices and cries could be heard from the ships on the pier, along which
men were running. In the distance a police whistle was being frantically
blown.

"Get out!" 'Frisco Kid shouted. "You ain't a-going to sink us if I know
it. Go and help your pardner."

But the Cockney's teeth were chattering with fright, and he was too
unnerved to move or speak.

"T'row ze crazy man out!" French Pete ordered from the bow. At this moment
a bullet shattered an oar in his hand, and he coolly proceeded to ship a
spare one.

"Give us a hand, Joe," 'Frisco Kid commanded.

Joe understood, and together they seized the terror-stricken creature
and flung him overboard. Two or three bullets splashed about him as he
came to the surface, just in time to be picked up by Bill, who had at
last succeeded in getting clear.

"Now!" French Pete called, and a few strokes into the darkness quickly
took them out of the zone of fire.

So much water had been shipped that the light skiff was in danger of
sinking at any moment. While the other two rowed, and by the Frenchman's
orders, Joe began to throw out the iron. This saved them for the time
being. But just as they swept alongside the _Dazzler_ the skiff lurched,
shoved a side under, and turned turtle, sending the remainder of the iron
to bottom. Joe and 'Frisco Kid came up side by side, and together they
clambered aboard with the skiff's painter in tow. French Pete had already
arrived, and now helped them out.

By the time they had canted the water out of the swamped boat, Bill and
his partner appeared on the scene. All hands worked rapidly, and, almost
before Joe could realize, the mainsail and jib had been hoisted, the
anchor broken out, and the _Dazzler_ was leaping down the channel. Off
a bleak piece of marshland Bill and the Cockney said good-by and cast
loose in their skiff. French Pete, in the cabin, bewailed their bad luck
in various languages, and sought consolation in the wine-bottle.




CHAPTER X

WITH THE BAY PIRATES


The wind freshened as they got clear of the land, and soon the _Dazzler_
was heeling it with her lee deck buried and the water churning by,
half-way up the cockpit-rail. Side-lights had been hung out. 'Frisco
Kid was steering, and by his side sat Joe, pondering over the events
of the night.

He could no longer blind himself to the facts. His mind was in a whirl
of apprehension. If he had done wrong, he reasoned, he had done it
through ignorance; and he did not feel shame for the past so much as
he did fear for the future. His companions were thieves and robbers--the
bay pirates, of whose wild deeds he had heard vague tales. And here he
was, right in the midst of them, already possessing information which
could send them to State's prison. This very fact, he knew, would force
them to keep a sharp watch upon him and so lessen his chances of escape.
But escape he would, at the very first opportunity.

At this point his thoughts were interrupted by a sharp squall, which
hurled the _Dazzler_ over till the sea rushed inboard. 'Frisco Kid
luffed quickly, at the same time slacking off the main-sheet. Then,
single-handed,--for French Pete remained below,--and with Joe looking
idly on, he proceeded to reef down.

The squall which had so nearly capsized the _Dazzler_ was of short
duration, but it marked the rising of the wind, and soon puff after
puff was shrieking down upon them out of the north. The mainsail was
spilling the wind, and slapping and thrashing about till it seemed it
would tear itself to pieces. The sloop was rolling wildly in the quick
sea which had come up. Everything was in confusion; but even Joe's
untrained eye showed him that it was an orderly confusion. He could
see that 'Frisco Kid knew just what to do and just how to do it. As
he watched him he learned a lesson, the lack of which has made failures
of the lives of many men--_the value of knowledge of one's own capacities_.
'Frisco Kid knew what he was able to do, and because of this he had
confidence in himself. He was cool and self-possessed, working hurriedly
but not carelessly. There was no bungling. Every reef-point was drawn
down to stay. Other accidents might occur, but the next squall, or the
next forty squalls, would not carry one of those reef-knots away.

He called Joe for'ard to help stretch the mainsail by means of swinging
on the peak and throat-halyards. To lay out on the long bowsprit and put
a single reef in the jib was a slight task compared with what had been
already accomplished; so a few moments later they were again in the
cockpit. Under the other lad's directions, Joe flattened down the
jib-sheet, and, going into the cabin, let down a foot or so of centerboard.
The excitement of the struggle had chased all unpleasant thoughts from
his mind. Patterning after the other boy, he had retained his coolness.
He had executed his orders without fumbling, and at the same time without
undue slowness. Together they had exerted their puny strength in the face
of violent nature, and together they had outwitted her.

He came back to where his companion stood at the tiller steering, and he
felt proud of him and of himself; and when he read the unspoken praise
in 'Frisco Kid's eyes he blushed like a girl at her first compliment. But
the next instant the thought flashed across him that this boy was a thief,
a common thief; and he instinctively recoiled. His whole life had been
sheltered from the harsher things of the world. His reading, which had
been of the best, had laid a premium upon honesty and uprightness, and he
had learned to look with abhorrence upon the criminal classes. So he drew
a little away from 'Frisco Kid and remained silent. But 'Frisco Kid,
devoting all his energies to the handling of the sloop, had no time in
which to remark this sudden change of feeling on the part of his companion.

But there was one thing Joe found in himself that surprised him. While the
thought of 'Frisco Kid being a thief was repulsive to him, 'Frisco Kid
himself was not. Instead of feeling an honest desire to shun him, he felt
drawn toward him. He could not help liking him, though he knew not why.
Had he been a little older he would have understood that it was the lad's
good qualities which appealed to him--his coolness and self-reliance, his
manliness and bravery, and a certain kindliness and sympathy in his nature.
As it was, he thought it his own natural badness which prevented him from
disliking 'Frisco Kid; but, while he felt shame at his own weakness, he
could not smother the warm regard which he felt growing up for this
particular bay pirate.

"Take in two or three feet on the skiff's painter," commanded 'Frisco Kid,
who had an eye for everything.

The skiff was towing with too long a painter, and was behaving very badly.
Every once in a while it would hold back till the tow-rope tautened, then
come leaping ahead and sheering and dropping slack till it threatened to
shove its nose under the huge whitecaps which roared so hungrily on every
hand. Joe climbed over the cockpit-rail to the slippery after-deck, and
made his way to the bitt to which the skiff was fastened.

"Be careful," 'Frisco Kid warned, as a heavy puff struck the _Dazzler_
and careened her dangerously over on her side. "Keep one turn round the
bitt, and heave in on it when the painter slacks."

It was ticklish work for a greenhorn. Joe threw off all the turns save
the last, which he held with one hand, while with the other he attempted
to bring in on the painter. But at that instant it tightened with a
tremendous jerk, the boat sheering sharply into the crest of a heavy
sea. The rope slipped from his hands and began to fly out over the stern.
He clutched it frantically, and was dragged after it over the sloping deck.

"Let her go! Let her go!" 'Frisco Kid shouted.

Joe let go just as he was on the verge of going overboard, and the skiff
dropped rapidly astern. He glanced in a shamefaced way at his companion,
expecting to be sharply reprimanded for his awkwardness. But 'Frisco Kid
smiled good-naturedly.

"That 's all right," he said. "No bones broke and nobody overboard.
Better to lose a boat than a man any day; that 's what I say. Besides,
I should n't have sent you out there. And there 's no harm done. We can
pick it up all right. Go in and drop some more centerboard,--a couple of
feet,--and then come out and do what I tell you. But don't be in a hurry.
Take it easy and sure."

Joe dropped the centerboard and returned, to be stationed at the jib-sheet.

"Hard a-lee!" 'Frisco Kid cried, throwing the tiller down, and following
it with his body. "Cast off! That 's right. Now lend a hand on the
main-sheet!"

Together, hand over hand, they came in on the reefed mainsail. Joe began
to warm up with the work. The _Dazzler_ turned on her heel like a
race-horse, and swept into the wind, her canvas snarling and her sheets
slatting like hail.

"Draw down the jib-sheet!"

Joe obeyed, and, the head-sail filling, forced her off on the other tack.
This manoeuver had turned French Pete's bunk from the lee to the weather
side, and rolled him out on the cabin floor, where he lay in a drunken
stupor.

'Frisco Kid, with his back against the tiller and holding the sloop off
that it might cover their previous course, looked at him with an expression
of disgust, and muttered: "The dog! We could well go to the bottom, for
all he 'd care or do!"

Twice they tacked, trying to go over the same ground; and then Joe
discovered the skiff bobbing to windward in the star-lit darkness.

"Plenty of time," 'Frisco Kid cautioned, shooting the _Dazzler_ into the
wind toward it and gradually losing headway. "Now!"

Joe leaned over the side, grasped the trailing painter, and made it fast
to the bitt. Then they tacked ship again and started on their way. Joe
still felt ashamed for the trouble he had caused; but 'Frisco Kid quickly
put him at ease.

"Oh, that 's nothing," he said. "Everybody does that when they 're
beginning. Now some men forget all about the trouble they had in
learning, and get mad when a greeny makes a mistake. I never do. Why,
I remember--"

And then he told Joe of many of the mishaps which fell to him when, as
a little lad, he first went on the water, and of some of the severe
punishments for the same which were measured out to him. He had passed
the running end of a lanyard over the tiller-neck, and as they talked
they sat side by side and close against each other in the shelter of
the cockpit.

"What place is that?" Joe asked, as they flew by a lighthouse blinking
from a rocky headland.

"Goat Island. They 've got a naval training station for boys over on
the other side, and a torpedo-magazine. There 's jolly good fishing,
too--rock-cod. We 'll pass to the lee of it, and make across, and
anchor in the shelter of Angel Island. There 's a quarantine station
there. Then when French Pete gets sober we 'll know where he wants to
go. You can turn in now and get some sleep. I can manage all right."

Joe shook his head. There had been too much excitement for him to feel
in the least like sleeping. He could not bear to think of it with the
_Dazzler_ leaping and surging along and shattering the seas into clouds
of spray on her weather bow. His clothes had half dried already, and he
preferred to stay on deck and enjoy it.

The lights of Oakland had dwindled till they made only a hazy flare
against the sky; but to the south the San Francisco lights, topping
hills and sinking into valleys, stretched miles upon miles. Starting
from the great ferry building, and passing on to Telegraph Hill, Joe
was soon able to locate the principal places of the city. Somewhere
over in that maze of light and shadow was the home of his father, and
perhaps even now they were thinking and worrying about him; and over
there Bessie was sleeping cozily, to wake up in the morning and wonder
why her brother Joe did not come down to breakfast. Joe shivered. It
was almost morning. Then slowly his head dropped over on 'Frisco Kid's
shoulder and he was fast asleep.




CHAPTER XI

CAPTAIN AND CREW


"Come! Wake up! We 're going into anchor."

Joe roused with a start, bewildered at the unusual scene; for sleep had
banished his troubles for the time being, and he knew not where he was.
Then he remembered. The wind had dropped with the night. Beyond, the
heavy after-sea was still rolling; but the _Dazzler_ was creeping up in
the shelter of a rocky island. The sky was clear, and the air had the
snap and vigor of early morning about it. The rippling water was laughing
in the rays of the sun just shouldering above the eastern sky-line. To
the south lay Alcatraz Island, and from its gun-crowned heights a flourish
of trumpets saluted the day. In the west the Golden Gate yawned between
the Pacific Ocean and San Francisco Bay. A full-rigged ship, with her
lightest canvas, even to the sky-sails, set, was coming slowly in on the
flood-tide.

It was a pretty sight. Joe rubbed the sleep from his eyes and drank in
the glory of it till 'Frisco Kid told him to go for'ard and make ready
for dropping the anchor.

"Overhaul about fifty fathoms of chain," he ordered, "and then stand by."
He eased the sloop gently into the wind, at the same time casting off
the jib-sheet. "Let go the jib-halyards and come in on the downhaul!"

Joe had seen the manoeuver performed the previous night, and so was able
to carry it out with fair success.

"Now! Over with the mud-hook! Watch out for turns! Lively, now!"

The chain flew out with startling rapidity and brought the _Dazzler_
to rest. 'Frisco Kid went for'ard to help, and together they lowered
the mainsail, furled it in shipshape manner and made all fast with the
gaskets, and put the crutches under the main-boom.

"Here 's a bucket," said 'Frisco Kid, as he passed him the article in
question. "Wash down the decks, and don't be afraid of the water, nor
of the dirt either. Here 's a broom. Give it what for, and have everything
shining. When you get that done bail out the skiff. She opened her seams
a little last night. I 'm going below to cook breakfast."

The water was soon slushing merrily over the deck, while the smoke pouring
from the cabin stove carried a promise of good things to come. Time and
again Joe lifted his head from his task to take in the scene. It was one
to appeal to any healthy boy, and he was no exception. The romance of it
stirred him strangely, and his happiness would have been complete could
he have escaped remembering who and what his companions were. The thought
of this, and of French Pete in his bleary sleep below, marred the beauty
of the day. He had been unused to such things and was shocked at the harsh
reality of life. But instead of hurting him, as it might a lad of weaker
nature, it had the opposite effect. It strengthened his desire to be clean
and strong, and to not be ashamed of himself in his own eyes. He glanced
about him and sighed. Why could not men be honest and true? It seemed too
bad that he must go away and leave all this; but the events of the night
were strong upon him, and he knew that in order to be true to himself
he must escape.

At this juncture he was called to breakfast. He discovered that 'Frisco
Kid was as good a cook as he was a sailor, and made haste to do justice
to the fare. There were mush and condensed milk, beefsteak and fried
potatoes, and all topped off with good French bread, butter, and coffee.
French Pete did not join them, though 'Frisco Kid attempted a couple of
times to rouse him. He mumbled and grunted, half opened his bleared eyes,
then fell to snoring again.

"Can't tell when he 's going to get those spells," 'Frisco Kid explained,
when Joe, having finished washing dishes, came on deck. "Sometimes he
won't get that way for a month, and others he won't be decent for a
week at a stretch. Sometimes he 's good-natured, and sometimes he 's
dangerous; so the best thing to do is to let him alone and keep out of
his way; and don't cross him, for if you do there 's liable to be trouble.

"Come on; let 's take a swim," he added, abruptly changing the subject
to one more agreeable. "Can you swim?"

Joe nodded.

"What 's that place?" he asked, as he poised before diving, pointing toward
a sheltered beach on the island where there were several buildings and a
large number of tents.

"Quarantine station. Lots of smallpox coming in now on the China steamers,
and they make them go there till the doctors say they 're safe to land. I
tell you, they 're strict about it, too. Why--"

Splash! Had 'Frisco Kid finished his sentence just then, instead of diving
overboard, much trouble might have been saved to Joe. But he did not finish
it, and Joe dived after him.

"I 'll tell you what," 'Frisco Kid suggested half an hour later, while they
clung to the bobstay preparatory to climbing out. "Let 's catch a mess of
fish for dinner, and then turn in and make up for the sleep we lost last
night. What d' you say?"

They made a race to clamber aboard, but Joe was shoved over the side again.
When he finally did arrive, the other lad had brought to light a pair of
heavily leaded, large-hooked lines and a mackerel-keg of salt sardines.

"Bait," he said. "Just shove a whole one on. They 're not a bit partic'lar.
Swallow the bait, hook and all, and go--that 's their caper. The fellow
that does n't catch the first fish has to clean 'em."

Both sinkers started on their long descent together, and seventy feet of
line whizzed out before they came to rest. But at the instant his sinker
touched the bottom Joe felt the struggling jerks of a hooked fish. As
he began to haul in he glanced at 'Frisco Kid and saw that he too had
evidently captured a finny prize. The race between them was exciting.
Hand over hand the wet lines flashed inboard. But 'Frisco Kid was more
expert, and his fish tumbled into the cockpit first. Joe's followed an
instant later--a three-pound rock-cod. He was wild with joy. It was
magnificent--the largest fish he had ever landed or ever seen landed.
Over went the lines again, and up they came with two mates of the ones
already captured. It was sport royal. Joe would certainly have continued
till he had fished the bay empty, had not 'Frisco Kid persuaded him
to stop.

"We 've got enough for three meals now," he said, "so there 's no use in
having them spoil. Besides, the more you catch the more you clean, and
you 'd better start in right away. I 'm going to bed."




CHAPTER XII

JOE TRIES TO TAKE FRENCH LEAVE


Joe did not mind. In fact, he was glad he had not caught the first fish,
for it helped out a little plan which had come to him while swimming. He
threw the last cleaned fish into a bucket of water and glanced about him.
The quarantine station was a bare half-mile away, and he could make out
a soldier pacing up and down at sentry duty on the beach. Going into the
cabin, he listened to the heavy breathing of the sleepers. He had to pass
so close to 'Frisco Kid to get his bundle of clothes that he decided not
to take it. Returning outside, he carefully pulled the skiff alongside,
got aboard with a pair of oars, and cast off.

At first he rowed very gently in the direction of the station, fearing
the chance of noise if he made undue haste. But gradually he increased
the strength of his strokes till he had settled down to the regular
stride. When he had covered half the distance he glanced about. Escape
was sure now, for he knew, even if he were discovered, that it would be
impossible for the _Dazzler_ to get under way and head him off before he
made the land and the protection of that man who wore the uniform of
Uncle Sam's soldiers.

The report of a gun came to him from the shore, but his back was in that
direction and he did not bother to turn around. A second report followed,
and a bullet cut the water within a couple of feet of his oar-blade. This
time he did turn around. The soldier on the beach was leveling his rifle
at him for a third shot.

Joe was in a predicament, and a very tantalizing one at that. A few
minutes of hard rowing would bring him to the beach and to safety; but
on that beach, for some unaccountable reason, stood a United States
soldier who persisted in firing at him. When Joe saw the gun aimed at
him for the third time, he backed water hastily. As a result, the skiff
came to a standstill, and the soldier, lowering his rifle, regarded
him intently.

"I want to come ashore! Important!" Joe shouted out to him.

The man in uniform shook his head.

"But it 's important, I tell you! Won't you let me come ashore?"

He took a hurried look in the direction of the _Dazzler_. The shots had
evidently awakened French Pete, for the mainsail had been hoisted, and
as he looked he saw the anchor broken out and the jib flung to the breeze.

"Can't land here!" the soldier shouted back. "Smallpox!"

"But I must!" he cried, choking down a half-sob and preparing to row.

"Then I 'll shoot you," was the cheering response, and the rifle came to
shoulder again.

Joe thought rapidly. The island was large. Perhaps there were no soldiers
farther on, and if he only once got ashore he did not care how quickly
they captured him. He might catch the smallpox, but even that was better
than going back to the bay pirates. He whirled the skiff half about to
the right, and threw all his strength against the oars. The cove was quite
wide, and the nearest point which he must go around a good distance away.
Had he been more of a sailor, he would have gone in the other direction
for the opposite point, and thus had the wind on his pursuers. As it was,
the _Dazzler_ had a beam wind in which to overtake him.

It was nip and tuck for a while. The breeze was light and not very steady,
so sometimes he gained and sometimes they. Once it freshened till the sloop
was within a hundred yards of him, and then it dropped suddenly flat, the
_Dazzler's_ big mainsail flapping idly from side to side.

"Ah! you steal ze skiff, eh?" French Pete howled at him, running into the
cabin for his rifle. "I fix you! You come back queeck, or I kill you!" But
he knew the soldier was watching them from the shore, and did not dare to
fire, even over the lad's head.

Joe did not think of this, for he, who had never been shot at in all his
previous life, had been under fire twice in the last twenty-four hours.
Once more or less could n't amount to much. So he pulled steadily away,
while French Pete raved like a wild man, threatening him with all manner
of punishments once he laid hands upon him again. To complicate matters,
'Frisco Kid waxed mutinous.

"Just you shoot him, and I 'll see you hung for it--see if I don't," he
threatened. "You 'd better let him go. He 's a good boy and all right,
and not raised for the dirty life you and I are leading."

"You too, eh!" the Frenchman shrieked, beside himself with rage. "Den I
fix you, you rat!"

He made a rush for the boy, but 'Frisco Kid led him a lively chase from
cockpit to bowsprit and back again. A sharp capful of wind arriving just
then, French Pete abandoned the one chase for the other. Springing to the
tiller and slacking away on the main-sheet,--for the wind favored,--he
headed the sloop down upon Joe. The latter made one tremendous spurt,
then gave up in despair and hauled in his oars. French Pete let go the
main-sheet, lost steerageway as he rounded up alongside the motionless
skiff, and dragged Joe out.

"Keep mum," 'Frisco Kid whispered to him while the irate Frenchman was
busy fastening the painter. "Don't talk back. Let him say all he wants
to, and keep quiet. It 'll be better for you."

But Joe's Anglo-Saxon blood was up, and he did not heed.

"Look here, Mr. French Pete, or whatever your name is," he commenced; "I
give you to understand that I want to quit, and that I 'm going to quit.
So you 'd better put me ashore at once. If you don't I 'll put you in
prison, or my name 's not Joe Bronson."

'Frisco Kid waited the outcome fearfully. French Pete was aghast. He was
being defied aboard his own vessel--and by a boy! Never had such a thing
been heard of. He knew he was committing an unlawful act in detaining him,
but at the same time he was afraid to let him go with the information he
had gathered concerning the sloop and its occupation. The boy had spoken
the unpleasant truth when he said he could send him to prison. The only
thing for him to do was to bully him.

"You will, eh?" His shrill voice rose wrathfully. "Den you come too. You
row ze boat last-a night--answer me dat! You steal ze iron--answer me
dat! You run away--answer me dat! And den you say you put me in jail? Bah!"

"But I did n't know," Joe protested.

"Ha, ha! Dat is funny. You tell dat to ze judge; mebbe him laugh, eh?"

"I say I did n't," he reiterated manfully. "I did n't know I 'd shipped
along with a lot of thieves."

'Frisco Kid winced at this epithet, and had Joe been looking at him he
would have seen a red flush mount to his face.

"And now that I do know," he continued, "I wish to be put ashore. I don't
know anything about the law, but I do know something of right and wrong;
and I 'm willing to take my chance with any judge for whatever wrong I
have done--with all the judges in the United States, for that matter.
And that 's more than you can say, Mr. Pete."

"You say dat, eh? Vaire good. But you are one big t'ief--"

"I 'm not--don't you dare call me that again!" Joe's face was pale, and he
was trembling--but not with fear.

"T'ief!" the Frenchman taunted back.

"You lie!"

Joe had not been a boy among boys for nothing. He knew the penalty which
attached itself to the words he had just spoken, and he expected to receive
it. So he was not overmuch surprised when he picked himself up from the
floor of the cockpit an instant later, his head still ringing from a stiff
blow between the eyes.

"Say dat one time more," French Pete bullied, his fist raised and prepared
to strike.

Tears of anger stood in Joe's eyes, but he was calm and in deadly earnest.
"When you say I am a thief, Pete, you lie. You can kill me, but still I
will say you lie."

"No, you don't!" 'Frisco Kid had darted in like a cat, preventing a second
blow, and shoving the Frenchman back across the cockpit.

"You leave the boy alone!" he continued, suddenly unshipping and arming
himself with the heavy iron tiller, and standing between them. "This thing
's gone just about as far as it 's going to go. You big fool, can't you
see the stuff the boy 's made of? He speaks true. He 's right, and he
knows it, and you could kill him and he would n't give in. There 's my
hand on it, Joe." He turned and extended his hand to Joe, who returned
the grip. "You 've got spunk and you 're not afraid to show it."

French Pete's mouth twisted itself in a sickly smile, but the evil gleam
in his eyes gave it the lie. He shrugged his shoulders and said, "Ah! So?
He does not dee-sire dat I call him pet names. Ha, ha! It is only ze
sailorman play. Let us--what you call--forgive and forget, eh? Vaire good;
forgive and forget."

He reached out his hand, but Joe refused to take it. 'Frisco Kid nodded
approval, while French Pete, still shrugging his shoulders and smiling,
passed into the cabin.

"Slack off ze main-sheet," he called out, "and run down for Hunter's Point.
For one time I will cook ze dinner, and den you will say dat it is ze
vaire good dinner. Ah! French Pete is ze great cook!"

"That 's the way he always does--gets real good and cooks when he wants
to make up," 'Frisco Kid hazarded, slipping the tiller into the rudder-head
and obeying the order. "But even then you can't trust him."

Joe nodded his head, but did not speak. He was in no mood for conversation.
He was still trembling from the excitement of the last few moments, while
deep down he questioned himself on how he had behaved, and found nothing
to be ashamed of.




CHAPTER XIII

BEFRIENDING EACH OTHER


The afternoon sea-breeze had sprung up and was now rioting in from the
Pacific. Angel Island was fast dropping astern, and the water-front of
San Francisco showing up, as the _Dazzler_ plowed along before it. Soon
they were in the midst of the shipping, passing in and out among the
vessels which had come from the ends of the earth. Later they crossed
the fairway, where the ferry steamers, crowded with passengers, passed to
and fro between San Francisco and Oakland. One came so close that the
passengers crowded to the side to see the gallant little sloop and the two
boys in the cockpit. Joe gazed enviously at the row of down-turned faces.
They were all going to their homes, while he--he was going he knew not
whither, at the will of French Pete. He was half tempted to cry out for
help; but the foolishness of such an act struck him, and he held his
tongue. Turning his head, his eyes wandered along the smoky heights of
the city, and he fell to musing on the strange way of men and ships on
the sea.

'Frisco Kid watched him from the corner of his eye, following his thoughts
as accurately as though he spoke them aloud.

"Got a home over there somewheres?" he queried suddenly, waving his hand
in the direction of the city.

Joe started, so correctly had his thought been guessed. "Yes," he said
simply.

"Tell us about it."

Joe rapidly described his home, though forced to go into greater detail
because of the curious questions of his companion. 'Frisco Kid was
interested in everything, especially in Mrs. Bronson and Bessie. Of the
latter he could not seem to tire, and poured forth question after question
concerning her. So peculiar and artless were some of them that Joe could
hardly forbear to smile.

"Now tell me about yours," he said when he at last had finished.

'Frisco Kid seemed suddenly to harden, and his face took on a stern look
which the other had never seen there before. He swung his foot idly to
and fro, and lifted a dull eye aloft to the main-peak blocks, with which,
by the way, there was nothing the matter.

"Go ahead," the other encouraged.

"I have n't no home."

The four words left his mouth as though they had been forcibly ejected,
and his lips came together after them almost with a snap.

Joe saw he had touched a tender spot, and strove to ease the way out of
it again. "Then the home you did have." He did not dream that there were
lads in the world who never had known homes, or that he had only succeeded
in probing deeper.

"Never had none."

"Oh!" His interest was aroused, and he now threw solicitude to the winds.
"Any sisters?"

"Nope."

"Mother?"

"I was so young when she died that I don't remember her."

"Father?"

"I never saw much of him. He went to sea--anyhow, he disappeared."

"Oh!" Joe did not know what to say, and an oppressive silence, broken only
by the churn of the _Dazzler's_ forefoot, fell upon them.

Just then Pete came out to relieve at the tiller while they went in to eat.
Both lads hailed his advent with feelings of relief, and the awkwardness
vanished over the dinner, which was all their skipper had claimed it to be.
Afterward 'Frisco Kid relieved Pete, and while he was eating Joe washed up
the dishes and put the cabin shipshape. Then they all gathered in the
stern, where the captain strove to increase the general cordiality by
entertaining them with descriptions of life among the pearl-divers of
the South Seas.

In this fashion the afternoon wore away. They had long since left San
Francisco behind, rounded Hunter's Point, and were now skirting the
San Mateo shore. Joe caught a glimpse, once, of a party of cyclists
rounding a cliff on the San Bruno Road, and remembered the time when
he had gone over the same ground on his own wheel. It was only a month
or two before, but it seemed an age to him now, so much had there been
to come between.

By the time supper had been eaten and the things cleared away, they were
well down the bay, off the marshes behind which Redwood City clustered.
The wind had gone down with the sun, and the _Dazzler_ was making but
little headway, when they sighted a sloop bearing down upon them on the
dying wind. 'Frisco Kid instantly named it as the _Reindeer_, to which
French Pete, after a deep scrutiny, agreed. He seemed very much pleased
at the meeting.

"Red Nelson runs her," 'Frisco Kid informed Joe. "And he 's a terror and
no mistake. I 'm always afraid of him when he comes near. They 've got
something big down here, and they 're always after French Pete to tackle
it with them. He knows more about it, whatever it is."

Joe nodded, and looked at the approaching craft curiously. Though somewhat
larger, it was built on about the same lines as the _Dazzler_ which meant,
above everything else, that it was built for speed. The mainsail was so
large that it was more like that of a racing-yacht, and it carried the
points for no less than three reefs in case of rough weather. Aloft and
on deck everything was in place--nothing was untidy or useless. From
running-gear to standing rigging, everything bore evidence of thorough
order and smart seamanship.

The _Reindeer_ came up slowly in the gathering twilight and went to anchor
a biscuit-toss away. French Pete followed suit with the _Dazzler_, and then
went in the skiff to pay them a visit. The two lads stretched themselves
out on top the cabin and awaited his return.

"Do you like the life?" Joe broke silence.

The other turned on his elbow. "Well--I do, and then again I don't. The
fresh air, and the salt water, and all that, and the freedom--that 's all
right; but I don't like the--the--" He paused a moment, as though his
tongue had failed in its duty, and then blurted out: "the stealing."

"Then why don't you quit it?" Joe liked the lad more than he dared confess
to himself, and he felt a sudden missionary zeal come upon him.

"I will just as soon as I can turn my hand to something else."

"But why not now?"

_Now is the accepted time_ was ringing in Joe's ears, and if the other
wished to leave, it seemed a pity that he did not, and at once.

"Where can I go? What can I do? There 's nobody in all the world to lend
me a hand, just as there never has been. I tried it once, and learned my
lesson too well to do it again in a hurry."

"Well, when I get out of this I 'm going home. Guess my father was right,
after all. And I don't see, maybe--what 's the matter with you going with
me?" He said this last without thinking, impulsively, and 'Frisco Kid
knew it.

"You don't know what you 're talking about," he answered. "Fancy me going
off with you! What 'd your father say? and--and the rest? How would he
think of me? And what 'd he do?"

Joe felt sick at heart. He realized that in the spirit of the moment
he had given an invitation which, on sober thought, he knew would be
impossible to carry out. He tried to imagine his father receiving in
his own house a stranger like 'Frisco Kid--no, that was not to be
thought of. Then, forgetting his own plight, he fell to racking his
brains for some other method by which 'Frisco Kid could get away from
his present surroundings.

"He might turn me over to the police," the other went on, "and send me to
a refuge. I 'd die first, before I 'd let that happen to me. And besides,
Joe, I 'm not of your kind, and you know it. Why, I 'd be like a fish out
of water, what with all the things I did n't know. Nope; I guess I 'll
have to wait a little before I strike out. But there 's only one thing
for you to do, and that 's to go straight home. First chance I get I 'll
land you, and then I 'll deal with French Pete--"

"No, you don't," Joe interrupted hotly. "When I leave I 'm not going to
leave you in trouble on my account. So don't you try anything like that.
I 'll get away, never fear, and if I can figure it out I want you to
come along too; come along anyway, and figure it out afterward. What d'
you say?"

'Frisco Kid shook his head, and, gazing up at the starlit heavens,
wandered off into dreams of the life he would like to lead but from
which he seemed inexorably shut out. The seriousness of life was
striking deeper than ever into Joe's heart, and he lay silent,
thinking hard. A mumble of heavy voices came to them from the
_Reindeer_; and from the land the solemn notes of a church bell
floated across the water, while the summer night wrapped them
slowly in its warm darkness.




CHAPTER XIV

AMONG THE OYSTER-BEDS


Time and the world slipped away, and both boys were aroused by the harsh
voice of French Pete from the sleep into which they had fallen.

"Get under way!" he was bawling. "Here, you Sho! Cast off ze gaskets!
Queeck! Lively! You Kid, ze jib!"

Joe was clumsy in the darkness, not knowing the names of things and the
places where they were to be found; but he made fair progress, and when
he had tossed the gaskets into the cockpit was ordered forward to help
hoist the mainsail. After that the anchor was hove in and the jib set.
Then they coiled down the halyards and put everything in order before
they returned aft.

"Vaire good, vaire good," the Frenchman praised, as Joe dropped in over
the rail. "Splendeed! You make ze good sailorman, I know for sure."

'Frisco Kid lifted the cover of one of the cockpit lockers and glanced
questioningly at French Pete.

"For sure," that mariner replied. "Put up ze side-lights."

'Frisco Kid took the red and green lanterns into the cabin to light them,
and then went forward with Joe to hang them in the rigging.

"They 're not goin' to tackle it," 'Frisco Kid said in an undertone.

"What?" Joe asked.

"That big thing I was tellin' you was down here somewhere. It 's so big,
I guess, that French Pete 's 'most afraid to go in for it. Red Nelson 'd
go in quicker 'n a wink, but he don't know enough about it. Can't go in,
you see, till Pete gives the word."

"Where are we going now?" Joe questioned.

"Don't know; oyster-beds most likely, from the way we 're heading."

It was an uneventful trip. A breeze sprang up out of the night behind them,
and held steady for an hour or more. Then it dropped and became aimless and
erratic, puffing gently first from one quarter and then another. French
Pete remained at the tiller, while occasionally Joe or 'Frisco Kid took
in or slacked off a sheet.

Joe sat and marveled that the Frenchman should know where he was going.
To Joe it seemed that they were lost in the impenetrable darkness which
shrouded them. A high fog had rolled in from the Pacific, and though they
were beneath, it came between them and the stars, depriving them of the
little light from that source.

But French Pete seemed to know instinctively the direction he should go,
and once, in reply to a query from Joe, bragged of his ability to go by
the "feel" of things.

"I feel ze tide, ze wind, ze speed," he explained. "Even do I feel ze land.
Dat I tell you for sure. How? I do not know. Only do I know dat I feel ze
land, just like my arm grow long, miles and miles long, and I put my hand
upon ze land and feel it, and know dat it is there."

Joe looked incredulously at 'Frisco Kid.

"That 's right," he affirmed. "After you 've been on the water a good
while you come to feel the land. And if your nose is any account, you
can usually smell it."

An hour or so later, Joe surmised from the Frenchman's actions that they
were approaching their destination. He seemed on the alert, and was
constantly peering into the darkness ahead as though he expected to see
something at any moment. Joe looked very hard, but saw only the darkness.

"Try ze stick, Kid," French Pete ordered. "I t'ink it is about ze time."

'Frisco Kid unlashed a long and slender pole from the top of the cabin,
and, standing on the narrow deck amidships, plunged one end of it into
the water and drove it straight down.

"About fifteen feet," he said.

"What ze bottom?"

"Mud," was the answer.

"Wait one while, den we try some more."

Five minutes afterward the pole was plunged overside again.

"Two fathoms," Joe answered--"shells."

French Pete rubbed his hands with satisfaction. "Vaire good, vaire well,"
he said. "I hit ze ground every time. You can't fool-a ze old man; I tell
you dat for sure."

'Frisco Kid continued operating the pole and announcing the results, to the
mystification of Joe, who could not comprehend their intimate knowledge of
the bottom of the bay.

"Ten feet--shells," 'Frisco Kid went on in a monotonous voice. "'Leven
feet--shells. Fourteen feet--soft. Sixteen feet--mud. No bottom."

"Ah, ze channel," said French Pete at this.

For a few minutes it was "No bottom"; and then, suddenly, came 'Frisco
Kid's cry: "Eight feet--hard!"

"Dat 'll do," French Pete commanded. "Run for'ard, you Sho, an' let go ze
jib. You, Kid, get all ready ze hook."

Joe found the jib-halyard and cast it off the pin, and, as the canvas
fluttered down, came in hand over hand on the downhaul.

"Let 'er go!" came the command, and the anchor dropped into the water,
carrying but little chain after it.

'Frisco Kid threw over plenty of slack and made fast. Then they furled
the sails, made things tidy, and went below and to bed.

It was six o'clock when Joe awoke and went out into the cockpit to look
about. Wind and sea had sprung up, and the _Dazzler_ was rolling and
tossing and now and again fetching up on her anchor-chain with a savage
jerk. He was forced to hold on to the boom overhead to steady himself.
It was a gray and leaden day, with no signs of the rising sun, while the
sky was obscured by great masses of flying clouds.

Joe sought for the land. A mile and a half away it lay--a long, low
stretch of sandy beach with a heavy surf thundering upon it. Behind
appeared desolate marshlands, while far beyond towered the Contra
Costa Hills.

Changing the direction of his gaze, Joe was startled by the sight of a
small sloop rolling and plunging at her anchor not a hundred yards away.
She was nearly to windward, and as she swung off slightly he read her name
on the stern, the _Flying Dutchman_, one of the boats he had seen lying at
the city wharf in Oakland. A little to the left of her he discovered the
_Ghost_, and beyond were half a dozen other sloops at anchor.

"What I tell you?"

Joe looked quickly over his shoulder. French Pete had come out of the
cabin and was triumphantly regarding the spectacle.

"What I tell you? Can't fool-a ze old man, dat 's what. I hit it in ze
dark just so well as in ze sunshine. I know--I know."

"Is she goin' to howl?" 'Frisco Kid asked from the cabin, where he was
starting the fire.

The Frenchman gravely studied sea and sky for a couple of minutes.

"Mebbe blow over--mebbe blow up," was his doubtful verdict. "Get breakfast
queeck, and we try ze dredging."

Smoke was rising from the cabins of the different sloops, denoting that
they were all bent on getting the first meal of the day. So far as the
_Dazzler_ was concerned, it was a simple matter, and soon they were
putting a single reef in the mainsail and getting ready to weigh anchor.

Joe was curious. These were undoubtedly the oyster-beds; but how under the
sun, in that wild sea, were they to get oysters? He was quickly to learn
the way. Lifting a section of the cockpit flooring, French Pete brought
out two triangular frames of steel. At the apex of one of these triangles;
in a ring for the purpose, he made fast a piece of stout rope. From this
the sides (inch rods) diverged at almost right angles, and extended down
for a distance of four feet or more, where they were connected by the
third side of the triangle, which was the bottom of the dredge. This was
a flat plate of steel over a yard in length, to which was bolted a row of
long, sharp teeth, likewise of steel. Attached to the toothed plate, and
to the sides of the frame was a net of very coarse fishing-twine, which
Joe correctly surmised was there to catch the oysters raked loose by the
teeth from the bottom of the bay.

A rope being made fast to each of the dredges, they were dropped overboard
from either side of the _Dazzler_. When they had reached the bottom, and
were dragging with the proper length of line out, they checked her speed
quite noticeably. Joe touched one of the lines with his hands, and could
feel plainly the shock and jar and grind as it tore over the bottom.

"All in!" French Pete shouted.

The boys laid hold of the line and hove in the dredge. The net was full
of mud and slime and small oysters, with here and there a large one. This
mess they dumped on the deck and picked over while the dredge was dragging
again. The large oysters they threw into the cockpit, and shoveled the
rubbish overboard. There was no rest, for by this time the other dredge
required emptying. And when this was done and the oysters sorted, both
dredges had to be hauled aboard, so that French Pete could put the
_Dazzler_ about on the other tack.

The rest of the fleet was under way and dredging back in similar fashion.
Sometimes the different sloops came quite close to them, and they hailed
them and exchanged snatches of conversation and rough jokes. But in the
main it was hard work, and at the end of an hour Joe's back was aching
from the unaccustomed strain, and his fingers were cut and bleeding from
his clumsy handling of the sharp-edged oysters.

"Dat 's right," French Pete said approvingly. "You learn queeck. Vaire
soon you know how."

Joe grinned ruefully and wished it was dinner-time. Now and then, when
a light dredge was hauled, the boys managed to catch breath and say a
couple of words.

"That 's Asparagus Island," 'Frisco Kid said, indicating the shore. "At
least, that 's what the fishermen and scow-sailors call it. The people
who live there call it Bay Farm Island." He pointed more to the right.
"And over there is San Leandro. You can't see it, but it 's there."

"Ever been there?" Joe asked.

'Frisco Kid nodded his head and signed to him to help heave in the
starboard dredge.

"These are what they call the deserted beds," he said again. "Nobody owns
them, so the oyster pirates come down and make a bluff at working them."

"Why a bluff?"

"'Cause they 're pirates, that 's why, and because there 's more money in
raiding the private beds."

He made a sweeping gesture toward the east and southeast. "The private beds
are over yonder, and if it don't storm the whole fleet 'll be raidin' 'em
to-night."

"And if it does storm?" Joe asked.

"Why, we won't raid them, and French Pete 'll be mad, that 's all. He
always hates being put out by the weather. But it don't look like lettin'
up, and this is the worst possible shore in a sou'wester. Pete may try
to hang on, but it 's best to get out before she howls."

At first it did seem as though the weather were growing better. The stiff
southwest wind dropped perceptibly, and by noon, when they went to anchor
for dinner, the sun was breaking fitfully through the clouds.

"That 's all right," 'Frisco Kid said prophetically. "But I ain't been
on the bay for nothing. She 's just gettin' ready to let us have it good
an' hard."

"I t'ink you 're right, Kid," French Pete agreed; "but ze _Dazzler_ hang
on all ze same. Last-a time she run away, an' fine night come. Dis time
she run not away. Eh? Vaire good."




CHAPTER XV

GOOD SAILORS IN A WILD ANCHORAGE


All afternoon the _Dazzler_ pitched and rolled at her anchorage, and as
evening drew on the wind deceitfully eased down. This, and the example
set by French Pete, encouraged the rest of the oyster-boats to attempt
to ride out the night; but they looked carefully to their moorings and
put out spare anchors.

French Pete ordered the two boys into the skiff, and, at the imminent risk
of swamping, they carried out a second anchor, at nearly right angles to
the first one, and dropped it over. French Pete then ran out a great
quantity of chain and rope, so that the _Dazzler_ dropped back a hundred
feet or more, where she rode more easily.

It was a wild stretch of water which Joe looked upon from the shelter of
the cockpit. The oyster-beds were out in the open bay, utterly unprotected,
and the wind, sweeping the water for a clean twelve miles, kicked up so
tremendous a sea that at every moment it seemed as though the wallowing
sloops would roll their masts overside. Just before twilight a patch of
sail sprang up to windward, and grew and grew until it resolved itself
into the huge mainsail of the _Reindeer_.

"Ze beeg fool!" French Pete cried, running out of the cabin to see.
"Sometime--ah, sometime, I tell you--he crack on like dat, an' he go,
pouf! just like dat, pouf!--an' no more Nelson, no more _Reindeer_, no
more nothing."

Joe looked inquiringly at 'Frisco Kid.

"That 's right," he answered. "Nelson ought to have at least one reef
in. Two 'd be better. But there he goes, every inch spread, as though
some fiend was after 'im. He drives too hard; he 's too reckless, when
there ain't the smallest need for it. I 've sailed with him, and I know
his ways."

Like some huge bird of the air, the _Reindeer_ lifted and soared down
on them on the foaming crest of a wave.

"Don't mind," 'Frisco Kid warned. "He 's only tryin' to see how close
he can come to us without hittin' us."

Joe nodded, and stared with wide eyes at the thrilling sight. The
_Reindeer_ leaped up in the air, pointing her nose to the sky till
they could see her whole churning forefoot; then she plunged downward
till her for'ard deck was flush with the foam, and with a dizzying rush
she drove past them, her main-boom missing the _Dazzler's_ rigging by
scarcely a foot.

Nelson, at the wheel, waved his hand to them as he hurtled past,
and laughed joyously in French Pete's face, who was angered by the
dangerous trick.

When to leeward, the splendid craft rounded to the wind, rolling once
till her brown bottom showed to the centerboard and they thought she
was over, then righting and dashing ahead again like a thing possessed.
She passed abreast of them on the starboard side. They saw the jib run
down with a rush and an anchor go overboard as she shot into the wind;
and as she fell off and back and off and back with a spilling mainsail,
they saw a second anchor go overboard, wide apart from the first. Then
the mainsail came down on the run, and was furled and fastened by the
time she had tightened to her double hawsers.

"Ah, ah! Never was there such a man!"

The Frenchman's eyes were glistening with admiration for such perfect
seamanship, and 'Frisco Kid's were likewise moist.

"Just like a yacht," he said as he went back into the cabin. "Just like
a yacht, only better."

As night came on the wind began to rise again, and by eleven o'clock had
reached the stage which 'Frisco Kid described as "howlin'." There was
little sleep on the _Dazzler_. He alone closed his eyes. French Pete was
up and down every few minutes. Twice, when he went on deck, he paid out
more chain and rope. Joe lay in his blankets and listened, the while
vainly courting sleep. He was not frightened, but he was untrained in
the art of sleeping in the midst of such turmoil and uproar and violent
commotion. Nor had he imagined a boat could play as wild antics as did
the _Dazzler_ and still survive. Often she wallowed over on her beam
till he thought she would surely capsize. At other times she leaped
and plunged in the air and fell upon the seas with thunderous crashes
as though her bottom were shattered to fragments. Again, she would fetch
up taut on her hawsers so suddenly and so fiercely as to reel from the
shock and to groan and protest through every timber.

'Frisco Kid awoke once, and smiled at him, saying:

"This is what they call hangin' on. But just you wait till daylight comes,
and watch us clawin' off. If some of the sloops don't go ashore, I 'm not
me, that 's all."

And thereat he rolled over on his side and was off to sleep. Joe envied
him. About three in the morning he heard French Pete crawl up for'ard and
rummage around in the eyes of the boat. Joe looked on curiously, and by
the dim light of the wildly swinging sea-lamp saw him drag out two spare
coils of line. These he took up on deck, and Joe knew he was bending them
on to the hawsers to make them still longer.

At half-past four French Pete had the fire going, and at five he called
the boys for coffee. This over, they crept into the cockpit to gaze on the
terrible scene. The dawn was breaking bleak and gray over a wild waste of
tumbling water. They could faintly see the beach-line of Asparagus Island,
but they could distinctly hear the thunder of the surf upon it; and as the
day grew stronger they made out that they had dragged fully half a mile
during the night.

The rest of the fleet had likewise dragged. The _Reindeer_ was almost
abreast of them; _La Caprice_ lay a few hundred yards away; and to
leeward, straggling between them and shore, were five more of the
struggling oyster-boats.

"Two missing," 'Frisco Kid announced, putting the glasses to his eyes
and searching the beach.

"And there 's one!" he cried. And after studying it carefully he added:
"The _Go Ask Her_. She 'll be in pieces in no time. I hope they got
ashore."

French Pete looked through the glasses, and then Joe. He could clearly see
the unfortunate sloop lifting and pounding in the surf, and on the beach he
spied the men who made up her crew.

"Where 's ze _Ghost_?" French Pete queried.

'Frisco Kid looked for her in vain along the beach; but when he turned the
glass seaward he quickly discovered her riding safely in the growing light,
half a mile or more to windward.

"I 'll bet she did n't drag a hundred feet all night," he said. "Must 've
struck good holding-ground."

"Mud," was French Pete's verdict. "Just one vaire small patch of mud right
there. If she get t'rough it she 's a sure-enough goner, I tell you dat.
Her anchors vaire light, only good for mud. I tell ze boys get more heavy
anchors, but dey laugh. Some day be sorry, for sure."

One of the sloops to leeward raised a patch of sail and began the terrible
struggle out of the jaws of destruction and death. They watched her for a
space, rolling and plunging fearfully, and making very little headway.

French Pete put a stop to their gazing. "Come on!" he shouted. "Put two
reef in ze mainsail! We get out queeck!"

While occupied with this a shout aroused them. Looking up, they saw the
_Ghost_ dead ahead and right on top of them, and dragging down upon them
at a furious rate.

French Pete scrambled forward like a cat, at the same time drawing his
knife, with one stroke of which he severed the rope that held them to
the spare anchor. This threw the whole weight of the _Dazzler_ on the
chain-anchor. In consequence she swung off to the left, and just in time;
for the next instant, drifting stern foremost, the _Ghost_ passed over
the spot she had vacated.

"Why, she 's got four anchors out!" Joe exclaimed, at sight of four taut
ropes entering the water almost horizontally from her bow.

"Two of 'em 's dredges," 'Frisco Kid grinned; "and there goes the stove."

As he spoke, two young fellows appeared on deck and dropped the
cooking-stove overside with a line attached.

"Phew!" 'Frisco Kid cried. "Look at Nelson. He 's got one reef in,
and you can just bet that 's a sign she 's howlin'!"

The _Reindeer_ came foaming toward them, breasting the storm like some
magnificent sea-animal. Red Nelson waved to them as he passed astern,
and fifteen minutes later, when they were breaking out the one anchor
that remained to them, he passed well to windward on the other tack.

French Pete followed her admiringly, though he said ominously: "Some
day, pouf! he go just like dat, I tell you, sure."

A moment later the _Dazzler's_ reefed jib was flung out, and she was
straining and struggling in the thick of the fight. It was slow work,
and hard and dangerous, clawing off that lee shore, and Joe found
himself marveling often that so small a craft could possibly endure
a minute in such elemental fury. But little by little she worked off
the shore and out of the ground-swell into the deeper waters of the bay,
where the main-sheet was slacked away a bit, and she ran for shelter
behind the rock wall of the Alameda Mole a few miles away. Here they
found the _Reindeer_ calmly at anchor; and here, during the next several
hours, straggled in the remainder of the fleet, with the exception of the
_Ghost_, which had evidently gone ashore to keep the _Go Ask Her_ company.

By afternoon the wind had dropped away with surprising suddenness, and the
weather had turned almost summer-like.

"It does n't look right," 'Frisco Kid said in the evening, after French
Pete had rowed over in the skiff to visit Nelson.

"What does n't look right?" Joe asked.

"Why, the weather. It went down too sudden. It did n't have a chance
to blow itself out, and it ain't going to quit till does blow itself
out. It 's likely to puff up and howl at any moment, if I know anything
about it."

"Where will we go from here?" Joe asked. "Back to the oyster-beds?"

'Frisco Kid shook his head. "I can't say what French Pete 'll do. He 's
been fooled on the iron, and fooled on the oysters, and he 's that
disgusted he 's liable to do 'most anything desperate. I would n't be
surprised to see him go off with Nelson towards Redwood City, where that
big thing is that I was tellin' you about. It 's somewhere over there."

"Well, I won't have anything to do with it," Joe announced decisively.

"Of course not," 'Frisco Kid answered. "And with Nelson and his two men
an' French Pete, I don't think there 'll be any need for you anyway."




CHAPTER XVI

'FRISCO KID'S DITTY-BOX


After the conversation died away, the two lads lay upon the cabin for
perhaps an hour. Then, without saying a word, 'Frisco Kid went below
and struck a light. Joe could hear him fumbling about, and a little
later heard his own name called softly. On going into the cabin, he
saw 'Frisco Kid sitting on the edge of the bunk, a sailor's ditty-box
on his knees, and in his hand a carefully folded page from a magazine.

"Does she look like this?" he asked, smoothing it out and turning it that
the other might see.

It was a half-page illustration of two girls and a boy, grouped, evidently,
in an old-fashioned roomy attic, and holding a council of some sort. The
girl who was talking faced the onlooker, while the backs of the other two
were turned.

"Who?" Joe queried, glancing in perplexity from the picture to 'Frisco
Kid's face.

"Your--your sister--Bessie."

The word seemed reluctant in coming to his lips, and he expressed
himself with a certain shy reverence, as though it were something
unspeakably sacred.

Joe was nonplussed for the moment. He could see no bearing between the
two in point, and, anyway, girls were rather silly creatures to waste
one's time over. "He 's actually blushing," he thought, regarding the
soft glow on the other's cheeks. He felt an irresistible desire to laugh,
and tried to smother it down.

"No, no; don't!" 'Frisco Kid cried, snatching the paper away and putting
it back in the ditty-box with shaking fingers. Then he added more slowly:
"I thought--I--I kind o' thought you would understand, and--and--"

His lips trembled and his eyes glistened with unwonted moistness as he
turned hastily away.

The next instant Joe was by his side on the bunk, his arm around him.
Prompted by some instinctive monitor, he had done it before he thought.
A week before he could not have imagined himself in such an absurd
situation--his arm around a boy; but now it seemed the most natural
thing in the world. He did not comprehend, but he knew, whatever it
was, that it was of deep importance to his companion.

"Go ahead and tell us," he urged. "I 'll understand."

"No, you won't. You can't."

"Yes, sure. Go ahead."

'Frisco Kid choked and shook his head. "I don't think I could, anyway.
It 's more the things I feel, and I don't know how to put them in words."
Joe's hand patted his shoulder reassuringly, and he went on: "Well, it 's
this way. You see, I don't know much about the land, and people, and
things, and I never had any brothers or sisters or playmates. All the
time I did n't know it, but I was lonely--sort of missed them down in
here somewheres." He placed a hand over his breast. "Did you ever feel
downright hungry? Well, that 's just the way I used to feel, only a
different kind of hunger, and me not knowing what it was. But one day,
oh, a long time back, I got a-hold of a magazine and saw a picture--that
picture, with the two girls and the boy talking together. I thought it must
be fine to be like them, and I got to thinking about the things they said
and did, till it came to me all of a sudden like, and I knew it was just
loneliness was the matter with me.

"But, more than anything else, I got to wondering about the girl who looks
out of the picture right at you. I was thinking about her all the time,
and by and by she became real to me. You see, it was making believe, and
I knew it all the time, and then again I did n't. Whenever I 'd think of
the men, and the work, and the hard life, I 'd know it was make-believe;
but when I 'd think of her, it was n't. I don't know; I can't explain it."

Joe remembered all his own adventures which he had imagined on land and
sea, and nodded. He at least understood that much.

"Of course it was all foolishness, but to have a girl like that for a
comrade or friend seemed more like heaven to me than anything else I
knew of. As I said, it was a long while back, and I was only a little
kid--that was when Red Nelson gave me my name, and I 've never been
anything but 'Frisco Kid ever since. But the girl in the picture: I
was always getting that picture out to look at her, and before long,
if I was n't square--why, I felt ashamed to look at her. Afterwards,
when I was older, I came to look at it in another way. I thought,
'Suppose, Kid, some day you were to meet a girl like that, what would
she think of you? Could she like you? Could she be even the least bit
of a friend to you?' And then I 'd make up my mind to be better, to try
and do something with myself so that she or any of her kind of people
would not be ashamed to know me.

"That 's why I learned to read. That 's why I ran away. Nicky Perrata,
a Greek boy, taught me my letters, and it was n't till after I learned
to read that I found out there was anything really wrong in bay-pirating.
I 'd been used to it ever since I could remember, and almost all the people
I knew made their living that way. But when I did find out, I ran away,
thinking to quit it for good. I 'll tell you about it sometime, and how
I 'm back at it again.

"Of course she seemed a real girl when I was a youngster, and even now she
sometimes seems that way, I 've thought so much about her. But while I 'm
talking to you it all clears up and she comes to me in this light: she
stands just for a plain idea, a better, cleaner life than this, and one
I 'd like to live; and if I could live it, why, I 'd come to know that
kind of girls, and their kind of people--your kind, that 's what I mean.
So I was wondering about your sister and you, and that 's why--I don't
know; I guess I was just wondering. But I suppose you know lots of girls
like that, don't you?"

Joe nodded his head.

"Then tell me about them--something, anything," he added as he noted the
fleeting expression of doubt in the other's eyes.

"Oh, that 's easy," Joe began valiantly. To a certain extent he did
understand the lad's hunger, and it seemed a simple enough task to at
least partially satisfy him. "To begin with, they 're like--hem!--why,
they 're like--girls, just girls." He broke off with a miserable sense
of failure.

'Frisco Kid waited patiently, his face a study in expectancy.

Joe struggled valiantly to marshal his forces. To his mind, in quick
succession, came the girls with whom he had gone to school--the sisters
of the boys he knew, and those who were his sister's friends: slim girls
and plump girls, tall girls and short girls, blue-eyed and brown-eyed,
curly-haired, black-haired, golden-haired; in short, a procession of girls
of all sorts and descriptions. But, to save himself, he could say nothing
about them. Anyway, he 'd never been a "sissy," and why should he be
expected to know anything about them? "All girls are alike," he concluded
desperately. "They 're just the same as the ones you know, Kid--sure
they are."

"But I don't know any."

Joe whistled. "And never did?"

"Yes, one. Carlotta Gispardi. But she could n't speak English, and I could
n't speak Dago; and she died. I don't care; though I never knew any, I seem
to know as much about them as you do."

"And I guess I know more about adventures all over the world than you do,"
Joe retorted.

Both boys laughed. But a moment later, Joe fell into deep thought. It had
come upon him quite swiftly that he had not been duly grateful for the good
things of life he did possess. Already home, father, and mother had assumed
a greater significance to him; but he now found himself placing a higher
personal value upon his sister and his chums and friends. He had never
appreciated them properly, he thought, but henceforth--well, there would
be a different tale to tell.

The voice of French Pete hailing them put a finish to the conversation,
for they both ran on deck.




CHAPTER XVII

'FRISCO KID TELLS HIS STORY


"Get up ze mainsail and break out ze hook!" the Frenchman shouted. "And
den tail on to ze _Reindeer_! No side-lights!"

"Come! Cast off those gaskets--lively!" 'Frisco Kid ordered. "Now lay on
to the peak-halyards--there, that rope--cast it off the pin. And don't
hoist ahead of me. There! Make fast! We 'll stretch it afterwards. Run aft
and come in on the main-sheet! Shove the helm up!"

Under the sudden driving power of the mainsail, the _Dazzler_ strained
and tugged at her anchor like an impatient horse till the muddy iron left
the bottom with a rush and she was free.

"Let go the sheet! Come for'ard again and lend a hand on the chain! Stand
by to give her the jib!" 'Frisco Kid the boy who mooned over girls in
pictorial magazines had vanished, and 'Frisco Kid the sailor, strong and
dominant, was on deck. He ran aft and tacked about as the jib rattled aloft
in the hands of Joe, who quickly joined him. Just then the _Reindeer_,
like a monstrous bat, passed to leeward of them in the gloom.

"Ah, dose boys! Dey take all-a night!" they heard French Pete exclaim, and
then the gruff voice of Red Nelson, who said: "Never you mind, Frenchy. I
taught the Kid his sailorizing, and I ain't never been ashamed of him yet."

The _Reindeer_ was the faster boat, but by spilling the wind from her sails
they managed so that the boys could keep them in sight. The breeze came
steadily in from the west, with a promise of early increase. The stars were
being blotted out by masses of driving clouds, which indicated a greater
velocity in the upper strata. 'Frisco Kid surveyed the sky.

"Going to have it good and stiff before morning," he said, "just as I
told you."

Several hours later, both boats stood in for the San Mateo shore, and
dropped anchor not more than a cable's-length away. A little wharf ran
out, the bare end of which was perceptible to them, though they could
discern a small yacht lying moored to a buoy a short distance away.

According to their custom, everything was put in readiness for hasty
departure. The anchors could be tripped and the sails flung out on a
moment's notice. Both skiffs came over noiselessly from the _Reindeer_.
Red Nelson had given one of his two men to French Pete, so that each
skiff was doubly manned. They were not a very prepossessing group of
men,--at least, Joe did not think so,--for their faces bore a savage
seriousness which almost made him shiver. The captain of the _Dazzler_
buckled on his pistol-belt, and placed a rifle and a stout double-block
tackle in the boat. Then he poured out wine all around, and, standing in
the darkness of the little cabin, they pledged success to the expedition.
Red Nelson was also armed, while his men wore at their hips the customary
sailor's sheath-knife. They were very slow and careful to avoid noise
in getting into the boats, French Pete pausing long enough to warn the
boys to remain quietly aboard and not try any tricks.

"Now 'd be your chance, Joe, if they had n't taken the skiff," 'Frisco Kid
whispered, when the boats had vanished into the loom of the land.

"What 's the matter with the _Dazzler_?" was the unexpected answer. "We
could up sail and away before you could say Jack Robinson."

'Frisco Kid hesitated. The spirit of comradeship was strong in the lad,
and deserting a companion in a pinch could not but be repulsive to him.

"I don't think it 'd be exactly square to leave them in the lurch ashore,"
he said. "Of course," he went on hurriedly, "I know the whole thing 's
wrong; but you remember that first night, when you came running through
the water for the skiff, and those fellows on the bank busy popping away?
We did n't leave you in the lurch, did we?"

Joe assented reluctantly, and then a new thought flashed across his mind.
"But they 're pirates--and thieves--and criminals. They 're breaking the
law, and you and I are not willing to be lawbreakers. Besides, they 'll
not be left. There 's the _Reindeer_. There 's nothing to prevent them
from getting away on her, and they 'll never catch us in the dark."

"Come on, then." Though he had agreed, 'Frisco Kid did not quite like it,
for it still seemed to savor of desertion.

They crawled forward and began to hoist the mainsail. The anchor they
could slip, if necessary, and save the time of pulling it up. But at the
first rattle of the halyards on the sheaves a warning "Hist!" came to
them through the darkness, followed by a loudly whispered "Drop that!"

Glancing in the direction from which these sounds proceeded, they made
out a white face peering at them from over the rail of the other sloop.

"Aw, it 's only the _Reindeer's_ boy," 'Frisco Kid said. "Come on."

Again they were interrupted at the first rattling of the blocks.

"I say, you fellers, you 'd better let go them halyards pretty quick,
I 'm a-tellin' you, or I 'll give you what for!"

This threat being dramatically capped by the click of a cocking pistol,
'Frisco Kid obeyed and went grumblingly back to the cockpit. "Oh, there 's
plenty more chances to come," he whispered consolingly to Joe. "French Pete
was cute, was n't he? He thought you might be trying to make a break, and
put a guard on us."

Nothing came from the shore to indicate how the pirates were faring. Not
a dog barked, not a light flared. Yet the air seemed quivering with an
alarm about to burst forth. The night had taken on a strained feeling of
intensity, as though it held in store all kinds of terrible things. The
boys felt this keenly as they huddled against each other in the cockpit
and waited.

"You were going to tell me about your running away," Joe ventured finally,
"and why you came back again."

'Frisco Kid took up the tale at once, speaking in a muffled undertone
close to the other's ear.

"You see, when I made up my mind to quit the life, there was n't a soul
to lend me a hand; but I knew that the only thing for me to do was to
get ashore and find some kind of work, so I could study. Then I figured
there 'd be more chance in the country than in the city; so I gave Red
Nelson the slip--I was on the _Reindeer_ then. One night on the Alameda
oyster-beds, I got ashore and headed back from the bay as fast as I
could sprint. Nelson did n't catch me. But they were all Portuguese
farmers thereabouts, and none of them had work for me. Besides, it was
in the wrong time of the year--winter. That shows how much I knew about
the land.

"I 'd saved up a couple of dollars, and I kept traveling back, deeper
and deeper into the country, looking for work, and buying bread and
cheese and such things from the storekeepers. I tell you, it was cold,
nights, sleeping out without blankets, and I was always glad when morning
came. But worse than that was the way everybody looked on me. They were
all suspicious, and not a bit afraid to show it, and sometimes they 'd
set their dogs on me and tell me to get along. Seemed as though there
was n't any place for me on the land. Then my money gave out, and just
about the time I was good and hungry I got captured."

"Captured! What for?"

"Nothing. Living, I suppose. I crawled into a haystack to sleep one night,
because it was warmer, and along comes a village constable and arrests me
for being a tramp. At first they thought I was a runaway, and telegraphed
my description all over. I told them I did n't have any people, but they
would n't believe me for a long while. And then, when nobody claimed me,
the judge sent me to a boys' 'refuge' in San Francisco."

He stopped and peered intently in the direction of the shore. The darkness
and the silence in which the men had been swallowed up was profound.
Nothing was stirring save the rising wind.

"I thought I 'd die in that 'refuge.' It was just like being in jail. We
were locked up and guarded like prisoners. Even then, if I could have
liked the other boys it might have been all right. But they were mostly
street-boys of the worst kind--lying, and sneaking, and cowardly, without
one spark of manhood or one idea of square dealing and fair play. There
was only one thing I did like, and that was the books. Oh, I did lots of
reading, I tell you! But that could n't make up for the rest. I wanted
the freedom and the sunlight and the salt water. And what had I done to
be kept in prison and herded with such a gang? Instead of doing wrong,
I had tried to do right, to make myself better, and that 's what I got
for it. I was n't old enough, you see, to reason anything out.

"Sometimes I 'd see the sunshine dancing on the water and showing white
on the sails, and the _Reindeer_ cutting through it just as you please,
and I 'd get that sick I would know hardly what I did. And then the boys
would come against me with some of their meannesses, and I 'd start in
to lick the whole kit of them. Then the men in charge would lock me up
and punish me. Well, I could n't stand it any longer; I watched my chance
and ran for it. Seemed as though there was n't any place on the land for
me, so I picked up with French Pete and went back on the bay. That 's about
all there is to it, though I 'm going to try it again when I get a little
older--old enough to get a square deal for myself."

"You 're going to go back on the land with me," Joe said authoritatively,
laying a hand on his shoulder. "That 's what you 're going to do. As for--"

Bang! a revolver-shot rang out from the shore. Bang! bang! More guns were
speaking sharply and hurriedly. A man's voice rose wildly on the air and
died away. Somebody began to cry for help. Both boys were on their feet on
the instant, hoisting the mainsail and getting everything ready to run.
The _Reindeer_ boy was doing likewise. A man, roused from his sleep on
the yacht, thrust an excited head through the skylight, but withdrew it
hastily at sight of the two stranger sloops. The intensity of waiting was
broken, the time for action come.




CHAPTER XVIII

A NEW RESPONSIBILITY FOR JOE


Heaving in on the anchor-chain till it was up and down, 'Frisco Kid
and Joe ceased from their exertions. Everything was in readiness to
give the _Dazzler_ the jib, and go. They strained their eyes in the
direction of the shore. The clamor had died away, but here and there
lights were beginning to flash. The creaking of a block and tackle
came to their ears, and they heard Red Nelson's voice singing out:
"Lower away!" and "Cast off!"

"French Pete forgot to oil it," 'Frisco Kid commented, referring to
the tackle.

"Takin' their time about it, ain't they?" the boy on the _Reindeer_
called over to them, sitting down on the cabin and mopping his face
after the exertion of hoisting the mainsail single-handed.

"Guess they 're all right," 'Frisco Kid rejoined. "All ready?"

"Yes--all right here."

"Say, you," the man on the yacht cried through the skylight, not
venturing to show his head. "You 'd better go away."

"And you 'd better stay below and keep quiet," was the response.
"We 'll take care of ourselves. You do the same."

"If I was only out of this, I 'd show you!" he threatened.

"Lucky for you you 're not," responded the boy on the _Reindeer_;
and thereat the man kept quiet.

"Here they come!" said 'Frisco Kid suddenly to Joe.

The two skiffs shot out of the darkness and came alongside. Some kind
of an altercation was going on, as French Pete's voice attested.

"No, no!" he cried. "Put it on ze _Dazzler_. Ze _Reindeer_ she sail too
fast-a, and run away, oh, so queeck, and never more I see it. Put it on
ze _Dazzler_. Eh? Wot you say?"

"All right then," Red Nelson agreed. "We 'll whack up afterwards. But,
say, hurry up. Out with you, lads, and heave her up! My arm 's broke."

The men tumbled out, ropes were cast inboard, and all hands, with the
exception of Joe, tailed on. The shouting of men, the sound of oars, and
the rattling and slapping of blocks and sails, told that the men on shore
were getting under way for the pursuit.

"Now!" Red Nelson commanded. "All together! Don't let her come back or
you 'll smash the skiff. There she takes it! A long pull and a strong
pull! Once again! And yet again! Get a turn there, somebody, and take
a spell."

Though the task was but half accomplished, they were exhausted by the
strenuous effort, and hailed the rest eagerly. Joe glanced over the side
to discover what the heavy object might be, and saw the vague outlines
of a small office-safe.

"Now all together!" Red Nelson began again. "Take her on the run and don't
let her stop! Yo, ho! heave, ho! Once again! And another! Over with her!"

Straining and gasping, with tense muscles and heaving chests, they brought
the cumbersome weight over the side, rolled it on top of the rail, and
lowered it into the cockpit on the run. The cabin doors were thrown apart,
and it was moved along, end for end, till it lay on the cabin floor, snug
against the end of the centerboard-case. Red Nelson had followed it aboard
to superintend. His left arm hung helpless at his side, and from the
finger-tips blood dripped with monotonous regularity. He did not seem to
mind it, however, nor even the mutterings of the human storm he had raised
ashore, and which, to judge by the sounds, was even then threatening to
break upon them.

"Lay your course for the Golden Gate," he said to French Pete, as he turned
to go. "I 'll try to stand by you, but if you get lost in the dark I 'll
meet you outside, off the Farralones, in the morning." He sprang into the
skiff after the men, and, with a wave of his uninjured arm, cried heartily:
"And then it 's for Mexico, my lads--Mexico and summer weather!"

Just as the _Dazzler_, freed from her anchor, paid off under the jib and
filled away, a dark sail loomed under their stern, barely missing the skiff
in tow. The cockpit of the stranger was crowded with men, who raised their
voices angrily at sight of the pirates. Joe had half a mind to run forward
and cut the halyards so that the _Dazzler_ might be captured. As he had
told French Pete the day before, he had done nothing to be ashamed of, and
was not afraid to go before a court of justice. But the thought of 'Frisco
Kid restrained him. He wanted to take him ashore with him, but in so doing
he did not wish to take him to jail. So he, too, began to experience a keen
interest in the escape of the _Dazzler_.

The pursuing sloop rounded up hurriedly to come about after them, and in
the darkness fouled the yacht which lay at anchor. The man aboard of her,
thinking that at last his time had come, gave one wild yell, ran on deck,
and leaped overboard. In the confusion of the collision, and while they
were endeavoring to save him, French Pete and the boys slipped away into
the night.

The _Reindeer_ had already disappeared, and by the time Joe and 'Frisco
Kid had the running-gear coiled down and everything in shape, they were
standing out in open water. The wind was freshening constantly, and the
_Dazzler_ heeled a lively clip through the comparatively smooth stretch.
Before an hour had passed, the lights of Hunter's Point were well on her
starboard beam. 'Frisco Kid went below to make coffee, but Joe remained
on deck, watching the lights of South San Francisco grow, and speculating
on their destination. Mexico! They were going to sea in such a frail craft!
Impossible! At least, it seemed so to him, for his conceptions of ocean
travel were limited to steamers and full-rigged ships. He was beginning
to feel half sorry that he had not cut the halyards, and longed to ask
French Pete a thousand questions; but just as the first was on his lips
that worthy ordered him to go below and get some coffee and then to turn
in. He was followed shortly afterward by 'Frisco Kid, French Pete remaining
at his lonely task of beating down the bay and out to sea. Twice he heard
the waves buffeted back from some flying forefoot, and once he saw a sail
to leeward on the opposite tack, which luffed sharply and came about at
sight of him. But the darkness favored, and he heard no more of it--perhaps
because he worked into the wind closer by a point, and held on his way
with a shaking after-leech.

Shortly after dawn, the two boys were called and came sleepily on deck.
The day had broken cold and gray, while the wind had attained half a gale.
Joe noted with astonishment the white tents of the quarantine station on
Angel Island. San Francisco lay a smoky blur on the southern horizon,
while the night, still lingering on the western edge of the world, slowly
withdrew before their eyes. French Pete was just finishing a long reach
into the Raccoon Straits, and at the same time studiously regarding a
plunging sloop-yacht half a mile astern.

"Dey t'ink to catch ze _Dazzler_, eh? Bah!" And he brought the craft
in question about, laying a course straight for the Golden Gate.

The pursuing yacht followed suit. Joe watched her a few moments. She held
an apparently parallel course to them, and forged ahead much faster.

"Why, at this rate they 'll have us in no time!" he cried.

French Pete laughed. "You t'ink so? Bah! Dey outfoot; we outpoint. Dey
are scared of ze wind; we wipe ze eye of ze wind. Ah! you wait, you see."

"They 're traveling ahead faster," 'Frisco Kid explained, "but we 're
sailing closer to the wind. In the end we 'll beat them, even if they
have the nerve to cross the bar--which I don't think they have. Look! See!"

Ahead could be seen the great ocean surges, flinging themselves skyward
and bursting into roaring caps of smother. In the midst of it, now rolling
her dripping bottom clear, now sousing her deck-load of lumber far above
the guards, a coasting steam-schooner was lumbering drunkenly into port.
It was magnificent--this battle between man and the elements. Whatever
timidity he had entertained fled away, and Joe's nostrils began to dilate
and his eyes to flash at the nearness of the impending struggle.

French Pete called for his oilskins and sou'wester, and Joe also was
equipped with a spare suit. Then he and 'Frisco Kid were sent below to
lash and cleat the safe in place. In the midst of this task Joe glanced
at the firm-name, gilt-lettered on the face of it, and read: "Bronson
& Tate." Why, that was his father and his father's partner. That was their
safe, their money! 'Frisco Kid, nailing the last cleat on the floor of
the cabin, looked up and followed his fascinated gaze.

"That 's rough, is n't it," he whispered. "Your father?"

Joe nodded. He could see it all now. They had run into San Andreas,
where his father worked the big quarries, and most probably the safe
contained the wages of the thousand men or more whom he employed.
"Don't say anything," he cautioned.

'Frisco Kid agreed knowingly. "French Pete can't read, anyway," he
muttered, "and the chances are that Red Nelson won't know what _your_
name is. But, just the same, it 's pretty rough. They 'll break it open
and divide up as soon as they can, so I don't see what you 're going to
do about it."

"Wait and see."
Joe had made up his mind that he would do his best to stand by his
father's property. At the worst, it could only be lost; and that would
surely be the case were he not along, while, being along, he at least
had a fighting chance to save it, or to be in position to recover it.
Responsibilities were showering upon him thick and fast. But a few days
back he had had but himself to consider; then, in some subtle way, he
had felt a certain accountability for 'Frisco Kid's future welfare; and
after that, and still more subtly, he had become aware of duties which
he owed to his position, to his sister, to his chums and friends; and
now, by a most unexpected chain of circumstances, came the pressing need
of service for his father's sake. It was a call upon his deepest strength,
and he responded bravely. While the future might be doubtful, he had no
doubt of himself; and this very state of mind, this self-confidence, by
a generous alchemy, gave him added resolution. Nor did he fail to be
vaguely aware of it, and to grasp dimly at the truth that confidence
breeds confidence--strength, strength.




CHAPTER XIX

THE BOYS PLAN AN ESCAPE


"Now she takes it!" French Pete cried.

Both lads ran into the cockpit. They were on the edge of the breaking bar.
A huge forty-footer reared a foam-crested head far above them, stealing
their wind for the moment and threatening to crush the tiny craft like
an egg-shell. Joe held his breath. It was the supreme moment. French Pete
luffed straight into it, and the _Dazzler_ mounted the steep slope with
a rush, poised a moment on the giddy summit, and fell into the yawning
valley beyond. Keeping off in the intervals to fill the mainsail, and
luffing into the combers, they worked their way across the dangerous
stretch. Once they caught the tail-end of a whitecap and were well-nigh
smothered in the froth, but otherwise the sloop bobbed and ducked with
the happy facility of a cork.

To Joe it seemed as though he had been lifted out of himself--out of
the world. Ah, this was life! this was action! Surely it could not be
the old, commonplace world he had lived in so long! The sailors, grouped
on the streaming deck-load of the steamer, waved their sou'westers, and,
on the bridge, even the captain was expressing his admiration for the
plucky craft.

"Ah, you see! you see!" French Pete pointed astern.

The sloop-yacht had been afraid to venture it, and was skirting back
and forth on the inner edge of the bar. The chase was over. A pilot-boat,
running for shelter from the coming storm, flew by them like a frightened
bird, passing the steamer as though the latter were standing still.

Half an hour later the _Dazzler_ sped beyond the last smoking sea and was
sliding up and down on the long Pacific swell. The wind had increased its
velocity and necessitated a reefing down of jib and mainsail. Then they
laid off again, full and free on the starboard tack, for the Farralones,
thirty miles away. By the time breakfast was cooked and eaten they picked
up the _Reindeer_, which was hove to and working offshore to the south and
west. The wheel was lashed down, and there was not a soul on deck.

French Pete complained bitterly against such recklessness. "Dat is ze one
fault of Red Nelson. He no care. He is afraid of not'ing. Some day he will
die, oh, so vaire queeck! I know he will."

Three times they circled about the _Reindeer_, running under her weather
quarter and shouting in chorus, before they brought anybody on deck. Sail
was then made at once, and together the two cockle-shells plunged away
into the vastness of the Pacific. This was necessary, as 'Frisco Kid
informed Joe, in order to have an offing before the whole fury of the
storm broke upon them. Otherwise they would be driven on the lee shore
of the California coast. Grub and water, he said, could be obtained by
running into the land when fine weather came. He congratulated Joe upon
the fact that he was not seasick, which circumstance likewise brought
praise from French Pete and put him in better humor with his mutinous
young sailor.

"I 'll tell you what we 'll do," 'Frisco Kid whispered, while cooking
dinner. "To-night we 'll drag French Pete down--"

"Drag French Pete down!"

"Yes, and tie him up good and snug, as soon as it gets dark; then put
out the lights and make a run for land; get to port anyway, anywhere,
just so long as we shake loose from Red Nelson."

"Yes," Joe deliberated; "that would be all right--if I could do it
alone. But as for asking you to help me--why, that would be treason
to French Pete."

"That 's what I 'm coming to. I 'll help you if you promise me a few
things. French Pete took me aboard when I ran away from the 'refuge,'
when I was starving and had no place to go, and I just can't repay him
for that by sending him to jail. 'T would n't be square. Your father
would n't have you break your word, would he?"

"No; of course not." Joe knew how sacredly his father held his word
of honor.

"Then you must promise, and your father must see it carried out, not
to press any charge against French Pete."

"All right. And now, what about yourself? You can't very well expect
to go away with him again on the _Dazzler_!"

"Oh, don't bother about me. There 's nobody to miss me. I 'm strong
enough, and know enough about it, to ship to sea as ordinary seaman.
I 'll go away somewhere over on the other side of the world, and begin
all over again."

"Then we 'll have to call it off, that 's all."

"Call what off?"

"Tying French Pete up and running for it."

"No, sir. That 's decided upon."

"Now listen here: I 'll not have a thing to do with it. I 'll go on to
Mexico first, if you don't make me one promise."

"And what 's the promise?"

"Just this: you place yourself in my hands from the moment we get ashore,
and trust to me. You don't know anything about the land, anyway--you said
so. And I 'll fix it with my father--I know I can--so that you can get to
know people of the right sort, and study and get an education, and be
something else than a bay pirate or a sailor. That 's what you 'd like,
is n't it?"

Though he said nothing, 'Frisco Kid showed how well he liked it by the
expression of his face.

"And it 'll be no more than your due, either," Joe continued. "You will
have stood by me, and you 'll have recovered my father's money. He 'll
owe it to you."

"But I don't do things that way. I don't think much of a man who does
a favor just to be paid for it."

"Now you keep quiet. How much do you think it would cost my father for
detectives and all that to recover that safe? Give me your promise, that
's all, and when I 've got things arranged, if you don't like them you
can back out. Come on; that 's fair."

They shook hands on the bargain, and proceeded to map out their line of
action for the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the storm, yelling down out of the northwest, had something entirely
different in store for the _Dazzler_ and her crew. By the time dinner was
over they were forced to put double reefs in mainsail and jib, and still
the gale had not reached its height. The sea, also, had been kicked up till
it was a continuous succession of water-mountains, frightful and withal
grand to look upon from the low deck of the sloop. It was only when the
sloops were tossed upon the crests of the waves at the same time that they
caught sight of each other. Occasional fragments of seas swashed into the
cockpit or dashed aft over the cabin, and Joe was stationed at the small
pump to keep the well dry.

At three o'clock, watching his chance, French Pete motioned to the
_Reindeer_ that he was going to heave to and get out a sea-anchor.
This latter was of the nature of a large shallow canvas bag, with the
mouth held open by triangularly lashed spars. To this the towing-ropes
were attached, on the kite principle, so that the greatest resisting
surface was presented to the water. The sloop, drifting so much faster,
would thus be held bow on to both wind and sea--the safest possible
position in a storm. Red Nelson waved his hand in response that he
understood and to go ahead.

French Pete went forward to launch the sea-anchor himself, leaving it
to 'Frisco Kid to put the helm down at the proper moment and run into
the wind. The Frenchman poised on the slippery fore-deck, waiting an
opportunity. But at that moment the _Dazzler_ lifted into an unusually
large sea, and, as she cleared the summit, caught a heavy snort of the
gale at the very instant she was righting herself to an even keel. Thus
there was not the slightest yield to this sudden pressure on her sails
and mast-gear.

There was a quick snap, followed by a crash. The steel weather-rigging
carried away at the lanyards, and mast, jib, mainsail, blocks, stays,
sea-anchor, French Pete--everything--went over the side. Almost by a
miracle, the captain clutched at the bobstay and managed to get one hand
up and over the bowsprit. The boys ran forward to drag him into safety,
and Red Nelson, observing the disaster, put up his helm and ran down to
the rescue.




CHAPTER XX

PERILOUS HOURS


French Pete was uninjured from the fall overboard with the _Dazzler's_
mast; but the sea-anchor, which had gone with him, had not escaped so
easily. The gaff of the mainsail had been driven through it, and it
refused to work. The wreckage, thumping alongside, held the sloop in
a quartering slant to the seas--not so dangerous a position as it might
be, nor so safe, either. "Good-by, old-a _Dazzler_. Never no more you
wipe ze eye of ze wind. Never no more you kick your heels at ze crack
gentlemen-yachts."

So the captain lamented, standing in the cockpit and surveying the ruin
with wet eyes. Even Joe, who bore him great dislike, felt sorry for him
at this moment. A heavier blast of the wind caught the jagged crest of
a wave and hurled it upon the helpless craft.

"Can't we save her?" Joe spluttered.

'Frisco Kid shook his head.

"Nor the safe?"

"Impossible," he answered. "Could n't lay another boat alongside for a
United States mint. As it is, it 'll keep us guessing to save ourselves."

Another sea swept over them, and the skiff, which had long since been
swamped, dashed itself to pieces against the stern. Then the _Reindeer_
towered above them on a mountain of water. Joe caught himself half
shrinking back, for it seemed she would fall down squarely on top
of them; but the next instant she dropped into the gaping trough,
and they were looking down upon her far below. It was a striking
picture--one Joe was destined never to forget. The _Reindeer_ was
wallowing in the snow-white smother, her rails flush with the sea,
the water scudding across her deck in foaming cataracts. The air was
filled with flying spray, which made the scene appear hazy and unreal.
One of the men was clinging to the perilous after-deck and striving
to cast off the water-logged skiff. The boy, leaning far over the
cockpit-rail and holding on for dear life, was passing him a knife.
The second man stood at the wheel, putting it up with flying hands
and forcing the sloop to pay off. Beside him, his injured arm in a
sling, was Red Nelson, his sou'wester gone and his fair hair plastered
in wet, wind-blown ringlets about his face. His whole attitude breathed
indomitability, courage, strength. It seemed almost as though the divine
were blazing forth from him. Joe looked upon him in sudden awe, and,
realizing the enormous possibilities of the man, felt sorrow for the way
in which they had been wasted. A thief and a robber! In that flashing
moment Joe caught a glimpse of human truth, grasped at the mystery of
success and failure. Life threw back its curtains that he might read it
and understand. Of such stuff as Red Nelson were heroes made; but they
possessed wherein he lacked--the power of choice, the careful poise of
mind, the sober control of soul: in short, the very things his father
had so often "preached" to him about.

These were the thoughts which came to Joe in the flight of a second. Then
the _Reindeer_ swept skyward and hurtled across their bow to leeward on
the breast of a mighty billow.

"Ze wild man! ze wild man!" French Pete shrieked, watching her in
amazement. "He t'inks he can jibe! He will die! We will all die! He
must come about. Oh, ze fool, ze fool!"

But time was precious, and Red Nelson ventured the chance. At the right
moment he jibed the mainsail over and hauled back on the wind.

"Here she comes! Make ready to jump for it," 'Frisco Kid cried to Joe.

The _Reindeer_ dashed by their stern, heeling over till the cabin windows
were buried, and so close that it appeared she must run them down. But a
freak of the waters lurched the two crafts apart. Red Nelson, seeing that
the manoeuver had miscarried, instantly instituted another. Throwing the
helm hard up, the _Reindeer_ whirled on her heel, thus swinging her
overhanging main-boom closer to the _Dazzler_. French Pete was the
nearest, and the opportunity could last no longer than a second. Like
a cat he sprang, catching the foot-rope with both hands. Then the
_Reindeer_ forged ahead, dipping him into the sea at every plunge. But
he clung on, working inboard every time he emerged, till he dropped into
the cockpit as Red Nelson squared off to run down to leeward and repeat
the manoeuver.

"Your turn next," 'Frisco Kid said.

"No; yours," Joe replied.

"But I know more about the water," 'Frisco Kid insisted.

"And I can swim as well as you," the other retorted.

It would have been hard to forecast the outcome of this dispute; but,
as it was, the swift rush of events made any settlement needless. The
_Reindeer_ had jibed over and was plowing back at breakneck speed,
careening at such an angle that it seemed she must surely capsize. It
was a gallant sight. Just then the storm burst in all its fury, the
shouting wind flattening the ragged crests till they boiled. The
_Reindeer_ dipped from view behind an immense wave. The wave rolled
on, but the next moment, where the sloop had been, the boys noted with
startled eyes only the angry waters! Doubting, they looked a second time.
There was no _Reindeer_. They were alone on the torn crest of the ocean!

"God have mercy on their souls!" 'Frisco Kid said solemnly.

Joe was too horrified at the suddenness of the catastrophe to utter
a sound.

"Sailed her clean under, and, with the ballast she carried, went
straight to bottom," 'Frisco Kid gasped. Then, turning to their own
pressing need, he said: "Now we 've got to look out for ourselves.
The back of the storm broke in that puff, but the sea 'll kick up
worse yet as the wind eases down. Lend a hand and hang on with the
other. We 've got to get her head-on."

Together, knives in hand, they crawled forward to where the pounding
wreckage hampered the boat sorely. 'Frisco Kid took the lead in the
ticklish work, but Joe obeyed orders like a veteran. Every minute or
two the bow was swept by the sea, and they were pounded and buffeted
about like a pair of shuttlecocks. First the main portion of the
wreckage was securely fastened to the forward bitts; then, breathless
and gasping, more often under the water than out, they cut and hacked
at the tangle of halyards, sheets, stays, and tackles. The cockpit was
taking water rapidly, and it was a race between swamping and completing
the task. At last, however, everything stood clear save the lee rigging.
'Frisco Kid slashed the lanyards. The storm did the rest. The _Dazzler_
drifted swiftly to leeward of the wreckage till the strain on the line
fast to the forward bitts jerked her bow into place and she ducked dead
into the eye of the wind and sea.

Pausing only for a cheer at the success of their undertaking, the two lads
raced aft, where the cockpit was half full and the dunnage of the cabin
all afloat. With a couple of buckets procured from the stern lockers, they
proceeded to fling the water overboard. It was heartbreaking work, for
many a barrelful was flung back upon them again; but they persevered, and
when night fell the _Dazzler_, bobbing merrily at her sea-anchor, could
boast that her pumps sucked once more. As 'Frisco Kid had said, the
backbone of the storm was broken, though the wind had veered to the west,
where it still blew stiffly.

"If she holds," 'Frisco Kid said, referring to the breeze, "we 'll drift
to the California coast sometime to-morrow. Nothing to do now but wait."

They said little, oppressed by the loss of their comrades and overcome
with exhaustion, preferring to huddle against each other for the sake
of warmth and companionship. It was a miserable night, and they shivered
constantly from the cold. Nothing dry was to be obtained aboard, food,
blankets, everything being soaked with the salt water. Sometimes they
dozed; but these intervals were short and harassing, for it seemed each
took turn in waking with such sudden starts as to rouse the other.

At last day broke, and they looked about. Wind and sea had dropped
considerably, and there was no question as to the safety of the
_Dazzler_. The coast was nearer than they had expected, its cliffs
showing dark and forbidding in the gray of dawn. But with the rising
of the sun they could see the yellow beaches, flanked by the white
surf, and beyond--it seemed too good to be true--the clustering houses
and smoking chimneys of a town.

"Santa Cruz!" 'Frisco Kid cried, "and no chance of being wrecked in
the surf!"

"Then the safe _is_ safe?" Joe queried.

"Safe! I should say so. It ain't much of a sheltered harbor for large
vessels, but with this breeze we 'll run right up the mouth of the
San Lorenzo River. Then there 's a little lake like, and a boat-house.
Water smooth as glass and hardly over your head. You see, I was down
here once before, with Red Nelson. Come on. We 'll be in in time for
breakfast."

Bringing to light some spare coils of rope from the lockers, he put a
clove-hitch on the standing part of the sea-anchor hawser, and carried
the new running-line aft, making it fast to the stern bitts. Then he
cast off from the forward bitts. The _Dazzler_ swung off into the trough,
completed the evolution, and pointed her nose toward shore. A couple of
spare oars from below, and as many water-soaked blankets, sufficed to
make a jury-mast and sail. When this was in place, Joe cast loose from
the wreckage, which was now towing astern, while 'Frisco Kid took the
tiller.




CHAPTER XXI

JOE AND HIS FATHER


"How 's that?" cried 'Frisco Kid, as he finished making the _Dazzler_
fast fore and aft, and sat down on the stringpiece of the tiny wharf.
"What 'll we do next, captain?"

Joe looked up in quick surprise. "Why--I--what 's the matter?"

"Well, ain't you captain now? Have n't we reached land? I 'm crew from
now on, ain't I? What 's your orders?"

Joe caught the spirit of it. "Pipe all hands for breakfast--that is--wait
a minute."

Diving below, he possessed himself of the money he had stowed away in his
bundle when he came aboard. Then he locked the cabin door, and they went
uptown in search of a restaurant. Over the breakfast Joe planned the next
move, and, when they had done, communicated it to 'Frisco Kid.

In response to his inquiry, the cashier told him when the morning train
started for San Francisco. He glanced at the clock.

"Just time to catch it," he said to 'Frisco Kid. "Keep the cabin doors
locked, and don't let anybody come aboard. Here 's money. Eat at the
restaurants. Dry your blankets and sleep in the cockpit. I 'll be back
to-morrow. And don't let anybody into that cabin. Good-by."

With a hasty hand-grip, he sped down the street to the depot. The conductor
looked at him with surprise when he punched his ticket. And well he might,
for it was not the custom of his passengers to travel in sea-boots and
sou'westers. But Joe did not mind. He did not even notice. He had bought
a paper and was absorbed in its contents. Before long his eyes caught an
interesting paragraph:

  SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN LOST

  The tug _Sea Queen_, chartered by Bronson & Tate,
  has returned from a fruitless cruise outside the
  Heads. No news of value could be obtained
  concerning the pirates who so daringly carried
  off their safe at San Andreas last Tuesday night.
  The lighthouse-keeper at the Farralones mentions
  having sighted the two sloops Wednesday morning,
  clawing offshore in the teeth of the gale. It is
  supposed by shipping men that they perished in
  the storm with, their ill-gotten treasure. Rumor
  has it that, in addition to the ten thousand
  dollars in gold, the safe contained papers of
  great importance.

When Joe had read this he felt a great relief. It was evident no one had
been killed at San Andreas the night of the robbery, else there would
have been some comment on it in the paper. Nor, if they had had any clue
to his own whereabouts, would they have omitted such a striking bit of
information.

At the depot in San Francisco the curious onlookers were surprised to see
a boy clad conspicuously in sea-boots and sou'wester hail a cab and dash
away. But Joe was in a hurry. He knew his father's hours, and was fearful
lest he should not catch him before he went to lunch.

The office-boy scowled at him when he pushed open the door and asked to see
Mr. Bronson; nor could the head clerk, when summoned by this disreputable
intruder, recognize him.

"Don't you know me, Mr. Willis?"

Mr. Willis looked a second time. "Why, it 's Joe Bronson! Of all things
under the sun, where did you drop from? Go right in. Your father 's in
there."

Mr. Bronson stopped dictating to his stenographer and looked up. "Hello!
Where have you been?" he said.

"To sea," Joe answered demurely, not sure of just what kind of a reception
he was to get, and fingering his sou'wester nervously.

"Short trip, eh? How did you make out?"

"Oh, so-so." He had caught the twinkle in his father's eye and knew that
it was all clear sailing. "Not so bad--er--that is, considering."

"Considering?"

"Well, not exactly that; rather, it might have been worse, while it
could n't have been better."

"That 's interesting. Sit down." Then, turning to the stenographer:
"You may go, Mr. Brown, and--hum!--I won't need you any more to-day."

It was all Joe could do to keep from crying, so kindly and naturally had
his father received him, making him feel at once as if not the slightest
thing uncommon had occurred. It seemed as if he had just returned from
a vacation, or, man-grown, had come back from some business trip.

"Now go ahead, Joe. You were speaking to me a moment ago in conundrums,
and you have aroused my curiosity to a most uncomfortable degree."

Whereupon Joe sat down and told what had happened--all that had
happened--from Monday night to that very moment. Each little incident
he related,--every detail,--not forgetting his conversations with
'Frisco Kid nor his plans concerning him. His face flushed and he was
carried away with the excitement of the narrative, while Mr. Bronson
was almost as eager, urging him on whenever he slackened his pace,
but otherwise remaining silent.

"So you see," Joe concluded, "it could n't possibly have turned out
any better."

"Ah, well," Mr. Bronson deliberated judiciously, "it may be so, and then
again it may not."

"I don't see it." Joe felt sharp disappointment at his father's qualified
approval. It seemed to him that the return of the safe merited something
stronger.

That Mr. Bronson fully comprehended the way Joe felt about it was clearly
in evidence, for he went on: "As to the matter of the safe, all hail to
you, Joe! Credit, and plenty of it, is your due. Mr. Tate and myself have
already spent five hundred dollars in attempting to recover it. So
important was it that we have also offered five thousand dollars reward,
and but this morning were considering the advisability of increasing the
amount. But, my son,"--Mr. Bronson stood up, resting a hand affectionately
on his boy's shoulder,--"there are certain things in this world which are
of still greater importance than gold, or papers which represent what gold
may buy. How about _yourself_? That 's the point. Will you sell the best
possibilities of your life right now for a million dollars?"

Joe shook his head.

"As I said, that 's the point. A human life the money of the world cannot
buy; nor can it redeem one which is misspent; nor can it make full and
complete and beautiful a life which is dwarfed and warped and ugly. How
about yourself? What is to be the effect of all these strange adventures
on your life--_your_ life, Joe? Are you going to pick yourself up to-morrow
and try it over again? or the next day? or the day after? Do you
understand? Why, Joe, do you think for one moment that I would place
against the best value of my son's life the paltry value of a safe? And
_can_ I say, until time has told me, whether this trip of yours could not
possibly have been better? Such an experience is as potent for evil as
for good. One dollar is exactly like another--there are many in the world:
but no Joe is like my Joe, nor can there be any others in the world to
take his place. Don't you see, Joe? Don't you understand?"

Mr. Bronson's voice broke slightly, and the next instant Joe was sobbing
as though his heart would break. He had never understood this father of
his before, and he knew now the pain he must have caused him, to say
nothing of his mother and sister. But the four stirring days he had
lived had given him a clearer view of the world and humanity, and he
had always possessed the power of putting his thoughts into speech; so
he spoke of these things and the lessons he had learned--the conclusions
he had drawn from his conversations with 'Frisco Kid, from his intercourse
with French Pete, from the graphic picture he retained of the _Reindeer_
and Red Nelson as they wallowed in the trough beneath him. And Mr. Bronson
listened and, in turn, understood.

"But what of 'Frisco Kid, father?" Joe asked when he had finished.

"Hum! there seems to be a great deal of promise in the boy, from what
you say of him." Mr. Bronson hid the twinkle in his eye this time. "And,
I must confess, he seems perfectly capable of shifting for himself."

"Sir?" Joe could not believe his ears.

"Let us see, then. He is at present entitled to the half of five
thousand dollars, the other half of which belongs to you. It was
you two who preserved the safe from the bottom of the Pacific, and
if you only had waited a little longer, Mr. Tate and myself would
have increased the reward."

"Oh!" Joe caught a glimmering of the light. "Part of that is easily
arranged. I simply refuse to take my half. As to the other--that is n't
exactly what 'Frisco Kid desires. He wants friends--and--and--though
you did n't say so, they are far higher than money, nor can money buy
them. He wants friends and a chance for an education, not twenty-five
hundred dollars."

"Don't you think it would be better for him to choose for himself?"

"Ah, no. That 's all arranged."

"Arranged?"

"Yes, sir. He 's captain on sea, and I 'm captain on land. So he 's under
my charge now."

"Then you have the power of attorney for him in the present negotiations?
Good. I 'll make you a proposition. The twenty-five hundred dollars shall
be held in trust by me, on his demand at any time. We 'll settle about
yours afterward. Then he shall be put on probation for, say, a year--in
our office. You can either coach him in his studies, for I am confident
now that you will be up in yours hereafter, or he can attend night-school.
And after that, if he comes through his period of probation with flying
colors, I 'll give him the same opportunities for an education that you
possess. It all depends on himself. And now, Mr. Attorney, what have you
to say to my offer in the interests of your client?"

"That I close with it at once."

Father and son shook hands.

"And what are you going to do now, Joe?"

"Send a telegram to 'Frisco Kid first, and then hurry home."

"Then wait a minute till I call up San Andreas and tell Mr. Tate the
good news, and then I 'll go with you."

"Mr. Willis," Mr. Bronson said as they left the outer office, "the
San Andreas safe is recovered, and we 'll all take a holiday. Kindly
tell the clerks that they are free for the rest of the day. And I
say," he called back as they entered the elevator, "don't forget the
office-boy."





End of Project Gutenberg's The Cruise of the Dazzler, by Jack London



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CRUISE OF THE DAZZLER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Son of the Wolf
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Son of the Wolf

Author: Jack London

Release date: October 1, 2000 [eBook #2377]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer. HTML
        version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SON OF THE WOLF ***




Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer. HTML
version by Al Haines.









The Son of the Wolf

Jack London


1900



Contains

  The White Silence
  The Son of the Wolf
  The Men of Forty Mile
  In a Far Country
  To the Man on the Trail
  The Priestly Prerogative
  The Wisdom of the Trail
  The Wife of a King
  An Odyssey of the North




The White Silence

'Carmen won't last more than a couple of days.' Mason spat out a chunk
of ice and surveyed the poor animal ruefully, then put her foot in his
mouth and proceeded to bite out the ice which clustered cruelly between
the toes.

'I never saw a dog with a highfalutin' name that ever was worth a rap,'
he said, as he concluded his task and shoved her aside. 'They just fade
away and die under the responsibility. Did ye ever see one go wrong
with a sensible name like Cassiar, Siwash, or Husky? No, sir! Take a
look at Shookum here, he's--' Snap! The lean brute flashed up, the
white teeth just missing Mason's throat.

'Ye will, will ye?' A shrewd clout behind the ear with the butt of the
dog whip stretched the animal in the snow, quivering softly, a yellow
slaver dripping from its fangs.

'As I was saying, just look at Shookum here--he's got the spirit. Bet
ye he eats Carmen before the week's out.' 'I'll bank another
proposition against that,' replied Malemute Kid, reversing the frozen
bread placed before the fire to thaw. 'We'll eat Shookum before the
trip is over. What d'ye say, Ruth?' The Indian woman settled the coffee
with a piece of ice, glanced from Malemute Kid to her husband, then at
the dogs, but vouchsafed no reply. It was such a palpable truism that
none was necessary. Two hundred miles of unbroken trail in prospect,
with a scant six days' grub for themselves and none for the dogs, could
admit no other alternative. The two men and the woman grouped about the
fire and began their meager meal. The dogs lay in their harnesses for
it was a midday halt, and watched each mouthful enviously.

'No more lunches after today,' said Malemute Kid. 'And we've got to
keep a close eye on the dogs--they're getting vicious. They'd just as
soon pull a fellow down as not, if they get a chance.' 'And I was
president of an Epworth once, and taught in the Sunday school.' Having
irrelevantly delivered himself of this, Mason fell into a dreamy
contemplation of his steaming moccasins, but was aroused by Ruth
filling his cup.

'Thank God, we've got slathers of tea! I've seen it growing, down in
Tennessee. What wouldn't I give for a hot corn pone just now! Never
mind, Ruth; you won't starve much longer, nor wear moccasins either.'
The woman threw off her gloom at this, and in her eyes welled up a
great love for her white lord--the first white man she had ever
seen--the first man whom she had known to treat a woman as something
better than a mere animal or beast of burden.

'Yes, Ruth,' continued her husband, having recourse to the macaronic
jargon in which it was alone possible for them to understand each
other; 'wait till we clean up and pull for the Outside. We'll take the
White Man's canoe and go to the Salt Water. Yes, bad water, rough
water--great mountains dance up and down all the time. And so big, so
far, so far away--you travel ten sleep, twenty sleep, forty sleep'--he
graphically enumerated the days on his fingers--'all the time water,
bad water. Then you come to great village, plenty people, just the same
mosquitoes next summer. Wigwams oh, so high--ten, twenty pines.

'Hi-yu skookum!' He paused impotently, cast an appealing glance at
Malemute Kid, then laboriously placed the twenty pines, end on end, by
sign language. Malemute Kid smiled with cheery cynicism; but Ruth's
eyes were wide with wonder, and with pleasure; for she half believed he
was joking, and such condescension pleased her poor woman's heart.

'And then you step into a--a box, and pouf! up you go.' He tossed his
empty cup in the air by way of illustration and, as he deftly caught
it, cried: 'And biff! down you come. Oh, great medicine men! You go
Fort Yukon. I go Arctic City--twenty-five sleep--big string, all the
time--I catch him string--I say, "Hello, Ruth! How are ye?"--and you
say, "Is that my good husband?"--and I say, "Yes"--and you say, "No can
bake good bread, no more soda"--then I say, "Look in cache, under
flour; good-by." You look and catch plenty soda. All the time you Fort
Yukon, me Arctic City. Hi-yu medicine man!' Ruth smiled so ingenuously
at the fairy story that both men burst into laughter. A row among the
dogs cut short the wonders of the Outside, and by the time the snarling
combatants were separated, she had lashed the sleds and all was ready
for the trail.--'Mush! Baldy! Hi! Mush on!' Mason worked his whip
smartly and, as the dogs whined low in the traces, broke out the sled
with the gee pole. Ruth followed with the second team, leaving Malemute
Kid, who had helped her start, to bring up the rear. Strong man, brute
that he was, capable of felling an ox at a blow, he could not bear to
beat the poor animals, but humored them as a dog driver rarely
does--nay, almost wept with them in their misery.

'Come, mush on there, you poor sore-footed brutes!' he murmured, after
several ineffectual attempts to start the load. But his patience was at
last rewarded, and though whimpering with pain, they hastened to join
their fellows.

No more conversation; the toil of the trail will not permit such
extravagance.

And of all deadening labors, that of the Northland trail is the worst.
Happy is the man who can weather a day's travel at the price of
silence, and that on a beaten track.  And of all heartbreaking labors,
that of breaking trail is the worst. At every step the great webbed
shoe sinks till the snow is level with the knee. Then up, straight up,
the deviation of a fraction of an inch being a certain precursor of
disaster, the snowshoe must be lifted till the surface is cleared; then
forward, down, and the other foot is raised perpendicularly for the
matter of half a yard. He who tries this for the first time, if haply
he avoids bringing his shoes in dangerous propinquity and measures not
his length on the treacherous footing, will give up exhausted at the
end of a hundred yards; he who can keep out of the way of the dogs for
a whole day may well crawl into his sleeping bag with a clear
conscience and a pride which passeth all understanding; and he who
travels twenty sleeps on the Long Trail is a man whom the gods may envy.

The afternoon wore on, and with the awe, born of the White Silence, the
voiceless travelers bent to their work. Nature has many tricks
wherewith she convinces man of his finity--the ceaseless flow of the
tides, the fury of the storm, the shock of the earthquake, the long
roll of heaven's artillery--but the most tremendous, the most
stupefying of all, is the passive phase of the White Silence. All
movement ceases, the sky clears, the heavens are as brass; the
slightest whisper seems sacrilege, and man becomes timid, affrighted at
the sound of his own voice. Sole speck of life journeying across the
ghostly wastes of a dead world, he trembles at his audacity, realizes
that his is a maggot's life, nothing more.

Strange thoughts arise unsummoned, and the mystery of all things
strives for utterance.

And the fear of death, of God, of the universe, comes over him--the
hope of the Resurrection and the Life, the yearning for immortality,
the vain striving of the imprisoned essence--it is then, if ever, man
walks alone with God.

So wore the day away. The river took a great bend, and Mason headed his
team for the cutoff across the narrow neck of land. But the dogs balked
at the high bank. Again and again, though Ruth and Malemute Kid were
shoving on the sled, they slipped back. Then came the concerted effort.
The miserable creatures, weak from hunger, exerted their last strength.
Up--up--the sled poised on the top of the bank; but the leader swung
the string of dogs behind him to the right, fouling Mason's snowshoes.
The result was grievous.

Mason was whipped off his feet; one of the dogs fell in the traces; and
the sled toppled back, dragging everything to the bottom again.

Slash! the whip fell among the dogs savagely, especially upon the one
which had fallen.

'Don't,--Mason,' entreated Malemute Kid; 'the poor devil's on its last
legs.  Wait and we'll put my team on.' Mason deliberately withheld the
whip till the last word had fallen, then out flashed the long lash,
completely curling about the offending creature's body.

Carmen--for it was Carmen--cowered in the snow, cried piteously, then
rolled over on her side.

It was a tragic moment, a pitiful incident of the trail--a dying dog,
two comrades in anger.

Ruth glanced solicitously from man to man. But Malemute Kid restrained
himself, though there was a world of reproach in his eyes, and, bending
over the dog, cut the traces. No word was spoken. The teams were
doublespanned and the difficulty overcome; the sleds were under way
again, the dying dog dragging herself along in the rear. As long as an
animal can travel, it is not shot, and this last chance is accorded
it--the crawling into camp, if it can, in the hope of a moose being
killed.

Already penitent for his angry action, but too stubborn to make amends,
Mason toiled on at the head of the cavalcade, little dreaming that
danger hovered in the air. The timber clustered thick in the sheltered
bottom, and through this they threaded their way. Fifty feet or more
from the trail towered a lofty pine. For generations it had stood
there, and for generations destiny had had this one end in
view--perhaps the same had been decreed of Mason.

He stooped to fasten the loosened thong of his moccasin. The sleds came
to a halt, and the dogs lay down in the snow without a whimper. The
stillness was weird; not a breath rustled the frost-encrusted forest;
the cold and silence of outer space had chilled the heart and smote the
trembling lips of nature. A sigh pulsed through the air--they did not
seem to actually hear it, but rather felt it, like the premonition of
movement in a motionless void. Then the great tree, burdened with its
weight of years and snow, played its last part in the tragedy of life.
He heard the warning crash and attempted to spring up but, almost
erect, caught the blow squarely on the shoulder.

The sudden danger, the quick death--how often had Malemute Kid faced
it! The pine needles were still quivering as he gave his commands and
sprang into action. Nor did the Indian girl faint or raise her voice in
idle wailing, as might many of her white sisters. At his order, she
threw her weight on the end of a quickly extemporized handspike, easing
the pressure and listening to her husband's groans, while Malemute Kid
attacked the tree with his ax. The steel rang merrily as it bit into
the frozen trunk, each stroke being accompanied by a forced, audible
respiration, the 'Huh!' 'Huh!' of the woodsman.

At last the Kid laid the pitiable thing that was once a man in the
snow. But worse than his comrade's pain was the dumb anguish in the
woman's face, the blended look of hopeful, hopeless query. Little was
said; those of the Northland are early taught the futility of words and
the inestimable value of deeds. With the temperature at sixty-five
below zero, a man cannot lie many minutes in the snow and live. So the
sled lashings were cut, and the sufferer, rolled in furs, laid on a
couch of boughs. Before him roared a fire, built of the very wood which
wrought the mishap. Behind and partially over him was stretched the
primitive fly--a piece of canvas, which caught the radiating heat and
threw it back and down upon him--a trick which men may know who study
physics at the fount.

And men who have shared their bed with death know when the call is
sounded. Mason was terribly crushed. The most cursory examination
revealed it.

His right arm, leg, and back were broken; his limbs were paralyzed from
the hips; and the likelihood of internal injuries was large. An
occasional moan was his only sign of life.

No hope; nothing to be done. The pitiless night crept slowly by--Ruth's
portion, the despairing stoicism of her race, and Malemute Kid adding
new lines to his face of bronze.

In fact, Mason suffered least of all, for he spent his time in eastern
Tennessee, in the Great Smoky Mountains, living over the scenes of his
childhood. And most pathetic was the melody of his long-forgotten
Southern vernacular, as he raved of swimming holes and coon hunts and
watermelon raids. It was as Greek to Ruth, but the Kid understood and
felt--felt as only one can feel who has been shut out for years from
all that civilization means.

Morning brought consciousness to the stricken man, and Malemute Kid
bent closer to catch his whispers.

'You remember when we foregathered on the Tanana, four years come next
ice run? I didn't care so much for her then. It was more like she was
pretty, and there was a smack of excitement about it, I think. But d'ye
know, I've come to think a heap of her. She's been a good wife to me,
always at my shoulder in the pinch. And when it comes to trading, you
know there isn't her equal. D'ye recollect the time she shot the
Moosehorn Rapids to pull you and me off that rock, the bullets whipping
the water like hailstones?--and the time of the famine at
Nuklukyeto?--when she raced the ice run to bring the news?

'Yes, she's been a good wife to me, better'n that other one. Didn't
know I'd been there?

'Never told you, eh? Well, I tried it once, down in the States. That's
why I'm here. Been raised together, too. I came away to give her a
chance for divorce. She got it.

'But that's got nothing to do with Ruth. I had thought of cleaning up
and pulling for the Outside next year--her and I--but it's too late.
Don't send her back to her people, Kid. It's beastly hard for a woman
to go back. Think of it!--nearly four years on our bacon and beans and
flour and dried fruit, and then to go back to her fish and caribou.
It's not good for her to have tried our ways, to come to know they're
better'n her people's, and then return to them. Take care of her, Kid,
why don't you--but no, you always fought shy of them--and you never
told me why you came to this country. Be kind to her, and send her back
to the States as soon as you can. But fix it so she can come
back--liable to get homesick, you know.

'And the youngster--it's drawn us closer, Kid. I only hope it is a boy.
Think of it!--flesh of my flesh, Kid. He mustn't stop in this country.
And if it's a girl, why, she can't. Sell my furs; they'll fetch at
least five thousand, and I've got as much more with the company. And
handle my interests with yours. I think that bench claim will show up.
See that he gets a good schooling; and Kid, above all, don't let him
come back. This country was not made for white men.

'I'm a gone man, Kid. Three or four sleeps at the best. You've got to
go on.  You must go on! Remember, it's my wife, it's my boy--O God! I
hope it's a boy! You can't stay by me--and I charge you, a dying man,
to pull on.'

'Give me three days,' pleaded Malemute Kid. 'You may change for the
better; something may turn up.'

'No.'

'Just three days.'

'You must pull on.'

'Two days.'

'It's my wife and my boy, Kid. You would not ask it.'

'One day.'

'No, no! I charge--'

'Only one day. We can shave it through on the grub, and I might knock
over a moose.'

'No--all right; one day, but not a minute more. And, Kid, don't--don't
leave me to face it alone. Just a shot, one pull on the trigger. You
understand. Think of it! Think of it! Flesh of my flesh, and I'll never
live to see him!

'Send Ruth here. I want to say good-by and tell her that she must think
of the boy and not wait till I'm dead. She might refuse to go with you
if I didn't. Goodby, old man; good-by.

'Kid! I say--a--sink a hole above the pup, next to the slide. I panned
out forty cents on my shovel there.

'And, Kid!' He stooped lower to catch the last faint words, the dying
man's surrender of his pride. 'I'm sorry--for--you know--Carmen.'
Leaving the girl crying softly over her man, Malemute Kid slipped into
his parka and snowshoes, tucked his rifle under his arm, and crept away
into the forest. He was no tyro in the stern sorrows of the Northland,
but never had he faced so stiff a problem as this. In the abstract, it
was a plain, mathematical proposition--three possible lives as against
one doomed one. But now he hesitated. For five years, shoulder to
shoulder, on the rivers and trails, in the camps and mines, facing
death by field and flood and famine, had they knitted the bonds of
their comradeship. So close was the tie that he had often been
conscious of a vague jealousy of Ruth, from the first time she had come
between. And now it must be severed by his own hand.

Though he prayed for a moose, just one moose, all game seemed to have
deserted the land, and nightfall found the exhausted man crawling into
camp, lighthanded, heavyhearted. An uproar from the dogs and shrill
cries from Ruth hastened him.

Bursting into the camp, he saw the girl in the midst of the snarling
pack, laying about her with an ax. The dogs had broken the iron rule of
their masters and were rushing the grub.

He joined the issue with his rifle reversed, and the hoary game of
natural selection was played out with all the ruthlessness of its
primeval environment. Rifle and ax went up and down, hit or missed with
monotonous regularity; lithe bodies flashed, with wild eyes and
dripping fangs; and man and beast fought for supremacy to the bitterest
conclusion. Then the beaten brutes crept to the edge of the firelight,
licking their wounds, voicing their misery to the stars.

The whole stock of dried salmon had been devoured, and perhaps five
pounds of flour remained to tide them over two hundred miles of
wilderness. Ruth returned to her husband, while Malemute Kid cut up the
warm body of one of the dogs, the skull of which had been crushed by
the ax. Every portion was carefully put away, save the hide and offal,
which were cast to his fellows of the moment before.

Morning brought fresh trouble. The animals were turning on each other.
Carmen, who still clung to her slender thread of life, was downed by
the pack. The lash fell among them unheeded. They cringed and cried
under the blows, but refused to scatter till the last wretched bit had
disappeared--bones, hide, hair, everything.

Malemute Kid went about his work, listening to Mason, who was back in
Tennessee, delivering tangled discourses and wild exhortations to his
brethren of other days.

Taking advantage of neighboring pines, he worked rapidly, and Ruth
watched him make a cache similar to those sometimes used by hunters to
preserve their meat from the wolverines and dogs. One after the other,
he bent the tops of two small pines toward each other and nearly to the
ground, making them fast with thongs of moosehide. Then he beat the
dogs into submission and harnessed them to two of the sleds, loading
the same with everything but the furs which enveloped Mason. These he
wrapped and lashed tightly about him, fastening either end of the robes
to the bent pines. A single stroke of his hunting knife would release
them and send the body high in the air.

Ruth had received her husband's last wishes and made no struggle. Poor
girl, she had learned the lesson of obedience well. From a child, she
had bowed, and seen all women bow, to the lords of creation, and it did
not seem in the nature of things for woman to resist. The Kid permitted
her one outburst of grief, as she kissed her husband--her own people
had no such custom--then led her to the foremost sled and helped her
into her snowshoes. Blindly, instinctively, she took the gee pole and
whip, and 'mushed' the dogs out on the trail. Then he returned to
Mason, who had fallen into a coma, and long after she was out of sight
crouched by the fire, waiting, hoping, praying for his comrade to die.

It is not pleasant to be alone with painful thoughts in the White
Silence. The silence of gloom is merciful, shrouding one as with
protection and breathing a thousand intangible sympathies; but the
bright White Silence, clear and cold, under steely skies, is pitiless.

An hour passed--two hours--but the man would not die. At high noon the
sun, without raising its rim above the southern horizon, threw a
suggestion of fire athwart the heavens, then quickly drew it back.
Malemute Kid roused and dragged himself to his comrade's side. He cast
one glance about him. The White Silence seemed to sneer, and a great
fear came upon him. There was a sharp report; Mason swung into his
aerial sepulcher, and Malemute Kid lashed the dogs into a wild gallop
as he fled across the snow.



The Son of the Wolf

Man rarely places a proper valuation upon his womankind, at least not
until deprived of them. He has no conception of the subtle atmosphere
exhaled by the sex feminine, so long as he bathes in it; but let it be
withdrawn, and an ever-growing void begins to manifest itself in his
existence, and he becomes hungry, in a vague sort of way, for a
something so indefinite that he cannot characterize it. If his comrades
have no more experience than himself, they will shake their heads
dubiously and dose him with strong physic. But the hunger will continue
and become stronger; he will lose interest in the things of his
everyday life and wax morbid; and one day, when the emptiness has
become unbearable, a revelation will dawn upon him.

In the Yukon country, when this comes to pass, the man usually
provisions a poling boat, if it is summer, and if winter, harnesses his
dogs, and heads for the Southland. A few months later, supposing him to
be possessed of a faith in the country, he returns with a wife to share
with him in that faith, and incidentally in his hardships. This but
serves to show the innate selfishness of man. It also brings us to the
trouble of 'Scruff' Mackenzie, which occurred in the old days, before
the country was stampeded and staked by a tidal-wave of the
che-cha-quas, and when the Klondike's only claim to notice was its
salmon fisheries.

'Scruff' Mackenzie bore the earmarks of a frontier birth and a frontier
life.

His face was stamped with twenty-five years of incessant struggle with
Nature in her wildest moods,--the last two, the wildest and hardest of
all, having been spent in groping for the gold which lies in the shadow
of the Arctic Circle. When the yearning sickness came upon him, he was
not surprised, for he was a practical man and had seen other men thus
stricken. But he showed no sign of his malady, save that he worked
harder. All summer he fought mosquitoes and washed the sure-thing bars
of the Stuart River for a double grubstake. Then he floated a raft of
houselogs down the Yukon to Forty Mile, and put together as comfortable
a cabin as any the camp could boast of. In fact, it showed such cozy
promise that many men elected to be his partner and to come and live
with him. But he crushed their aspirations with rough speech, peculiar
for its strength and brevity, and bought a double supply of grub from
the trading-post.

As has been noted, 'Scruff' Mackenzie was a practical man. If he wanted
a thing he usually got it, but in doing so, went no farther out of his
way than was necessary. Though a son of toil and hardship, he was
averse to a journey of six hundred miles on the ice, a second of two
thousand miles on the ocean, and still a third thousand miles or so to
his last stamping-grounds,--all in the mere quest of a wife. Life was
too short. So he rounded up his dogs, lashed a curious freight to his
sled, and faced across the divide whose westward slopes were drained by
the head-reaches of the Tanana.

He was a sturdy traveler, and his wolf-dogs could work harder and
travel farther on less grub than any other team in the Yukon. Three
weeks later he strode into a hunting-camp of the Upper Tanana Sticks.
They marveled at his temerity; for they had a bad name and had been
known to kill white men for as trifling a thing as a sharp ax or a
broken rifle.

But he went among them single-handed, his bearing being a delicious
composite of humility, familiarity, sang-froid, and insolence. It
required a deft hand and deep knowledge of the barbaric mind
effectually to handle such diverse weapons; but he was a past-master in
the art, knowing when to conciliate and when to threaten with Jove-like
wrath.

He first made obeisance to the Chief Thling-Tinneh, presenting him with
a couple of pounds of black tea and tobacco, and thereby winning his
most cordial regard. Then he mingled with the men and maidens, and that
night gave a potlach.

The snow was beaten down in the form of an oblong, perhaps a hundred
feet in length and quarter as many across. Down the center a long fire
was built, while either side was carpeted with spruce boughs. The
lodges were forsaken, and the fivescore or so members of the tribe gave
tongue to their folk-chants in honor of their guest.

'Scruff' Mackenzie's two years had taught him the not many hundred
words of their vocabulary, and he had likewise conquered their deep
gutturals, their Japanese idioms, constructions, and honorific and
agglutinative particles. So he made oration after their manner,
satisfying their instinctive poetry-love with crude flights of
eloquence and metaphorical contortions. After Thling-Tinneh and the
Shaman had responded in kind, he made trifling presents to the menfolk,
joined in their singing, and proved an expert in their fifty-two-stick
gambling game.

And they smoked his tobacco and were pleased. But among the younger men
there was a defiant attitude, a spirit of braggadocio, easily
understood by the raw insinuations of the toothless squaws and the
giggling of the maidens. They had known few white men, 'Sons of the
Wolf,' but from those few they had learned strange lessons.

Nor had 'Scruff' Mackenzie, for all his seeming carelessness, failed to
note these phenomena. In truth, rolled in his sleeping-furs, he thought
it all over, thought seriously, and emptied many pipes in mapping out a
campaign. One maiden only had caught his fancy,--none other than
Zarinska, daughter to the chief. In features, form, and poise,
answering more nearly to the white man's type of beauty, she was almost
an anomaly among her tribal sisters. He would possess her, make her his
wife, and name her--ah, he would name her Gertrude! Having thus
decided, he rolled over on his side and dropped off to sleep, a true
son of his all-conquering race, a Samson among the Philistines.

It was slow work and a stiff game; but 'Scruff' Mackenzie maneuvered
cunningly, with an unconcern which served to puzzle the Sticks. He took
great care to impress the men that he was a sure shot and a mighty
hunter, and the camp rang with his plaudits when he brought down a
moose at six hundred yards. Of a night he visited in Chief
Thling-Tinneh's lodge of moose and cariboo skins, talking big and
dispensing tobacco with a lavish hand. Nor did he fail to likewise
honor the Shaman; for he realized the medicine-man's influence with his
people, and was anxious to make of him an ally. But that worthy was
high and mighty, refused to be propitiated, and was unerringly marked
down as a prospective enemy.

Though no opening presented for an interview with Zarinska, Mackenzie
stole many a glance to her, giving fair warning of his intent. And well
she knew, yet coquettishly surrounded herself with a ring of women
whenever the men were away and he had a chance. But he was in no hurry;
besides, he knew she could not help but think of him, and a few days of
such thought would only better his suit.

At last, one night, when he deemed the time to be ripe, he abruptly
left the chief's smoky dwelling and hastened to a neighboring lodge. As
usual, she sat with squaws and maidens about her, all engaged in sewing
moccasins and beadwork. They laughed at his entrance, and badinage,
which linked Zarinska to him, ran high. But one after the other they
were unceremoniously bundled into the outer snow, whence they hurried
to spread the tale through all the camp.

His cause was well pleaded, in her tongue, for she did not know his,
and at the end of two hours he rose to go.

'So Zarinska will come to the White Man's lodge? Good! I go now to have
talk with thy father, for he may not be so minded. And I will give him
many tokens; but he must not ask too much. If he say no? Good! Zarinska
shall yet come to the White Man's lodge.'

He had already lifted the skin flap to depart, when a low exclamation
brought him back to the girl's side. She brought herself to her knees
on the bearskin mat, her face aglow with true Eve-light, and shyly
unbuckled his heavy belt. He looked down, perplexed, suspicious, his
ears alert for the slightest sound without.

But her next move disarmed his doubt, and he smiled with pleasure. She
took from her sewing bag a moosehide sheath, brave with bright
beadwork, fantastically designed. She drew his great hunting-knife,
gazed reverently along the keen edge, half tempted to try it with her
thumb, and shot it into place in its new home. Then she slipped the
sheath along the belt to its customary resting-place, just above the
hip.  For all the world, it was like a scene of olden time,--a lady and
her knight.

Mackenzie drew her up full height and swept her red lips with his
moustache, the, to her, foreign caress of the Wolf. It was a meeting of
the stone age and the steel; but she was none the less a woman, as her
crimson cheeks and the luminous softness of her eyes attested.

There was a thrill of excitement in the air as 'Scruff' Mackenzie, a
bulky bundle under his arm, threw open the flap of Thling-Tinneh's
tent. Children were running about in the open, dragging dry wood to the
scene of the potlach, a babble of women's voices was growing in
intensity, the young men were consulting in sullen groups, while from
the Shaman's lodge rose the eerie sounds of an incantation.

The chief was alone with his blear-eyed wife, but a glance sufficed to
tell Mackenzie that the news was already told. So he plunged at once
into the business, shifting the beaded sheath prominently to the fore
as advertisement of the betrothal.

'O Thling-Tinneh, mighty chief of the Sticks And the land of the
Tanana, ruler of the salmon and the bear, the moose and the cariboo!
The White Man is before thee with a great purpose. Many moons has his
lodge been empty, and he is lonely. And his heart has eaten itself in
silence, and grown hungry for a woman to sit beside him in his lodge,
to meet him from the hunt with warm fire and good food. He has heard
strange things, the patter of baby moccasins and the sound of
children's voices. And one night a vision came upon him, and he beheld
the Raven, who is thy father, the great Raven, who is the father of all
the Sticks. And the Raven spake to the lonely White Man, saying: "Bind
thou thy moccasins upon thee, and gird thy snow-shoes on, and lash thy
sled with food for many sleeps and fine tokens for the Chief
Thling-Tinneh. For thou shalt turn thy face to where the mid-spring sun
is wont to sink below the land and journey to this great chief's
hunting-grounds. There thou shalt make big presents, and Thling-Tinneh,
who is my son, shall become to thee as a father. In his lodge there is
a maiden into whom I breathed the breath of life for thee. This maiden
shalt thou take to wife." 'O Chief, thus spake the great Raven; thus do
I lay many presents at thy feet; thus am I come to take thy daughter!'
The old man drew his furs about him with crude consciousness of
royalty, but delayed reply while a youngster crept in, delivered a
quick message to appear before the council, and was gone.

'O White Man, whom we have named Moose-Killer, also known as the Wolf,
and the Son of the Wolf! We know thou comest of a mighty race; we are
proud to have thee our potlach-guest; but the king-salmon does not mate
with the dogsalmon, nor the Raven with the Wolf.' 'Not so!' cried
Mackenzie. 'The daughters of the Raven have I met in the camps of the
Wolf,--the squaw of Mortimer, the squaw of Tregidgo, the squaw of
Barnaby, who came two ice-runs back, and I have heard of other squaws,
though my eyes beheld them not.' 'Son, your words are true; but it were
evil mating, like the water with the sand, like the snow-flake with the
sun. But met you one Mason and his squaw' No?

He came ten ice-runs ago,--the first of all the Wolves. And with him
there was a mighty man, straight as a willow-shoot, and tall; strong as
the bald-faced grizzly, with a heart like the full summer moon; his-'
'Oh!' interrupted Mackenzie, recognizing the well-known Northland
figure, 'Malemute Kid!' 'The same,--a mighty man. But saw you aught of
the squaw? She was full sister to Zarinska.' 'Nay, Chief; but I have
heard. Mason--far, far to the north, a spruce-tree, heavy with years,
crushed out his life beneath. But his love was great, and he had much
gold. With this, and her boy, she journeyed countless sleeps toward the
winter's noonday sun, and there she yet lives,--no biting frost, no
snow, no summer's midnight sun, no winter's noonday night.'

A second messenger interrupted with imperative summons from the council.

As Mackenzie threw him into the snow, he caught a glimpse of the
swaying forms before the council-fire, heard the deep basses of the men
in rhythmic chant, and knew the Shaman was fanning the anger of his
people. Time pressed. He turned upon the chief.

'Come! I wish thy child. And now, see! Here are tobacco, tea, many cups
of sugar, warm blankets, handkerchiefs, both good and large; and here,
a true rifle, with many bullets and much powder.' 'Nay,' replied the
old man, struggling against the great wealth spread before him. 'Even
now are my people come together. They will not have this marriage.'

'But thou art chief.' 'Yet do my young men rage because the Wolves have
taken their maidens so that they may not marry.' 'Listen, O
Thling-Tinneh! Ere the night has passed into the day, the Wolf shall
face his dogs to the Mountains of the East and fare forth to the
Country of the Yukon. And Zarinska shall break trail for his dogs.'
'And ere the night has gained its middle, my young men may fling to the
dogs the flesh of the Wolf, and his bones be scattered in the snow till
the springtime lay them bare.' It was threat and counter-threat.
Mackenzie's bronzed face flushed darkly. He raised his voice. The old
squaw, who till now had sat an impassive spectator, made to creep by
him for the door.

The song of the men broke suddenly and there was a hubbub of many
voices as he whirled the old woman roughly to her couch of skins.

'Again I cry--listen, O Thling-Tinneh! The Wolf dies with teeth
fast-locked, and with him there shall sleep ten of thy strongest
men,--men who are needed, for the hunting is not begun, and the fishing
is not many moons away. And again, of what profit should I die? I know
the custom of thy people; thy share of my wealth shall be very small.
Grant me thy child, and it shall all be thine. And yet again, my
brothers will come, and they are many, and their maws are never filled;
and the daughters of the Raven shall bear children in the lodges of the
Wolf. My people are greater than thy people. It is destiny. Grant, and
all this wealth is thine.' Moccasins were crunching the snow without.
Mackenzie threw his rifle to cock, and loosened the twin Colts in his
belt.

'Grant, O Chief!' 'And yet will my people say no.' 'Grant, and the
wealth is thine. Then shall I deal with thy people after.' 'The Wolf
will have it so. I will take his tokens,--but I would warn him.'
Mackenzie passed over the goods, taking care to clog the rifle's
ejector, and capping the bargain with a kaleidoscopic silk kerchief.
The Shaman and half a dozen young braves entered, but he shouldered
boldly among them and passed out.

'Pack!' was his laconic greeting to Zarinska as he passed her lodge and
hurried to harness his dogs. A few minutes later he swept into the
council at the head of the team, the woman by his side. He took his
place at the upper end of the oblong, by the side of the chief. To his
left, a step to the rear, he stationed Zarinska, her proper place.
Besides, the time was ripe for mischief, and there was need to guard
his back.

On either side, the men crouched to the fire, their voices lifted in a
folk-chant out of the forgotten past. Full of strange, halting cadences
and haunting recurrences, it was not beautiful. 'Fearful' may
inadequately express it. At the lower end, under the eye of the Shaman,
danced half a score of women. Stern were his reproofs of those who did
not wholly abandon themselves to the ecstasy of the rite. Half hidden
in their heavy masses of raven hair, all dishevelled and falling to
their waists, they slowly swayed to and fro, their forms rippling to an
ever-changing rhythm.

It was a weird scene; an anachronism. To the south, the nineteenth
century was reeling off the few years of its last decade; here
flourished man primeval, a shade removed from the prehistoric
cave-dweller, forgotten fragment of the Elder World. The tawny
wolf-dogs sat between their skin-clad masters or fought for room, the
firelight cast backward from their red eyes and dripping fangs. The
woods, in ghostly shroud, slept on unheeding.

The White Silence, for the moment driven to the rimming forest, seemed
ever crushing inward; the stars danced with great leaps, as is their
wont in the time of the Great Cold; while the Spirits of the Pole
trailed their robes of glory athwart the heavens.

'Scruff' Mackenzie dimly realized the wild grandeur of the setting as
his eyes ranged down the fur-fringed sides in quest of missing faces.
They rested for a moment on a newborn babe, suckling at its mother's
naked breast. It was forty below,--seven and odd degrees of frost. He
thought of the tender women of his own race and smiled grimly. Yet from
the loins of some such tender woman had he sprung with a kingly
inheritance,--an inheritance which gave to him and his dominance over
the land and sea, over the animals and the peoples of all the zones.
Single-handed against fivescore, girt by the Arctic winter, far from
his own, he felt the prompting of his heritage, the desire to possess,
the wild danger--love, the thrill of battle, the power to conquer or to
die.

The singing and the dancing ceased, and the Shaman flared up in rude
eloquence.

Through the sinuosities of their vast mythology, he worked cunningly
upon the credulity of his people. The case was strong. Opposing the
creative principles as embodied in the Crow and the Raven, he
stigmatized Mackenzie as the Wolf, the fighting and the destructive
principle. Not only was the combat of these forces spiritual, but men
fought, each to his totem. They were the children of Jelchs, the Raven,
the Promethean fire-bringer; Mackenzie was the child of the Wolf, or in
other words, the Devil. For them to bring a truce to this perpetual
warfare, to marry their daughters to the arch-enemy, were treason and
blasphemy of the highest order. No phrase was harsh nor figure vile
enough in branding Mackenzie as a sneaking interloper and emissary of
Satan. There was a subdued, savage roar in the deep chests of his
listeners as he took the swing of his peroration.

'Aye, my brothers, Jelchs is all-powerful! Did he not bring
heaven-borne fire that we might be warm? Did he not draw the sun, moon,
and stars, from their holes that we might see? Did he not teach us that
we might fight the Spirits of Famine and of Frost? But now Jelchs is
angry with his children, and they are grown to a handful, and he will
not help.

'For they have forgotten him, and done evil things, and trod bad
trails, and taken his enemies into their lodges to sit by their fires.
And the Raven is sorrowful at the wickedness of his children; but when
they shall rise up and show they have come back, he will come out of
the darkness to aid them. O brothers! the Fire-Bringer has whispered
messages to thy Shaman; the same shall ye hear. Let the young men take
the young women to their lodges; let them fly at the throat of the
Wolf; let them be undying in their enmity! Then shall their women
become fruitful and they shall multiply into a mighty people! And the
Raven shall lead great tribes of their fathers and their fathers'
fathers from out of the North; and they shall beat back the Wolves till
they are as last year's campfires; and they shall again come to rule
over all the land! 'Tis the message of Jelchs, the Raven.' This
foreshadowing of the Messiah's coming brought a hoarse howl from the
Sticks as they leaped to their feet. Mackenzie slipped the thumbs of
his mittens and waited. There was a clamor for the 'Fox,' not to be
stilled till one of the young men stepped forward to speak.

'Brothers! The Shaman has spoken wisely. The Wolves have taken our
women, and our men are childless. We are grown to a handful. The Wolves
have taken our warm furs and given for them evil spirits which dwell in
bottles, and clothes which come not from the beaver or the lynx, but
are made from the grass.

And they are not warm, and our men die of strange sicknesses. I, the
Fox, have taken no woman to wife; and why? Twice have the maidens which
pleased me gone to the camps of the Wolf. Even now have I laid by skins
of the beaver, of the moose, of the cariboo, that I might win favor in
the eyes of Thling-Tinneh, that I might marry Zarinska, his daughter.
Even now are her snow-shoes bound to her feet, ready to break trail for
the dogs of the Wolf. Nor do I speak for myself alone.

As I have done, so has the Bear. He, too, had fain been the father of
her children, and many skins has he cured thereto. I speak for all the
young men who know not wives. The Wolves are ever hungry. Always do
they take the choice meat at the killing. To the Ravens are left the
leavings.

'There is Gugkla,' he cried, brutally pointing out one of the women,
who was a cripple.

'Her legs are bent like the ribs of a birch canoe. She cannot gather
wood nor carry the meat of the hunters. Did the Wolves choose her?'
'Ai! ai!' vociferated his tribesmen.

'There is Moyri, whose eyes are crossed by the Evil Spirit. Even the
babes are affrighted when they gaze upon her, and it is said the
bald-face gives her the trail.

'Was she chosen?' Again the cruel applause rang out.

'And there sits Pischet. She does not hearken to my words. Never has
she heard the cry of the chit-chat, the voice of her husband, the
babble of her child.

'She lives in the White Silence. Cared the Wolves aught for her? No!
Theirs is the choice of the kill; ours is the leavings.

'Brothers, it shall not be! No more shall the Wolves slink among our
campfires. The time is come.' A great streamer of fire, the aurora
borealis, purple, green, and yellow, shot across the zenith, bridging
horizon to horizon. With head thrown back and arms extended, he swayed
to his climax.

'Behold! The spirits of our fathers have arisen and great deeds are
afoot this night!' He stepped back, and another young man somewhat
diffidently came forward, pushed on by his comrades. He towered a full
head above them, his broad chest defiantly bared to the frost. He swung
tentatively from one foot to the other.

Words halted upon his tongue, and he was ill at ease. His face was
horrible to look upon, for it had at one time been half torn away by
some terrific blow. At last he struck his breast with his clenched
fist, drawing sound as from a drum, and his voice rumbled forth as does
the surf from an ocean cavern.

'I am the Bear,--the Silver-Tip and the Son of the Silver-Tip! When my
voice was yet as a girl's, I slew the lynx, the moose, and the cariboo;
when it whistled like the wolverines from under a cache, I crossed the
Mountains of the South and slew three of the White Rivers; when it
became as the roar of the Chinook, I met the bald-faced grizzly, but
gave no trail.' At this he paused, his hand significantly sweeping
across his hideous scars.

'I am not as the Fox. My tongue is frozen like the river. I cannot make
great talk. My words are few. The Fox says great deeds are afoot this
night. Good! Talk flows from his tongue like the freshets of the
spring, but he is chary of deeds.

'This night shall I do battle with the Wolf. I shall slay him, and
Zarinska shall sit by my fire. The Bear has spoken.' Though pandemonium
raged about him, 'Scruff' Mackenzie held his ground.

Aware how useless was the rifle at close quarters, he slipped both
holsters to the fore, ready for action, and drew his mittens till his
hands were barely shielded by the elbow gauntlets. He knew there was no
hope in attack en masse, but true to his boast, was prepared to die
with teeth fast-locked. But the Bear restrained his comrades, beating
back the more impetuous with his terrible fist. As the tumult began to
die away, Mackenzie shot a glance in the direction of Zarinska. It was
a superb picture. She was leaning forward on her snow-shoes, lips apart
and nostrils quivering, like a tigress about to spring. Her great black
eyes were fixed upon her tribesmen, in fear and defiance. So extreme
the tension, she had forgotten to breathe. With one hand pressed
spasmodically against her breast and the other as tightly gripped about
the dog-whip, she was as turned to stone. Even as he looked, relief
came to her. Her muscles loosened; with a heavy sigh she settled back,
giving him a look of more than love--of worship.

Thling-Tinneh was trying to speak, but his people drowned his voice.
Then Mackenzie strode forward. The Fox opened his mouth to a piercing
yell, but so savagely did Mackenzie whirl upon him that he shrank back,
his larynx all agurgle with suppressed sound. His discomfiture was
greeted with roars of laughter, and served to soothe his fellows to a
listening mood.

'Brothers! The White Man, whom ye have chosen to call the Wolf, came
among you with fair words. He was not like the Innuit; he spoke not
lies. He came as a friend, as one who would be a brother. But your men
have had their say, and the time for soft words is past.

'First, I will tell you that the Shaman has an evil tongue and is a
false prophet, that the messages he spake are not those of the
Fire-Bringer. His ears are locked to the voice of the Raven, and out of
his own head he weaves cunning fancies, and he has made fools of you.
He has no power.

'When the dogs were killed and eaten, and your stomachs were heavy with
untanned hide and strips of moccasins; when the old men died, and the
old women died, and the babes at the dry dugs of the mothers died; when
the land was dark, and ye perished as do the salmon in the fall; aye,
when the famine was upon you, did the Shaman bring reward to your
hunters? did the Shaman put meat in your bellies? Again I say, the
Shaman is without power. Thus I spit upon his face!' Though taken aback
by the sacrilege, there was no uproar. Some of the women were even
frightened, but among the men there was an uplifting, as though in
preparation or anticipation of the miracle. All eyes were turned upon
the two central figures. The priest realized the crucial moment, felt
his power tottering, opened his mouth in denunciation, but fled
backward before the truculent advance, upraised fist, and flashing
eyes, of Mackenzie. He sneered and resumed.

'Was I stricken dead? Did the lightning burn me? Did the stars fall
from the sky and crush me? Pish! I have done with the dog. Now will I
tell you of my people, who are the mightiest of all the peoples, who
rule in all the lands. At first we hunt as I hunt, alone.

'After that we hunt in packs; and at last, like the cariboo-run, we
sweep across all the land.

'Those whom we take into our lodges live; those who will not come die.
Zarinska is a comely maiden, full and strong, fit to become the mother
of Wolves. Though I die, such shall she become; for my brothers are
many, and they will follow the scent of my dogs.

'Listen to the Law of the Wolf: Whoso taketh the life of one Wolf, the
forfeit shall ten of his people pay. In many lands has the price been
paid; in many lands shall it yet be paid.

'Now will I deal with the Fox and the Bear. It seems they have cast
eyes upon the maiden. So? Behold, I have bought her! Thling-Tinneh
leans upon the rifle; the goods of purchase are by his fire. Yet will I
be fair to the young men. To the Fox, whose tongue is dry with many
words, will I give of tobacco five long plugs.

'Thus will his mouth be wetted that he may make much noise in the
council. But to the Bear, of whom I am well proud, will I give of
blankets two; of flour, twenty cups; of tobacco, double that of the
Fox; and if he fare with me over the Mountains of the East, then will I
give him a rifle, mate to Thling-Tinneh's. If not? Good! The Wolf is
weary of speech. Yet once again will he say the Law: Whoso taketh the
life of one Wolf, the forfeit shall ten of his people pay.'

Mackenzie smiled as he stepped back to his old position, but at heart
he was full of trouble. The night was yet dark. The girl came to his
side, and he listened closely as she told of the Bear's battle-tricks
with the knife.

The decision was for war. In a trice, scores of moccasins were widening
the space of beaten snow by the fire. There was much chatter about the
seeming defeat of the Shaman; some averred he had but withheld his
power, while others conned past events and agreed with the Wolf. The
Bear came to the center of the battle-ground, a long naked
hunting-knife of Russian make in his hand. The Fox called attention to
Mackenzie's revolvers; so he stripped his belt, buckling it about
Zarinska, into whose hands he also entrusted his rifle. She shook her
head that she could not shoot,--small chance had a woman to handle such
precious things.

'Then, if danger come by my back, cry aloud, "My husband!" No; thus,
"My husband!"'

He laughed as she repeated it, pinched her cheek, and reentered the
circle. Not only in reach and stature had the Bear the advantage of
him, but his blade was longer by a good two inches. 'Scruff' Mackenzie
had looked into the eyes of men before, and he knew it was a man who
stood against him; yet he quickened to the glint of light on the steel,
to the dominant pulse of his race.

Time and again he was forced to the edge of the fire or the deep snow,
and time and again, with the foot tactics of the pugilist, he worked
back to the center.  Not a voice was lifted in encouragement, while his
antagonist was heartened with applause, suggestions, and warnings. But
his teeth only shut the tighter as the knives clashed together, and he
thrust or eluded with a coolness born of conscious strength. At first
he felt compassion for his enemy; but this fled before the primal
instinct of life, which in turn gave way to the lust of slaughter. The
ten thousand years of culture fell from him, and he was a cave-dweller,
doing battle for his female.

Twice he pricked the Bear, getting away unscathed; but the third time
caught, and to save himself, free hands closed on fighting hands, and
they came together.

Then did he realize the tremendous strength of his opponent. His
muscles were knotted in painful lumps, and cords and tendons threatened
to snap with the strain; yet nearer and nearer came the Russian steel.
He tried to break away, but only weakened himself. The fur-clad circle
closed in, certain of and anxious to see the final stroke. But with
wrestler's trick, swinging partly to the side, he struck at his
adversary with his head. Involuntarily the Bear leaned back, disturbing
his center of gravity. Simultaneous with this, Mackenzie tripped
properly and threw his whole weight forward, hurling him clear through
the circle into the deep snow. The Bear floundered out and came back
full tilt.

'O my husband!' Zarinska's voice rang out, vibrant with danger.

To the twang of a bow-string, Mackenzie swept low to the ground, and a
bonebarbed arrow passed over him into the breast of the Bear, whose
momentum carried him over his crouching foe. The next instant Mackenzie
was up and about. The bear lay motionless, but across the fire was the
Shaman, drawing a second arrow. Mackenzie's knife leaped short in the
air. He caught the heavy blade by the point. There was a flash of light
as it spanned the fire. Then the Shaman, the hilt alone appearing
without his throat, swayed and pitched forward into the glowing embers.

Click! Click!--the Fox had possessed himself of Thling-Tinneh's rifle
and was vainly trying to throw a shell into place. But he dropped it at
the sound of Mackenzie's laughter.

'So the Fox has not learned the way of the plaything? He is yet a woman.

'Come! Bring it, that I may show thee!' The Fox hesitated.

'Come, I say!' He slouched forward like a beaten cur.

'Thus, and thus; so the thing is done.' A shell flew into place and the
trigger was at cock as Mackenzie brought it to shoulder.

'The Fox has said great deeds were afoot this night, and he spoke true.
There have been great deeds, yet least among them were those of the
Fox. Is he still intent to take Zarinska to his lodge? Is he minded to
tread the trail already broken by the Shaman and the Bear?

'No? Good!'

Mackenzie turned contemptuously and drew his knife from the priest's
throat.

'Are any of the young men so minded? If so, the Wolf will take them by
two and three till none are left. No? Good! Thling-Tinneh, I now give
thee this rifle a second time. If, in the days to come, thou shouldst
journey to the Country of the Yukon, know thou that there shall always
be a place and much food by the fire of the Wolf. The night is now
passing into the day. I go, but I may come again. And for the last
time, remember the Law of the Wolf!' He was supernatural in their sight
as he rejoined Zarinska. She took her place at the head of the team,
and the dogs swung into motion. A few moments later they were swallowed
up by the ghostly forest. Till now Mackenzie had waited; he slipped
into his snow-shoes to follow.

'Has the Wolf forgotten the five long plugs?' Mackenzie turned upon the
Fox angrily; then the humor of it struck him.

'I will give thee one short plug.' 'As the Wolf sees fit,' meekly
responded the Fox, stretching out his hand.



The Men of Forty Mile

When Big Jim Belden ventured the apparently innocuous proposition that
mush-ice was 'rather pecooliar,' he little dreamed of what it would
lead to.

Neither did Lon McFane, when he affirmed that anchor-ice was even more
so; nor did Bettles, as he instantly disagreed, declaring the very
existence of such a form to be a bugaboo.

'An' ye'd be tellin' me this,' cried Lon, 'after the years ye've spint
in the land! An' we atin' out the same pot this many's the day!' 'But
the thing's agin reasin,' insisted Bettles.

'Look you, water's warmer than ice--' 'An' little the difference, once
ye break through.'

'Still it's warmer, because it ain't froze. An' you say it freezes on
the bottom?' 'Only the anchor-ice, David, only the anchor-ice. An' have
ye niver drifted along, the water clear as glass, whin suddin, belike a
cloud over the sun, the mushy-ice comes bubblin' up an' up till from
bank to bank an' bind to bind it's drapin' the river like a first
snowfall?' 'Unh, hunh! more'n once when I took a doze at the
steering-oar. But it allus come out the nighest side-channel, an' not
bubblin' up an' up.' 'But with niver a wink at the helm?'

'No; nor you. It's agin reason. I'll leave it to any man!' Bettles
appealed to the circle about the stove, but the fight was on between
himself and Lon McFane.

'Reason or no reason, it's the truth I'm tellin' ye. Last fall, a year
gone, 'twas Sitka Charley and meself saw the sight, droppin' down the
riffle ye'll remember below Fort Reliance. An' regular fall weather it
was--the glint o' the sun on the golden larch an' the quakin' aspens;
an' the glister of light on ivery ripple; an' beyand, the winter an'
the blue haze of the North comin' down hand in hand. It's well ye know
the same, with a fringe to the river an' the ice formin' thick in the
eddies--an' a snap an' sparkle to the air, an' ye a-feelin' it through
all yer blood, a-takin' new lease of life with ivery suck of it. 'Tis
then, me boy, the world grows small an' the wandtherlust lays ye by the
heels.

'But it's meself as wandthers. As I was sayin', we a-paddlin', with
niver a sign of ice, barrin' that by the eddies, when the Injun lifts
his paddle an' sings out, "Lon McFane! Look ye below!" So have I heard,
but niver thought to see! As ye know, Sitka Charley, like meself, niver
drew first breath in the land; so the sight was new. Then we drifted,
with a head over ayther side, peerin' down through the sparkly water.
For the world like the days I spint with the pearlers, watchin' the
coral banks a-growin' the same as so many gardens under the sea. There
it was, the anchor-ice, clingin' an' clusterin' to ivery rock, after
the manner of the white coral.

'But the best of the sight was to come. Just after clearin' the tail of
the riffle, the water turns quick the color of milk, an' the top of it
in wee circles, as when the graylin' rise in the spring, or there's a
splatter of wet from the sky. 'Twas the anchor-ice comin' up. To the
right, to the lift, as far as iver a man cud see, the water was covered
with the same.

An' like so much porridge it was, slickin' along the bark of the canoe,
stickin' like glue to the paddles. It's many's the time I shot the
self-same riffle before, and it's many's the time after, but niver a
wink of the same have I seen. 'Twas the sight of a lifetime.' 'Do
tell!' dryly commented Bettles. 'D'ye think I'd b'lieve such a yarn?
I'd ruther say the glister of light'd gone to your eyes, and the snap
of the air to your tongue.' ''Twas me own eyes that beheld it, an' if
Sitka Charley was here, he'd be the lad to back me.' 'But facts is
facts, an' they ain't no gettin' round 'em. It ain't in the nature of
things for the water furtherest away from the air to freeze first.'
'But me own eyes-' 'Don't git het up over it,' admonished Bettles, as
the quick Celtic anger began to mount.

'Then yer not after belavin' me?' 'Sence you're so blamed forehanded
about it, no; I'd b'lieve nature first, and facts.'

'Is it the lie ye'd be givin' me?' threatened Lon. 'Ye'd better be
askin' that Siwash wife of yours. I'll lave it to her, for the truth I
spake.' Bettles flared up in sudden wrath. The Irishman had unwittingly
wounded him; for his wife was the half-breed daughter of a Russian
fur-trader, married to him in the Greek Mission of Nulato, a thousand
miles or so down the Yukon, thus being of much higher caste than the
common Siwash, or native, wife. It was a mere Northland nuance, which
none but the Northland adventurer may understand.

'I reckon you kin take it that way,' was his deliberate affirmation.

The next instant Lon McFane had stretched him on the floor, the circle
was broken up, and half a dozen men had stepped between.

Bettles came to his feet, wiping the blood from his mouth. 'It hain't
new, this takin' and payin' of blows, and don't you never think but
that this will be squared.' 'An' niver in me life did I take the lie
from mortal man,' was the retort courteous. 'An' it's an avil day I'll
not be to hand, waitin' an' willin' to help ye lift yer debts, barrin'
no manner of way.'

'Still got that 38-55?' Lon nodded.

'But you'd better git a more likely caliber. Mine'll rip holes through
you the size of walnuts.'

'Niver fear; it's me own slugs smell their way with soft noses, an'
they'll spread like flapjacks against the coming out beyand. An'
when'll I have the pleasure of waitin' on ye? The waterhole's a
strikin' locality.' ''Tain't bad. Jest be there in an hour, and you
won't set long on my coming.' Both men mittened and left the Post,
their ears closed to the remonstrances of their comrades. It was such a
little thing; yet with such men, little things, nourished by quick
tempers and stubborn natures, soon blossomed into big things.

Besides, the art of burning to bedrock still lay in the womb of the
future, and the men of Forty-Mile, shut in by the long Arctic winter,
grew high-stomached with overeating and enforced idleness, and became
as irritable as do the bees in the fall of the year when the hives are
overstocked with honey.

There was no law in the land. The mounted police was also a thing of
the future. Each man measured an offense, and meted out the punishment
inasmuch as it affected himself.

Rarely had combined action been necessary, and never in all the dreary
history of the camp had the eighth article of the Decalogue been
violated.

Big Jim Belden called an impromptu meeting. Scruff Mackenzie was placed
as temporary chairman, and a messenger dispatched to solicit Father
Roubeau's good offices. Their position was paradoxical, and they knew
it. By the right of might could they interfere to prevent the duel; yet
such action, while in direct line with their wishes, went counter to
their opinions. While their rough-hewn, obsolete ethics recognized the
individual prerogative of wiping out blow with blow, they could not
bear to think of two good comrades, such as Bettles and McFane, meeting
in deadly battle. Deeming the man who would not fight on provocation a
dastard, when brought to the test it seemed wrong that he should fight.

But a scurry of moccasins and loud cries, rounded off with a
pistol-shot, interrupted the discussion. Then the storm-doors opened
and Malemute Kid entered, a smoking Colt's in his hand, and a merry
light in his eye.

'I got him.' He replaced the empty shell, and added, 'Your dog,
Scruff.' 'Yellow Fang?'

Mackenzie asked.

'No; the lop-eared one.' 'The devil! Nothing the matter with him.'
'Come out and take a look.' 'That's all right after all. Buess he's got
'em, too. Yellow Fang came back this morning and took a chunk out of
him, and came near to making a widower of me. Made a rush for Zarinska,
but she whisked her skirts in his face and escaped with the loss of the
same and a good roll in the snow. Then he took to the woods again. Hope
he don't come back. Lost any yourself?' 'One--the best one of the
pack--Shookum. Started amuck this morning, but didn't get very far. Ran
foul of Sitka Charley's team, and they scattered him all over the
street. And now two of them are loose, and raging mad; so you see he
got his work in. The dog census will be small in the spring if we don't
do something.'

'And the man census, too.' 'How's that? Who's in trouble now?' 'Oh,
Bettles and Lon McFane had an argument, and they'll be down by the
waterhole in a few minutes to settle it.' The incident was repeated for
his benefit, and Malemute Kid, accustomed to an obedience which his
fellow men never failed to render, took charge of the affair. His
quickly formulated plan was explained, and they promised to follow his
lead implicitly.

'So you see,' he concluded, 'we do not actually take away their
privilege of fighting; and yet I don't believe they'll fight when they
see the beauty of the scheme. Life's a game and men the gamblers.
They'll stake their whole pile on the one chance in a thousand.

'Take away that one chance, and--they won't play.' He turned to the man
in charge of the Post. 'Storekeeper, weight out three fathoms of your
best half-inch manila.

'We'll establish a precedent which will last the men of Forty-Mile to
the end of time,' he prophesied. Then he coiled the rope about his arm
and led his followers out of doors, just in time to meet the principals.

'What danged right'd he to fetch my wife in?' thundered Bettles to the
soothing overtures of a friend. ''Twa'n't called for,' he concluded
decisively. ''Twa'n't called for,' he reiterated again and again,
pacing up and down and waiting for Lon McFane.

And Lon McFane--his face was hot and tongue rapid as he flaunted
insurrection in the face of the Church. 'Then, father,' he cried, 'it's
with an aisy heart I'll roll in me flamy blankets, the broad of me back
on a bed of coals. Niver shall it be said that Lon McFane took a lie
'twixt the teeth without iver liftin' a hand! An' I'll not ask a
blessin'. The years have been wild, but it's the heart was in the right
place.' 'But it's not the heart, Lon,' interposed Father Roubeau; 'It's
pride that bids you forth to slay your fellow man.' 'Yer Frinch,' Lon
replied. And then, turning to leave him, 'An' will ye say a mass if the
luck is against me?' But the priest smiled, thrust his moccasined feet
to the fore, and went out upon the white breast of the silent river. A
packed trail, the width of a sixteen-inch sled, led out to the
waterhole. On either side lay the deep, soft snow. The men trod in
single file, without conversation; and the black-stoled priest in their
midst gave to the function the solemn aspect of a funeral. It was a
warm winter's day for Forty-Mile--a day in which the sky, filled with
heaviness, drew closer to the earth, and the mercury sought the
unwonted level of twenty below. But there was no cheer in the warmth.
There was little air in the upper strata, and the clouds hung
motionless, giving sullen promise of an early snowfall. And the earth,
unresponsive, made no preparation, content in its hibernation.

When the waterhole was reached, Bettles, having evidently reviewed the
quarrel during the silent walk, burst out in a final ''Twa'n't called
for,' while Lon McFane kept grim silence. Indignation so choked him
that he could not speak.

Yet deep down, whenever their own wrongs were not uppermost, both men
wondered at their comrades. They had expected opposition, and this
tacit acquiescence hurt them. It seemed more was due them from the men
they had been so close with, and they felt a vague sense of wrong,
rebelling at the thought of so many of their brothers coming out, as on
a gala occasion, without one word of protest, to see them shoot each
other down. It appeared their worth had diminished in the eyes of the
community. The proceedings puzzled them.

'Back to back, David. An' will it be fifty paces to the man, or double
the quantity?'

'Fifty,' was the sanguinary reply, grunted out, yet sharply cut.

But the new manila, not prominently displayed, but casually coiled
about Malemute Kid's arm, caught the quick eye of the Irishman, and
thrilled him with a suspicious fear.

'An' what are ye doin' with the rope?' 'Hurry up!' Malemute Kid glanced
at his watch.

'I've a batch of bread in the cabin, and I don't want it to fall.
Besides, my feet are getting cold.' The rest of the men manifested
their impatience in various suggestive ways.

'But the rope, Kid' It's bran' new, an' sure yer bread's not that heavy
it needs raisin' with the like of that?' Bettles by this time had faced
around. Father Roubeau, the humor of the situation just dawning on him,
hid a smile behind his mittened hand.

'No, Lon; this rope was made for a man.' Malemute Kid could be very
impressive on occasion.

'What man?' Bettles was becoming aware of a personal interest.

'The other man.' 'An' which is the one ye'd mane by that?' 'Listen,
Lon--and you, too, Bettles! We've been talking this little trouble of
yours over, and we've come to one conclusion. We know we have no right
to stop your fighting-' 'True for ye, me lad!' 'And we're not going to.
But this much we can do, and shall do--make this the only duel in the
history of Forty-Mile, set an example for every che-cha-qua that comes
up or down the Yukon. The man who escapes killing shall be hanged to
the nearest tree. Now, go ahead!'

Lon smiled dubiously, then his face lighted up. 'Pace her off,
David--fifty paces, wheel, an' niver a cease firin' till a lad's down
for good. 'Tis their hearts'll niver let them do the deed, an' it's
well ye should know it for a true Yankee bluff.'

He started off with a pleased grin on his face, but Malemute Kid halted
him.

'Lon! It's a long while since you first knew me?' 'Many's the day.'
'And you, Bettles?'

'Five year next June high water.' 'And have you once, in all that time,
known me to break my word' Or heard of me breaking it?' Both men shook
their heads, striving to fathom what lay beyond.

'Well, then, what do you think of a promise made by me?' 'As good as
your bond,' from Bettles.

'The thing to safely sling yer hopes of heaven by,' promptly endorsed
Lon McFane.

'Listen! I, Malemute Kid, give you my word--and you know what that
means that the man who is not shot stretches rope within ten minutes
after the shooting.' He stepped back as Pilate might have done after
washing his hands.

A pause and a silence came over the men of Forty-Mile. The sky drew
still closer, sending down a crystal flight of frost--little geometric
designs, perfect, evanescent as a breath, yet destined to exist till
the returning sun had covered half its northern journey.

Both men had led forlorn hopes in their time--led with a curse or a
jest on their tongues, and in their souls an unswerving faith in the
God of Chance. But that merciful deity had been shut out from the
present deal. They studied the face of Malemute Kid, but they studied
as one might the Sphinx. As the quiet minutes passed, a feeling that
speech was incumbent on them began to grow. At last the howl of a
wolf-dog cracked the silence from the direction of Forty-Mile. The
weird sound swelled with all the pathos of a breaking heart, then died
away in a long-drawn sob.

'Well I be danged!' Bettles turned up the collar of his mackinaw jacket
and stared about him helplessly.

'It's a gloryus game yer runnin', Kid,' cried Lon McFane. 'All the
percentage of the house an' niver a bit to the man that's buckin'. The
Devil himself'd niver tackle such a cinch--and damned if I do.' There
were chuckles, throttled in gurgling throats, and winks brushed away
with the frost which rimed the eyelashes, as the men climbed the
ice-notched bank and started across the street to the Post. But the
long howl had drawn nearer, invested with a new note of menace. A woman
screamed round the corner. There was a cry of, 'Here he comes!' Then an
Indian boy, at the head of half a dozen frightened dogs, racing with
death, dashed into the crowd. And behind came Yellow Fang, a bristle of
hair and a flash of gray. Everybody but the Yankee fled.

The Indian boy had tripped and fallen. Bettles stopped long enough to
grip him by the slack of his furs, then headed for a pile of cordwood
already occupied by a number of his comrades. Yellow Fang, doubling
after one of the dogs, came leaping back. The fleeing animal, free of
the rabies, but crazed with fright, whipped Bettles off his feet and
flashed on up the street. Malemute Kid took a flying shot at Yellow
Fang. The mad dog whirled a half airspring, came down on his back,
then, with a single leap, covered half the distance between himself and
Bettles.

But the fatal spring was intercepted. Lon McFane leaped from the
woodpile, countering him in midair. Over they rolled, Lon holding him
by the throat at arm's length, blinking under the fetid slaver which
sprayed his face. Then Bettles, revolver in hand and coolly waiting a
chance, settled the combat.

''Twas a square game, Kid,' Lon remarked, rising to his feet and
shaking the snow from out his sleeves; 'with a fair percentage to
meself that bucked it.' That night, while Lon McFane sought the
forgiving arms of the Church in the direction of Father Roubeau's
cabin, Malemute Kid talked long to little purpose.

'But would you,' persisted Mackenzie, 'supposing they had fought?'
'Have I ever broken my word?' 'No; but that isn't the point. Answer the
question. Would you?' Malemute Kid straightened up. 'Scruff, I've been
asking myself that question ever since, and--'

'Well?'

'Well, as yet, I haven't found the answer.'



In a Far Country

When a man journeys into a far country, he must be prepared to forget
many of the things he has learned, and to acquire such customs as are
inherent with existence in the new land; he must abandon the old ideals
and the old gods, and oftentimes he must reverse the very codes by
which his conduct has hitherto been shaped. To those who have the
protean faculty of adaptability, the novelty of such change may even be
a source of pleasure; but to those who happen to be hardened to the
ruts in which they were created, the pressure of the altered
environment is unbearable, and they chafe in body and in spirit under
the new restrictions which they do not understand. This chafing is
bound to act and react, producing divers evils and leading to various
misfortunes. It were better for the man who cannot fit himself to the
new groove to return to his own country; if he delay too long, he will
surely die.

The man who turns his back upon the comforts of an elder civilization,
to face the savage youth, the primordial simplicity of the North, may
estimate success at an inverse ratio to the quantity and quality of his
hopelessly fixed habits. He will soon discover, if he be a fit
candidate, that the material habits are the less important. The
exchange of such things as a dainty menu for rough fare, of the stiff
leather shoe for the soft, shapeless moccasin, of the feather bed for a
couch in the snow, is after all a very easy matter. But his pinch will
come in learning properly to shape his mind's attitude toward all
things, and especially toward his fellow man. For the courtesies of
ordinary life, he must substitute unselfishness, forbearance, and
tolerance. Thus, and thus only, can he gain that pearl of great
price--true comradeship. He must not say 'thank you'; he must mean it
without opening his mouth, and prove it by responding in kind. In
short, he must substitute the deed for the word, the spirit for the
letter.

When the world rang with the tale of Arctic gold, and the lure of the
North gripped the heartstrings of men, Carter Weatherbee threw up his
snug clerkship, turned the half of his savings over to his wife, and
with the remainder bought an outfit. There was no romance in his
nature--the bondage of commerce had crushed all that; he was simply
tired of the ceaseless grind, and wished to risk great hazards in view
of corresponding returns. Like many another fool, disdaining the old
trails used by the Northland pioneers for a score of years, he hurried
to Edmonton in the spring of the year; and there, unluckily for his
soul's welfare, he allied himself with a party of men.

There was nothing unusual about this party, except its plans. Even its
goal, like that of all the other parties, was the Klondike. But the
route it had mapped out to attain that goal took away the breath of the
hardiest native, born and bred to the vicissitudes of the Northwest.
Even Jacques Baptiste, born of a Chippewa woman and a renegade voyageur
(having raised his first whimpers in a deerskin lodge north of the
sixty-fifth parallel, and had the same hushed by blissful sucks of raw
tallow), was surprised. Though he sold his services to them and agreed
to travel even to the never-opening ice, he shook his head ominously
whenever his advice was asked.

Percy Cuthfert's evil star must have been in the ascendant, for he,
too, joined this company of argonauts. He was an ordinary man, with a
bank account as deep as his culture, which is saying a good deal. He
had no reason to embark on such a venture--no reason in the world save
that he suffered from an abnormal development of sentimentality. He
mistook this for the true spirit of romance and adventure. Many another
man has done the like, and made as fatal a mistake.

The first break-up of spring found the party following the ice-run of
Elk River. It was an imposing fleet, for the outfit was large, and they
were accompanied by a disreputable contingent of half-breed voyageurs
with their women and children. Day in and day out, they labored with
the bateaux and canoes, fought mosquitoes and other kindred pests, or
sweated and swore at the portages. Severe toil like this lays a man
naked to the very roots of his soul, and ere Lake Athabasca was lost in
the south, each member of the party had hoisted his true colors.

The two shirks and chronic grumblers were Carter Weatherbee and Percy
Cuthfert. The whole party complained less of its aches and pains than
did either of them. Not once did they volunteer for the thousand and
one petty duties of the camp. A bucket of water to be brought, an extra
armful of wood to be chopped, the dishes to be washed and wiped, a
search to be made through the outfit for some suddenly indispensable
article--and these two effete scions of civilization discovered sprains
or blisters requiring instant attention.

They were the first to turn in at night, with score of tasks yet
undone; the last to turn out in the morning, when the start should be
in readiness before the breakfast was begun.

They were the first to fall to at mealtime, the last to have a hand in
the cooking; the first to dive for a slim delicacy, the last to
discover they had added to their own another man's share. If they
toiled at the oars, they slyly cut the water at each stroke and allowed
the boat's momentum to float up the blade. They thought nobody noticed;
but their comrades swore under their breaths and grew to hate them,
while Jacques Baptiste sneered openly and damned them from morning till
night. But Jacques Baptiste was no gentleman.

At the Great Slave, Hudson Bay dogs were purchased, and the fleet sank
to the guards with its added burden of dried fish and pemican. Then
canoe and bateau answered to the swift current of the Mackenzie, and
they plunged into the Great Barren Ground. Every likely-looking
'feeder' was prospected, but the elusive 'pay-dirt' danced ever to the
north. At the Great Bear, overcome by the common dread of the Unknown
Lands, their voyageurs began to desert, and Fort of Good Hope saw the
last and bravest bending to the towlines as they bucked the current
down which they had so treacherously glided.

Jacques Baptiste alone remained. Had he not sworn to travel even to the
never-opening ice? The lying charts, compiled in main from hearsay,
were now constantly consulted.

And they felt the need of hurry, for the sun had already passed its
northern solstice and was leading the winter south again. Skirting the
shores of the bay, where the Mackenzie disembogues into the Arctic
Ocean, they entered the mouth of the Little Peel River. Then began the
arduous up-stream toil, and the two Incapables fared worse than ever.
Towline and pole, paddle and tumpline, rapids and portages--such
tortures served to give the one a deep disgust for great hazards, and
printed for the other a fiery text on the true romance of adventure.
One day they waxed mutinous, and being vilely cursed by Jacques
Baptiste, turned, as worms sometimes will. But the half-breed thrashed
the twain, and sent them, bruised and bleeding, about their work. It
was the first time either had been manhandled.

Abandoning their river craft at the headwaters of the Little Peel, they
consumed the rest of the summer in the great portage over the Mackenzie
watershed to the West Rat. This little stream fed the Porcupine, which
in turn joined the Yukon where that mighty highway of the North
countermarches on the Arctic Circle.

But they had lost in the race with winter, and one day they tied their
rafts to the thick eddy-ice and hurried their goods ashore. That night
the river jammed and broke several times; the following morning it had
fallen asleep for good. 'We can't be more'n four hundred miles from the
Yukon,' concluded Sloper, multiplying his thumb nails by the scale of
the map. The council, in which the two Incapables had whined to
excellent disadvantage, was drawing to a close.

'Hudson Bay Post, long time ago. No use um now.' Jacques Baptiste's
father had made the trip for the Fur Company in the old days,
incidentally marking the trail with a couple of frozen toes.

Sufferin' cracky!' cried another of the party. 'No whites?' 'Nary
white,' Sloper sententiously affirmed; 'but it's only five hundred more
up the Yukon to Dawson. Call it a rough thousand from here.' Weatherbee
and Cuthfert groaned in chorus.

'How long'll that take, Baptiste?' The half-breed figured for a moment.
'Workum like hell, no man play out, ten--twenty--forty--fifty days. Um
babies come' (designating the Incapables), 'no can tell. Mebbe when
hell freeze over; mebbe not then.' The manufacture of snowshoes and
moccasins ceased. Somebody called the name of an absent member, who
came out of an ancient cabin at the edge of the campfire and joined
them. The cabin was one of the many mysteries which lurk in the vast
recesses of the North. Built when and by whom, no man could tell.

Two graves in the open, piled high with stones, perhaps contained the
secret of those early wanderers. But whose hand had piled the stones?
The moment had come. Jacques Baptiste paused in the fitting of a
harness and pinned the struggling dog in the snow. The cook made mute
protest for delay, threw a handful of bacon into a noisy pot of beans,
then came to attention. Sloper rose to his feet. His body was a
ludicrous contrast to the healthy physiques of the Incapables. Yellow
and weak, fleeing from a South American fever-hole, he had not broken
his flight across the zones, and was still able to toil with men. His
weight was probably ninety pounds, with the heavy hunting knife thrown
in, and his grizzled hair told of a prime which had ceased to be. The
fresh young muscles of either Weatherbee or Cuthfert were equal to ten
times the endeavor of his; yet he could walk them into the earth in a
day's journey. And all this day he had whipped his stronger comrades
into venturing a thousand miles of the stiffest hardship man can
conceive. He was the incarnation of the unrest of his race, and the old
Teutonic stubbornness, dashed with the quick grasp and action of the
Yankee, held the flesh in the bondage of the spirit.

'All those in favor of going on with the dogs as soon as the ice sets,
say ay.' 'Ay!' rang out eight voices--voices destined to string a trail
of oaths along many a hundred miles of pain.

'Contrary minded?' 'No!' For the first time the Incapables were united
without some compromise of personal interests.

'And what are you going to do about it?' Weatherbee added belligerently.

'Majority rule! Majority rule!' clamored the rest of the party.

'I know the expedition is liable to fall through if you don't come,'
Sloper replied sweetly; 'but I guess, if we try real hard, we can
manage to do without you.

What do you say, boys?' The sentiment was cheered to the echo.

'But I say, you know,' Cuthfert ventured apprehensively; 'what's a chap
like me to do?'

'Ain't you coming with us.' 'No--o.' 'Then do as you damn well please.
We won't have nothing to say.' 'Kind o' calkilate yuh might settle it
with that canoodlin' pardner of yourn,' suggested a heavy-going
Westerner from the Dakotas, at the same time pointing out Weatherbee.
'He'll be shore to ask yuh what yur a-goin' to do when it comes to
cookin' an' gatherin' the wood.' 'Then we'll consider it all arranged,'
concluded Sloper.

'We'll pull out tomorrow, if we camp within five miles--just to get
everything in running order and remember if we've forgotten anything.'
The sleds groaned by on their steel-shod runners, and the dogs strained
low in the harnesses in which they were born to die.

Jacques Baptiste paused by the side of Sloper to get a last glimpse of
the cabin. The smoke curled up pathetically from the Yukon stovepipe.
The two Incapables were watching them from the doorway.

Sloper laid his hand on the other's shoulder.

'Jacques Baptiste, did you ever hear of the Kilkenny cats?' The
half-breed shook his head.

'Well, my friend and good comrade, the Kilkenny cats fought till
neither hide, nor hair, nor yowl, was left. You understand?--till
nothing was left. Very good.

Now, these two men don't like work. They'll be all alone in that cabin
all winter--a mighty long, dark winter. Kilkenny cats--well?' The
Frenchman in Baptiste shrugged his shoulders, but the Indian in him was
silent. Nevertheless, it was an eloquent shrug, pregnant with prophecy.
Things prospered in the little cabin at first. The rough badinage of
their comrades had made Weatherbee and Cuthfert conscious of the mutual
responsibility which had devolved upon them; besides, there was not so
much work after all for two healthy men. And the removal of the cruel
whiphand, or in other words the bulldozing half-breed, had brought with
it a joyous reaction. At first, each strove to outdo the other, and
they performed petty tasks with an unction which would have opened the
eyes of their comrades who were now wearing out bodies and souls on the
Long Trail.

All care was banished. The forest, which shouldered in upon them from
three sides, was an inexhaustible woodyard. A few yards from their door
slept the Porcupine, and a hole through its winter robe formed a
bubbling spring of water, crystal clear and painfully cold. But they
soon grew to find fault with even that. The hole would persist in
freezing up, and thus gave them many a miserable hour of ice-chopping.
The unknown builders of the cabin had extended the sidelogs so as to
support a cache at the rear. In this was stored the bulk of the party's
provisions.

Food there was, without stint, for three times the men who were fated
to live upon it. But the most of it was the kind which built up brawn
and sinew, but did not tickle the palate.

True, there was sugar in plenty for two ordinary men; but these two
were little else than children. They early discovered the virtues of
hot water judiciously saturated with sugar, and they prodigally swam
their flapjacks and soaked their crusts in the rich, white syrup.

Then coffee and tea, and especially the dried fruits, made disastrous
inroads upon it. The first words they had were over the sugar question.
And it is a really serious thing when two men, wholly dependent upon
each other for company, begin to quarrel.

Weatherbee loved to discourse blatantly on politics, while Cuthfert,
who had been prone to clip his coupons and let the commonwealth jog on
as best it might, either ignored the subject or delivered himself of
startling epigrams. But the clerk was too obtuse to appreciate the
clever shaping of thought, and this waste of ammunition irritated
Cuthfert.

He had been used to blinding people by his brilliancy, and it worked
him quite a hardship, this loss of an audience. He felt personally
aggrieved and unconsciously held his muttonhead companion responsible
for it.

Save existence, they had nothing in common--came in touch on no single
point.

Weatherbee was a clerk who had known naught but clerking all his life;
Cuthfert was a master of arts, a dabbler in oils, and had written not a
little. The one was a lower-class man who considered himself a
gentleman, and the other was a gentleman who knew himself to be such.
From this it may be remarked that a man can be a gentleman without
possessing the first instinct of true comradeship. The clerk was as
sensuous as the other was aesthetic, and his love adventures, told at
great length and chiefly coined from his imagination, affected the
supersensitive master of arts in the same way as so many whiffs of
sewer gas. He deemed the clerk a filthy, uncultured brute, whose place
was in the muck with the swine, and told him so; and he was
reciprocally informed that he was a milk-and-water sissy and a cad.
Weatherbee could not have defined 'cad' for his life; but it satisfied
its purpose, which after all seems the main point in life.

Weatherbee flatted every third note and sang such songs as 'The Boston
Burglar' and 'the Handsome Cabin Boy,' for hours at a time, while
Cuthfert wept with rage, till he could stand it no longer and fled into
the outer cold. But there was no escape. The intense frost could not be
endured for long at a time, and the little cabin crowded them--beds,
stove, table, and all--into a space of ten by twelve. The very presence
of either became a personal affront to the other, and they lapsed into
sullen silences which increased in length and strength as the days went
by. Occasionally, the flash of an eye or the curl of a lip got the
better of them, though they strove to wholly ignore each other during
these mute periods.

And a great wonder sprang up in the breast of each, as to how God had
ever come to create the other.

With little to do, time became an intolerable burden to them. This
naturally made them still lazier. They sank into a physical lethargy
which there was no escaping, and which made them rebel at the
performance of the smallest chore. One morning when it was his turn to
cook the common breakfast, Weatherbee rolled out of his blankets, and
to the snoring of his companion, lighted first the slush lamp and then
the fire. The kettles were frozen hard, and there was no water in the
cabin with which to wash. But he did not mind that. Waiting for it to
thaw, he sliced the bacon and plunged into the hateful task of
bread-making. Cuthfert had been slyly watching through his half-closed
lids.

Consequently there was a scene, in which they fervently blessed each
other, and agreed, henceforth, that each do his own cooking. A week
later, Cuthfert neglected his morning ablutions, but none the less
complacently ate the meal which he had cooked. Weatherbee grinned.
After that the foolish custom of washing passed out of their lives.

As the sugar-pile and other little luxuries dwindled, they began to be
afraid they were not getting their proper shares, and in order that
they might not be robbed, they fell to gorging themselves. The luxuries
suffered in this gluttonous contest, as did also the men.

In the absence of fresh vegetables and exercise, their blood became
impoverished, and a loathsome, purplish rash crept over their bodies.
Yet they refused to heed the warning.

Next, their muscles and joints began to swell, the flesh turning black,
while their mouths, gums, and lips took on the color of rich cream.
Instead of being drawn together by their misery, each gloated over the
other's symptoms as the scurvy took its course.

They lost all regard for personal appearance, and for that matter,
common decency. The cabin became a pigpen, and never once were the beds
made or fresh pine boughs laid underneath. Yet they could not keep to
their blankets, as they would have wished; for the frost was
inexorable, and the fire box consumed much fuel. The hair of their
heads and faces grew long and shaggy, while their garments would have
disgusted a ragpicker. But they did not care. They were sick, and there
was no one to see; besides, it was very painful to move about.

To all this was added a new trouble--the Fear of the North. This Fear
was the joint child of the Great Cold and the Great Silence, and was
born in the darkness of December, when the sun dipped below the horizon
for good. It affected them according to their natures.

Weatherbee fell prey to the grosser superstitions, and did his best to
resurrect the spirits which slept in the forgotten graves. It was a
fascinating thing, and in his dreams they came to him from out of the
cold, and snuggled into his blankets, and told him of their toils and
troubles ere they died. He shrank away from the clammy contact as they
drew closer and twined their frozen limbs about him, and when they
whispered in his ear of things to come, the cabin rang with his
frightened shrieks. Cuthfert did not understand--for they no longer
spoke--and when thus awakened he invariably grabbed for his revolver.
Then he would sit up in bed, shivering nervously, with the weapon
trained on the unconscious dreamer. Cuthfert deemed the man going mad,
and so came to fear for his life.

His own malady assumed a less concrete form. The mysterious artisan who
had laid the cabin, log by log, had pegged a wind-vane to the
ridgepole. Cuthfert noticed it always pointed south, and one day,
irritated by its steadfastness of purpose, he turned it toward the
east. He watched eagerly, but never a breath came by to disturb it.
Then he turned the vane to the north, swearing never again to touch it
till the wind did blow. But the air frightened him with its unearthly
calm, and he often rose in the middle of the night to see if the vane
had veered--ten degrees would have satisfied him. But no, it poised
above him as unchangeable as fate.

His imagination ran riot, till it became to him a fetish. Sometimes he
followed the path it pointed across the dismal dominions, and allowed
his soul to become saturated with the Fear. He dwelt upon the unseen
and the unknown till the burden of eternity appeared to be crushing
him. Everything in the Northland had that crushing effect--the absence
of life and motion; the darkness; the infinite peace of the brooding
land; the ghastly silence, which made the echo of each heartbeat a
sacrilege; the solemn forest which seemed to guard an awful,
inexpressible something, which neither word nor thought could compass.

The world he had so recently left, with its busy nations and great
enterprises, seemed very far away. Recollections occasionally
obtruded--recollections of marts and galleries and crowded
thoroughfares, of evening dress and social functions, of good men and
dear women he had known--but they were dim memories of a life he had
lived long centuries agone, on some other planet. This phantasm was the
Reality. Standing beneath the wind-vane, his eyes fixed on the polar
skies, he could not bring himself to realize that the Southland really
existed, that at that very moment it was a-roar with life and action.

There was no Southland, no men being born of women, no giving and
taking in marriage.

Beyond his bleak skyline there stretched vast solitudes, and beyond
these still vaster solitudes.

There were no lands of sunshine, heavy with the perfume of flowers.
Such things were only old dreams of paradise. The sunlands of the West
and the spicelands of the East, the smiling Arcadias and blissful
Islands of the Blest--ha! ha! His laughter split the void and shocked
him with its unwonted sound. There was no sun.

This was the Universe, dead and cold and dark, and he its only citizen.
Weatherbee? At such moments Weatherbee did not count. He was a Caliban,
a monstrous phantom, fettered to him for untold ages, the penalty of
some forgotten crime.

He lived with Death among the dead, emasculated by the sense of his own
insignificance, crushed by the passive mastery of the slumbering ages.
The magnitude of all things appalled him. Everything partook of the
superlative save himself--the perfect cessation of wind and motion, the
immensity of the snow-covered wildness, the height of the sky and the
depth of the silence. That wind-vane--if it would only move. If a
thunderbolt would fall, or the forest flare up in flame.

The rolling up of the heavens as a scroll, the crash of Doom--anything,
anything! But no, nothing moved; the Silence crowded in, and the Fear
of the North laid icy fingers on his heart.

Once, like another Crusoe, by the edge of the river he came upon a
track--the faint tracery of a snowshoe rabbit on the delicate
snow-crust. It was a revelation.

There was life in the Northland. He would follow it, look upon it,
gloat over it.

He forgot his swollen muscles, plunging through the deep snow in an
ecstasy of anticipation. The forest swallowed him up, and the brief
midday twilight vanished; but he pursued his quest till exhausted
nature asserted itself and laid him helpless in the snow.

There he groaned and cursed his folly, and knew the track to be the
fancy of his brain; and late that night he dragged himself into the
cabin on hands and knees, his cheeks frozen and a strange numbness
about his feet. Weatherbee grinned malevolently, but made no offer to
help him. He thrust needles into his toes and thawed them out by the
stove. A week later mortification set in.

But the clerk had his own troubles. The dead men came out of their
graves more frequently now, and rarely left him, waking or sleeping. He
grew to wait and dread their coming, never passing the twin cairns
without a shudder. One night they came to him in his sleep and led him
forth to an appointed task. Frightened into inarticulate horror, he
awoke between the heaps of stones and fled wildly to the cabin. But he
had lain there for some time, for his feet and cheeks were also frozen.

Sometimes he became frantic at their insistent presence, and danced
about the cabin, cutting the empty air with an axe, and smashing
everything within reach.

During these ghostly encounters, Cuthfert huddled into his blankets and
followed the madman about with a cocked revolver, ready to shoot him if
he came too near.

But, recovering from one of these spells, the clerk noticed the weapon
trained upon him.

His suspicions were aroused, and thenceforth he, too, lived in fear of
his life. They watched each other closely after that, and faced about
in startled fright whenever either passed behind the other's back. The
apprehensiveness became a mania which controlled them even in their
sleep. Through mutual fear they tacitly let the slush-lamp burn all
night, and saw to a plentiful supply of bacon-grease before retiring.
The slightest movement on the part of one was sufficient to arouse the
other, and many a still watch their gazes countered as they shook
beneath their blankets with fingers on the trigger-guards.

What with the Fear of the North, the mental strain, and the ravages of
the disease, they lost all semblance of humanity, taking on the
appearance of wild beasts, hunted and desperate. Their cheeks and
noses, as an aftermath of the freezing, had turned black.

Their frozen toes had begun to drop away at the first and second
joints. Every movement brought pain, but the fire box was insatiable,
wringing a ransom of torture from their miserable bodies. Day in, day
out, it demanded its food--a veritable pound of flesh--and they dragged
themselves into the forest to chop wood on their knees. Once, crawling
thus in search of dry sticks, unknown to each other they entered a
thicket from opposite sides.

Suddenly, without warning, two peering death's-heads confronted each
other. Suffering had so transformed them that recognition was
impossible. They sprang to their feet, shrieking with terror, and
dashed away on their mangled stumps; and falling at the cabin's door,
they clawed and scratched like demons till they discovered their
mistake.

Occasionally they lapsed normal, and during one of these sane
intervals, the chief bone of contention, the sugar, had been divided
equally between them. They guarded their separate sacks, stored up in
the cache, with jealous eyes; for there were but a few cupfuls left,
and they were totally devoid of faith in each other.

But one day Cuthfert made a mistake. Hardly able to move, sick with
pain, with his head swimming and eyes blinded, he crept into the cache,
sugar canister in hand, and mistook Weatherbee's sack for his own.

January had been born but a few days when this occurred. The sun had
some time since passed its lowest southern declination, and at meridian
now threw flaunting streaks of yellow light upon the northern sky. On
the day following his mistake with the sugar-bag, Cuthfert found
himself feeling better, both in body and in spirit. As noontime drew
near and the day brightened, he dragged himself outside to feast on the
evanescent glow, which was to him an earnest of the sun's future
intentions. Weatherbee was also feeling somewhat better, and crawled
out beside him. They propped themselves in the snow beneath the
moveless wind-vane, and waited.

The stillness of death was about them. In other climes, when nature
falls into such moods, there is a subdued air of expectancy, a waiting
for some small voice to take up the broken strain. Not so in the North.
The two men had lived seeming eons in this ghostly peace.

They could remember no song of the past; they could conjure no song of
the future. This unearthly calm had always been--the tranquil silence
of eternity.

Their eyes were fixed upon the north. Unseen, behind their backs,
behind the towering mountains to the south, the sun swept toward the
zenith of another sky than theirs. Sole spectators of the mighty
canvas, they watched the false dawn slowly grow. A faint flame began to
glow and smoulder. It deepened in intensity, ringing the changes of
reddish-yellow, purple, and saffron. So bright did it become that
Cuthfert thought the sun must surely be behind it--a miracle, the sun
rising in the north! Suddenly, without warning and without fading, the
canvas was swept clean. There was no color in the sky. The light had
gone out of the day.

They caught their breaths in half-sobs. But lo! the air was aglint with
particles of scintillating frost, and there, to the north, the
wind-vane lay in vague outline of the snow.

A shadow! A shadow! It was exactly midday. They jerked their heads
hurriedly to the south. A golden rim peeped over the mountain's snowy
shoulder, smiled upon them an instant, then dipped from sight again.

There were tears in their eyes as they sought each other. A strange
softening came over them. They felt irresistibly drawn toward each
other. The sun was coming back again. It would be with them tomorrow,
and the next day, and the next.

And it would stay longer every visit, and a time would come when it
would ride their heaven day and night, never once dropping below the
skyline. There would be no night.

The ice-locked winter would be broken; the winds would blow and the
forests answer; the land would bathe in the blessed sunshine, and life
renew.

Hand in hand, they would quit this horrid dream and journey back to the
Southland. They lurched blindly forward, and their hands met--their
poor maimed hands, swollen and distorted beneath their mittens.

But the promise was destined to remain unfulfilled. The Northland is
the Northland, and men work out their souls by strange rules, which
other men, who have not journeyed into far countries, cannot come to
understand.

An hour later, Cuthfert put a pan of bread into the oven, and fell to
speculating on what the surgeons could do with his feet when he got
back. Home did not seem so very far away now. Weatherbee was rummaging
in the cache. Of a sudden, he raised a whirlwind of blasphemy, which in
turn ceased with startling abruptness. The other man had robbed his
sugar-sack. Still, things might have happened differently, had not the
two dead men come out from under the stones and hushed the hot words in
his throat. They led him quite gently from the cache, which he forgot
to close. That consummation was reached; that something they had
whispered to him in his dreams was about to happen. They guided him
gently, very gently, to the woodpile, where they put the axe in his
hands.

Then they helped him shove open the cabin door, and he felt sure they
shut it after him--at least he heard it slam and the latch fall sharply
into place. And he knew they were waiting just without, waiting for him
to do his task.

'Carter! I say, Carter!' Percy Cuthfert was frightened at the look on
the clerk's face, and he made haste to put the table between them.

Carter Weatherbee followed, without haste and without enthusiasm. There
was neither pity nor passion in his face, but rather the patient,
stolid look of one who has certain work to do and goes about it
methodically.

'I say, what's the matter?'

The clerk dodged back, cutting off his retreat to the door, but never
opening his mouth.

'I say, Carter, I say; let's talk. There's a good chap.' The master of
arts was thinking rapidly, now, shaping a skillful flank movement on
the bed where his Smith & Wesson lay. Keeping his eyes on the madman,
he rolled backward on the bunk, at the same time clutching the pistol.

'Carter!' The powder flashed full in Weatherbee's face, but he swung
his weapon and leaped forward. The axe bit deeply at the base of the
spine, and Percy Cuthfert felt all consciousness of his lower limbs
leave him. Then the clerk fell heavily upon him, clutching him by the
throat with feeble fingers. The sharp bite of the axe had caused
Cuthfert to drop the pistol, and as his lungs panted for release, he
fumbled aimlessly for it among the blankets. Then he remembered. He
slid a hand up the clerk's belt to the sheath-knife; and they drew very
close to each other in that last clinch.

Percy Cuthfert felt his strength leave him. The lower portion of his
body was useless, The inert weight of Weatherbee crushed him--crushed
him and pinned him there like a bear under a trap. The cabin became
filled with a familiar odor, and he knew the bread to be burning. Yet
what did it matter? He would never need it. And there were all of six
cupfuls of sugar in the cache--if he had foreseen this he would not
have been so saving the last several days. Would the wind-vane ever
move? Why not' Had he not seen the sun today? He would go and see. No;
it was impossible to move. He had not thought the clerk so heavy a man.

How quickly the cabin cooled! The fire must be out. The cold was
forcing in.

It must be below zero already, and the ice creeping up the inside of
the door. He could not see it, but his past experience enabled him to
gauge its progress by the cabin's temperature. The lower hinge must be
white ere now. Would the tale of this ever reach the world? How would
his friends take it? They would read it over their coffee, most likely,
and talk it over at the clubs. He could see them very clearly, 'Poor
Old Cuthfert,' they murmured; 'not such a bad sort of a chap, after
all.' He smiled at their eulogies, and passed on in search of a Turkish
bath. It was the same old crowd upon the streets.

Strange, they did not notice his moosehide moccasins and tattered
German socks! He would take a cab. And after the bath a shave would not
be bad. No; he would eat first.

Steak, and potatoes, and green things how fresh it all was! And what
was that? Squares of honey, streaming liquid amber! But why did they
bring so much? Ha! ha! he could never eat it all.

Shine! Why certainly. He put his foot on the box. The bootblack looked
curiously up at him, and he remembered his moosehide moccasins and went
away hastily.

Hark! The wind-vane must be surely spinning. No; a mere singing in his
ears.

That was all--a mere singing. The ice must have passed the latch by
now. More likely the upper hinge was covered. Between the moss-chinked
roof-poles, little points of frost began to appear. How slowly they
grew! No; not so slowly. There was a new one, and there another.
Two--three--four; they were coming too fast to count. There were two
growing together. And there, a third had joined them.

Why, there were no more spots. They had run together and formed a sheet.

Well, he would have company. If Gabriel ever broke the silence of the
North, they would stand together, hand in hand, before the great White
Throne. And God would judge them, God would judge them!

Then Percy Cuthfert closed his eyes and dropped off to sleep.



To the Man on the Trail

'Dump it in!.' 'But I say, Kid, isn't that going it a little too
strong? Whisky and alcohol's bad enough; but when it comes to brandy
and pepper sauce and-' 'Dump it in. Who's making this punch, anyway?'
And Malemute Kid smiled benignantly through the clouds of steam. 'By
the time you've been in this country as long as I have, my son, and
lived on rabbit tracks and salmon belly, you'll learn that Christmas
comes only once per annum.

And a Christmas without punch is sinking a hole to bedrock with nary a
pay streak.'

'Stack up on that fer a high cyard,' approved Big Jim Belden, who had
come down from his claim on Mazy May to spend Christmas, and who, as
everyone knew, had been living the two months past on straight moose
meat. 'Hain't fergot the hooch we-uns made on the Tanana, hey yeh?'
'Well, I guess yes. Boys, it would have done your hearts good to see
that whole tribe fighting drunk--and all because of a glorious ferment
of sugar and sour dough. That was before your time,' Malemute Kid said
as he turned to Stanley Prince, a young mining expert who had been in
two years. 'No white women in the country then, and Mason wanted to get
married. Ruth's father was chief of the Tananas, and objected, like the
rest of the tribe. Stiff? Why, I used my last pound of sugar; finest
work in that line I ever did in my life. You should have seen the
chase, down the river and across the portage.' 'But the squaw?' asked
Louis Savoy, the tall French Canadian, becoming interested; for he had
heard of this wild deed when at Forty Mile the preceding winter.

Then Malemute Kid, who was a born raconteur, told the unvarnished tale
of the Northland Lochinvar. More than one rough adventurer of the North
felt his heartstrings draw closer and experienced vague yearnings for
the sunnier pastures of the Southland, where life promised something
more than a barren struggle with cold and death.

'We struck the Yukon just behind the first ice run,' he concluded, 'and
the tribe only a quarter of an hour behind. But that saved us; for the
second run broke the jam above and shut them out. When they finally got
into Nuklukyeto, the whole post was ready for them.

'And as to the forgathering, ask Father Roubeau here: he performed the
ceremony.' The Jesuit took the pipe from his lips but could only
express his gratification with patriarchal smiles, while Protestant and
Catholic vigorously applauded.

'By gar!' ejaculated Louis Savoy, who seemed overcome by the romance of
it. 'La petite squaw: mon Mason brav. By gar!' Then, as the first tin
cups of punch went round, Bettles the Unquenchable sprang to his feet
and struck up his favorite drinking song: 'There's Henry Ward Beecher
And Sunday-school teachers, All drink of the sassafras root; But you
bet all the same, If it had its right name, It's the juice of the
forbidden fruit.'

'Oh, the juice of the forbidden fruit,' roared out the bacchanalian
chorus, 'Oh, the juice of the forbidden fruit; But you bet all the
same, If it had its right name, It's the juice of the forbidden fruit.'

Malemute Kid's frightful concoction did its work; the men of the camps
and trails unbent in its genial glow, and jest and song and tales of
past adventure went round the board.

Aliens from a dozen lands, they toasted each and all. It was the
Englishman, Prince, who pledged 'Uncle Sam, the precocious infant of
the New World'; the Yankee, Bettles, who drank to 'The Queen, God bless
her'; and together, Savoy and Meyers, the German trader, clanged their
cups to Alsace and Lorraine.

Then Malemute Kid arose, cup in hand, and glanced at the greased-paper
window, where the frost stood full three inches thick. 'A health to the
man on trail this night; may his grub hold out; may his dogs keep their
legs; may his matches never miss fire.' Crack!

Crack! heard the familiar music of the dog whip, the whining howl of
the Malemutes, and the crunch of a sled as it drew up to the cabin.
Conversation languished while they waited the issue.

'An old-timer; cares for his dogs and then himself,' whispered Malemute
Kid to Prince as they listened to the snapping jaws and the wolfish
snarls and yelps of pain which proclaimed to their practiced ears that
the stranger was beating back their dogs while he fed his own.

Then came the expected knock, sharp and confident, and the stranger
entered.

Dazzled by the light, he hesitated a moment at the door, giving to all
a chance for scrutiny. He was a striking personage, and a most
picturesque one, in his Arctic dress of wool and fur. Standing six foot
two or three, with proportionate breadth of shoulders and depth of
chest, his smooth-shaven face nipped by the cold to a gleaming pink,
his long lashes and eyebrows white with ice, and the ear and neck flaps
of his great wolfskin cap loosely raised, he seemed, of a verity, the
Frost King, just stepped in out of the night.

Clasped outside his Mackinaw jacket, a beaded belt held two large
Colt's revolvers and a hunting knife, while he carried, in addition to
the inevitable dog whip, a smokeless rifle of the largest bore and
latest pattern. As he came forward, for all his step was firm and
elastic, they could see that fatigue bore heavily upon him.

An awkward silence had fallen, but his hearty 'What cheer, my lads?'
put them quickly at ease, and the next instant Malemute Kid and he had
gripped hands. Though they had never met, each had heard of the other,
and the recognition was mutual. A sweeping introduction and a mug of
punch were forced upon him before he could explain his errand.

How long since that basket sled, with three men and eight dogs,
passed?' he asked.

'An even two days ahead. Are you after them?' 'Yes; my team. Run them
off under my very nose, the cusses. I've gained two days on them
already--pick them up on the next run.' 'Reckon they'll show spunk?'
asked Belden, in order to keep up the conversation, for Malemute Kid
already had the coffeepot on and was busily frying bacon and moose meat.

The stranger significantly tapped his revolvers.

'When'd yeh leave Dawson?' 'Twelve o'clock.' 'Last night?'--as a matter
of course.

'Today.' A murmur of surprise passed round the circle. And well it
might; for it was just midnight, and seventy-five miles of rough river
trail was not to be sneered at for a twelve hours' run.

The talk soon became impersonal, however, harking back to the trails of
childhood. As the young stranger ate of the rude fare Malemute Kid
attentively studied his face. Nor was he long in deciding that it was
fair, honest, and open, and that he liked it. Still youthful, the lines
had been firmly traced by toil and hardship.

Though genial in conversation, and mild when at rest, the blue eyes
gave promise of the hard steel-glitter which comes when called into
action, especially against odds. The heavy jaw and square-cut chin
demonstrated rugged pertinacity and indomitability. Nor, though the
attributes of the lion were there, was there wanting the certain
softness, the hint of womanliness, which bespoke the emotional nature.

'So thet's how me an' the ol' woman got spliced,' said Belden,
concluding the exciting tale of his courtship. '"Here we be, Dad," sez
she. "An' may yeh be damned," sez he to her, an' then to me, "Jim,
yeh--yeh git outen them good duds o' yourn; I want a right peart slice
o' thet forty acre plowed 'fore dinner." An' then he sort o' sniffled
an' kissed her. An' I was thet happy--but he seen me an' roars out,
"Yeh, Jim!" An' yeh bet I dusted fer the barn.' 'Any kids waiting for
you back in the States?' asked the stranger.

'Nope; Sal died 'fore any come. Thet's why I'm here.' Belden
abstractedly began to light his pipe, which had failed to go out, and
then brightened up with, 'How 'bout yerself, stranger--married man?'
For reply, he opened his watch, slipped it from the thong which served
for a chain, and passed it over. Belden picked up the slush lamp,
surveyed the inside of the case critically, and, swearing admiringly to
himself, handed it over to Louis Savoy. With numerous 'By gars!' he
finally surrendered it to Prince, and they noticed that his hands
trembled and his eyes took on a peculiar softness. And so it passed
from horny hand to horny hand--the pasted photograph of a woman, the
clinging kind that such men fancy, with a babe at the breast. Those who
had not yet seen the wonder were keen with curiosity; those who had
became silent and retrospective. They could face the pinch of famine,
the grip of scurvy, or the quick death by field or flood; but the
pictured semblance of a stranger woman and child made women and
children of them all.

'Never have seen the youngster yet--he's a boy, she says, and two years
old,' said the stranger as he received the treasure back. A lingering
moment he gazed upon it, then snapped the case and turned away, but not
quick enough to hide the restrained rush of tears.  Malemute Kid led
him to a bunk and bade him turn in.

'Call me at four sharp. Don't fail me,' were his last words, and a
moment later he was breathing in the heaviness of exhausted sleep.

'By Jove! He's a plucky chap,' commented Prince. 'Three hours' sleep
after seventy-five miles with the dogs, and then the trail again. Who
is he, Kid?' 'Jack Westondale. Been in going on three years, with
nothing but the name of working like a horse, and any amount of bad
luck to his credit. I never knew him, but Sitka Charley told me about
him.' 'It seems hard that a man with a sweet young wife like his should
be putting in his years in this Godforsaken hole, where every year
counts two on the outside.' 'The trouble with him is clean grit and
stubbornness. He's cleaned up twice with a stake, but lost it both
times.' Here the conversation was broken off by an uproar from Bettles,
for the effect had begun to wear away. And soon the bleak years of
monotonous grub and deadening toil were being forgotten in rough
merriment. Malemute Kid alone seemed unable to lose himself, and cast
many an anxious look at his watch. Once he put on his mittens and
beaver-skin cap, and, leaving the cabin, fell to rummaging about in the
cache.

Nor could he wait the hour designated; for he was fifteen minutes ahead
of time in rousing his guest. The young giant had stiffened badly, and
brisk rubbing was necessary to bring him to his feet. He tottered
painfully out of the cabin, to find his dogs harnessed and everything
ready for the start. The company wished him good luck and a short
chase, while Father Roubeau, hurriedly blessing him, led the stampede
for the cabin; and small wonder, for it is not good to face
seventy-four degrees below zero with naked ears and hands.

Malemute Kid saw him to the main trail, and there, gripping his hand
heartily, gave him advice.

'You'll find a hundred pounds of salmon eggs on the sled,' he said.
'The dogs will go as far on that as with one hundred and fifty of fish,
and you can't get dog food at Pelly, as you probably expected.' The
stranger started, and his eyes flashed, but he did not interrupt. 'You
can't get an ounce of food for dog or man till you reach Five Fingers,
and that's a stiff two hundred miles. Watch out for open water on the
Thirty Mile River, and be sure you take the big cutoff above Le Barge.'
'How did you know it? Surely the news can't be ahead of me already?' 'I
don't know it; and what's more, I don't want to know it. But you never
owned that team you're chasing. Sitka Charley sold it to them last
spring. But he sized you up to me as square once, and I believe him.
I've seen your face; I like it. And I've seen--why, damn you, hit the
high places for salt water and that wife of yours, and--' Here the Kid
unmittened and jerked out his sack.

'No; I don't need it,' and the tears froze on his cheeks as he
convulsively gripped Malemute Kid's hand.

'Then don't spare the dogs; cut them out of the traces as fast as they
drop; buy them, and think they're cheap at ten dollars a pound. You can
get them at Five Fingers, Little Salmon, and Hootalinqua. And watch out
for wet feet,' was his parting advice. 'Keep a-traveling up to
twenty-five, but if it gets below that, build a fire and change your
socks.'

Fifteen minutes had barely elapsed when the jingle of bells announced
new arrivals. The door opened, and a mounted policeman of the Northwest
Territory entered, followed by two half-breed dog drivers. Like
Westondale, they were heavily armed and showed signs of fatigue. The
half-breeds had been born to the trail and bore it easily; but the
young policeman was badly exhausted. Still, the dogged obstinacy of his
race held him to the pace he had set, and would hold him till he
dropped in his tracks.

'When did Westondale pull out?' he asked. 'He stopped here, didn't he?'
This was supererogatory, for the tracks told their own tale too well.

Malemute Kid had caught Belden's eye, and he, scenting the wind,
replied evasively, 'A right peart while back.' 'Come, my man; speak
up,' the policeman admonished.

'Yeh seem to want him right smart. Hez he ben gittin' cantankerous down
Dawson way?'

'Held up Harry McFarland's for forty thousand; exchanged it at the P.C.
store for a check on Seattle; and who's to stop the cashing of it if we
don't overtake him? When did he pull out?'

Every eye suppressed its excitement, for Malemute Kid had given the
cue, and the young officer encountered wooden faces on every hand.

Striding over to Prince, he put the question to him. Though it hurt
him, gazing into the frank, earnest face of his fellow countryman, he
replied inconsequentially on the state of the trail.

Then he espied Father Roubeau, who could not lie. 'A quarter of an hour
ago,' the priest answered; 'but he had four hours' rest for himself and
dogs.' 'Fifteen minutes' start, and he's fresh! My God!' The poor
fellow staggered back, half fainting from exhaustion and
disappointment, murmuring something about the run from Dawson in ten
hours and the dogs being played out.

Malemute Kid forced a mug of punch upon him; then he turned for the
door, ordering the dog drivers to follow. But the warmth and promise of
rest were too tempting, and they objected strenuously. The Kid was
conversant with their French patois, and followed it anxiously.

They swore that the dogs were gone up; that Siwash and Babette would
have to be shot before the first mile was covered; that the rest were
almost as bad; and that it would be better for all hands to rest up.

'Lend me five dogs?' he asked, turning to Malemute Kid.

But the Kid shook his head.

'I'll sign a check on Captain Constantine for five thousand--here's my
papers--I'm authorized to draw at my own discretion.'

Again the silent refusal.

'Then I'll requisition them in the name of the Queen.' Smiling
incredulously, the Kid glanced at his well-stocked arsenal, and the
Englishman, realizing his impotency, turned for the door. But the dog
drivers still objecting, he whirled upon them fiercely, calling them
women and curs. The swart face of the older half-breed flushed angrily
as he drew himself up and promised in good, round terms that he would
travel his leader off his legs, and would then be delighted to plant
him in the snow.

The young officer--and it required his whole will--walked steadily to
the door, exhibiting a freshness he did not possess. But they all knew
and appreciated his proud effort; nor could he veil the twinges of
agony that shot across his face. Covered with frost, the dogs were
curled up in the snow, and it was almost impossible to get them to
their feet. The poor brutes whined under the stinging lash, for the dog
drivers were angry and cruel; nor till Babette, the leader, was cut
from the traces, could they break out the sled and get under way.

'A dirty scoundrel and a liar!' 'By gar! Him no good!' 'A thief!'
'Worse than an Indian!'

It was evident that they were angry--first at the way they had been
deceived; and second at the outraged ethics of the Northland, where
honesty, above all, was man's prime jewel.

'An' we gave the cuss a hand, after knowin' what he'd did.' All eyes
turned accusingly upon Malemute Kid, who rose from the corner where he
had been making Babette comfortable, and silently emptied the bowl for
a final round of punch.

'It's a cold night, boys--a bitter cold night,' was the irrelevant
commencement of his defense. 'You've all traveled trail, and know what
that stands for. Don't jump a dog when he's down. You've only heard one
side. A whiter man than Jack Westondale never ate from the same pot nor
stretched blanket with you or me.

'Last fall he gave his whole clean-up, forty thousand, to Joe Castrell,
to buy in on Dominion. Today he'd be a millionaire. But, while he
stayed behind at Circle City, taking care of his partner with the
scurvy, what does Castell do? Goes into McFarland's, jumps the limit,
and drops the whole sack. Found him dead in the snow the next day. And
poor Jack laying his plans to go out this winter to his wife and the
boy he's never seen. You'll notice he took exactly what his partner
lost--forty thousand. Well, he's gone out; and what are you going to do
about it?' The Kid glanced round the circle of his judges, noted the
softening of their faces, then raised his mug aloft. 'So a health to
the man on trail this night; may his grub hold out; may his dogs keep
their legs; may his matches never miss fire.

'God prosper him; good luck go with him; and--' 'Confusion to the
Mounted Police!' cried Bettles, to the crash of the empty cups.



The Priestly Prerogative

This is the story of a man who did not appreciate his wife; also, of a
woman who did him too great an honor when she gave herself to him.
Incidentally, it concerns a Jesuit priest who had never been known to
lie. He was an appurtenance, and a very necessary one, to the Yukon
country; but the presence of the other two was merely accidental. They
were specimens of the many strange waifs which ride the breast of a
gold rush or come tailing along behind.

Edwin Bentham and Grace Bentham were waifs; they were also tailing
along behind, for the Klondike rush of '97 had long since swept down
the great river and subsided into the famine-stricken city of Dawson.
When the Yukon shut up shop and went to sleep under a three-foot
ice-sheet, this peripatetic couple found themselves at the Five Finger
Rapids, with the City of Gold still a journey of many sleeps to the
north.

Many cattle had been butchered at this place in the fall of the year,
and the offal made a goodly heap. The three fellow-voyagers of Edwin
Bentham and wife gazed upon this deposit, did a little mental
arithmetic, caught a certain glimpse of a bonanza, and decided to
remain. And all winter they sold sacks of bones and frozen hides to the
famished dog-teams. It was a modest price they asked, a dollar a pound,
just as it came. Six months later, when the sun came back and the Yukon
awoke, they buckled on their heavy moneybelts and journeyed back to the
Southland, where they yet live and lie mightily about the Klondike they
never saw.

But Edwin Bentham--he was an indolent fellow, and had he not been
possessed of a wife, would have gladly joined issued in the dog-meat
speculation. As it was, she played upon his vanity, told him how great
and strong he was, how a man such as he certainly was could overcome
all obstacles and of a surety obtain the Golden Fleece. So he squared
his jaw, sold his share in the bones and hides for a sled and one dog,
and turned his snowshoes to the north. Needless to state, Grace
Bentham's snowshoes never allowed his tracks to grow cold. Nay, ere
their tribulations had seen three days, it was the man who followed in
the rear, and the woman who broke trail in advance. Of course, if
anybody hove in sight, the position was instantly reversed. Thus did
his manhood remain virgin to the travelers who passed like ghosts on
the silent trail. There are such men in this world.

How such a man and such a woman came to take each other for better and
for worse is unimportant to this narrative. These things are familiar
to us all, and those people who do them, or even question them too
closely, are apt to lose a beautiful faith which is known as Eternal
Fitness.

Edwin Bentham was a boy, thrust by mischance into a man's body,--a boy
who could complacently pluck a butterfly, wing from wing, or cower in
abject terror before a lean, nervy fellow, not half his size. He was a
selfish cry-baby, hidden behind a man's mustache and stature, and
glossed over with a skin-deep veneer of culture and conventionality.
Yes; he was a clubman and a society man, the sort that grace social
functions and utter inanities with a charm and unction which is
indescribable; the sort that talk big, and cry over a toothache; the
sort that put more hell into a woman's life by marrying her than can
the most graceless libertine that ever browsed in forbidden pastures.
We meet these men every day, but we rarely know them for what they are.
Second to marrying them, the best way to get this knowledge is to eat
out of the same pot and crawl under the same blanket with them
for--well, say a week; no greater margin is necessary.

To see Grace Bentham, was to see a slender, girlish creature; to know
her, was to know a soul which dwarfed your own, yet retained all the
elements of the eternal feminine. This was the woman who urged and
encouraged her husband in his Northland quest, who broke trail for him
when no one was looking, and cried in secret over her weakling woman's
body.

So journeyed this strangely assorted couple down to old Fort Selkirk,
then through fivescore miles of dismal wilderness to Stuart River. And
when the short day left them, and the man lay down in the snow and
blubbered, it was the woman who lashed him to the sled, bit her lips
with the pain of her aching limbs, and helped the dog haul him to
Malemute Kid's cabin. Malemute Kid was not at home, but Meyers, the
German trader, cooked great moose-steaks and shook up a bed of fresh
pine boughs. Lake, Langham, and Parker, were excited, and not unduly so
when the cause was taken into account.

'Oh, Sandy! Say, can you tell a porterhouse from a round? Come out and
lend us a hand, anyway!' This appeal emanated from the cache, where
Langham was vainly struggling with divers quarters of frozen moose.

'Don't you budge from those dishes!' commanded Parker.

'I say, Sandy; there's a good fellow--just run down to the Missouri
Camp and borrow some cinnamon,' begged Lake.

'Oh! oh! hurry up! Why don't--' But the crash of meat and boxes, in the
cache, abruptly quenched this peremptory summons.

'Come now, Sandy; it won't take a minute to go down to the Missouri--'

'You leave him alone,' interrupted Parker. 'How am I to mix the
biscuits if the table isn't cleared off?'

Sandy paused in indecision, till suddenly the fact that he was
Langham's 'man' dawned upon him. Then he apologetically threw down the
greasy dishcloth, and went to his master's rescue.

These promising scions of wealthy progenitors had come to the Northland
in search of laurels, with much money to burn, and a 'man' apiece.
Luckily for their souls, the other two men were up the White River in
search of a mythical quartz-ledge; so Sandy had to grin under the
responsibility of three healthy masters, each of whom was possessed of
peculiar cookery ideas. Twice that morning had a disruption of the
whole camp been imminent, only averted by immense concessions from one
or the other of these knights of the chafing-dish. But at last their
mutual creation, a really dainty dinner, was completed.

Then they sat down to a three-cornered game of 'cut-throat,'--a
proceeding which did away with all casus belli for future hostilities,
and permitted the victor to depart on a most important mission.

This fortune fell to Parker, who parted his hair in the middle, put on
his mittens and bearskin cap, and stepped over to Malemute Kid's cabin.
And when he returned, it was in the company of Grace Bentham and
Malemute Kid,--the former very sorry her husband could not share with
her their hospitality, for he had gone up to look at the Henderson
Creek mines, and the latter still a trifle stiff from breaking trail
down the Stuart River.

Meyers had been asked, but had declined, being deeply engrossed in an
experiment of raising bread from hops.

Well, they could do without the husband; but a woman--why they had not
seen one all winter, and the presence of this one promised a new era in
their lives.

They were college men and gentlemen, these three young fellows,
yearning for the flesh-pots they had been so long denied. Probably
Grace Bentham suffered from a similar hunger; at least, it meant much
to her, the first bright hour in many weeks of darkness.

But that wonderful first course, which claimed the versatile Lake for
its parent, had no sooner been served than there came a loud knock at
the door.

'Oh! Ah! Won't you come in, Mr. Bentham?' said Parker, who had stepped
to see who the newcomer might be.

'Is my wife here?' gruffly responded that worthy.

'Why, yes. We left word with Mr. Meyers.' Parker was exerting his most
dulcet tones, inwardly wondering what the deuce it all meant. 'Won't
you come in? Expecting you at any moment, we reserved a place. And just
in time for the first course, too.' 'Come in, Edwin, dear,' chirped
Grace Bentham from her seat at the table.

Parker naturally stood aside.

'I want my wife,' reiterated Bentham hoarsely, the intonation savoring
disagreeably of ownership.

Parker gasped, was within an ace of driving his fist into the face of
his boorish visitor, but held himself awkwardly in check. Everybody
rose. Lake lost his head and caught himself on the verge of saying,
'Must you go?' Then began the farrago of leave-taking. 'So nice of
you--' 'I am awfully sorry' 'By Jove! how things did brighten--'
'Really now, you--'

'Thank you ever so much--' 'Nice trip to Dawson--' etc., etc.

In this wise the lamb was helped into her jacket and led to the
slaughter. Then the door slammed, and they gazed woefully upon the
deserted table.

'Damn!' Langham had suffered disadvantages in his early training, and
his oaths were weak and monotonous. 'Damn!' he repeated, vaguely
conscious of the incompleteness and vainly struggling for a more virile
term. It is a clever woman who can fill out the many weak places in an
inefficient man, by her own indomitability, re-enforce his vacillating
nature, infuse her ambitious soul into his, and spur him on to great
achievements. And it is indeed a very clever and tactful woman who can
do all this, and do it so subtly that the man receives all the credit
and believes in his inmost heart that everything is due to him and him
alone.

This is what Grace Bentham proceeded to do. Arriving in Dawson with a
few pounds of flour and several letters of introduction, she at once
applied herself to the task of pushing her big baby to the fore. It was
she who melted the stony heart and wrung credit from the rude barbarian
who presided over the destiny of the P. C. Company; yet it was Edwin
Bentham to whom the concession was ostensibly granted. It was she who
dragged her baby up and down creeks, over benches and divides, and on a
dozen wild stampedes; yet everybody remarked what an energetic fellow
that Bentham was. It was she who studied maps, and catechised miners,
and hammered geography and locations into his hollow head, till
everybody marveled at his broad grasp of the country and knowledge of
its conditions. Of course, they said the wife was a brick, and only a
few wise ones appreciated and pitied the brave little woman.

She did the work; he got the credit and reward. In the Northwest
Territory a married woman cannot stake or record a creek, bench, or
quartz claim; so Edwin Bentham went down to the Gold Commissioner and
filed on Bench Claim 23, second tier, of French Hill. And when April
came they were washing out a thousand dollars a day, with many, many
such days in prospect.

At the base of French Hill lay Eldorado Creek, and on a creek claim
stood the cabin of Clyde Wharton. At present he was not washing out a
diurnal thousand dollars; but his dumps grew, shift by shift, and there
would come a time when those dumps would pass through his sluice-boxes,
depositing in the riffles, in the course of half a dozen days, several
hundred thousand dollars. He often sat in that cabin, smoked his pipe,
and dreamed beautiful little dreams,--dreams in which neither the dumps
nor the half-ton of dust in the P. C. Company's big safe, played a part.

And Grace Bentham, as she washed tin dishes in her hillside cabin,
often glanced down into Eldorado Creek, and dreamed,--not of dumps nor
dust, however. They met frequently, as the trail to the one claim
crossed the other, and there is much to talk about in the Northland
spring; but never once, by the light of an eye nor the slip of a
tongue, did they speak their hearts.

This is as it was at first. But one day Edwin Bentham was brutal. All
boys are thus; besides, being a French Hill king now, he began to think
a great deal of himself and to forget all he owed to his wife. On this
day, Wharton heard of it, and waylaid Grace Bentham, and talked wildly.
This made her very happy, though she would not listen, and made him
promise to not say such things again. Her hour had not come.

But the sun swept back on its northern journey, the black of midnight
changed to the steely color of dawn, the snow slipped away, the water
dashed again over the glacial drift, and the wash-up began. Day and
night the yellow clay and scraped bedrock hurried through the swift
sluices, yielding up its ransom to the strong men from the Southland.

And in that time of tumult came Grace Bentham's hour.

To all of us such hours at some time come,--that is, to us who are not
too phlegmatic.

Some people are good, not from inherent love of virtue, but from sheer
laziness. But those of us who know weak moments may understand.

Edwin Bentham was weighing dust over the bar of the saloon at the
Forks--altogether too much of his dust went over that pine board--when
his wife came down the hill and slipped into Clyde Wharton's cabin.
Wharton was not expecting her, but that did not alter the case. And
much subsequent misery and idle waiting might have been avoided, had
not Father Roubeau seen this and turned aside from the main creek
trail. 'My child,--' 'Hold on, Father Roubeau! Though I'm not of your
faith, I respect you; but you can't come in between this woman and me!'
'You know what you are doing?' 'Know! Were you God Almighty, ready to
fling me into eternal fire, I'd bank my will against yours in this
matter.' Wharton had placed Grace on a stool and stood belligerently
before her.

'You sit down on that chair and keep quiet,' he continued, addressing
the Jesuit. 'I'll take my innings now. You can have yours after.'

Father Roubeau bowed courteously and obeyed. He was an easy-going man
and had learned to bide his time. Wharton pulled a stool alongside the
woman's, smothering her hand in his.

'Then you do care for me, and will take me away?' Her face seemed to
reflect the peace of this man, against whom she might draw close for
shelter.

'Dear, don't you remember what I said before? Of course I-' 'But how
can you?--the wash-up?' 'Do you think that worries? Anyway, I'll give
the job to Father Roubeau, here.

'I can trust him to safely bank the dust with the company.' 'To think
of it!--I'll never see him again.' 'A blessing!' 'And to go--O, Clyde,
I can't! I can't!' 'There, there; of course you can, just let me plan
it.--You see, as soon as we get a few traps together, we'll start,
and-' 'Suppose he comes back?' 'I'll break every-' 'No, no! No
fighting, Clyde! Promise me that.' 'All right! I'll just tell the men
to throw him off the claim. They've seen how he's treated you, and
haven't much love for him.'

'You mustn't do that. You mustn't hurt him.' 'What then? Let him come
right in here and take you away before my eyes?' 'No-o,' she half
whispered, stroking his hand softly.

'Then let me run it, and don't worry. I'll see he doesn't get hurt.
Precious lot he cared whether you got hurt or not! We won't go back to
Dawson. I'll send word down for a couple of the boys to outfit and pole
a boat up the Yukon. We'll cross the divide and raft down the Indian
River to meet them. Then--' 'And then?' Her head was on his shoulder.

Their voices sank to softer cadences, each word a caress. The Jesuit
fidgeted nervously.

'And then?' she repeated.

'Why we'll pole up, and up, and up, and portage the White Horse Rapids
and the Box Canon.' 'Yes?' 'And the Sixty-Mile River; then the lakes,
Chilcoot, Dyea, and Salt Water.' 'But, dear, I can't pole a boat.' 'You
little goose! I'll get Sitka Charley; he knows all the good water and
best camps, and he is the best traveler I ever met, if he is an Indian.
All you'll have to do, is to sit in the middle of the boat, and sing
songs, and play Cleopatra, and fight--no, we're in luck; too early for
mosquitoes.'

'And then, O my Antony?' 'And then a steamer, San Francisco, and the
world! Never to come back to this cursed hole again. Think of it! The
world, and ours to choose from! I'll sell out. Why, we're rich! The
Waldworth Syndicate will give me half a million for what's left in the
ground, and I've got twice as much in the dumps and with the P. C.
Company. We'll go to the Fair in Paris in 1900. We'll go to Jerusalem,
if you say so.

'We'll buy an Italian palace, and you can play Cleopatra to your
heart's content. No, you shall be Lucretia, Acte, or anybody your
little heart sees fit to become. But you mustn't, you really mustn't-'
'The wife of Caesar shall be above reproach.' 'Of course, but--' 'But I
won't be your wife, will I, dear?' 'I didn't mean that.' 'But you'll
love me just as much, and never even think--oh! I know you'll be like
other men; you'll grow tired, and--and-'

'How can you? I--' 'Promise me.' 'Yes, yes; I do promise.' 'You say it
so easily, dear; but how do you know?--or I know? I have so little to
give, yet it is so much, and all I have. O, Clyde! promise me you
won't?'

'There, there! You mustn't begin to doubt already. Till death do us
part, you know.'

'Think! I once said that to--to him, and now?' 'And now, little
sweetheart, you're not to bother about such things any more.

Of course, I never, never will, and--' And for the first time, lips
trembled against lips.

Father Roubeau had been watching the main trail through the window, but
could stand the strain no longer.

He cleared his throat and turned around.

'Your turn now, Father!' Wharton's face was flushed with the fire of
his first embrace.

There was an exultant ring to his voice as he abdicated in the other's
favor. He had no doubt as to the result. Neither had Grace, for a smile
played about her mouth as she faced the priest.

'My child,' he began, 'my heart bleeds for you. It is a pretty dream,
but it cannot be.'

'And why, Father? I have said yes.' 'You knew not what you did. You did
not think of the oath you took, before your God, to that man who is
your husband. It remains for me to make you realize the sanctity of
such a pledge.' 'And if I do realize, and yet refuse?'

'Then God'

'Which God? My husband has a God which I care not to worship. There
must be many such.' 'Child! unsay those words! Ah! you do not mean
them. I understand. I, too, have had such moments.' For an instant he
was back in his native France, and a wistful, sad-eyed face came as a
mist between him and the woman before him.

'Then, Father, has my God forsaken me? I am not wicked above women. My
misery with him has been great. Why should it be greater? Why shall I
not grasp at happiness? I cannot, will not, go back to him!' 'Rather is
your God forsaken. Return. Throw your burden upon Him, and the darkness
shall be lifted. O my child,--' 'No; it is useless; I have made my bed
and so shall I lie. I will go on. And if God punishes me, I shall bear
it somehow. You do not understand. You are not a woman.' 'My mother was
a woman.'

'But--' 'And Christ was born of a woman.' She did not answer. A silence
fell. Wharton pulled his mustache impatiently and kept an eye on the
trail. Grace leaned her elbow on the table, her face set with resolve.
The smile had died away. Father Roubeau shifted his ground.

'You have children?'

'At one time I wished--but now--no. And I am thankful.' 'And a mother?'
'Yes.' 'She loves you?' 'Yes.' Her replies were whispers.

'And a brother?--no matter, he is a man. But a sister?' Her head
drooped a quavering 'Yes.' 'Younger? Very much?' 'Seven years.' 'And
you have thought well about this matter? About them? About your mother?
And your sister? She stands on the threshold of her woman's life, and
this wildness of yours may mean much to her. Could you go before her,
look upon her fresh young face, hold her hand in yours, or touch your
cheek to hers?'

To his words, her brain formed vivid images, till she cried out,
'Don't! don't!' and shrank away as do the wolf-dogs from the lash.

'But you must face all this; and better it is to do it now.' In his
eyes, which she could not see, there was a great compassion, but his
face, tense and quivering, showed no relenting.

She raised her head from the table, forced back the tears, struggled
for control.

'I shall go away. They will never see me, and come to forget me. I
shall be to them as dead. And--and I will go with Clyde--today.' It
seemed final. Wharton stepped forward, but the priest waved him back.

'You have wished for children?' A silent 'Yes.' 'And prayed for them?'
'Often.' 'And have you thought, if you should have children?' Father
Roubeau's eyes rested for a moment on the man by the window.

A quick light shot across her face. Then the full import dawned upon
her. She raised her hand appealingly, but he went on.

'Can you picture an innocent babe in your arms? A boy? The world is not
so hard upon a girl. Why, your very breast would turn to gall! And you
could be proud and happy of your boy, as you looked on other
children?--' 'O, have pity! Hush!' 'A scapegoat--'

'Don't! don't! I will go back!' She was at his feet.

'A child to grow up with no thought of evil, and one day the world to
fling a tender name in his face. A child to look back and curse you
from whose loins he sprang!'

'O my God! my God!' She groveled on the floor. The priest sighed and
raised her to her feet.

Wharton pressed forward, but she motioned him away.

'Don't come near me, Clyde! I am going back!' The tears were coursing
pitifully down her face, but she made no effort to wipe them away.

'After all this? You cannot! I will not let you!' 'Don't touch me!' She
shivered and drew back.

'I will! You are mine! Do you hear? You are mine!' Then he whirled upon
the priest. 'O what a fool I was to ever let you wag your silly tongue!
Thank your God you are not a common man, for I'd--but the priestly
prerogative must be exercised, eh? Well, you have exercised it. Now get
out of my house, or I'll forget who and what you are!' Father Roubeau
bowed, took her hand, and started for the door. But Wharton cut them
off.

'Grace! You said you loved me?' 'I did.' 'And you do now?' 'I do.' 'Say
it again.'

'I do love you, Clyde; I do.' 'There, you priest!' he cried. 'You have
heard it, and with those words on her lips you would send her back to
live a lie and a hell with that man?'

But Father Roubeau whisked the woman into the inner room and closed the
door. 'No words!' he whispered to Wharton, as he struck a casual
posture on a stool. 'Remember, for her sake,' he added.

The room echoed to a rough knock at the door; the latch raised and
Edwin Bentham stepped in.

'Seen anything of my wife?' he asked as soon as salutations had been
exchanged.

Two heads nodded negatively.

'I saw her tracks down from the cabin,' he continued tentatively, 'and
they broke off, just opposite here, on the main trail.' His listeners
looked bored.

'And I--I thought--'

'She was here!' thundered Wharton.

The priest silenced him with a look. 'Did you see her tracks leading up
to this cabin, my son?' Wily Father Roubeau--he had taken good care to
obliterate them as he came up the same path an hour before.

'I didn't stop to look, I--' His eyes rested suspiciously on the door
to the other room, then interrogated the priest. The latter shook his
head; but the doubt seemed to linger.

Father Roubeau breathed a swift, silent prayer, and rose to his feet.
'If you doubt me, why--' He made as though to open the door.

A priest could not lie. Edwin Bentham had heard this often, and
believed it.

'Of course not, Father,' he interposed hurriedly. 'I was only wondering
where my wife had gone, and thought maybe--I guess she's up at Mrs.
Stanton's on French Gulch. Nice weather, isn't it? Heard the news?
Flour's gone down to forty dollars a hundred, and they say the
che-cha-quas are flocking down the river in droves.

'But I must be going; so good-by.' The door slammed, and from the
window they watched him take his guest up French Gulch. A few weeks
later, just after the June high-water, two men shot a canoe into
mid-stream and made fast to a derelict pine. This tightened the painter
and jerked the frail craft along as would a tow-boat. Father Roubeau
had been directed to leave the Upper Country and return to his swarthy
children at Minook. The white men had come among them, and they were
devoting too little time to fishing, and too much to a certain deity
whose transient habitat was in countless black bottles.

Malemute Kid also had business in the Lower Country, so they journeyed
together.

But one, in all the Northland, knew the man Paul Roubeau, and that man
was Malemute Kid. Before him alone did the priest cast off the
sacerdotal garb and stand naked. And why not? These two men knew each
other. Had they not shared the last morsel of fish, the last pinch of
tobacco, the last and inmost thought, on the barren stretches of Bering
Sea, in the heartbreaking mazes of the Great Delta, on the terrible
winter journey from Point Barrow to the Porcupine? Father Roubeau
puffed heavily at his trail-worn pipe, and gazed on the reddisked sun,
poised somberly on the edge of the northern horizon.

Malemute Kid wound up his watch. It was midnight.

'Cheer up, old man!' The Kid was evidently gathering up a broken thread.

'God surely will forgive such a lie. Let me give you the word of a man
who strikes a true note: If She have spoken a word, remember thy lips
are sealed, And the brand of the Dog is upon him by whom is the secret
revealed.

If there be trouble to Herward, and a lie of the blackest can clear,
Lie, while thy lips can move or a man is alive to hear.'

Father Roubeau removed his pipe and reflected. 'The man speaks true,
but my soul is not vexed with that. The lie and the penance stand with
God; but--but--'

'What then? Your hands are clean.' 'Not so. Kid, I have thought much,
and yet the thing remains. I knew, and made her go back.' The clear
note of a robin rang out from the wooden bank, a partridge drummed the
call in the distance, a moose lunged noisily in the eddy; but the twain
smoked on in silence.



The Wisdom of the Trail

Sitka Charley had achieved the impossible. Other Indians might have
known as much of the wisdom of the trail as he did; but he alone knew
the white man's wisdom, the honor of the trail, and the law. But these
things had not come to him in a day. The aboriginal mind is slow to
generalize, and many facts, repeated often, are required to compass an
understanding. Sitka Charley, from boyhood, had been thrown continually
with white men, and as a man he had elected to cast his fortunes with
them, expatriating himself, once and for all, from his own people. Even
then, respecting, almost venerating their power, and pondering over it,
he had yet to divine its secret essence--the honor and the law. And it
was only by the cumulative evidence of years that he had finally come
to understand. Being an alien, when he did know, he knew it better than
the white man himself; being an Indian, he had achieved the impossible.

And of these things had been bred a certain contempt for his own
people--a contempt which he had made it a custom to conceal, but which
now burst forth in a polyglot whirlwind of curses upon the heads of
Kah-Chucte and Gowhee. They cringed before him like a brace of snarling
wolf dogs, too cowardly to spring, too wolfish to cover their fangs.
They were not handsome creatures. Neither was Sitka Charley. All three
were frightful-looking. There was no flesh to their faces; their
cheekbones were massed with hideous scabs which had cracked and frozen
alternately under the intense frost; while their eyes burned luridly
with the light which is born of desperation and hunger. Men so
situated, beyond the pale of the honor and the law, are not to be
trusted. Sitka Charley knew this; and this was why he had forced them
to abandon their rifles with the rest of the camp outfit ten days
before. His rifle and Captain Eppingwell's were the only ones that
remained.

'Come, get a fire started,' he commanded, drawing out the precious
matchbox with its attendant strips of dry birchbark.

The two Indians fell sullenly to the task of gathering dead branches
and underwood. They were weak and paused often, catching themselves, in
the act of stooping, with giddy motions, or staggering to the center of
operations with their knees shaking like castanets.

After each trip they rested for a moment, as though sick and deadly
weary. At times their eyes took on the patient stoicism of dumb
suffering; and again the ego seemed almost burst forth with its wild
cry, 'I, I, I want to exist!'--the dominant note of the whole living
universe.

A light breath of air blew from the south, nipping the exposed portions
of their bodies and driving the frost, in needles of fire, through fur
and flesh to the bones. So, when the fire had grown lusty and thawed a
damp circle in the snow about it, Sitka Charley forced his reluctant
comrades to lend a hand in pitching a fly. It was a primitive affair,
merely a blanket stretched parallel with the fire and to windward of
it, at an angle of perhaps forty-five degrees. This shut out the chill
wind and threw the heat backward and down upon those who were to huddle
in its shelter. Then a layer of green spruce boughs were spread, that
their bodies might not come in contact with the snow. When this task
was completed, Kah-Chucte and Gowhee proceeded to take care of their
feet. Their icebound moccasins were sadly worn by much travel, and the
sharp ice of the river jams had cut them to rags.

Their Siwash socks were similarly conditioned, and when these had been
thawed and removed, the dead-white tips of the toes, in the various
stages of mortification, told their simple tale of the trail.

Leaving the two to the drying of their footgear, Sitka Charley turned
back over the course he had come. He, too, had a mighty longing to sit
by the fire and tend his complaining flesh, but the honor and the law
forbade. He toiled painfully over the frozen field, each step a
protest, every muscle in revolt. Several times, where the open water
between the jams had recently crusted, he was forced to miserably
accelerate his movements as the fragile footing swayed and threatened
beneath him. In such places death was quick and easy; but it was not
his desire to endure no more.

His deepening anxiety vanished as two Indians dragged into view round a
bend in the river. They staggered and panted like men under heavy
burdens; yet the packs on their backs were a matter of but a few
pounds. He questioned them eagerly, and their replies seemed to relieve
him. He hurried on. Next came two white men, supporting between them a
woman. They also behaved as though drunken, and their limbs shook with
weakness. But the woman leaned lightly upon them, choosing to carry
herself forward with her own strength. At the sight of her a flash of
joy cast its fleeting light across Sitka Charley's face. He cherished a
very great regard for Mrs. Eppingwell. He had seen many white women,
but this was the first to travel the trail with him. When Captain
Eppingwell proposed the hazardous undertaking and made him an offer for
his services, he had shaken his head gravely; for it was an unknown
journey through the dismal vastnesses of the Northland, and he knew it
to be of the kind that try to the uttermost the souls of men.

But when he learned that the captain's wife was to accompany them, he
had refused flatly to have anything further to do with it. Had it been
a woman of his own race he would have harbored no objections; but these
women of the Southland--no, no, they were too soft, too tender, for
such enterprises.

Sitka Charley did not know this kind of woman. Five minutes before, he
did not even dream of taking charge of the expedition; but when she
came to him with her wonderful smile and her straight clean English,
and talked to the point, without pleading or persuading, he had
incontinently yielded. Had there been a softness and appeal to mercy in
the eyes, a tremble to the voice, a taking advantage of sex, he would
have stiffened to steel; instead her clear-searching eyes and
clear-ringing voice, her utter frankness and tacit assumption of
equality, had robbed him of his reason. He felt, then, that this was a
new breed of woman; and ere they had been trail mates for many days he
knew why the sons of such women mastered the land and the sea, and why
the sons of his own womankind could not prevail against them. Tender
and soft! Day after day he watched her, muscle-weary, exhausted,
indomitable, and the words beat in upon him in a perennial refrain.
Tender and soft! He knew her feet had been born to easy paths and sunny
lands, strangers to the moccasined pain of the North, unkissed by the
chill lips of the frost, and he watched and marveled at them twinkling
ever through the weary day.

She had always a smile and a word of cheer, from which not even the
meanest packer was excluded. As the way grew darker she seemed to
stiffen and gather greater strength, and when Kah-Chucte and Gowhee,
who had bragged that they knew every landmark of the way as a child did
the skin bails of the tepee, acknowledged that they knew not where they
were, it was she who raised a forgiving voice amid the curses of the
men. She had sung to them that night till they felt the weariness fall
from them and were ready to face the future with fresh hope. And when
the food failed and each scant stint was measured jealously, she it was
who rebelled against the machinations of her husband and Sitka Charley,
and demanded and received a share neither greater nor less than that of
the others.

Sitka Charley was proud to know this woman. A new richness, a greater
breadth, had come into his life with her presence. Hitherto he had been
his own mentor, had turned to right or left at no man's beck; he had
moulded himself according to his own dictates, nourished his manhood
regardless of all save his own opinion. For the first time he had felt
a call from without for the best that was in him, just a glance of
appreciation from the clear-searching eyes, a word of thanks from the
clear-ringing voice, just a slight wreathing of the lips in the
wonderful smile, and he walked with the gods for hours to come. It was
a new stimulant to his manhood; for the first time he thrilled with a
conscious pride in his wisdom of the trail; and between the twain they
ever lifted the sinking hearts of their comrades. The faces of the two
men and the woman brightened as they saw him, for after all he was the
staff they leaned upon. But Sitka Charley, rigid as was his wont,
concealing pain and pleasure impartially beneath an iron exterior,
asked them the welfare of the rest, told the distance to the fire, and
continued on the back-trip.

Next he met a single Indian, unburdened, limping, lips compressed, and
eyes set with the pain of a foot in which the quick fought a losing
battle with the dead. All possible care had been taken of him, but in
the last extremity the weak and unfortunate must perish, and Sitka
Charley deemed his days to be few. The man could not keep up for long,
so he gave him rough cheering words. After that came two more Indians,
to whom he had allotted the task of helping along Joe, the third white
man of the party. They had deserted him. Sitka Charley saw at a glance
the lurking spring in their bodies, and knew they had at last cast off
his mastery. So he was not taken unawares when he ordered them back in
quest of their abandoned charge, and saw the gleam of the hunting
knives that they drew from the sheaths. A pitiful spectacle, three weak
men lifting their puny strength in the face of the mighty vastness; but
the two recoiled under the fierce rifle blows of the one and returned
like beaten dogs to the leash. Two hours later, with Joe reeling
between them and Sitka Charley bringing up the rear, they came to the
fire, where the remainder of the expedition crouched in the shelter of
the fly.

'A few words, my comrades, before we sleep,' Sitka Charley said after
they had devoured their slim rations of unleavened bread. He was
speaking to the Indians in their own tongue, having already given the
import to the whites. 'A few words, my comrades, for your own good,
that ye may yet perchance live. I shall give you the law; on his own
head by the death of him that breaks it. We have passed the Hills of
Silence, and we now travel the head reaches of the Stuart. It may be
one sleep, it may be several, it may be many sleeps, but in time we
shall come among the men of the Yukon, who have much grub. It were well
that we look to the law. Today Kah-Chucte and Gowhee, whom I commanded
to break trail, forgot they were men, and like frightened children ran
away.

'True, they forgot; so let us forget. But hereafter, let them remember.
If it should happen they do not...' He touched his rifle carelessly,
grimly. 'Tomorrow they shall carry the flour and see that the white man
Joe lies not down by the trail. The cups of flour are counted; should
so much as an ounce be wanting at nightfall... Do ye understand? Today
there were others that forgot. Moose Head and Three Salmon left the
white man Joe to lie in the snow. Let them forget no more. With the
light of day shall they go forth and break trail. Ye have heard the
law. Look well, lest ye break it.' Sitka Charley found it beyond him to
keep the line close up. From Moose Head and Three Salmon, who broke
trail in advance, to Kah-Chucte, Gowhee, and Joe, it straggled out over
a mile. Each staggered, fell or rested as he saw fit.

The line of march was a progression through a chain of irregular halts.
Each drew upon the last remnant of his strength and stumbled onward
till it was expended, but in some miraculous way there was always
another last remnant. Each time a man fell it was with the firm belief
that he would rise no more; yet he did rise, and again and again. The
flesh yielded, the will conquered; but each triumph was a tragedy. The
Indian with the frozen foot, no longer erect, crawled forward on hand
and knee. He rarely rested, for he knew the penalty exacted by the
frost.

Even Mrs. Eppingwell's lips were at last set in a stony smile, and her
eyes, seeing, saw not. Often she stopped, pressing a mittened hand to
her heart, gasping and dizzy.

Joe, the white man, had passed beyond the stage of suffering. He no
longer begged to be let alone, prayed to die; but was soothed and
content under the anodyne of delirium. Kah-Chucte and Gowhee dragged
him on roughly, venting upon him many a savage glance or blow. To them
it was the acme of injustice.

Their hearts were bitter with hate, heavy with fear. Why should they
cumber their strength with his weakness? To do so meant death; not to
do so--and they remembered the law of Sitka Charley, and the rifle.

Joe fell with greater frequency as the daylight waned, and so hard was
he to raise that they dropped farther and farther behind. Sometimes all
three pitched into the snow, so weak had the Indians become. Yet on
their backs was life, and strength, and warmth.

Within the flour sacks were all the potentialities of existence. They
could not but think of this, and it was not strange, that which came to
pass. They had fallen by the side of a great timber jam where a
thousand cords of firewood waited the match. Near by was an air hole
through the ice. Kah-Chucte looked on the wood and the water, as did
Gowhee; then they looked at each other.

Never a word was spoken. Gowhee struck a fire; Kah-Chucte filled a tin
cup with water and heated it; Joe babbled of things in another land, in
a tongue they did not understand.

They mixed flour with the warm water till it was a thin paste, and of
this they drank many cups. They did not offer any to Joe; but he did
not mind. He did not mind anything, not even his moccasins, which
scorched and smoked among the coals.

A crystal mist of snow fell about them, softly, caressingly, wrapping
them in clinging robes of white. And their feet would have yet trod
many trails had not destiny brushed the clouds aside and cleared the
air. Nay, ten minutes' delay would have been salvation.

Sitka Charley, looking back, saw the pillared smoke of their fire, and
guessed. And he looked ahead at those who were faithful, and at Mrs.
Eppingwell. 'So, my good comrades, ye have again forgotten that you
were men? Good! Very good. There will be fewer bellies to feed.' Sitka
Charley retied the flour as he spoke, strapping the pack to the one on
his own back. He kicked Joe till the pain broke through the poor
devil's bliss and brought him doddering to his feet. Then he shoved him
out upon the trail and started him on his way. The two Indians
attempted to slip off.

'Hold, Gowhee! And thou, too, Kah-Chucte! Hath the flour given such
strength to thy legs that they may outrun the swift-winged lead? Think
not to cheat the law. Be men for the last time, and be content that ye
die full-stomached.

Come, step up, back to the timber, shoulder to shoulder. Come!' The two
men obeyed, quietly, without fear; for it is the future which pressed
upon the man, not the present.

'Thou, Gowhee, hast a wife and children and a deerskin lodge in the
Chipewyan. What is thy will in the matter?' 'Give thou her of the goods
which are mine by the word of the captain--the blankets, the beads, the
tobacco, the box which makes strange sounds after the manner of the
white men. Say that I did die on the trail, but say not how.' 'And
thou, Kah-Chucte, who hast nor wife nor child?' 'Mine is a sister, the
wife of the factor at Koshim. He beats her, and she is not happy. Give
thou her the goods which are mine by the contract, and tell her it were
well she go back to her own people. Shouldst thou meet the man, and be
so minded, it were a good deed that he should die. He beats her, and
she is afraid.' 'Are ye content to die by the law?' 'We are.' 'Then
good-bye, my good comrades. May ye sit by the well-filled pot, in warm
lodges, ere the day is done.' As he spoke he raised his rifle, and many
echoes broke the silence. Hardly had they died away when other rifles
spoke in the distance. Sitka Charley started.

There had been more than one shot, yet there was but one other rifle in
the party.

He gave a fleeting glance at the men who lay so quietly, smiled
viciously at the wisdom of the trail, and hurried on to meet the men of
the Yukon.



The Wife of a King

Once when the northland was very young, the social and civic virtues
were remarkably alike for their paucity and their simplicity. When the
burden of domestic duties grew grievous, and the fireside mood expanded
to a constant protest against its bleak loneliness, the adventurers
from the Southland, in lieu of better, paid the stipulated prices and
took unto themselves native wives. It was a foretaste of Paradise to
the women, for it must be confessed that the white rovers gave far
better care and treatment of them than did their Indian copartners. Of
course, the white men themselves were satisfied with such deals, as
were also the Indian men for that matter. Having sold their daughters
and sisters for cotton blankets and obsolete rifles and traded their
warm furs for flimsy calico and bad whisky, the sons of the soil
promptly and cheerfully succumbed to quick consumption and other swift
diseases correlated with the blessings of a superior civilization.

It was in these days of Arcadian simplicity that Cal Galbraith
journeyed through the land and fell sick on the Lower River. It was a
refreshing advent in the lives of the good Sisters of the Holy Cross,
who gave him shelter and medicine; though they little dreamed of the
hot elixir infused into his veins by the touch of their soft hands and
their gentle ministrations. Cal Galbraith, became troubled with strange
thoughts which clamored for attention till he laid eyes on the Mission
girl, Madeline. Yet he gave no sign, biding his time patiently. He
strengthened with the coming spring, and when the sun rode the heavens
in a golden circle, and the joy and throb of life was in all the land,
he gathered his still weak body together and departed.

Now, Madeline, the Mission girl, was an orphan. Her white father had
failed to give a bald-faced grizzly the trail one day, and had died
quickly. Then her Indian mother, having no man to fill the winter
cache, had tried the hazardous experiment of waiting till the
salmon-run on fifty pounds of flour and half as many of bacon. After
that, the baby, Chook-ra, went to live with the good Sisters, and to be
thenceforth known by another name.

But Madeline still had kinsfolk, the nearest being a dissolute uncle
who outraged his vitals with inordinate quantities of the white man's
whisky. He strove daily to walk with the gods, and incidentally, his
feet sought shorter trails to the grave. When sober he suffered
exquisite torture. He had no conscience. To this ancient vagabond Cal
Galbraith duly presented himself, and they consumed many words and much
tobacco in the conversation that followed. Promises were also made; and
in the end the old heathen took a few pounds of dried salmon and his
birch-bark canoe, and paddled away to the Mission of the Holy Cross.

It is not given the world to know what promises he made and what lies
he told--the Sisters never gossip; but when he returned, upon his
swarthy chest there was a brass crucifix, and in his canoe his niece
Madeline. That night there was a grand wedding and a potlach; so that
for two days to follow there was no fishing done by the village. But in
the morning Madeline shook the dust of the Lower River from her
moccasins, and with her husband, in a poling-boat, went to live on the
Upper River in a place known as the Lower Country. And in the years
which followed she was a good wife, sharing her husband's hardships and
cooking his food. And she kept him in straight trails, till he learned
to save his dust and to work mightily. In the end, he struck it rich
and built a cabin in Circle City; and his happiness was such that men
who came to visit him in his home-circle became restless at the sight
of it and envied him greatly.

But the Northland began to mature and social amenities to make their
appearance.

Hitherto, the Southland had sent forth its sons; but it now belched
forth a new exodus--this time of its daughters. Sisters and wives they
were not; but they did not fail to put new ideas in the heads of the
men, and to elevate the tone of things in ways peculiarly their own. No
more did the squaws gather at the dances, go roaring down the center in
the good, old Virginia reels, or make merry with jolly 'Dan Tucker.'
They fell back on their natural stoicism and uncomplainingly watched
the rule of their white sisters from their cabins.

Then another exodus came over the mountains from the prolific Southland.

This time it was of women that became mighty in the land. Their word
was law; their law was steel. They frowned upon the Indian wives, while
the other women became mild and walked humbly. There were cowards who
became ashamed of their ancient covenants with the daughters of the
soil, who looked with a new distaste upon their dark-skinned children;
but there were also others--men--who remained true and proud of their
aboriginal vows. When it became the fashion to divorce the native
wives. Cal Galbraith retained his manhood, and in so doing felt the
heavy hand of the women who had come last, knew least, but who ruled
the land.

One day, the Upper Country, which lies far above Circle City, was
pronounced rich. Dog-teams carried the news to Salt Water; golden
argosies freighted the lure across the North Pacific; wires and cables
sang with the tidings; and the world heard for the first time of the
Klondike River and the Yukon Country. Cal Galbraith had lived the years
quietly. He had been a good husband to Madeline, and she had blessed
him. But somehow discontent fell upon him; he felt vague yearnings for
his own kind, for the life he had been shut out from--a general sort of
desire, which men sometimes feel, to break out and taste the prime of
living. Besides, there drifted down the river wild rumors of the
wonderful El Dorado, glowing descriptions of the city of logs and
tents, and ludicrous accounts of the che-cha-quas who had rushed in and
were stampeding the whole country.

Circle City was dead. The world had moved on up river and become a new
and most marvelous world.

Cal Galbraith grew restless on the edge of things, and wished to see
with his own eyes.

So, after the wash-up, he weighed in a couple of hundred pounds of dust
on the Company's big scales, and took a draft for the same on Dawson.
Then he put Tom Dixon in charge of his mines, kissed Madeline good-by,
promised to be back before the first mush-ice ran, and took passage on
an up-river steamer.

Madeline waited, waited through all the three months of daylight. She
fed the dogs, gave much of her time to Young Cal, watched the short
summer fade away and the sun begin its long journey to the south. And
she prayed much in the manner of the Sisters of the Holy Cross. The
fall came, and with it there was mush-ice on the Yukon, and Circle City
kings returning to the winter's work at their mines, but no Cal
Galbraith. Tom Dixon received a letter, however, for his men sledded up
her winter's supply of dry pine. The Company received a letter for its
dogteams filled her cache with their best provisions, and she was told
that her credit was limitless.

Through all the ages man has been held the chief instigator of the woes
of woman; but in this case the men held their tongues and swore harshly
at one of their number who was away, while the women failed utterly to
emulate them. So, without needless delay, Madeline heard strange tales
of Cal Galbraith's doings; also, of a certain Greek dancer who played
with men as children did with bubbles. Now Madeline was an Indian
woman, and further, she had no woman friend to whom to go for wise
counsel. She prayed and planned by turns, and that night, being quick
of resolve and action, she harnessed the dogs, and with Young Cal
securely lashed to the sled, stole away.

Though the Yukon still ran free, the eddy-ice was growing, and each day
saw the river dwindling to a slushy thread. Save him who has done the
like, no man may know what she endured in traveling a hundred miles on
the rim-ice; nor may they understand the toil and hardship of breaking
the two hundred miles of packed ice which remained after the river
froze for good. But Madeline was an Indian woman, so she did these
things, and one night there came a knock at Malemute Kid's door.
Thereat he fed a team of starving dogs, put a healthy youngster to bed,
and turned his attention to an exhausted woman. He removed her icebound
moccasins while he listened to her tale, and stuck the point of his
knife into her feet that he might see how far they were frozen.

Despite his tremendous virility, Malemute Kid was possessed of a
softer, womanly element, which could win the confidence of a snarling
wolf-dog or draw confessions from the most wintry heart. Nor did he
seek them. Hearts opened to him as spontaneously as flowers to the sun.
Even the priest, Father Roubeau, had been known to confess to him,
while the men and women of the Northland were ever knocking at his
door--a door from which the latch-string hung always out. To Madeline,
he could do no wrong, make no mistake. She had known him from the time
she first cast her lot among the people of her father's race; and to
her half-barbaric mind it seemed that in him was centered the wisdom of
the ages, that between his vision and the future there could be no
intervening veil.

There were false ideals in the land. The social strictures of Dawson
were not synonymous with those of the previous era, and the swift
maturity of the Northland involved much wrong. Malemute Kid was aware
of this, and he had Cal Galbraith's measure accurately.

He knew a hasty word was the father of much evil; besides, he was
minded to teach a great lesson and bring shame upon the man. So Stanley
Prince, the young mining expert, was called into the conference the
following night as was also Lucky Jack Harrington and his violin. That
same night, Bettles, who owed a great debt to Malemute Kid, harnessed
up Cal Galbraith's dogs, lashed Cal Galbraith, Junior, to the sled, and
slipped away in the dark for Stuart River.


II

'So; one--two--three, one--two--three. Now reverse! No, no! Start up
again, Jack. See--this way.' Prince executed the movement as one should
who has led the cotillion.

'Now; one--two--three, one--two--three. Reverse! Ah! that's better. Try
it again. I say, you know, you mustn't look at your feet.
One--two--three, one--two--three. Shorter steps! You are not hanging to
the gee-pole just now. Try it over.

'There! that's the way. One--two--three, one--two--three.' Round and
round went Prince and Madeline in an interminable waltz. The table and
stools had been shoved over against the wall to increase the room.
Malemute Kid sat on the bunk, chin to knees, greatly interested. Jack
Harrington sat beside him, scraping away on his violin and following
the dancers.

It was a unique situation, the undertaking of these three men with the
woman.

The most pathetic part, perhaps, was the businesslike way in which they
went about it.

No athlete was ever trained more rigidly for a coming contest, nor
wolf-dog for the harness, than was she. But they had good material, for
Madeline, unlike most women of her race, in her childhood had escaped
the carrying of heavy burdens and the toil of the trail. Besides, she
was a clean-limbed, willowy creature, possessed of much grace which had
not hitherto been realized. It was this grace which the men strove to
bring out and knock into shape.

'Trouble with her she learned to dance all wrong,' Prince remarked to
the bunk after having deposited his breathless pupil on the table.
'She's quick at picking up; yet I could do better had she never danced
a step. But say, Kid, I can't understand this.' Prince imitated a
peculiar movement of the shoulders and head--a weakness Madeline
suffered from in walking.

'Lucky for her she was raised in the Mission,' Malemute Kid answered.
'Packing, you know,--the head-strap. Other Indian women have it bad,
but she didn't do any packing till after she married, and then only at
first. Saw hard lines with that husband of hers. They went through the
Forty-Mile famine together.' 'But can we break it?' 'Don't know.

'Perhaps long walks with her trainers will make the riffle. Anyway,
they'll take it out some, won't they, Madeline?' The girl nodded
assent. If Malemute Kid, who knew all things, said so, why it was so.
That was all there was about it.

She had come over to them, anxious to begin again. Harrington surveyed
her in quest of her points much in the same manner men usually do
horses. It certainly was not disappointing, for he asked with sudden
interest, 'What did that beggarly uncle of yours get anyway?' 'One
rifle, one blanket, twenty bottles of hooch. Rifle broke.' She said
this last scornfully, as though disgusted at how low her maiden-value
had been rated.

She spoke fair English, with many peculiarities of her husband's
speech, but there was still perceptible the Indian accent, the
traditional groping after strange gutturals. Even this her instructors
had taken in hand, and with no small success, too.

At the next intermission, Prince discovered a new predicament.

'I say, Kid,' he said, 'we're wrong, all wrong. She can't learn in
moccasins.

'Put her feet into slippers, and then onto that waxed floor--phew!'
Madeline raised a foot and regarded her shapeless house-moccasins
dubiously. In previous winters, both at Circle City and Forty-Mile, she
had danced many a night away with similar footgear, and there had been
nothing the matter.

But now--well, if there was anything wrong it was for Malemute Kid to
know, not her.

But Malemute Kid did know, and he had a good eye for measures; so he
put on his cap and mittens and went down the hill to pay Mrs.
Eppingwell a call. Her husband, Clove Eppingwell, was prominent in the
community as one of the great Government officials.

The Kid had noted her slender little foot one night, at the Governor's
Ball. And as he also knew her to be as sensible as she was pretty, it
was no task to ask of her a certain small favor.

On his return, Madeline withdrew for a moment to the inner room. When
she reappeared Prince was startled.

'By Jove!' he gasped. 'Who'd a' thought it! The little witch! Why my
sister--' 'Is an English girl,' interrupted Malemute Kid, 'with an
English foot. This girl comes of a small-footed race. Moccasins just
broadened her feet healthily, while she did not misshape them by
running with the dogs in her childhood.' But this explanation failed
utterly to allay Prince's admiration. Harrington's commercial instinct
was touched, and as he looked upon the exquisitely turned foot and
ankle, there ran through his mind the sordid list--'One rifle, one
blanket, twenty bottles of hooch.' Madeline was the wife of a king, a
king whose yellow treasure could buy outright a score of fashion's
puppets; yet in all her life her feet had known no gear save red-tanned
moosehide. At first she had looked in awe at the tiny white-satin
slippers; but she had quickly understood the admiration which shone,
manlike, in the eyes of the men. Her face flushed with pride. For the
moment she was drunken with her woman's loveliness; then she murmured,
with increased scorn, 'And one rifle, broke!' So the training went on.
Every day Malemute Kid led the girl out on long walks devoted to the
correction of her carriage and the shortening of her stride.

There was little likelihood of her identity being discovered, for Cal
Galbraith and the rest of the Old-Timers were like lost children among
the many strangers who had rushed into the land. Besides, the frost of
the North has a bitter tongue, and the tender women of the South, to
shield their cheeks from its biting caresses, were prone to the use of
canvas masks. With faces obscured and bodies lost in squirrel-skin
parkas, a mother and daughter, meeting on trail, would pass as
strangers.

The coaching progressed rapidly. At first it had been slow, but later a
sudden acceleration had manifested itself. This began from the moment
Madeline tried on the white-satin slippers, and in so doing found
herself. The pride of her renegade father, apart from any natural
self-esteem she might possess, at that instant received its birth.
Hitherto, she had deemed herself a woman of an alien breed, of inferior
stock, purchased by her lord's favor. Her husband had seemed to her a
god, who had lifted her, through no essential virtues on her part, to
his own godlike level. But she had never forgotten, even when Young Cal
was born, that she was not of his people. As he had been a god, so had
his womenkind been goddesses. She might have contrasted herself with
them, but she had never compared.

It might have been that familiarity bred contempt; however, be that as
it may, she had ultimately come to understand these roving white men,
and to weigh them.

True, her mind was dark to deliberate analysis, but she yet possessed
her woman's clarity of vision in such matters. On the night of the
slippers she had measured the bold, open admiration of her three
man-friends; and for the first time comparison had suggested itself. It
was only a foot and an ankle, but--but comparison could not, in the
nature of things, cease at that point. She judged herself by their
standards till the divinity of her white sisters was shattered. After
all, they were only women, and why should she not exalt herself to
their midst? In doing these things she learned where she lacked and
with the knowledge of her weakness came her strength. And so mightily
did she strive that her three trainers often marveled late into the
night over the eternal mystery of woman.

In this way Thanksgiving Night drew near. At irregular intervals
Bettles sent word down from Stuart River regarding the welfare of Young
Cal. The time of their return was approaching. More than once a casual
caller, hearing dance-music and the rhythmic pulse of feet, entered,
only to find Harrington scraping away and the other two beating time or
arguing noisily over a mooted step. Madeline was never in evidence,
having precipitately fled to the inner room.

On one of these nights Cal Galbraith dropped in. Encouraging news had
just come down from Stuart River, and Madeline had surpassed
herself--not in walk alone, and carriage and grace, but in womanly
roguishness. They had indulged in sharp repartee and she had defended
herself brilliantly; and then, yielding to the intoxication of the
moment, and of her own power, she had bullied, and mastered, and
wheedled, and patronized them with most astonishing success. And
instinctively, involuntarily, they had bowed, not to her beauty, her
wisdom, her wit, but to that indefinable something in woman to which
man yields yet cannot name.

The room was dizzy with sheer delight as she and Prince whirled through
the last dance of the evening. Harrington was throwing in inconceivable
flourishes, while Malemute Kid, utterly abandoned, had seized the broom
and was executing mad gyrations on his own account.

At this instant the door shook with a heavy rap-rap, and their quick
glances noted the lifting of the latch. But they had survived similar
situations before. Harrington never broke a note. Madeline shot through
the waiting door to the inner room. The broom went hurtling under the
bunk, and by the time Cal Galbraith and Louis Savoy got their heads in,
Malemute Kid and Prince were in each other's arms, wildly schottisching
down the room.

As a rule, Indian women do not make a practice of fainting on
provocation, but Madeline came as near to it as she ever had in her
life. For an hour she crouched on the floor, listening to the heavy
voices of the men rumbling up and down in mimic thunder. Like familiar
chords of childhood melodies, every intonation, every trick of her
husband's voice swept in upon her, fluttering her heart and weakening
her knees till she lay half-fainting against the door. It was well she
could neither see nor hear when he took his departure.

'When do you expect to go back to Circle City?' Malemute Kid asked
simply.

'Haven't thought much about it,' he replied. 'Don't think till after
the ice breaks.' 'And Madeline?'

He flushed at the question, and there was a quick droop to his eyes.
Malemute Kid could have despised him for that, had he known men less.
As it was, his gorge rose against the wives and daughters who had come
into the land, and not satisfied with usurping the place of the native
women, had put unclean thoughts in the heads of the men and made them
ashamed.

'I guess she's all right,' the Circle City King answered hastily, and
in an apologetic manner. 'Tom Dixon's got charge of my interests, you
know, and he sees to it that she has everything she wants.' Malemute
Kid laid hand upon his arm and hushed him suddenly. They had stepped
without. Overhead, the aurora, a gorgeous wanton, flaunted miracles of
color; beneath lay the sleeping town. Far below, a solitary dog gave
tongue.

The King again began to speak, but the Kid pressed his hand for
silence. The sound multiplied. Dog after dog took up the strain till
the full-throated chorus swayed the night.

To him who hears for the first time this weird song, is told the first
and greatest secret of the Northland; to him who has heard it often, it
is the solemn knell of lost endeavor. It is the plaint of tortured
souls, for in it is invested the heritage of the North, the suffering
of countless generations--the warning and the requiem to the world's
estrays.

Cal Galbraith shivered slightly as it died away in half-caught sobs.
The Kid read his thoughts openly, and wandered back with him through
all the weary days of famine and disease; and with him was also the
patient Madeline, sharing his pains and perils, never doubting, never
complaining. His mind's retina vibrated to a score of pictures, stern,
clear-cut, and the hand of the past drew back with heavy fingers on his
heart. It was the psychological moment. Malemute Kid was half-tempted
to play his reserve card and win the game; but the lesson was too mild
as yet, and he let it pass. The next instant they had gripped hands,
and the King's beaded moccasins were drawing protests from the outraged
snow as he crunched down the hill.

Madeline in collapse was another woman to the mischievous creature of
an hour before, whose laughter had been so infectious and whose
heightened color and flashing eyes had made her teachers for the while
forget. Weak and nerveless, she sat in the chair just as she had been
dropped there by Prince and Harrington.

Malemute Kid frowned. This would never do. When the time of meeting her
husband came to hand, she must carry things off with high-handed
imperiousness. It was very necessary she should do it after the manner
of white women, else the victory would be no victory at all. So he
talked to her, sternly, without mincing of words, and initiated her
into the weaknesses of his own sex, till she came to understand what
simpletons men were after all, and why the word of their women was law.

A few days before Thanksgiving Night, Malemute Kid made another call on
Mrs. Eppingwell. She promptly overhauled her feminine fripperies, paid
a protracted visit to the dry-goods department of the P. C. Company,
and returned with the Kid to make Madeline's acquaintance. After that
came a period such as the cabin had never seen before, and what with
cutting, and fitting, and basting, and stitching, and numerous other
wonderful and unknowable things, the male conspirators were more often
banished the premises than not. At such times the Opera House opened
its double storm-doors to them.

So often did they put their heads together, and so deeply did they
drink to curious toasts, that the loungers scented unknown creeks of
incalculable richness, and it is known that several checha-quas and at
least one Old-Timer kept their stampeding packs stored behind the bar,
ready to hit the trail at a moment's notice.

Mrs. Eppingwell was a woman of capacity; so, when she turned Madeline
over to her trainers on Thanksgiving Night she was so transformed that
they were almost afraid of her. Prince wrapped a Hudson Bay blanket
about her with a mock reverence more real than feigned, while Malemute
Kid, whose arm she had taken, found it a severe trial to resume his
wonted mentorship. Harrington, with the list of purchases still running
through his head, dragged along in the rear, nor opened his mouth once
all the way down into the town. When they came to the back door of the
Opera House they took the blanket from Madeline's shoulders and spread
it on the snow. Slipping out of Prince's moccasins, she stepped upon it
in new satin slippers. The masquerade was at its height. She hesitated,
but they jerked open the door and shoved her in. Then they ran around
to come in by the front entrance.


III

'Where is Freda?' the Old-Timers questioned, while the che-cha-quas
were equally energetic in asking who Freda was. The ballroom buzzed
with her name.

It was on everybody's lips. Grizzled 'sour-dough boys,' day-laborers at
the mines but proud of their degree, either patronized the
spruce-looking tenderfeet and lied eloquently--the 'sour-dough boys'
being specially created to toy with truth--or gave them savage looks of
indignation because of their ignorance. Perhaps forty kings of the
Upper and Lower Countries were on the floor, each deeming himself hot
on the trail and sturdily backing his judgment with the yellow dust of
the realm. An assistant was sent to the man at the scales, upon whom
had fallen the burden of weighing up the sacks, while several of the
gamblers, with the rules of chance at their finger-ends, made up
alluring books on the field and favorites.

Which was Freda? Time and again the 'Greek Dancer' was thought to have
been discovered, but each discovery brought panic to the betting ring
and a frantic registering of new wagers by those who wished to hedge.
Malemute Kid took an interest in the hunt, his advent being hailed
uproariously by the revelers, who knew him to a man. The Kid had a good
eye for the trick of a step, and ear for the lilt of a voice, and his
private choice was a marvelous creature who scintillated as the 'Aurora
Borealis.' But the Greek dancer was too subtle for even his
penetration. The majority of the gold-hunters seemed to have centered
their verdict on the 'Russian Princess,' who was the most graceful in
the room, and hence could be no other than Freda Moloof.

During a quadrille a roar of satisfaction went up. She was discovered.
At previous balls, in the figure, 'all hands round,' Freda had
displayed an inimitable step and variation peculiarly her own. As the
figure was called, the 'Russian Princess' gave the unique rhythm to
limb and body. A chorus of I-told-you-so's shook the squared
roof-beams, when lo! it was noticed that 'Aurora Borealis' and another
masque, the 'Spirit of the Pole,' were performing the same trick
equally well. And when two twin 'Sun-Dogs' and a 'Frost Queen' followed
suit, a second assistant was dispatched to the aid of the man at the
scales.

Bettles came off trail in the midst of the excitement, descending upon
them in a hurricane of frost. His rimed brows turned to cataracts as he
whirled about; his mustache, still frozen, seemed gemmed with diamonds
and turned the light in varicolored rays; while the flying feet slipped
on the chunks of ice which rattled from his moccasins and German socks.
A Northland dance is quite an informal affair, the men of the creeks
and trails having lost whatever fastidiousness they might have at one
time possessed; and only in the high official circles are conventions
at all observed. Here, caste carried no significance. Millionaires and
paupers, dog-drivers and mounted policemen joined hands with 'ladies in
the center,' and swept around the circle performing most remarkable
capers. Primitive in their pleasure, boisterous and rough, they
displayed no rudeness, but rather a crude chivalry more genuine than
the most polished courtesy.

In his quest for the 'Greek Dancer,' Cal Galbraith managed to get into
the same set with the 'Russian Princess,' toward whom popular suspicion
had turned.

But by the time he had guided her through one dance, he was willing not
only to stake his millions that she was not Freda, but that he had had
his arm about her waist before. When or where he could not tell, but
the puzzling sense of familiarity so wrought upon him that he turned
his attention to the discovery of her identity. Malemute Kid might have
aided him instead of occasionally taking the Princess for a few turns
and talking earnestly to her in low tones. But it was Jack Harrington
who paid the 'Russian Princess' the most assiduous court. Once he drew
Cal Galbraith aside and hazarded wild guesses as to who she was, and
explained to him that he was going in to win. That rankled the Circle
City King, for man is not by nature monogamic, and he forgot both
Madeline and Freda in the new quest.

It was soon noised about that the 'Russian Princess' was not Freda
Moloof. Interest deepened. Here was a fresh enigma. They knew Freda
though they could not find her, but here was somebody they had found
and did not know. Even the women could not place her, and they knew
every good dancer in the camp. Many took her for one of the official
clique, indulging in a silly escapade. Not a few asserted she would
disappear before the unmasking. Others were equally positive that she
was the woman-reporter of the Kansas City Star, come to write them up
at ninety dollars per column. And the men at the scales worked busily.

At one o'clock every couple took to the floor. The unmasking began amid
laughter and delight, like that of carefree children. There was no end
of Oh's and Ah's as mask after mask was lifted. The scintillating
'Aurora Borealis' became the brawny negress whose income from washing
the community's clothes ran at about five hundred a month. The twin
'Sun-Dogs' discovered mustaches on their upper lips, and were
recognized as brother Fraction-Kings of El Dorado. In one of the most
prominent sets, and the slowest in uncovering, was Cal Galbraith with
the 'Spirit of the Pole.' Opposite him was Jack Harrington and the
'Russian Princess.' The rest had discovered themselves, yet the 'Greek
Dancer' was still missing. All eyes were upon the group. Cal Galbraith,
in response to their cries, lifted his partner's mask. Freda's
wonderful face and brilliant eyes flashed out upon them. A roar went
up, to be squelched suddenly in the new and absorbing mystery of the
'Russian Princess.' Her face was still hidden, and Jack Harrington was
struggling with her. The dancers tittered on the tiptoes of expectancy.
He crushed her dainty costume roughly, and then--and then the revelers
exploded. The joke was on them. They had danced all night with a
tabooed native woman.

But those that knew, and they were many, ceased abruptly, and a hush
fell upon the room.

Cal Galbraith crossed over with great strides, angrily, and spoke to
Madeline in polyglot Chinook. But she retained her composure,
apparently oblivious to the fact that she was the cynosure of all eyes,
and answered him in English. She showed neither fright nor anger, and
Malemute Kid chuckled at her well-bred equanimity. The King felt
baffled, defeated; his common Siwash wife had passed beyond him.

'Come!' he said finally. 'Come on home.' 'I beg pardon,' she replied;
'I have agreed to go to supper with Mr. Harrington. Besides, there's no
end of dances promised.'

Harrington extended his arm to lead her away. He evinced not the
slightest disinclination toward showing his back, but Malemute Kid had
by this time edged in closer. The Circle City King was stunned. Twice
his hand dropped to his belt, and twice the Kid gathered himself to
spring; but the retreating couple passed through the supper-room door
where canned oysters were spread at five dollars the plate.

The crowd sighed audibly, broke up into couples, and followed them.
Freda pouted and went in with Cal Galbraith; but she had a good heart
and a sure tongue, and she spoiled his oysters for him. What she said
is of no importance, but his face went red and white at intervals, and
he swore repeatedly and savagely at himself.

The supper-room was filled with a pandemonium of voices, which ceased
suddenly as Cal Galbraith stepped over to his wife's table. Since the
unmasking considerable weights of dust had been placed as to the
outcome. Everybody watched with breathless interest.

Harrington's blue eyes were steady, but under the overhanging
tablecloth a Smith & Wesson balanced on his knee. Madeline looked up,
casually, with little interest.

'May--may I have the next round dance with you?' the King stuttered.

The wife of the King glanced at her card and inclined her head.



An Odyssey of the North

The sleds were singing their eternal lament to the creaking of the
harness and the tinkling bells of the leaders; but the men and dogs
were tired and made no sound. The trail was heavy with new-fallen snow,
and they had come far, and the runners, burdened with flint-like
quarters of frozen moose, clung tenaciously to the unpacked surface and
held back with a stubbornness almost human.

Darkness was coming on, but there was no camp to pitch that night. The
snow fell gently through the pulseless air, not in flakes, but in tiny
frost crystals of delicate design. It was very warm--barely ten below
zero--and the men did not mind. Meyers and Bettles had raised their ear
flaps, while Malemute Kid had even taken off his mittens.

The dogs had been fagged out early in the after noon, but they now
began to show new vigor. Among the more astute there was a certain
restlessness--an impatience at the restraint of the traces, an
indecisive quickness of movement, a sniffing of snouts and pricking of
ears. These became incensed at their more phlegmatic brothers, urging
them on with numerous sly nips on their hinder quarters. Those, thus
chidden, also contracted and helped spread the contagion. At last the
leader of the foremost sled uttered a sharp whine of satisfaction,
crouching lower in the snow and throwing himself against the collar.
The rest followed suit.

There was an ingathering of back hands, a tightening of traces; the
sleds leaped forward, and the men clung to the gee poles, violently
accelerating the uplift of their feet that they might escape going
under the runners. The weariness of the day fell from them, and they
whooped encouragement to the dogs. The animals responded with joyous
yelps. They were swinging through the gathering darkness at a rattling
gallop.

'Gee! Gee!' the men cried, each in turn, as their sleds abruptly left
the main trail, heeling over on single runners like luggers on the wind.

Then came a hundred yards' dash to the lighted parchment window, which
told its own story of the home cabin, the roaring Yukon stove, and the
steaming pots of tea. But the home cabin had been invaded. Threescore
huskies chorused defiance, and as many furry forms precipitated
themselves upon the dogs which drew the first sled. The door was flung
open, and a man, clad in the scarlet tunic of the Northwest Police,
waded knee-deep among the furious brutes, calmly and impartially
dispensing soothing justice with the butt end of a dog whip. After that
the men shook hands; and in this wise was Malemute Kid welcomed to his
own cabin by a stranger.

Stanley Prince, who should have welcomed him, and who was responsible
for the Yukon stove and hot tea aforementioned, was busy with his
guests. There were a dozen or so of them, as nondescript a crowd as
ever served the Queen in the enforcement of her laws or the delivery of
her mails. They were of many breeds, but their common life had formed
of them a certain type--a lean and wiry type, with trail-hardened
muscles, and sun-browned faces, and untroubled souls which gazed
frankly forth, clear-eyed and steady.

They drove the dogs of the Queen, wrought fear in the hearts of her
enemies, ate of her meager fare, and were happy. They had seen life,
and done deeds, and lived romances; but they did not know it.

And they were very much at home. Two of them were sprawled upon
Malemute Kid's bunk, singing chansons which their French forebears sang
in the days when first they entered the Northwest land and mated with
its Indian women. Bettles' bunk had suffered a similar invasion, and
three or four lusty voyageurs worked their toes among its blankets as
they listened to the tale of one who had served on the boat brigade
with Wolseley when he fought his way to Khartoum.

And when he tired, a cowboy told of courts and kings and lords and
ladies he had seen when Buffalo Bill toured the capitals of Europe. In
a corner two half-breeds, ancient comrades in a lost campaign, mended
harnesses and talked of the days when the Northwest flamed with
insurrection and Louis Riel was king.

Rough jests and rougher jokes went up and down, and great hazards by
trail and river were spoken of in the light of commonplaces, only to be
recalled by virtue of some grain of humor or ludicrous happening.
Prince was led away by these uncrowned heroes who had seen history
made, who regarded the great and the romantic as but the ordinary and
the incidental in the routine of life. He passed his precious tobacco
among them with lavish disregard, and rusty chains of reminiscence were
loosened, and forgotten odysseys resurrected for his especial benefit.

When conversation dropped and the travelers filled the last pipes and
lashed their tight-rolled sleeping furs. Prince fell back upon his
comrade for further information.

'Well, you know what the cowboy is,' Malemute Kid answered, beginning
to unlace his moccasins; 'and it's not hard to guess the British blood
in his bed partner. As for the rest, they're all children of the
coureurs du bois, mingled with God knows how many other bloods. The two
turning in by the door are the regulation 'breeds' or Boisbrules. That
lad with the worsted breech scarf--notice his eyebrows and the turn of
his jaw--shows a Scotchman wept in his mother's smoky tepee. And that
handsome looking fellow putting the capote under his head is a French
half-breed--you heard him talking; he doesn't like the two Indians
turning in next to him. You see, when the 'breeds' rose under the Riel
the full-bloods kept the peace, and they've not lost much love for one
another since.' 'But I say, what's that glum-looking fellow by the
stove? I'll swear he can't talk English. He hasn't opened his mouth all
night.' 'You're wrong. He knows English well enough. Did you follow his
eyes when he listened? I did. But he's neither kith nor kin to the
others. When they talked their own patois you could see he didn't
understand. I've been wondering myself what he is. Let's find out.'
'Fire a couple of sticks into the stove!'

Malemute Kid commanded, raising his voice and looking squarely at the
man in question.

He obeyed at once.

'Had discipline knocked into him somewhere.' Prince commented in a low
tone.

Malemute Kid nodded, took off his socks, and picked his way among
recumbent men to the stove. There he hung his damp footgear among a
score or so of mates.

'When do you expect to get to Dawson?' he asked tentatively.

The man studied him a moment before replying. 'They say seventy-five
mile. So? Maybe two days.' The very slightest accent was perceptible,
while there was no awkward hesitancy or groping for words.

'Been in the country before?' 'No.' 'Northwest Territory?' 'Yes.' 'Born
there?' 'No.'

'Well, where the devil were you born? You're none of these.' Malemute
Kid swept his hand over the dog drivers, even including the two
policemen who had turned into Prince's bunk. 'Where did you come from?
I've seen faces like yours before, though I can't remember just where.'
'I know you,' he irrelevantly replied, at once turning the drift of
Malemute Kid's questions.

'Where? Ever see me?' 'No; your partner, him priest, Pastilik, long
time ago. Him ask me if I see you, Malemute Kid. Him give me grub. I no
stop long. You hear him speak 'bout me?' 'Oh! you're the fellow that
traded the otter skins for the dogs?' The man nodded, knocked out his
pipe, and signified his disinclination for conversation by rolling up
in his furs. Malemute Kid blew out the slush lamp and crawled under the
blankets with Prince.

'Well, what is he?' 'Don't know--turned me off, somehow, and then shut
up like a clam.

'But he's a fellow to whet your curiosity. I've heard of him. All the
coast wondered about him eight years ago. Sort of mysterious, you know.
He came down out of the North in the dead of winter, many a thousand
miles from here, skirting Bering Sea and traveling as though the devil
were after him. No one ever learned where he came from, but he must
have come far. He was badly travel-worn when he got food from the
Swedish missionary on Golovin Bay and asked the way south. We heard of
all this afterward. Then he abandoned the shore line, heading right
across Norton Sound. Terrible weather, snowstorms and high winds, but
he pulled through where a thousand other men would have died, missing
St. Michaels and making the land at Pastilik. He'd lost all but two
dogs, and was nearly gone with starvation.

'He was so anxious to go on that Father Roubeau fitted him out with
grub; but he couldn't let him have any dogs, for he was only waiting my
arrival, to go on a trip himself. Mr. Ulysses knew too much to start on
without animals, and fretted around for several days. He had on his
sled a bunch of beautifully cured otter skins, sea otters, you know,
worth their weight in gold. There was also at Pastilik an old Shylock
of a Russian trader, who had dogs to kill. Well, they didn't dicker
very long, but when the Strange One headed south again, it was in the
rear of a spanking dog team. Mr. Shylock, by the way, had the otter
skins. I saw them, and they were magnificent. We figured it up and
found the dogs brought him at least five hundred apiece. And it wasn't
as if the Strange One didn't know the value of sea otter; he was an
Indian of some sort, and what little he talked showed he'd been among
white men.

'After the ice passed out of the sea, word came up from Nunivak Island
that he'd gone in there for grub. Then he dropped from sight, and this
is the first heard of him in eight years. Now where did he come from?
and what was he doing there? and why did he come from there? He's
Indian, he's been nobody knows where, and he's had discipline, which is
unusual for an Indian. Another mystery of the North for you to solve,
Prince.' 'Thanks awfully, but I've got too many on hand as it is,' he
replied.

Malemute Kid was already breathing heavily; but the young mining
engineer gazed straight up through the thick darkness, waiting for the
strange orgasm which stirred his blood to die away. And when he did
sleep, his brain worked on, and for the nonce he, too, wandered through
the white unknown, struggled with the dogs on endless trails, and saw
men live, and toil, and die like men. The next morning, hours before
daylight, the dog drivers and policemen pulled out for Dawson. But the
powers that saw to Her Majesty's interests and ruled the destinies of
her lesser creatures gave the mailmen little rest, for a week later
they appeared at Stuart River, heavily burdened with letters for Salt
Water.

However, their dogs had been replaced by fresh ones; but, then, they
were dogs.

The men had expected some sort of a layover in which to rest up;
besides, this Klondike was a new section of the Northland, and they had
wished to see a little something of the Golden City where dust flowed
like water and dance halls rang with never-ending revelry. But they
dried their socks and smoked their evening pipes with much the same
gusto as on their former visit, though one or two bold spirits
speculated on desertion and the possibility of crossing the unexplored
Rockies to the east, and thence, by the Mackenzie Valley, of gaining
their old stamping grounds in the Chippewyan country.

Two or three even decided to return to their homes by that route when
their terms of service had expired, and they began to lay plans
forthwith, looking forward to the hazardous undertaking in much the
same way a city-bred man would to a day's holiday in the woods.

He of the Otter Skins seemed very restless, though he took little
interest in the discussion, and at last he drew Malemute Kid to one
side and talked for some time in low tones.

Prince cast curious eyes in their direction, and the mystery deepened
when they put on caps and mittens and went outside. When they returned,
Malemute Kid placed his gold scales on the table, weighed out the
matter of sixty ounces, and transferred them to the Strange One's sack.
Then the chief of the dog drivers joined the conclave, and certain
business was transacted with him.

The next day the gang went on upriver, but He of the Otter Skins took
several pounds of grub and turned his steps back toward Dawson.

'Didn't know what to make of it,' said Malemute Kid in response to
Prince's queries; 'but the poor beggar wanted to be quit of the service
for some reason or other--at least it seemed a most important one to
him, though he wouldn't let on what. You see, it's just like the army:
he signed for two years, and the only way to get free was to buy
himself out. He couldn't desert and then stay here, and he was just
wild to remain in the country.

'Made up his mind when he got to Dawson, he said; but no one knew him,
hadn't a cent, and I was the only one he'd spoken two words with. So he
talked it over with the lieutenant-governor, and made arrangements in
case he could get the money from me--loan, you know. Said he'd pay back
in the year, and, if I wanted, would put me onto something rich.
Never'd seen it, but he knew it was rich.

'And talk! why, when he got me outside he was ready to weep. Begged and
pleaded; got down in the snow to me till I hauled him out of it.
Palavered around like a crazy man.

'Swore he's worked to this very end for years and years, and couldn't
bear to be disappointed now. Asked him what end, but he wouldn't say.

'Said they might keep him on the other half of the trail and he
wouldn't get to Dawson in two years, and then it would be too late.
Never saw a man take on so in my life. And when I said I'd let him have
it, had to yank him out of the snow again. Told him to consider it in
the light of a grubstake. Think he'd have it? No sir! Swore he'd give
me all he found, make me rich beyond the dreams of avarice, and all
such stuff. Now a man who puts his life and time against a grubstake
ordinarily finds it hard enough to turn over half of what he finds.
Something behind all this, Prince; just you make a note of it. We'll
hear of him if he stays in the country--' 'And if he doesn't?' 'Then my
good nature gets a shock, and I'm sixty some odd ounces out.' The cold
weather had come on with the long nights, and the sun had begun to play
his ancient game of peekaboo along the southern snow line ere aught was
heard of Malemute Kid's grubstake. And then, one bleak morning in early
January, a heavily laden dog train pulled into his cabin below Stuart
River. He of the Otter Skins was there, and with him walked a man such
as the gods have almost forgotten how to fashion. Men never talked of
luck and pluck and five-hundred-dollar dirt without bringing in the
name of Axel Gunderson; nor could tales of nerve or strength or daring
pass up and down the campfire without the summoning of his presence.
And when the conversation flagged, it blazed anew at mention of the
woman who shared his fortunes.

As has been noted, in the making of Axel Gunderson the gods had
remembered their old-time cunning and cast him after the manner of men
who were born when the world was young. Full seven feet he towered in
his picturesque costume which marked a king of Eldorado. His chest,
neck, and limbs were those of a giant. To bear his three hundred pounds
of bone and muscle, his snowshoes were greater by a generous yard than
those of other men. Rough-hewn, with rugged brow and massive jaw and
unflinching eyes of palest blue, his face told the tale of one who knew
but the law of might. Of the yellow of ripe corn silk, his
frost-incrusted hair swept like day across the night and fell far down
his coat of bearskin.

A vague tradition of the sea seemed to cling about him as he swung down
the narrow trail in advance of the dogs; and he brought the butt of his
dog whip against Malemute Kid's door as a Norse sea rover, on southern
foray, might thunder for admittance at the castle gate.

Prince bared his womanly arms and kneaded sour-dough bread, casting, as
he did so, many a glance at the three guests--three guests the like of
which might never come under a man's roof in a lifetime. The Strange
One, whom Malemute Kid had surnamed Ulysses, still fascinated him; but
his interest chiefly gravitated between Axel Gunderson and Axel
Gunderson's wife. She felt the day's journey, for she had softened in
comfortable cabins during the many days since her husband mastered the
wealth of frozen pay streaks, and she was tired. She rested against his
great breast like a slender flower against a wall, replying lazily to
Malemute Kid's good-natured banter, and stirring Prince's blood
strangely with an occasional sweep of her deep, dark eyes. For Prince
was a man, and healthy, and had seen few women in many months. And she
was older than he, and an Indian besides. But she was different from
all native wives he had met: she had traveled--had been in his country
among others, he gathered from the conversation; and she knew most of
the things the women of his own race knew, and much more that it was
not in the nature of things for them to know. She could make a meal of
sun-dried fish or a bed in the snow; yet she teased them with
tantalizing details of many-course dinners, and caused strange internal
dissensions to arise at the mention of various quondam dishes which
they had well-nigh forgotten. She knew the ways of the moose, the bear,
and the little blue fox, and of the wild amphibians of the Northern
seas; she was skilled in the lore of the woods, and the streams, and
the tale writ by man and bird and beast upon the delicate snow crust
was to her an open book; yet Prince caught the appreciative twinkle in
her eye as she read the Rules of the Camp. These rules had been
fathered by the Unquenchable Bettles at a time when his blood ran high,
and were remarkable for the terse simplicity of their humor.

Prince always turned them to the wall before the arrival of ladies; but
who could suspect that this native wife--Well, it was too late now.

This, then, was the wife of Axel Gunderson, a woman whose name and fame
had traveled with her husband's, hand in hand, through all the
Northland. At table, Malemute Kid baited her with the assurance of an
old friend, and Prince shook off the shyness of first acquaintance and
joined in. But she held her own in the unequal contest, while her
husband, slower in wit, ventured naught but applause. And he was very
proud of her; his every look and action revealed the magnitude of the
place she occupied in his life. He of the Otter Skins ate in silence,
forgotten in the merry battle; and long ere the others were done he
pushed back from the table and went out among the dogs. Yet all too
soon his fellow travelers drew on their mittens and parkas and followed
him.

There had been no snow for many days, and the sleds slipped along the
hardpacked Yukon trail as easily as if it had been glare ice. Ulysses
led the first sled; with the second came Prince and Axel Gunderson's
wife; while Malemute Kid and the yellow-haired giant brought up the
third.

'It's only a hunch, Kid,' he said, 'but I think it's straight. He's
never been there, but he tells a good story, and shows a map I heard of
when I was in the Kootenay country years ago. I'd like to have you go
along; but he's a strange one, and swore point-blank to throw it up if
anyone was brought in. But when I come back you'll get first tip, and
I'll stake you next to me, and give you a half share in the town site
besides.' 'No! no!' he cried, as the other strove to interrupt. 'I'm
running this, and before I'm done it'll need two heads.

'If it's all right, why, it'll be a second Cripple Creek, man; do you
hear?--a second Cripple Creek! It's quartz, you know, not placer; and
if we work it right we'll corral the whole thing--millions upon
millions. I've heard of the place before, and so have you. We'll build
a town--thousands of workmen--good waterways--steamship lines--big
carrying trade--light-draught steamers for head reaches--survey a
railroad, perhaps--sawmills--electric-light plant--do our own
banking--commercial company--syndicate--Say! Just you hold your hush
till I get back!' The sleds came to a halt where the trail crossed the
mouth of Stuart River. An unbroken sea of frost, its wide expanse
stretched away into the unknown east.

The snowshoes were withdrawn from the lashings of the sleds. Axel
Gunderson shook hands and stepped to the fore, his great webbed shoes
sinking a fair half yard into the feathery surface and packing the snow
so the dogs should not wallow. His wife fell in behind the last sled,
betraying long practice in the art of handling the awkward footgear.
The stillness was broken with cheery farewells; the dogs whined; and He
of the Otter Skins talked with his whip to a recalcitrant wheeler.

An hour later the train had taken on the likeness of a black pencil
crawling in a long, straight line across a mighty sheet of foolscap.


II

One night, many weeks later, Malemute Kid and Prince fell to solving
chess problems from the torn page of an ancient magazine. The Kid had
just returned from his Bonanza properties and was resting up
preparatory to a long moose hunt.

Prince, too, had been on creek and trail nearly all winter, and had
grown hungry for a blissful week of cabin life.

'Interpose the black knight, and force the king. No, that won't do.
See, the next move-'

'Why advance the pawn two squares? Bound to take it in transit, and
with the bishop out of the way-' 'But hold on! That leaves a hole,
and-' 'No; it's protected. Go ahead! You'll see it works.' It was very
interesting. Somebody knocked at the door a second time before Malemute
Kid said, 'Come in.' The door swung open. Something staggered in.

Prince caught one square look and sprang to his feet. The horror in his
eyes caused Malemute Kid to whirl about; and he, too, was startled,
though he had seen bad things before. The thing tottered blindly toward
them. Prince edged away till he reached the nail from which hung his
Smith & Wesson.

'My God! what is it?' he whispered to Malemute Kid.

'Don't know. Looks like a case of freezing and no grub,' replied the
Kid, sliding away in the opposite direction. 'Watch out! It may be
mad,' he warned, coming back from closing the door.

The thing advanced to the table. The bright flame of the slush lamp
caught its eye. It was amused, and gave voice to eldritch cackles which
betokened mirth.

Then, suddenly, he--for it was a man--swayed back, with a hitch to his
skin trousers, and began to sing a chantey, such as men lift when they
swing around the capstan circle and the sea snorts in their ears:
Yan-kee ship come down de ri-ib-er, Pull! my bully boys! Pull! D'yeh
want--to know de captain ru-uns her? Pull! my bully boys! Pull!
Jon-a-than Jones ob South Caho-li-in-a, Pull! my bully. He broke off
abruptly, tottered with a wolfish snarl to the meat shelf, and before
they could intercept was tearing with his teeth at a chunk of raw
bacon. The struggle was fierce between him and Malemute Kid; but his
mad strength left him as suddenly as it had come, and he weakly
surrendered the spoil. Between them they got him upon a stool, where he
sprawled with half his body across the table.

A small dose of whiskey strengthened him, so that he could dip a spoon
into the sugar caddy which Malemute Kid placed before him. After his
appetite had been somewhat cloyed, Prince, shuddering as he did so,
passed him a mug of weak beef tea.

The creature's eyes were alight with a somber frenzy, which blazed and
waned with every mouthful. There was very little skin to the face. The
face, for that matter, sunken and emaciated, bore little likeness to
human countenance.

Frost after frost had bitten deeply, each depositing its stratum of
scab upon the half-healed scar that went before. This dry, hard surface
was of a bloody-black color, serrated by grievous cracks wherein the
raw red flesh peeped forth. His skin garments were dirty and in
tatters, and the fur of one side was singed and burned away, showing
where he had lain upon his fire.

Malemute Kid pointed to where the sun-tanned hide had been cut away,
strip by strip--the grim signature of famine.

'Who--are--you?' slowly and distinctly enunciated the Kid.

The man paid no heed.

'Where do you come from?' 'Yan-kee ship come down de ri-ib-er,' was the
quavering response.

'Don't doubt the beggar came down the river,' the Kid said, shaking him
in an endeavor to start a more lucid flow of talk.

But the man shrieked at the contact, clapping a hand to his side in
evident pain. He rose slowly to his feet, half leaning on the table.

'She laughed at me--so--with the hate in her eye; and
she--would--not--come.' His voice died away, and he was sinking back
when Malemute Kid gripped him by the wrist and shouted, 'Who? Who would
not come?' 'She, Unga. She laughed, and struck at me, so, and so. And
then-' 'Yes?'

'And then--' 'And then what?' 'And then he lay very still in the snow a
long time. He is-still in--the--snow.' The two men looked at each other
helplessly.

'Who is in the snow?' 'She, Unga. She looked at me with the hate in her
eye, and then--'

'Yes, yes.' 'And then she took the knife, so; and once, twice--she was
weak. I traveled very slow. And there is much gold in that place, very
much gold.' 'Where is Unga?' For all Malemute Kid knew, she might be
dying a mile away. He shook the man savagely, repeating again and
again, 'Where is Unga? Who is Unga?' 'She--is--in--the--snow.' 'Go on!'
The Kid was pressing his wrist cruelly.

'So--I--would--be--in--the snow--but--I--had--a--debt--to--pay.
It--was--heavy--I--had--a-debt--to--pay--a--debt--to--pay I--had-' The
faltering monosyllables ceased as he fumbled in his pouch and drew
forth a buckskin sack. 'A--debt--to--pay--five--pounds--of--gold-grub--
stake--Mal--e--mute--Kid--I--y--' The exhausted head dropped upon the
table; nor could Malemute Kid rouse it again.

'It's Ulysses,' he said quietly, tossing the bag of dust on the table.
'Guess it's all day with Axel Gunderson and the woman. Come on, let's
get him between the blankets. He's Indian; he'll pull through and tell
a tale besides.' As they cut his garments from him, near his right
breast could be seen two unhealed, hard-lipped knife thrusts.


III

'I will talk of the things which were in my own way; but you will
understand. I will begin at the beginning, and tell of myself and the
woman, and, after that, of the man.' He of the Otter Skins drew over to
the stove as do men who have been deprived of fire and are afraid the
Promethean gift may vanish at any moment. Malemute Kid picked up the
slush lamp and placed it so its light might fall upon the face of the
narrator. Prince slid his body over the edge of the bunk and joined
them.

'I am Naass, a chief, and the son of a chief, born between a sunset and
a rising, on the dark seas, in my father's oomiak. All of a night the
men toiled at the paddles, and the women cast out the waves which threw
in upon us, and we fought with the storm. The salt spray froze upon my
mother's breast till her breath passed with the passing of the tide.
But I--I raised my voice with the wind and the storm, and lived.

'We dwelt in Akatan--' 'Where?' asked Malemute Kid.

'Akatan, which is in the Aleutians; Akatan, beyond Chignik, beyond
Kardalak, beyond Unimak. As I say, we dwelt in Akatan, which lies in
the midst of the sea on the edge of the world. We farmed the salt seas
for the fish, the seal, and the otter; and our homes shouldered about
one another on the rocky strip between the rim of the forest and the
yellow beach where our kayaks lay. We were not many, and the world was
very small. There were strange lands to the east--islands like Akatan;
so we thought all the world was islands and did not mind.

'I was different from my people. In the sands of the beach were the
crooked timbers and wave-warped planks of a boat such as my people
never built; and I remember on the point of the island which overlooked
the ocean three ways there stood a pine tree which never grew there,
smooth and straight and tall. It is said the two men came to that spot,
turn about, through many days, and watched with the passing of the
light. These two men came from out of the sea in the boat which lay in
pieces on the beach. And they were white like you, and weak as the
little children when the seal have gone away and the hunters come home
empty. I know of these things from the old men and the old women, who
got them from their fathers and mothers before them. These strange
white men did not take kindly to our ways at first, but they grew
strong, what of the fish and the oil, and fierce. And they built them
each his own house, and took the pick of our women, and in time
children came. Thus he was born who was to become the father of my
father's father.

'As I said, I was different from my people, for I carried the strong,
strange blood of this white man who came out of the sea. It is said we
had other laws in the days before these men; but they were fierce and
quarrelsome, and fought with our men till there were no more left who
dared to fight. Then they made themselves chiefs, and took away our old
laws, and gave us new ones, insomuch that the man was the son of his
father, and not his mother, as our way had been. They also ruled that
the son, first-born, should have all things which were his father's
before him, and that the brothers and sisters should shift for
themselves. And they gave us other laws. They showed us new ways in the
catching of fish and the killing of bear which were thick in the woods;
and they taught us to lay by bigger stores for the time of famine. And
these things were good.

'But when they had become chiefs, and there were no more men to face
their anger, they fought, these strange white men, each with the other.
And the one whose blood I carry drove his seal spear the length of an
arm through the other's body. Their children took up the fight, and
their children's children; and there was great hatred between them, and
black doings, even to my time, so that in each family but one lived to
pass down the blood of them that went before. Of my blood I was alone;
of the other man's there was but a girl. Unga, who lived with her
mother. Her father and my father did not come back from the fishing one
night; but afterward they washed up to the beach on the big tides, and
they held very close to each other.

'The people wondered, because of the hatred between the houses, and the
old men shook their heads and said the fight would go on when children
were born to her and children to me. They told me this as a boy, till I
came to believe, and to look upon Unga as a foe, who was to be the
mother of children which were to fight with mine. I thought of these
things day by day, and when I grew to a stripling I came to ask why
this should be so.

'And they answered, "We do not know, but that in such way your fathers
did." And I marveled that those which were to come should fight the
battles of those that were gone, and in it I could see no right. But
the people said it must be, and I was only a stripling.

'And they said I must hurry, that my blood might be the older and grow
strong before hers. This was easy, for I was head man, and the people
looked up to me because of the deeds and the laws of my fathers, and
the wealth which was mine. Any maiden would come to me, but I found
none to my liking. And the old men and the mothers of maidens told me
to hurry, for even then were the hunters bidding high to the mother of
Unga; and should her children grow strong before mine, mine would
surely die.

'Nor did I find a maiden till one night coming back from the fishing.
The sunlight was lying, so, low and full in the eyes, the wind free,
and the kayacks racing with the white seas. Of a sudden the kayak of
Unga came driving past me, and she looked upon me, so, with her black
hair flying like a cloud of night and the spray wet on her cheek. As I
say, the sunlight was full in the eyes, and I was a stripling; but
somehow it was all clear, and I knew it to be the call of kind to kind.

'As she whipped ahead she looked back within the space of two
strokes--looked as only the woman Unga could look--and again I knew it
as the call of kind. The people shouted as we ripped past the lazy
oomiaks and left them far behind. But she was quick at the paddle, and
my heart was like the belly of a sail, and I did not gain. The wind
freshened, the sea whitened, and, leaping like the seals on the
windward breech, we roared down the golden pathway of the sun.' Naass
was crouched half out of his stool, in the attitude of one driving a
paddle, as he ran the race anew. Somewhere across the stove he beheld
the tossing kayak and the flying hair of Unga. The voice of the wind
was in his ears, and its salt beat fresh upon his nostrils.

'But she made the shore, and ran up the sand, laughing, to the house of
her mother. And a great thought came to me that night--a thought worthy
of him that was chief over all the people of Akatan. So, when the moon
was up, I went down to the house of her mother, and looked upon the
goods of Yash-Noosh, which were piled by the door--the goods of
Yash-Noosh, a strong hunter who had it in mind to be the father of the
children of Unga. Other young men had piled their goods there and taken
them away again; and each young man had made a pile greater than the
one before.

'And I laughed to the moon and the stars, and went to my own house
where my wealth was stored. And many trips I made, till my pile was
greater by the fingers of one hand than the pile of Yash-Noosh. There
were fish, dried in the sun and smoked; and forty hides of the hair
seal, and half as many of the fur, and each hide was tied at the mouth
and big bellied with oil; and ten skins of bear which I killed in the
woods when they came out in the spring. And there were beads and
blankets and scarlet cloths, such as I got in trade from the people who
lived to the east, and who got them in trade from the people who lived
still beyond in the east.

'And I looked upon the pile of Yash-Noosh and laughed, for I was head
man in Akatan, and my wealth was greater than the wealth of all my
young men, and my fathers had done deeds, and given laws, and put their
names for all time in the mouths of the people.

'So, when the morning came, I went down to the beach, casting out of
the corner of my eye at the house of the mother of Unga. My offer yet
stood untouched.

'And the women smiled, and said sly things one to the other. I
wondered, for never had such a price been offered; and that night I
added more to the pile, and put beside it a kayak of well-tanned skins
which never yet had swam in the sea. But in the day it was yet there,
open to the laughter of all men. The mother of Unga was crafty, and I
grew angry at the shame in which I stood before my people. So that
night I added till it became a great pile, and I hauled up my oomiak,
which was of the value of twenty kayaks. And in the morning there was
no pile.

'Then made I preparation for the wedding, and the people that lived
even to the east came for the food of the feast and the potlatch token.
Unga was older than I by the age of four suns in the way we reckoned
the years. I was only a stripling; but then I was a chief, and the son
of a chief, and it did not matter.

'But a ship shoved her sails above the floor of the ocean, and grew
larger with the breath of the wind. From her scuppers she ran clear
water, and the men were in haste and worked hard at the pumps. On the
bow stood a mighty man, watching the depth of the water and giving
commands with a voice of thunder. His eyes were of the pale blue of the
deep waters, and his head was maned like that of a sea lion. And his
hair was yellow, like the straw of a southern harvest or the manila
rope yarns which sailormen plait.

'Of late years we had seen ships from afar, but this was the first to
come to the beach of Akatan. The feast was broken, and the women and
children fled to the houses, while we men strung our bows and waited
with spears in hand. But when the ship's forefoot smelled the beach the
strange men took no notice of us, being busy with their own work. With
the falling of the tide they careened the schooner and patched a great
hole in her bottom. So the women crept back, and the feast went on.

'When the tide rose, the sea wanderers kedged the schooner to deep
water and then came among us. They bore presents and were friendly; so
I made room for them, and out of the largeness of my heart gave them
tokens such as I gave all the guests, for it was my wedding day, and I
was head man in Akatan. And he with the mane of the sea lion was there,
so tall and strong that one looked to see the earth shake with the fall
of his feet. He looked much and straight at Unga, with his arms folded,
so, and stayed till the sun went away and the stars came out. Then he
went down to his ship. After that I took Unga by the hand and led her
to my own house. And there was singing and great laughter, and the
women said sly things, after the manner of women at such times. But we
did not care. Then the people left us alone and went home.

'The last noise had not died away when the chief of the sea wanderers
came in by the door. And he had with him black bottles, from which we
drank and made merry. You see, I was only a stripling, and had lived
all my days on the edge of the world. So my blood became as fire, and
my heart as light as the froth that flies from the surf to the cliff.
Unga sat silent among the skins in the corner, her eyes wide, for she
seemed to fear. And he with the mane of the sea lion looked upon her
straight and long. Then his men came in with bundles of goods, and he
piled before me wealth such as was not in all Akatan. There were guns,
both large and small, and powder and shot and shell, and bright axes
and knives of steel, and cunning tools, and strange things the like of
which I had never seen. When he showed me by sign that it was all mine,
I thought him a great man to be so free; but he showed me also that
Unga was to go away with him in his ship.

'Do you understand?--that Unga was to go away with him in his ship. The
blood of my fathers flamed hot on the sudden, and I made to drive him
through with my spear. But the spirit of the bottles had stolen the
life from my arm, and he took me by the neck, so, and knocked my head
against the wall of the house. And I was made weak like a newborn
child, and my legs would no more stand under me.

'Unga screamed, and she laid hold of the things of the house with her
hands, till they fell all about us as he dragged her to the door. Then
he took her in his great arms, and when she tore at his yellow hair
laughed with a sound like that of the big bull seal in the rut.

'I crawled to the beach and called upon my people, but they were
afraid. Only Yash-Noosh was a man, and they struck him on the head with
an oar, till he lay with his face in the sand and did not move. And
they raised the sails to the sound of their songs, and the ship went
away on the wind.

'The people said it was good, for there would be no more war of the
bloods in Akatan; but I said never a word, waiting till the time of the
full moon, when I put fish and oil in my kayak and went away to the
east. I saw many islands and many people, and I, who had lived on the
edge, saw that the world was very large. I talked by signs; but they
had not seen a schooner nor a man with the mane of a sea lion, and they
pointed always to the east. And I slept in queer places, and ate odd
things, and met strange faces. Many laughed, for they thought me light
of head; but sometimes old men turned my face to the light and blessed
me, and the eyes of the young women grew soft as they asked me of the
strange ship, and Unga, and the men of the sea.

'And in this manner, through rough seas and great storms, I came to
Unalaska. There were two schooners there, but neither was the one I
sought. So I passed on to the east, with the world growing ever larger,
and in the island of Unamok there was no word of the ship, nor in
Kadiak, nor in Atognak. And so I came one day to a rocky land, where
men dug great holes in the mountain. And there was a schooner, but not
my schooner, and men loaded upon it the rocks which they dug. This I
thought childish, for all the world was made of rocks; but they gave me
food and set me to work. When the schooner was deep in the water, the
captain gave me money and told me to go; but I asked which way he went,
and he pointed south. I made signs that I would go with him, and he
laughed at first, but then, being short of men, took me to help work
the ship. So I came to talk after their manner, and to heave on ropes,
and to reef the stiff sails in sudden squalls, and to take my turn at
the wheel. But it was not strange, for the blood of my fathers was the
blood of the men of the sea.

'I had thought it an easy task to find him I sought, once I got among
his own people; and when we raised the land one day, and passed between
a gateway of the sea to a port, I looked for perhaps as many schooners
as there were fingers to my hands. But the ships lay against the
wharves for miles, packed like so many little fish; and when I went
among them to ask for a man with the mane of a sea lion, they laughed,
and answered me in the tongues of many peoples. And I found that they
hailed from the uttermost parts of the earth.

'And I went into the city to look upon the face of every man. But they
were like the cod when they run thick on the banks, and I could not
count them. And the noise smote upon me till I could not hear, and my
head was dizzy with much movement. So I went on and on, through the
lands which sang in the warm sunshine; where the harvests lay rich on
the plains; and where great cities were fat with men that lived like
women, with false words in their mouths and their hearts black with the
lust of gold. And all the while my people of Akatan hunted and fished,
and were happy in the thought that the world was small.

'But the look in the eyes of Unga coming home from the fishing was with
me always, and I knew I would find her when the time was met. She
walked down quiet lanes in the dusk of the evening, or led me chases
across the thick fields wet with the morning dew, and there was a
promise in her eyes such as only the woman Unga could give.

'So I wandered through a thousand cities. Some were gentle and gave me
food, and others laughed, and still others cursed; but I kept my tongue
between my teeth, and went strange ways and saw strange sights.
Sometimes I, who was a chief and the son of a chief, toiled for
men--men rough of speech and hard as iron, who wrung gold from the
sweat and sorrow of their fellow men. Yet no word did I get of my quest
till I came back to the sea like a homing seal to the rookeries.

'But this was at another port, in another country which lay to the
north. And there I heard dim tales of the yellow-haired sea wanderer,
and I learned that he was a hunter of seals, and that even then he was
abroad on the ocean.

'So I shipped on a seal schooner with the lazy Siwashes, and followed
his trackless trail to the north where the hunt was then warm. And we
were away weary months, and spoke many of the fleet, and heard much of
the wild doings of him I sought; but never once did we raise him above
the sea. We went north, even to the Pribilofs, and killed the seals in
herds on the beach, and brought their warm bodies aboard till our
scuppers ran grease and blood and no man could stand upon the deck.
Then were we chased by a ship of slow steam, which fired upon us with
great guns. But we put sail till the sea was over our decks and washed
them clean, and lost ourselves in a fog.

'It is said, at this time, while we fled with fear at our hearts, that
the yellow-haired sea wanderer put in to the Pribilofs, right to the
factory, and while the part of his men held the servants of the
company, the rest loaded ten thousand green skins from the salt houses.
I say it is said, but I believe; for in the voyages I made on the coast
with never a meeting the northern seas rang with his wildness and
daring, till the three nations which have lands there sought him with
their ships.

'And I heard of Unga, for the captains sang loud in her praise, and she
was always with him. She had learned the ways of his people, they said,
and was happy. But I knew better--knew that her heart harked back to
her own people by the yellow beach of Akatan.

'So, after a long time, I went back to the port which is by a gateway
of the sea, and there I learned that he had gone across the girth of
the great ocean to hunt for the seal to the east of the warm land which
runs south from the Russian seas.

'And I, who was become a sailorman, shipped with men of his own race,
and went after him in the hunt of the seal. And there were few ships
off that new land; but we hung on the flank of the seal pack and
harried it north through all the spring of the year. And when the cows
were heavy with pup and crossed the Russian line, our men grumbled and
were afraid. For there was much fog, and every day men were lost in the
boats. They would not work, so the captain turned the ship back toward
the way it came. But I knew the yellow-haired sea wanderer was
unafraid, and would hang by the pack, even to the Russian Isles, where
few men go. So I took a boat, in the black of night, when the lookout
dozed on the fo'c'slehead, and went alone to the warm, long land. And I
journeyed south to meet the men by Yeddo Bay, who are wild and
unafraid. And the Yoshiwara girls were small, and bright like steel,
and good to look upon; but I could not stop, for I knew that Unga
rolled on the tossing floor by the rookeries of the north.

'The men by Yeddo Bay had met from the ends of the earth, and had
neither gods nor homes, sailing under the flag of the Japanese. And
with them I went to the rich beaches of Copper Island, where our salt
piles became high with skins.

'And in that silent sea we saw no man till we were ready to come away.
Then one day the fog lifted on the edge of a heavy wind, and there
jammed down upon us a schooner, with close in her wake the cloudy
funnels of a Russian man-of-war. We fled away on the beam of the wind,
with the schooner jamming still closer and plunging ahead three feet to
our two. And upon her poop was the man with the mane of the sea lion,
pressing the rails under with the canvas and laughing in his strength
of life. And Unga was there--I knew her on the moment--but he sent her
below when the cannons began to talk across the sea.

As I say, with three feet to our two, till we saw the rudder lift green
at every jump--and I swinging on to the wheel and cursing, with my back
to the Russian shot. For we knew he had it in mind to run before us,
that he might get away while we were caught. And they knocked our masts
out of us till we dragged into the wind like a wounded gull; but he
went on over the edge of the sky line--he and Unga.

'What could we? The fresh hides spoke for themselves. So they took us
to a Russian port, and after that to a lone country, where they set us
to work in the mines to dig salt. And some died, and--and some did not
die.' Naass swept the blanket from his shoulders, disclosing the
gnarled and twisted flesh, marked with the unmistakable striations of
the knout. Prince hastily covered him, for it was not nice to look upon.

'We were there a weary time and sometimes men got away to the south,
but they always came back. So, when we who hailed from Yeddo Bay rose
in the night and took the guns from the guards, we went to the north.
And the land was very large, with plains, soggy with water, and great
forests. And the cold came, with much snow on the ground, and no man
knew the way. Weary months we journeyed through the endless forest--I
do not remember, now, for there was little food and often we lay down
to die. But at last we came to the cold sea, and but three were left to
look upon it. One had shipped from Yeddo as captain, and he knew in his
head the lay of the great lands, and of the place where men may cross
from one to the other on the ice. And he led us--I do not know, it was
so long--till there were but two. When we came to that place we found
five of the strange people which live in that country, and they had
dogs and skins, and we were very poor. We fought in the snow till they
died, and the captain died, and the dogs and skins were mine. Then I
crossed on the ice, which was broken, and once I drifted till a gale
from the west put me upon the shore. And after that, Golovin Bay,
Pastilik, and the priest. Then south, south, to the warm sunlands where
first I wandered.

'But the sea was no longer fruitful, and those who went upon it after
the seal went to little profit and great risk. The fleets scattered,
and the captains and the men had no word of those I sought. So I turned
away from the ocean which never rests, and went among the lands, where
the trees, the houses, and the mountains sit always in one place and do
not move. I journeyed far, and came to learn many things, even to the
way of reading and writing from books. It was well I should do this,
for it came upon me that Unga must know these things, and that someday,
when the time was met--we--you understand, when the time was met.

'So I drifted, like those little fish which raise a sail to the wind
but cannot steer. But my eyes and my ears were open always, and I went
among men who traveled much, for I knew they had but to see those I
sought to remember. At last there came a man, fresh from the mountains,
with pieces of rock in which the free gold stood to the size of peas,
and he had heard, he had met, he knew them. They were rich, he said,
and lived in the place where they drew the gold from the ground.

'It was in a wild country, and very far away; but in time I came to the
camp, hidden between the mountains, where men worked night and day, out
of the sight of the sun. Yet the time was not come. I listened to the
talk of the people. He had gone away--they had gone away--to England,
it was said, in the matter of bringing men with much money together to
form companies. I saw the house they had lived in; more like a palace,
such as one sees in the old countries. In the nighttime I crept in
through a window that I might see in what manner he treated her. I went
from room to room, and in such way thought kings and queens must live,
it was all so very good. And they all said he treated her like a queen,
and many marveled as to what breed of woman she was for there was other
blood in her veins, and she was different from the women of Akatan, and
no one knew her for what she was. Aye, she was a queen; but I was a
chief, and the son of a chief, and I had paid for her an untold price
of skin and boat and bead.

'But why so many words? I was a sailorman, and knew the way of the
ships on the seas. I followed to England, and then to other countries.
Sometimes I heard of them by word of mouth, sometimes I read of them in
the papers; yet never once could I come by them, for they had much
money, and traveled fast, while I was a poor man. Then came trouble
upon them, and their wealth slipped away one day like a curl of smoke.
The papers were full of it at the time; but after that nothing was
said, and I knew they had gone back where more gold could be got from
the ground.

'They had dropped out of the world, being now poor, and so I wandered
from camp to camp, even north to the Kootenay country, where I picked
up the cold scent. They had come and gone, some said this way, and some
that, and still others that they had gone to the country of the Yukon.
And I went this way, and I went that, ever journeying from place to
place, till it seemed I must grow weary of the world which was so
large. But in the Kootenay I traveled a bad trail, and a long trail,
with a breed of the Northwest, who saw fit to die when the famine
pinched. He had been to the Yukon by an unknown way over the mountains,
and when he knew his time was near gave me the map and the secret of a
place where he swore by his gods there was much gold.

'After that all the world began to flock into the north. I was a poor
man; I sold myself to be a driver of dogs. The rest you know. I met him
and her in Dawson.

'She did not know me, for I was only a stripling, and her life had been
large, so she had no time to remember the one who had paid for her an
untold price.

'So? You bought me from my term of service. I went back to bring things
about in my own way, for I had waited long, and now that I had my hand
upon him was in no hurry.

'As I say, I had it in mind to do my own way, for I read back in my
life, through all I had seen and suffered, and remembered the cold and
hunger of the endless forest by the Russian seas. As you know, I led
him into the east--him and Unga--into the east where many have gone and
few returned. I led them to the spot where the bones and the curses of
men lie with the gold which they may not have.

'The way was long and the trail unpacked. Our dogs were many and ate
much; nor could our sleds carry till the break of spring. We must come
back before the river ran free. So here and there we cached grub, that
our sleds might be lightened and there be no chance of famine on the
back trip. At the McQuestion there were three men, and near them we
built a cache, as also did we at the Mayo, where was a hunting camp of
a dozen Pellys which had crossed the divide from the south.

'After that, as we went on into the east, we saw no men; only the
sleeping river, the moveless forest, and the White Silence of the
North. As I say, the way was long and the trail unpacked. Sometimes, in
a day's toil, we made no more than eight miles, or ten, and at night we
slept like dead men. And never once did they dream that I was Naass,
head man of Akatan, the righter of wrongs.

'We now made smaller caches, and in the nighttime it was a small matter
to go back on the trail we had broken and change them in such way that
one might deem the wolverines the thieves. Again there be places where
there is a fall to the river, and the water is unruly, and the ice
makes above and is eaten away beneath.

'In such a spot the sled I drove broke through, and the dogs; and to
him and Unga it was ill luck, but no more. And there was much grub on
that sled, and the dogs the strongest.

'But he laughed, for he was strong of life, and gave the dogs that were
left little grub till we cut them from the harnesses one by one and fed
them to their mates. We would go home light, he said, traveling and
eating from cache to cache, with neither dogs nor sleds; which was
true, for our grub was very short, and the last dog died in the traces
the night we came to the gold and the bones and the curses of men.

'To reach that place--and the map spoke true--in the heart of the great
mountains, we cut ice steps against the wall of a divide. One looked
for a valley beyond, but there was no valley; the snow spread away,
level as the great harvest plains, and here and there about us mighty
mountains shoved their white heads among the stars. And midway on that
strange plain which should have been a valley the earth and the snow
fell away, straight down toward the heart of the world.

'Had we not been sailormen our heads would have swung round with the
sight, but we stood on the dizzy edge that we might see a way to get
down. And on one side, and one side only, the wall had fallen away till
it was like the slope of the decks in a topsail breeze. I do not know
why this thing should be so, but it was so. "It is the mouth of hell,"
he said; "let us go down." And we went down.

'And on the bottom there was a cabin, built by some man, of logs which
he had cast down from above. It was a very old cabin, for men had died
there alone at different times, and on pieces of birch bark which were
there we read their last words and their curses.

'One had died of scurvy; another's partner had robbed him of his last
grub and powder and stolen away; a third had been mauled by a baldface
grizzly; a fourth had hunted for game and starved--and so it went, and
they had been loath to leave the gold, and had died by the side of it
in one way or another. And the worthless gold they had gathered
yellowed the floor of the cabin like in a dream.

'But his soul was steady, and his head clear, this man I had led thus
far. "We have nothing to eat," he said, "and we will only look upon
this gold, and see whence it comes and how much there be. Then we will
go away quick, before it gets into our eyes and steals away our
judgment. And in this way we may return in the end, with more grub, and
possess it all." So we looked upon the great vein, which cut the wall
of the pit as a true vein should, and we measured it, and traced it
from above and below, and drove the stakes of the claims and blazed the
trees in token of our rights. Then, our knees shaking with lack of
food, and a sickness in our bellies, and our hearts chugging close to
our mouths, we climbed the mighty wall for the last time and turned our
faces to the back trip.

'The last stretch we dragged Unga between us, and we fell often, but in
the end we made the cache. And lo, there was no grub. It was well done,
for he thought it the wolverines, and damned them and his gods in one
breath. But Unga was brave, and smiled, and put her hand in his, till I
turned away that I might hold myself. "We will rest by the fire," she
said, "till morning, and we will gather strength from our moccasins."
So we cut the tops of our moccasins in strips, and boiled them half of
the night, that we might chew them and swallow them. And in the morning
we talked of our chance. The next cache was five days' journey; we
could not make it. We must find game.

'"We will go forth and hunt," he said.

'"Yes," said I, "we will go forth and hunt." 'And he ruled that Unga
stay by the fire and save her strength. And we went forth, he in quest
of the moose and I to the cache I had changed. But I ate little, so
they might not see in me much strength. And in the night he fell many
times as he drew into camp. And I, too, made to suffer great weakness,
stumbling over my snowshoes as though each step might be my last. And
we gathered strength from our moccasins.

'He was a great man. His soul lifted his body to the last; nor did he
cry aloud, save for the sake of Unga. On the second day I followed him,
that I might not miss the end. And he lay down to rest often. That
night he was near gone; but in the morning he swore weakly and went
forth again. He was like a drunken man, and I looked many times for him
to give up, but his was the strength of the strong, and his soul the
soul of a giant, for he lifted his body through all the weary day. And
he shot two ptarmigan, but would not eat them. He needed no fire; they
meant life; but his thought was for Unga, and he turned toward camp.

'He no longer walked, but crawled on hand and knee through the snow. I
came to him, and read death in his eyes. Even then it was not too late
to eat of the ptarmigan. He cast away his rifle and carried the birds
in his mouth like a dog. I walked by his side, upright. And he looked
at me during the moments he rested, and wondered that I was so strong.
I could see it, though he no longer spoke; and when his lips moved,
they moved without sound.

'As I say, he was a great man, and my heart spoke for softness; but I
read back in my life, and remembered the cold and hunger of the endless
forest by the Russian seas. Besides, Unga was mine, and I had paid for
her an untold price of skin and boat and bead.

'And in this manner we came through the white forest, with the silence
heavy upon us like a damp sea mist. And the ghosts of the past were in
the air and all about us; and I saw the yellow beach of Akatan, and the
kayaks racing home from the fishing, and the houses on the rim of the
forest. And the men who had made themselves chiefs were there, the
lawgivers whose blood I bore and whose blood I had wedded in Unga. Aye,
and Yash-Noosh walked with me, the wet sand in his hair, and his war
spear, broken as he fell upon it, still in his hand. And I knew the
time was meet, and saw in the eyes of Unga the promise.

'As I say, we came thus through the forest, till the smell of the camp
smoke was in our nostrils. And I bent above him, and tore the ptarmigan
from his teeth.

'He turned on his side and rested, the wonder mounting in his eyes, and
the hand which was under slipping slow toward the knife at his hip. But
I took it from him, smiling close in his face. Even then he did not
understand. So I made to drink from black bottles, and to build high
upon the snow a pile--of goods, and to live again the things which had
happened on the night of my marriage. I spoke no word, but he
understood. Yet was he unafraid. There was a sneer to his lips, and
cold anger, and he gathered new strength with the knowledge. It was not
far, but the snow was deep, and he dragged himself very slow.

'Once he lay so long I turned him over and gazed into his eyes. And
sometimes he looked forth, and sometimes death. And when I loosed him
he struggled on again. In this way we came to the fire. Unga was at his
side on the instant. His lips moved without sound; then he pointed at
me, that Unga might understand. And after that he lay in the snow, very
still, for a long while. Even now is he there in the snow.

'I said no word till I had cooked the ptarmigan. Then I spoke to her,
in her own tongue, which she had not heard in many years. She
straightened herself, so, and her eyes were wonder-wide, and she asked
who I was, and where I had learned that speech.

'"I am Naass," I said.

'"You?" she said. "You?" And she crept close that she might look upon
me.

'"Yes," I answered; "I am Naass, head man of Akatan, the last of the
blood, as you are the last of the blood." 'And she laughed. By all the
things I have seen and the deeds I have done may I never hear such a
laugh again. It put the chill to my soul, sitting there in the White
Silence, alone with death and this woman who laughed.

'"Come!" I said, for I thought she wandered. "Eat of the food and let
us be gone. It is a far fetch from here to Akatan." 'But she shoved her
face in his yellow mane, and laughed till it seemed the heavens must
fall about our ears. I had thought she would be overjoyed at the sight
of me, and eager to go back to the memory of old times, but this seemed
a strange form to take.

'"Come!" I cried, taking her strong by the hand. "The way is long and
dark. Let us hurry!" "Where?" she asked, sitting up, and ceasing from
her strange mirth.

'"To Akatan," I answered, intent on the light to grow on her face at
the thought. But it became like his, with a sneer to the lips, and cold
anger.

'"Yes," she said; "we will go, hand in hand, to Akatan, you and I. And
we will live in the dirty huts, and eat of the fish and oil, and bring
forth a spawn--a spawn to be proud of all the days of our life. We will
forget the world and be happy, very happy. It is good, most good. Come!
Let us hurry. Let us go back to Akatan." And she ran her hand through
his yellow hair, and smiled in a way which was not good. And there was
no promise in her eyes.

'I sat silent, and marveled at the strangeness of woman. I went back to
the night when he dragged her from me and she screamed and tore at his
hair--at his hair which now she played with and would not leave. Then I
remembered the price and the long years of waiting; and I gripped her
close, and dragged her away as he had done. And she held back, even as
on that night, and fought like a she-cat for its whelp. And when the
fire was between us and the man. I loosed her, and she sat and
listened. And I told her of all that lay between, of all that had
happened to me on strange seas, of all that I had done in strange
lands; of my weary quest, and the hungry years, and the promise which
had been mine from the first. Aye, I told all, even to what had passed
that day between the man and me, and in the days yet young. And as I
spoke I saw the promise grow in her eyes, full and large like the break
of dawn. And I read pity there, the tenderness of woman, the love, the
heart and the soul of Unga. And I was a stripling again, for the look
was the look of Unga as she ran up the beach, laughing, to the home of
her mother. The stern unrest was gone, and the hunger, and the weary
waiting.

'The time was met. I felt the call of her breast, and it seemed there I
must pillow my head and forget. She opened her arms to me, and I came
against her. Then, sudden, the hate flamed in her eye, her hand was at
my hip. And once, twice, she passed the knife.

'"Dog!" she sneered, as she flung me into the snow. "Swine!" And then
she laughed till the silence cracked, and went back to her dead.

'As I say, once she passed the knife, and twice; but she was weak with
hunger, and it was not meant that I should die. Yet was I minded to
stay in that place, and to close my eyes in the last long sleep with
those whose lives had crossed with mine and led my feet on unknown
trails. But there lay a debt upon me which would not let me rest.

'And the way was long, the cold bitter, and there was little grub. The
Pellys had found no moose, and had robbed my cache. And so had the
three white men, but they lay thin and dead in their cabins as I
passed. After that I do not remember, till I came here, and found food
and fire--much fire.' As he finished, he crouched closely, even
jealously, over the stove. For a long while the slush-lamp shadows
played tragedies upon the wall.

'But Unga!' cried Prince, the vision still strong upon him.

'Unga? She would not eat of the ptarmigan. She lay with her arms about
his neck, her face deep in his yellow hair. I drew the fire close, that
she might not feel the frost, but she crept to the other side. And I
built a fire there; yet it was little good, for she would not eat. And
in this manner they still lie up there in the snow.'

'And you?' asked Malemute Kid.

'I do not know; but Akatan is small, and I have little wish to go back
and live on the edge of the world. Yet is there small use in life. I
can go to Constantine, and he will put irons upon me, and one day they
will tie a piece of rope, so, and I will sleep good. Yet--no; I do not
know.' 'But, Kid,' protested Prince, 'this is murder!' 'Hush!'
commanded Malemute Kid. 'There be things greater than our wisdom,
beyond our justice. The right and the wrong of this we cannot say, and
it is not for us to judge.' Naass drew yet closer to the fire. There
was a great silence, and in each man's eyes many pictures came and went.



The End











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SON OF THE WOLF ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Burning Daylight
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Burning Daylight

Author: Jack London

Release date: December 1, 1996 [eBook #746]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by John Bean.  HTML version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BURNING DAYLIGHT ***




Produced by John Bean.  HTML version by Al Haines.









BURNING DAYLIGHT


by

Jack London




PART I



CHAPTER I

It was a quiet night in the Shovel.  At the bar, which ranged along one
side of the large chinked-log room, leaned half a dozen men, two of
whom were discussing the relative merits of spruce-tea and lime-juice
as remedies for scurvy.  They argued with an air of depression and with
intervals of morose silence. The other men scarcely heeded them.  In a
row, against the opposite wall, were the gambling games.  The
crap-table was deserted.  One lone man was playing at the faro-table.
The roulette-ball was not even spinning, and the gamekeeper stood by
the roaring, red-hot stove, talking with the young, dark-eyed woman,
comely of face and figure, who was known from Juneau to Fort Yukon as
the Virgin.  Three men sat in at stud-poker, but they played with small
chips and without enthusiasm, while there were no onlookers.  On the
floor of the dancing-room, which opened out at the rear, three couples
were waltzing drearily to the strains of a violin and a piano.

Circle City was not deserted, nor was money tight.  The miners were in
from Moseyed Creek and the other diggings to the west, the summer
washing had been good, and the men's pouches were heavy with dust and
nuggets.  The Klondike had not yet been discovered, nor had the miners
of the Yukon learned the possibilities of deep digging and wood-firing.
No work was done in the winter, and they made a practice of hibernating
in the large camps like Circle City during the long Arctic night.  Time
was heavy on their hands, their pouches were well filled, and the only
social diversion to be found was in the saloons.  Yet the Shovel was
practically deserted, and the Virgin, standing by the stove, yawned
with uncovered mouth and said to Charley Bates:--

"If something don't happen soon, I'm gin' to bed.  What's the matter
with the camp, anyway?  Everybody dead?"

Bates did not even trouble to reply, but went on moodily rolling a
cigarette.  Dan MacDonald, pioneer saloonman and gambler on the upper
Yukon, owner and proprietor of the Tivoli and all its games, wandered
forlornly across the great vacant space of floor and joined the two at
the stove.

"Anybody dead?" the Virgin asked him.

"Looks like it," was the answer.

"Then it must be the whole camp," she said with an air of finality and
with another yawn.

MacDonald grinned and nodded, and opened his mouth to speak, when the
front door swung wide and a man appeared in the light.  A rush of
frost, turned to vapor by the heat of the room, swirled about him to
his knees and poured on across the floor, growing thinner and thinner,
and perishing a dozen feet from the stove. Taking the wisp broom from
its nail inside the door, the newcomer brushed the snow from his
moccasins and high German socks.  He would have appeared a large man
had not a huge French-Canadian stepped up to him from the bar and
gripped his hand.

"Hello, Daylight!" was his greeting.  "By Gar, you good for sore eyes!"

"Hello, Louis, when did you-all blow in?" returned the newcomer. "Come
up and have a drink and tell us all about Bone Creek.  Why, dog-gone
you-all, shake again.  Where's that pardner of yours? I'm looking for
him."

Another huge man detached himself from the bar to shake hands. Olaf
Henderson and French Louis, partners together on Bone Creek, were the
two largest men in the country, and though they were but half a head
taller than the newcomer, between them he was dwarfed completely.

"Hello, Olaf, you're my meat, savvee that," said the one called
Daylight.  "To-morrow's my birthday, and I'm going to put you-all on
your back--savvee?  And you, too, Louis.  I can put you-all on your
back on my birthday--savvee?  Come up and drink, Olaf, and I'll tell
you-all about it."

The arrival of the newcomer seemed to send a flood of warmth through
the place.  "It's Burning Daylight," the Virgin cried, the first to
recognize him as he came into the light.  Charley Bates' tight features
relaxed at the sight, and MacDonald went over and joined the three at
the bar.  With the advent of Burning Daylight the whole place became
suddenly brighter and cheerier. The barkeepers were active.  Voices
were raised.  Somebody laughed.  And when the fiddler, peering into the
front room, remarked to the pianist, "It's Burning Daylight," the
waltz-time perceptibly quickened, and the dancers, catching the
contagion, began to whirl about as if they really enjoyed it.  It was
known to them of old time that nothing languished when Burning Daylight
was around.

He turned from the bar and saw the woman by the stove and the eager
look of welcome she extended him.

"Hello, Virgin, old girl," he called.  "Hello, Charley.  What's the
matter with you-all?  Why wear faces like that when coffins cost only
three ounces?  Come up, you-all, and drink.  Come up, you unburied
dead, and name your poison.  Come up, everybody. This is my night, and
I'm going to ride it.  To-morrow I'm thirty, and then I'll be an old
man.  It's the last fling of youth.  Are you-all with me?  Surge along,
then.  Surge along.

"Hold on there, Davis,"  he called to the faro-dealer, who had shoved
his chair back from the table.  "I'm going you one flutter to see
whether you-all drink with me or we-all drink with you."

Pulling a heavy sack of gold-dust from his coat pocket, he dropped it
on the HIGH CARD.

"Fifty," he said.

The faro-dealer slipped two cards.  The high card won.  He scribbled
the amount on a pad, and the weigher at the bar balanced fifty dollars'
worth of dust in the gold-scales and poured it into Burning Daylight's
sack.  The waltz in the back room being finished, the three couples,
followed by the fiddler and the pianist and heading for the bar, caught
Daylight's eye.

"Surge along, you-all" he cried.  "Surge along and name it.  This is my
night, and it ain't a night that comes frequent.  Surge up, you
Siwashes and Salmon-eaters.  It's my night, I tell you-all--"

"A blame mangy night," Charley Bates interpolated.

"You're right, my son," Burning Daylight went on gaily.

"A mangy night, but it's MY night, you see.  I'm the mangy old he-wolf.
Listen to me howl."

And howl he did, like a lone gray timber wolf, till the Virgin thrust
her pretty fingers in her ears and shivered.  A minute later she was
whirled away in his arms to the dancing-floor, where, along with the
other three women and their partners, a rollicking Virginia reel was
soon in progress.  Men and women danced in moccasins, and the place was
soon a-roar, Burning Daylight the centre of it and the animating spark,
with quip and jest and rough merriment rousing them out of the slough
of despond in which he had found them.

The atmosphere of the place changed with his coming.  He seemed to fill
it with his tremendous vitality.  Men who entered from the street felt
it immediately, and in response to their queries the barkeepers nodded
at the back room, and said comprehensively, "Burning Daylight's on the
tear."  And the men who entered remained, and kept the barkeepers
busy.  The gamblers took heart of life, and soon the tables were
filled, the click of chips and whir of the roulette-ball rising
monotonously and imperiously above the hoarse rumble of men's voices
and their oaths and heavy laughs.

Few men knew Elam Harnish by any other name than Burning Daylight, the
name which had been given him in the early days in the land because of
his habit of routing his comrades out of their blankets with the
complaint that daylight was burning.  Of the pioneers in that far
Arctic wilderness, where all men were pioneers, he was reckoned among
the oldest.  Men like Al Mayo and Jack McQuestion antedated him; but
they had entered the land by crossing the Rockies from the Hudson Bay
country to the east. He, however, had been the pioneer over the
Chilcoot and Chilcat passes.  In the spring of 1883, twelve years
before, a stripling of eighteen, he had crossed over the Chilcoot with
five comrades.

In the fall he had crossed back with one.  Four had perished by
mischance in the bleak, uncharted vastness.  And for twelve years Elam
Harnish had continued to grope for gold among the shadows of the Circle.

And no man had groped so obstinately nor so enduringly.  He had grown
up with the land.  He knew no other land.  Civilization was a dream of
some previous life.  Camps like Forty Mile and Circle City were to him
metropolises.  And not alone had he grown up with the land, for, raw as
it was, he had helped to make it.  He had made history and geography,
and those that followed wrote of his traverses and charted the trails
his feet had broken.

Heroes are seldom given to hero-worship, but among those of that young
land, young as he was, he was accounted an elder hero.  In point of
time he was before them.  In point of deed he was beyond them.  In
point of endurance it was acknowledged that he could kill the hardiest
of them.  Furthermore, he was accounted a nervy man, a square man, and
a white man.

In all lands where life is a hazard lightly played with and lightly
flung aside, men turn, almost automatically, to gambling for diversion
and relaxation.  In the Yukon men gambled their lives for gold, and
those that won gold from the ground gambled for it with one another.
Nor was Elam Harnish an exception.  He was a man's man primarily, and
the instinct in him to play the game of life was strong.  Environment
had determined what form that game should take.  He was born on an Iowa
farm, and his father had emigrated to eastern Oregon, in which mining
country Elam's boyhood was lived.  He had known nothing but hard knocks
for big stakes.  Pluck and endurance counted in the game, but the great
god Chance dealt the cards.  Honest work for sure but meagre returns
did not count.  A man played big.  He risked everything for everything,
and anything less than everything meant that he was a loser.  So for
twelve Yukon years, Elam Harnish had been a loser.  True, on Moosehide
Creek the past summer he had taken out twenty thousand dollars, and
what was left in the ground was twenty thousand more.  But, as he
himself proclaimed, that was no more than getting his ante back.  He
had ante'd his life for a dozen years, and forty thousand was a small
pot for such a stake--the price of a drink and a dance at the Tivoli,
of a winter's flutter at Circle City, and a grubstake for the year to
come.

The men of the Yukon reversed the old maxim till it read: hard come,
easy go.  At the end of the reel, Elam Harnish called the house up to
drink again.  Drinks were a dollar apiece, gold rated at sixteen
dollars an ounce; there were thirty in the house that accepted his
invitation, and between every dance the house was Elam's guest.  This
was his night, and nobody was to be allowed to pay for anything.

Not that Elam Harnish was a drinking man.  Whiskey meant little to him.
He was too vital and robust, too untroubled in mind and body, to
incline to the slavery of alcohol.  He spent months at a time on trail
and river when he drank nothing stronger than coffee, while he had gone
a year at a time without even coffee. But he was gregarious, and since
the sole social expression of the Yukon was the saloon, he expressed
himself that way.  When he was a lad in the mining camps of the West,
men had always done that.  To him it was the proper way for a man to
express himself socially.  He knew no other way.

He was a striking figure of a man, despite his garb being similar to
that of all the men in the Tivoli.  Soft-tanned moccasins of
moose-hide, beaded in Indian designs, covered his feet.  His trousers
were ordinary overalls, his coat was made from a blanket.
Long-gauntleted leather mittens, lined with wool, hung by his side.
They were connected in the Yukon fashion, by a leather thong passed
around the neck and across the shoulders. On his head was a fur cap,
the ear-flaps raised and the tying-cords dangling.  His face, lean and
slightly long, with the suggestion of hollows under the cheek-bones,
seemed almost Indian.  The burnt skin and keen dark eyes contributed to
this effect, though the bronze of the skin and the eyes themselves were
essentially those of a white man.  He looked older than thirty, and
yet, smooth-shaven and without wrinkles, he was almost boyish.  This
impression of age was based on no tangible evidence.  It came from the
abstracter facts of the man, from what he had endured and survived,
which was far beyond that of ordinary men.  He had lived life naked and
tensely, and something of all this smouldered in his eyes, vibrated in
his voice, and seemed forever a-whisper on his lips.

The lips themselves were thin, and prone to close tightly over the
even, white teeth.  But their harshness was retrieved by the upward
curl at the corners of his mouth.  This curl gave to him sweetness, as
the minute puckers at the corners of the eyes gave him laughter.  These
necessary graces saved him from a nature that was essentially savage
and that otherwise would have been cruel and bitter.  The nose was
lean, full-nostrilled, and delicate, and of a size to fit the face;
while the high forehead, as if to atone for its narrowness, was
splendidly domed and symmetrical.  In line with the Indian effect was
his hair, very straight and very black, with a gloss to it that only
health could give.

"Burning Daylight's burning candlelight," laughed Dan MacDonald, as an
outburst of exclamations and merriment came from the dancers.

"An' he is der boy to do it, eh, Louis?" said Olaf Henderson.

"Yes, by Gar! you bet on dat," said French Louis.  "Dat boy is all
gold--"

"And when God Almighty washes Daylight's soul out on the last big
slucin' day," MacDonald interrupted, "why, God Almighty'll have to
shovel gravel along with him into the sluice-boxes."

"Dot iss goot," Olaf Henderson muttered, regarding the gambler with
profound admiration.

"Ver' good," affirmed French Louis.  "I t'ink we take a drink on dat
one time, eh?"



CHAPTER II

It was two in the morning when the dancers, bent on getting something
to eat, adjourned the dancing for half an hour.  And it was at this
moment that Jack Kearns suggested poker.  Jack Kearns was a big,
bluff-featured man, who, along with Bettles, had made the disastrous
attempt to found a post on the head-reaches of the Koyokuk, far inside
the Arctic Circle.  After that, Kearns had fallen back on his posts at
Forty Mile and Sixty Mile and changed the direction of his ventures by
sending out to the States for a small sawmill and a river steamer.  The
former was even then being sledded across Chilcoot Pass by Indians and
dogs, and would come down the Yukon in the early summer after the
ice-run.  Later in the summer, when Bering Sea and the mouth of the
Yukon cleared of ice, the steamer, put together at St. Michaels, was to
be expected up the river loaded to the guards with supplies.

Jack Kearns suggested poker.  French Louis, Dan MacDonald, and Hal
Campbell (who had make a strike on Moosehide), all three of whom were
not dancing because there were not girls enough to go around, inclined
to the suggestion.  They were looking for a fifth man when Burning
Daylight emerged from the rear room, the Virgin on his arm, the train
of dancers in his wake.  In response to the hail of the poker-players,
he came over to their table in the corner.

"Want you to sit in," said Campbell.  "How's your luck?"

"I sure got it to-night," Burning Daylight answered with enthusiasm,
and at the same time felt the Virgin press his arm warningly.  She
wanted him for the dancing.  "I sure got my luck with me, but I'd
sooner dance.  I ain't hankerin' to take the money away from you-all."

Nobody urged.  They took his refusal as final, and the Virgin was
pressing his arm to turn him away in pursuit of the supper-seekers,
when he experienced a change of heart.  It was not that he did not want
to dance, nor that he wanted to hurt her; but that insistent pressure
on his arm put his free man-nature in revolt.  The thought in his mind
was that he did not want any woman running him.  Himself a favorite
with women, nevertheless they did not bulk big with him.  They were
toys, playthings, part of the relaxation from the bigger game of life.
He met women along with the whiskey and gambling, and from observation
he had found that it was far easier to break away from the drink and
the cards than from a woman once the man was properly entangled.

He was a slave to himself, which was natural in one with a healthy ego,
but he rebelled in ways either murderous or panicky at being a slave to
anybody else.  Love's sweet servitude was a thing of which he had no
comprehension.  Men he had seen in love impressed him as lunatics, and
lunacy was a thing he had never considered worth analyzing.  But
comradeship with men was different from love with women.  There was no
servitude in comradeship.  It was a business proposition, a square deal
between men who did not pursue each other, but who shared the risks of
trail and river and mountain in the pursuit of life and treasure.  Men
and women pursued each other, and one must needs bend the other to his
will or hers.  Comradeship was different. There was no slavery about
it; and though he, a strong man beyond strength's seeming, gave far
more than he received, he gave not something due but in royal largess,
his gifts of toil or heroic effort falling generously from his hands.
To pack for days over the gale-swept passes or across the
mosquito-ridden marshes, and to pack double the weight his comrade
packed, did not involve unfairness or compulsion.  Each did his best.
That was the business essence of it.  Some men were stronger than
others--true; but so long as each man did his best it was fair
exchange, the business spirit was observed, and the square deal
obtained.

But with women--no.  Women gave little and wanted all.  Women had
apron-strings and were prone to tie them about any man who looked twice
in their direction.  There was the Virgin, yawning her head off when he
came in and mightily pleased that he asked her to dance.  One dance was
all very well, but because he danced twice and thrice with her and
several times more, she squeezed his arm when they asked him to sit in
at poker.  It was the obnoxious apron-string, the first of the many
compulsions she would exert upon him if he gave in.  Not that she was
not a nice bit of a woman, healthy and strapping and good to look upon,
also a very excellent dancer, but that she was a woman with all a
woman's desire to rope him with her apron-strings and tie him hand and
foot for the branding.  Better poker.  Besides, he liked poker as well
as he did dancing.

He resisted the pull on his arm by the mere negative mass of him, and
said:--

"I sort of feel a hankering to give you-all a flutter."

Again came the pull on his arm.  She was trying to pass the
apron-string around him.  For the fraction of an instant he was a
savage, dominated by the wave of fear and murder that rose up in him.
For that infinitesimal space of time he was to all purposes a
frightened tiger filled with rage and terror at the apprehension of the
trap.  Had he been no more than a savage, he would have leapt wildly
from the place or else sprung upon her and destroyed her.  But in that
same instant there stirred in him the generations of discipline by
which man had become an inadequate social animal.  Tact and sympathy
strove with him, and he smiled with his eyes into the Virgin's eyes as
he said:--

"You-all go and get some grub.  I ain't hungry.  And we'll dance some
more by and by.  The night's young yet.  Go to it, old girl."

He released his arm and thrust her playfully on the shoulder, at the
same time turning to the poker-players.

"Take off the limit and I'll go you-all."

"Limit's the roof," said Jack Kearns.

"Take off the roof."

The players glanced at one another, and Kearns announced, "The roof's
off."

Elam Harnish dropped into the waiting chair, started to pull out his
gold-sack, and changed his mind.  The Virgin pouted a moment, then
followed in the wake of the other dancers.

"I'll bring you a sandwich, Daylight," she called back over her
shoulder.

He nodded.  She was smiling her forgiveness.  He had escaped the
apron-string, and without hurting her feelings too severely.

"Let's play markers," he suggested.  "Chips do everlastingly clutter up
the table....If it's agreeable to you-all?"

"I'm willing," answered Hal Campbell.  "Let mine run at five hundred."

"Mine, too," answered Harnish, while the others stated the values they
put on their own markers, French Louis, the most modest, issuing his at
a hundred dollars each.

In Alaska, at that time, there were no rascals and no tin-horn
gamblers.  Games were conducted honestly, and men trusted one another.
A man's word was as good as his gold in the blower.  A marker was a
flat, oblong composition chip worth, perhaps, a cent.  But when a man
betted a marker in a game and said it was worth five hundred dollars,
it was accepted as worth five hundred dollars.  Whoever won it knew
that the man who issued it would redeem it with five hundred dollars'
worth of dust weighed out on the scales.  The markers being of
different colors, there was no difficulty in identifying the owners.
Also, in that early Yukon day, no one dreamed of playing table-stakes.
A man was good in a game for all that he possessed, no matter where his
possessions were or what was their nature.

Harnish cut and got the deal.  At this good augury, and while shuffling
the deck, he called to the barkeepers to set up the drinks for the
house.  As he dealt the first card to Dan MacDonald, on his left, he
called out:

"Get down to the ground, you-all, Malemutes, huskies, and Siwash purps!
Get down and dig in!  Tighten up them traces!  Put your weight into the
harness and bust the breast-bands!  Whoop-la! Yow!  We're off and bound
for Helen Breakfast!  And I tell you-all clear and plain there's goin'
to be stiff grades and fast goin' to-night before we win to that same
lady.  And somebody's goin' to bump...hard."

Once started, it was a quiet game, with little or no conversation,
though all about the players the place was a-roar. Elam Harnish had
ignited the spark.  More and more miners dropped in to the Tivoli and
remained.  When Burning Daylight went on the tear, no man cared to miss
it.  The dancing-floor was full. Owing to the shortage of women, many
of the men tied bandanna handkerchiefs around their arms in token of
femininity and danced with other men.  All the games were crowded, and
the voices of the men talking at the long bar and grouped about the
stove were accompanied by the steady click of chips and the sharp whir,
rising and falling, of the roulette-ball.  All the materials of a
proper Yukon night were at hand and mixing.

The luck at the table varied monotonously, no big hands being out.  As
a result, high play went on with small hands though no play lasted
long.  A filled straight belonging to French Louis gave him a pot of
five thousand against two sets of threes held by Campbell and Kearns.
One pot of eight hundred dollars was won by a pair of treys on a
showdown.  And once Harnish called Kearns for two thousand dollars on a
cold steal.  When Kearns laid down his hand it showed a bobtail flush,
while Harnish's hand proved that he had had the nerve to call on a pair
of tens.

But at three in the morning the big combination of hands arrived.

It was the moment of moments that men wait weeks for in a poker game.
The news of it tingled over the Tivoli.  The onlookers became quiet.
The men farther away ceased talking and moved over to the table.  The
players deserted the other games, and the dancing-floor was forsaken,
so that all stood at last, fivescore and more, in a compact and silent
group, around the poker-table. The high betting had begun before the
draw, and still the high betting went on, with the draw not in sight.
Kearns had dealt, and French Louis had opened the pot with one
marker--in his case one hundred dollars.  Campbell had merely "seen"
it, but Elam Harnish, corning next, had tossed in five hundred dollars,
with the remark to MacDonald that he was letting him in easy.

MacDonald, glancing again at his hand, put in a thousand in markers.
Kearns, debating a long time over his hand, finally "saw."  It then
cost French Louis nine hundred to remain in the game, which he
contributed after a similar debate.  It cost Campbell likewise nine
hundred to remain and draw cards, but to the surprise of all he saw the
nine hundred and raised another thousand.

"You-all are on the grade at last," Harnish remarked, as he saw the
fifteen hundred and raised a thousand in turn.  "Helen Breakfast's sure
on top this divide, and you-all had best look out for bustin' harness."

"Me for that same lady," accompanied MacDonald's markers for two
thousand and for an additional thousand-dollar raise.

It was at this stage that the players sat up and knew beyond
peradventure that big hands were out.  Though their features showed
nothing, each man was beginning unconsciously to tense. Each man strove
to appear his natural self, and each natural self was different.  Hal
Campbell affected his customary cautiousness.

French Louis betrayed interest.  MacDonald retained his whole-souled
benevolence, though it seemed to take on a slightly exaggerated tone.
Kearns was coolly dispassionate and noncommittal, while Elam Harnish
appeared as quizzical and jocular as ever.  Eleven thousand dollars
were already in the pot, and the markers were heaped in a confused pile
in the centre of the table.

"I ain't go no more markers," Kearns remarked plaintively.  "We'd best
begin I.O.U.'s."

"Glad you're going to stay," was MacDonald's cordial response.

"I ain't stayed yet.  I've got a thousand in already.  How's it stand
now?"

"It'll cost you three thousand for a look in, but nobody will stop you
from raising."

"Raise--hell.  You must think I got a pat like yourself." Kearns looked
at his hand.  "But I'll tell you what I'll do, Mac.

"I've got a hunch, and I'll just see that three thousand."

He wrote the sum on a slip of paper, signed his name, and consigned it
to the centre of the table.

French Louis became the focus of all eyes.  He fingered his cards
nervously for a space.  Then, with a "By Gar!  Ah got not one leetle
beet hunch," he regretfully tossed his hand into the discards.

The next moment the hundred and odd pairs of eyes shifted to Campbell.

"I won't hump you, Jack," he said, contenting himself with calling the
requisite two thousand.

The eyes shifted to Harnish, who scribbled on a piece of paper and
shoved it forward.

"I'll just let you-all know this ain't no Sunday-school society of
philanthropy," he said.  "I see you, Jack, and I raise you a thousand.
Here's where you-all get action on your pat, Mac."

"Action's what I fatten on, and I lift another thousand," was
MacDonald's rejoinder.  "Still got that hunch, Jack?"

"I still got the hunch."  Kearns fingered his cards a long time.  "And
I'll play it, but you've got to know how I stand. There's my steamer,
the Bella--worth twenty thousand if she's worth an ounce.  There's
Sixty Mile with five thousand in stock on the shelves.  And you know I
got a sawmill coming in.  It's at Linderman now, and the scow is
building.  Am I good?"

"Dig in; you're sure good," was Daylight's answer.  "And while we're
about it, I may mention casual that I got twenty thousand in Mac's
safe, there, and there's twenty thousand more in the ground on
Moosehide.  You know the ground, Campbell.  Is they that-all in the
dirt?"

"There sure is, Daylight."

"How much does it cost now?" Kearns asked.

"Two thousand to see."

"We'll sure hump you if you-all come in," Daylight warned him.

"It's an almighty good hunch," Kearns said, adding his slip for two
thousand to the growing heap.  "I can feel her crawlin' up and down my
back."

"I ain't got a hunch, but I got a tolerable likeable hand," Campbell
announced, as he slid in his slip; "but it's not a raising hand."

"Mine is," Daylight paused and wrote.  "I see that thousand and raise
her the same old thousand."

The Virgin, standing behind him, then did what a man's best friend was
not privileged to do.  Reaching over Daylight's shoulder, she picked up
his hand and read it, at the same time shielding the faces of the five
cards close to his chest.  What she saw were three queens and a pair of
eights, but nobody guessed what she saw.  Every player's eyes were on
her face as she scanned the cards, but no sign did she give.  Her
features might have been carved from ice, for her expression was
precisely the same before, during, and after.  Not a muscle quivered;
nor was there the slightest dilation of a nostril, nor the slightest
increase of light in the eyes.  She laid the hand face down again on
the table, and slowly the lingering eyes withdrew from her, having
learned nothing.

MacDonald smiled benevolently.  "I see you, Daylight, and I hump this
time for two thousand.  How's that hunch, Jack?"

"Still a-crawling, Mac.  You got me now, but that hunch is a
rip-snorter persuadin' sort of a critter, and it's my plain duty to
ride it.  I call for three thousand.  And I got another hunch:
Daylight's going to call, too."

"He sure is," Daylight agreed, after Campbell had thrown up his hand.
"He knows when he's up against it, and he plays accordin'. I see that
two thousand, and then I'll see the draw."

In a dead silence, save for the low voices of the three players, the
draw was made.  Thirty-four thousand dollars were already in the pot,
and the play possibly not half over.  To the Virgin's amazement,
Daylight held up his three queens, discarding his eights and calling
for two cards.  And this time not even she dared look at what he had
drawn.  She knew her limit of control. Nor did he look.  The two new
cards lay face down on the table where they had been dealt to him.

"Cards?" Kearns asked of MacDonald.

"Got enough," was the reply.

"You can draw if you want to, you know," Kearns warned him.

"Nope; this'll do me."

Kearns himself drew two cards, but did not look at them.

Still Harnish let his cards lie.

"I never bet in the teeth of a pat hand," he said slowly, looking at
the saloon-keeper.  "You-all start her rolling, Mac."

MacDonald counted his cards carefully, to make double sure it was not a
foul hand, wrote a sum on a paper slip, and slid it into the pot, with
the simple utterance:--

"Five thousand."

Kearns, with every eye upon him, looked at his two-card draw, counted
the other three to dispel any doubt of holding more than five cards,
and wrote on a betting slip.

"I see you, Mac," he said, "and I raise her a little thousand just so
as not to keep Daylight out."

The concentrated gaze shifted to Daylight.  He likewise examined his
draw and counted his five cards.

"I see that six thousand, and I raise her five thousand...just to try
and keep you out, Jack."

"And I raise you five thousand just to lend a hand at keeping Jack
out," MacDonald said, in turn.

His voice was slightly husky and strained, and a nervous twitch in the
corner of his mouth followed speech.

Kearns was pale, and those who looked on noted that his hand trembled
as he wrote his slip.  But his voice was unchanged.

"I lift her along for five thousand," he said.

Daylight was now the centre.  The kerosene lamps above flung high
lights from the rash of sweat on his forehead.  The bronze of his
cheeks was darkened by the accession of blood.  His black eyes
glittered, and his nostrils were distended and eager.  They were large
nostrils, tokening his descent from savage ancestors who had survived
by virtue of deep lungs and generous air-passages. Yet, unlike
MacDonald, his voice was firm and customary, and, unlike Kearns, his
hand did not tremble when he wrote.

"I call, for ten thousand," he said.  "Not that I'm afraid of you-all,
Mac.  It's that hunch of Jack's."

"I hump his hunch for five thousand just the same," said MacDonald.  "I
had the best hand before the draw, and I still guess I got it."

"Mebbe this is a case where a hunch after the draw is better'n the
hunch before," Kearns remarked; "wherefore duty says, 'Lift her, Jack,
lift her,' and so I lift her another five thousand."

Daylight leaned back in his chair and gazed up at the kerosene lamps
while he computed aloud.

"I was in nine thousand before the draw, and I saw and raised eleven
thousand--that makes thirty.  I'm only good for ten more."

He leaned forward and looked at Kearns.  "So I call that ten thousand."

"You can raise if you want," Kearns answered.  "Your dogs are good for
five thousand in this game."

"Nary dawg.  You-all can win my dust and dirt, but nary one of my
dawgs.  I just call."

MacDonald considered for a long time.  No one moved or whispered.

Not a muscle was relaxed on the part of the onlookers.  Not the weight
of a body shifted from one leg to the other.  It was a sacred silence.
Only could be heard the roaring draft of the huge stove, and from
without, muffled by the log-walls, the howling of dogs.  It was not
every night that high stakes were played on the Yukon, and for that
matter, this was the highest in the history of the country.  The
saloon-keeper finally spoke.

"If anybody else wins, they'll have to take a mortgage on the Tivoli."

The two other players nodded.

"So I call, too."  MacDonald added his slip for five thousand.

Not one of them claimed the pot, and not one of them called the size of
his hand.  Simultaneously and in silence they faced their cards on the
table, while a general tiptoeing and craning of necks took place among
the onlookers.  Daylight showed four queens and an ace; MacDonald four
jacks and an ace; and Kearns four kings and a trey.  Kearns reached
forward with an encircling movement of his arm and drew the pot in to
him, his arm shaking as he did so.

Daylight picked the ace from his hand and tossed it over alongside
MacDonald's ace, saying:--

"That's what cheered me along, Mac.  I knowed it was only kings that
could beat me, and he had them.

"What did you-all have?" he asked, all interest, turning to Campbell.

"Straight flush of four, open at both ends--a good drawing hand."

"You bet! You could a' made a straight, a straight flush, or a flush
out of it."

"That's what I thought," Campbell said sadly.  "It cost me six thousand
before I quit."

"I wisht you-all'd drawn," Daylight laughed.  "Then I wouldn't a'
caught that fourth queen.  Now I've got to take Billy Rawlins' mail
contract and mush for Dyea.  What's the size of the killing, Jack?"

Kearns attempted to count the pot, but was too excited.  Daylight drew
it across to him, with firm fingers separating and stacking the markers
and I.O.U.'s and with clear brain adding the sum.

"One hundred and twenty-seven thousand," he announced.  "You-all can
sell out now, Jack, and head for home."

The winner smiled and nodded, but seemed incapable of speech.

"I'd shout the drinks," MacDonald said, "only the house don't belong to
me any more."

"Yes, it does," Kearns replied, first wetting his lips with his tongue.
"Your note's good for any length of time.  But the drinks are on me."

"Name your snake-juice, you-all--the winner pays!" Daylight called out
loudly to all about him, at the same time rising from his chair and
catching the Virgin by the arm.  "Come on for a reel, you-all dancers.
The night's young yet, and it's Helen Breakfast and the mail contract
for me in the morning.  Here, you-all Rawlins, you--I hereby do take
over that same contract, and I start for salt water at nine
A.M.--savvee?  Come on, you-all!  Where's that fiddler?"



CHAPTER III

It was Daylight's night.  He was the centre and the head of the revel,
unquenchably joyous, a contagion of fun.  He multiplied himself, and in
so doing multiplied the excitement.  No prank he suggested was too wild
for his followers, and all followed save those that developed into
singing imbeciles and fell warbling by the wayside.  Yet never did
trouble intrude.  It was known on the Yukon that when Burning Daylight
made a night of it, wrath and evil were forbidden.  On his nights men
dared not quarrel.  In the younger days such things had happened, and
then men had known what real wrath was, and been man-handled as only
Burning Daylight could man-handle.  On his nights men must laugh and be
happy or go home.  Daylight was inexhaustible.  In between dances he
paid over to Kearns the twenty thousand in dust and transferred to him
his Moosehide claim.  Likewise he arranged the taking over of Billy
Rawlins' mail contract, and made his preparations for the start.  He
despatched a messenger to rout out Kama, his dog-driver--a Tananaw
Indian, far-wandered from his tribal home in the service of the
invading whites.  Kama entered the Tivoli, tall, lean, muscular, and
fur-clad, the pick of his barbaric race and barbaric still, unshaken
and unabashed by the revellers that rioted about him while Daylight
gave his orders. "Um," said Kama, tabling his instructions on his
fingers.  "Get um letters from Rawlins.  Load um on sled.  Grub for
Selkirk--you think um plenty dog-grub stop Selkirk?"

"Plenty dog-grub, Kama."

"Um, bring sled this place nine um clock.  Bring um snowshoes. No bring
um tent.  Mebbe bring um fly?  um little fly?"

"No fly," Daylight answered decisively.

"Um much cold."

"We travel light--savvee?  We carry plenty letters out, plenty letters
back.  You are strong man.  Plenty cold, plenty travel, all right."

"Sure all right," Kama muttered, with resignation.

"Much cold, no care a damn.  Um ready nine um clock."

He turned on his moccasined heel and walked out, imperturbable,
sphinx-like, neither giving nor receiving greetings nor looking to
right or left.  The Virgin led Daylight away into a corner.

"Look here, Daylight," she said, in a low voice, "you're busted."

"Higher'n a kite."

"I've eight thousand in Mac's safe--" she began.

But Daylight interrupted.  The apron-string loomed near and he shied
like an unbroken colt.

"It don't matter," he said.  "Busted I came into the world, busted I go
out, and I've been busted most of the time since I arrived.  Come on;
let's waltz."

"But listen," she urged.  "My money's doing nothing.  I could lend it
to you--a grub-stake," she added hurriedly, at sight of the alarm in
his face.

"Nobody grub-stakes me," was the answer.  "I stake myself, and when I
make a killing it's sure all mine.  No thank you, old girl.  Much
obliged.  I'll get my stake by running the mail out and in."

"Daylight," she murmured, in tender protest.

But with a sudden well-assumed ebullition of spirits he drew her toward
the dancing-floor, and as they swung around and around in a waltz she
pondered on the iron heart of the man who held her in his arms and
resisted all her wiles.

At six the next morning, scorching with whiskey, yet ever himself, he
stood at the bar putting every man's hand down.  The way of it was that
two men faced each other across a corner, their right elbows resting on
the bar, their right hands gripped together, while each strove to press
the other's hand down.  Man after man came against him, but no man put
his hand down, even Olaf Henderson and French Louis failing despite
their hugeness. When they contended it was a trick, a trained muscular
knack, he challenged them to another test.

"Look here, you-all" he cried.  "I'm going to do two things: first,
weigh my sack; and second, bet it that after you-all have lifted clean
from the floor all the sacks of flour you-all are able, I'll put on two
more sacks and lift the whole caboodle clean."

"By Gar! Ah take dat!" French Louis rumbled above the cheers.

"Hold on!" Olaf Henderson cried.  "I ban yust as good as you, Louis.  I
yump half that bet."

Put on the scales, Daylight's sack was found to balance an even four
hundred dollars, and Louis and Olaf divided the bet between them.
Fifty-pound sacks of flour were brought in from MacDonald's cache.
Other men tested their strength first.  They straddled on two chairs,
the flour sacks beneath them on the floor and held together by
rope-lashings.  Many of the men were able, in this manner, to lift four
or five hundred pounds, while some succeeded with as high as six
hundred.  Then the two giants took a hand, tying at seven hundred.
French Louis then added another sack, and swung seven hundred and fifty
clear.  Olaf duplicated the performance, whereupon both failed to clear
eight hundred.  Again and again they strove, their foreheads beaded
with sweat, their frames crackling with the effort.  Both were able to
shift the weight and to bump it, but clear the floor with it they could
not.

"By Gar! Daylight, dis tam you mek one beeg meestake," French Louis
said, straightening up and stepping down from the chairs. "Only one
damn iron man can do dat.  One hundred pun' more--my frien', not ten
poun' more."  The sacks were unlashed, but when two sacks were added,
Kearns interfered.  "Only one sack more."

"Two!" some one cried.  "Two was the bet."

"They didn't lift that last sack," Kearns protested.

"They only lifted seven hundred and fifty."

But Daylight grandly brushed aside the confusion.

"What's the good of you-all botherin' around that way?  What's one more
sack?  If I can't lift three more, I sure can't lift two.  Put 'em in."

He stood upon the chairs, squatted, and bent his shoulders down till
his hands closed on the rope.  He shifted his feet slightly, tautened
his muscles with a tentative pull, then relaxed again, questing for a
perfect adjustment of all the levers of his body.

French Louis, looking on sceptically, cried out,

"Pool lak hell, Daylight!  Pool lak hell!"

Daylight's muscles tautened a second time, and this time in earnest,
until steadily all the energy of his splendid body was applied, and
quite imperceptibly, without jerk or strain, the bulky nine hundred
pounds rose from the door and swung back and forth, pendulum like,
between his legs.

Olaf Henderson sighed a vast audible sigh.  The Virgin, who had tensed
unconsciously till her muscles hurt her, relaxed.  While French Louis
murmured reverently:--

"M'sieu Daylight, salut!  Ay am one beeg baby.  You are one beeg man."

Daylight dropped his burden, leaped to the floor, and headed for the
bar.

"Weigh in!" he cried, tossing his sack to the weigher, who transferred
to it four hundred dollars from the sacks of the two losers.

"Surge up, everybody!" Daylight went on.  "Name your snake-juice! The
winner pays!"

"This is my night!" he was shouting, ten minutes later.  "I'm the lone
he-wolf, and I've seen thirty winters.  This is my birthday, my one day
in the year, and I can put any man on his back.  Come on, you-all!  I'm
going to put you-all in the snow. Come on, you chechaquos [1] and
sourdoughs[2], and get your baptism!"

The rout streamed out of doors, all save the barkeepers and the singing
Bacchuses.  Some fleeting thought of saving his own dignity entered
MacDonald's head, for he approached Daylight with outstretched hand.

"What?  You first?" Daylight laughed, clasping the other's hand as if
in greeting.

"No, no," the other hurriedly disclaimed.  "Just congratulations on
your birthday.  Of course you can put me in the snow.  What chance have
I against a man that lifts nine hundred pounds?"

MacDonald weighed one hundred and eighty pounds, and Daylight had him
gripped solely by his hand; yet, by a sheer abrupt jerk, he took the
saloon-keeper off his feet and flung him face downward in the snow.  In
quick succession, seizing the men nearest him, he threw half a dozen
more.  Resistance was useless.  They flew helter-skelter out of his
grips, landing in all manner of attitudes, grotesquely and harmlessly,
in the soft snow.  It soon became difficult, in the dim starlight, to
distinguish between those thrown and those waiting their turn, and he
began feeling their backs and shoulders, determining their status by
whether or not he found them powdered with snow.

"Baptized yet?" became his stereotyped question, as he reached out his
terrible hands.

Several score lay down in the snow in a long row, while many others
knelt in mock humility, scooping snow upon their heads and claiming the
rite accomplished.  But a group of five stood upright, backwoodsmen and
frontiersmen, they, eager to contest any man's birthday.

Graduates of the hardest of man-handling schools, veterans of
multitudes of rough-and-tumble battles, men of blood and sweat and
endurance, they nevertheless lacked one thing that Daylight possessed
in high degree--namely, an almost perfect brain and muscular
coordination.  It was simple, in its way, and no virtue of his.  He had
been born with this endowment.  His nerves carried messages more
quickly than theirs; his mental processes, culminating in acts of will,
were quicker than theirs; his muscles themselves, by some immediacy of
chemistry, obeyed the messages of his will quicker than theirs.  He was
so made, his muscles were high-power explosives.  The levers of his
body snapped into play like the jaws of steel traps.  And in addition
to all this, his was that super-strength that is the dower of but one
human in millions--a strength depending not on size but on degree, a
supreme organic excellence residing in the stuff of the muscles
themselves.  Thus, so swiftly could he apply a stress, that, before an
opponent could become aware and resist, the aim of the stress had been
accomplished.  In turn, so swiftly did he become aware of a stress
applied to him, that he saved himself by resistance or by delivering a
lightning counter-stress.

"It ain't no use you-all standing there," Daylight addressed the
waiting group.  "You-all might as well get right down and take your
baptizing.  You-all might down me any other day in the year, but on my
birthday I want you-all to know I'm the best man.  Is that Pat
Hanrahan's mug looking hungry and willing?  Come on, Pat."  Pat
Hanrahan, ex-bare-knuckle-prize fighter and roughhouse-expert, stepped
forth.  The two men came against each other in grips, and almost before
he had exerted himself the Irishman found himself in the merciless vise
of a half-Nelson that buried him head and shoulders in the snow.  Joe
Hines, ex-lumber-jack, came down with an impact equal to a fall from a
two-story building--his overthrow accomplished by a cross-buttock,
delivered, he claimed, before he was ready.

There was nothing exhausting in all this to Daylight.  He did not heave
and strain through long minutes.  No time, practically, was occupied.
His body exploded abruptly and terrifically in one instant, and on the
next instant was relaxed.  Thus, Doc Watson, the gray-bearded, iron
bodied man without a past, a fighting terror himself, was overthrown in
the fraction of a second preceding his own onslaught.  As he was in the
act of gathering himself for a spring, Daylight was upon him, and with
such fearful suddenness as to crush him backward and down.  Olaf
Henderson, receiving his cue from this, attempted to take Daylight
unaware, rushing upon him from one side as he stooped with extended
hand to help Doc Watson up.  Daylight dropped on his hands and knees,
receiving in his side Olaf's knees.  Olaf's momentum carried him clear
over the obstruction in a long, flying fall.  Before he could rise,
Daylight had whirled him over on his back and was rubbing his face and
ears with snow and shoving handfuls down his neck.  "Ay ban yust as
good a man as you ban, Daylight," Olaf spluttered, as he pulled himself
to his feet; "but by Yupiter, I ban navver see a grip like that."
French Louis was the last of the five, and he had seen enough to make
him cautious.  He circled and baffled for a full minute before coming
to grips; and for another full minute they strained and reeled without
either winning the advantage.  And then, just as the contest was
becoming interesting, Daylight effected one of his lightning shifts,
changing all stresses and leverages and at the same time delivering one
of his muscular explosions.  French Louis resisted till his huge frame
crackled, and then, slowly, was forced over and under and downward.

"The winner pays!" Daylight cried; as he sprang to his feet and led the
way back into the Tivoli.  "Surge along you-all! This way to the
snake-room!"

They lined up against the long bar, in places two or three deep,
stamping the frost from their moccasined feet, for outside the
temperature was sixty below.  Bettles, himself one of the gamest of the
old-timers in deeds and daring ceased from his drunken lay of the
"Sassafras Root," and titubated over to congratulate Daylight.  But in
the midst of it he felt impelled to make a speech, and raised his voice
oratorically.

"I tell you fellers I'm plum proud to call Daylight my friend. We've
hit the trail together afore now, and he's eighteen carat from his
moccasins up, damn his mangy old hide, anyway.  He was a shaver when he
first hit this country.  When you fellers was his age, you wa'n't dry
behind the ears yet.  He never was no kid. He was born a full-grown
man.  An' I tell you a man had to be a man in them days.  This wa'n't
no effete civilization like it's come to be now."  Bettles paused long
enough to put his arm in a proper bear-hug around Daylight's neck.
"When you an' me mushed into the Yukon in the good ole days, it didn't
rain soup and they wa'n't no free-lunch joints.  Our camp fires was lit
where we killed our game, and most of the time we lived on
salmon-tracks and rabbit-bellies--ain't I right?"

But at the roar of laughter that greeted his inversion, Bettles
released the bear-hug and turned fiercely on them.  "Laugh, you mangy
short-horns, laugh!  But I tell you plain and simple, the best of you
ain't knee-high fit to tie Daylight's moccasin strings.

"Ain't I right, Campbell?  Ain't I right, Mac?  Daylight's one of the
old guard, one of the real sour-doughs.  And in them days they wa'n't
ary a steamboat or ary a trading-post, and we cusses had to live offen
salmon-bellies and rabbit-tracks."

He gazed triumphantly around, and in the applause that followed arose
cries for a speech from Daylight.  He signified his consent.  A chair
was brought, and he was helped to stand upon it.  He was no more sober
than the crowd above which he now towered--a wild crowd, uncouthly
garmented, every foot moccasined or muc-lucked[3], with mittens
dangling from necks and with furry ear-flaps raised so that they took
on the seeming of the winged helmets of the Norsemen.  Daylight's black
eyes were flashing, and the flush of strong drink flooded darkly under
the bronze of his cheeks.  He was greeted with round on round of
affectionate cheers, which brought a suspicious moisture to his eyes,
albeit many of the voices were inarticulate and inebriate.  And yet,
men have so behaved since the world began, feasting, fighting, and
carousing, whether in the dark cave-mouth or by the fire of the
squatting-place, in the palaces of imperial Rome and the rock
strongholds of robber barons, or in the sky-aspiring hotels of modern
times and in the boozing-dens of sailor-town.  Just so were these men,
empire-builders in the Arctic Light, boastful and drunken and
clamorous, winning surcease for a few wild moments from the grim
reality of their heroic toil.  Modern heroes they, and in nowise
different from the heroes of old time.  "Well, fellows, I don't know
what to say to you-all," Daylight began lamely, striving still to
control his whirling brain.  "I think I'll tell you-all a story.  I had
a pardner wunst, down in Juneau.  He come from North Caroliney, and he
used to tell this same story to me.  It was down in the mountains in
his country, and it was a wedding.  There they was, the family and all
the friends.  The parson was just puttin' on the last touches, and he
says, 'They as the Lord have joined let no man put asunder.'

"'Parson,' says the bridegroom, 'I rises to question your grammar in
that there sentence.  I want this weddin' done right.'

"When the smoke clears away, the bride she looks around and sees a dead
parson, a dead bridegroom, a dead brother, two dead uncles, and five
dead wedding-guests.

"So she heaves a mighty strong sigh and says, 'Them new-fangled,
self-cocking revolvers sure has played hell with my prospects.'

"And so I say to you-all," Daylight added, as the roar of laughter died
down, "that them four kings of Jack Kearns sure has played hell with my
prospects.  I'm busted higher'n a kite, and I'm hittin' the trail for
Dyea--"

"Goin' out?" some one called.  A spasm of anger wrought on his face for
a flashing instant, but in the next his good-humor was back again.

"I know you-all are only pokin' fun asking such a question," he said,
with a smile.  "Of course I ain't going out."

"Take the oath again, Daylight," the same voice cried.

"I sure will.  I first come over Chilcoot in '83.  I went out over the
Pass in a fall blizzard, with a rag of a shirt and a cup of raw flour.
I got my grub-stake in Juneau that winter, and in the spring I went
over the Pass once more.  And once more the famine drew me out.  Next
spring I went in again, and I swore then that I'd never come out till I
made my stake.  Well, I ain't made it, and here I am.  And I ain't
going out now.  I get the mail and I come right back.  I won't stop the
night at Dyea. I'll hit up Chilcoot soon as I change the dogs and get
the mail and grub.  And so I swear once more, by the mill-tails of hell
and the head of John the Baptist, I'll never hit for the Outside till I
make my pile.  And I tell you-all, here and now, it's got to be an
almighty big pile."

"How much might you call a pile?" Bettles demanded from beneath, his
arms clutched lovingly around Daylight's legs.

"Yes, how much?  What do you call a pile?" others cried.

Daylight steadied himself for a moment and debated.  "Four or five
millions," he said slowly, and held up his hand for silence as his
statement was received with derisive yells.  "I'll be real
conservative, and put the bottom notch at a million.  And for not an
ounce less'n that will I go out of the country."

Again his statement was received with an outburst of derision. Not only
had the total gold output of the Yukon up to date been below five
millions, but no man had ever made a strike of a hundred thousand, much
less of a million.

"You-all listen to me.  You seen Jack Kearns get a hunch to-night.  We
had him sure beat before the draw.  His ornery three kings was no good.
But he just knew there was another king coming--that was his hunch--and
he got it.  And I tell you-all I got a hunch.  There's a big strike
coming on the Yukon, and it's just about due.  I don't mean no ornery
Moosehide, Birch-Creek kind of a strike.  I mean a real rip-snorter
hair-raiser.  I tell you-all she's in the air and hell-bent for
election.  Nothing can stop her, and she'll come up river.  There's
where you-all track my moccasins in the near future if you-all want to
find me--somewhere in the country around Stewart River, Indian River,
and Klondike River.  When I get back with the mail, I'll head that way
so fast you-all won't see my trail for smoke.  She's a-coming, fellows,
gold from the grass roots down, a hundred dollars to the pan, and a
stampede in from the Outside fifty thousand strong.  You-all'll think
all hell's busted loose when that strike is made."

He raised his glass to his lips.  "Here's kindness, and hoping you-all
will be in on it."

He drank and stepped down from the chair, falling into another one of
Bettles' bear-hugs.

"If I was you, Daylight, I wouldn't mush to-day," Joe Hines counselled,
coming in from consulting the spirit thermometer outside the door.
"We're in for a good cold snap.  It's sixty-two below now, and still
goin' down.  Better wait till she breaks."

Daylight laughed, and the old sour-doughs around him laughed.

"Just like you short-horns," Bettles cried, "afeard of a little frost.
And blamed little you know Daylight, if you think frost kin stop 'm."

"Freeze his lungs if he travels in it," was the reply.

"Freeze pap and lollypop!  Look here, Hines, you only ben in this here
country three years.  You ain't seasoned yet.  I've seen Daylight do
fifty miles up on the Koyokuk on a day when the thermometer busted at
seventy-two."

Hines shook his head dolefully.

"Them's the kind that does freeze their lungs," he lamented.  "If
Daylight pulls out before this snap breaks, he'll never get
through--an' him travelin' without tent or fly."

"It's a thousand miles to Dyea," Bettles announced, climbing on the
chair and supporting his swaying body by an arm passed around
Daylight's neck.  "It's a thousand miles, I'm sayin' an' most of the
trail unbroke, but I bet any chechaquo--anything he wants--that
Daylight makes Dyea in thirty days."

"That's an average of over thirty-three miles a day," Doc Watson
warned, "and I've travelled some myself.  A blizzard on Chilcoot would
tie him up for a week."

"Yep," Bettles retorted, "an' Daylight'll do the second thousand back
again on end in thirty days more, and I got five hundred dollars that
says so, and damn the blizzards."

To emphasize his remarks, he pulled out a gold-sack the size of a
bologna sausage and thumped it down on the bar.  Doc Watson thumped his
own sack alongside.

"Hold on!" Daylight cried.  "Bettles's right, and I want in on this.  I
bet five hundred that sixty days from now I pull up at the Tivoli door
with the Dyea mail."

A sceptical roar went up, and a dozen men pulled out their sacks.

Jack Kearns crowded in close and caught Daylight's attention.

"I take you, Daylight," he cried.  "Two to one you don't--not in
seventy-five days."

"No charity, Jack," was the reply.  "The bettin's even, and the time is
sixty days."

"Seventy-five days, and two to one you don't," Kearns insisted. "Fifty
Mile'll be wide open and the rim-ice rotten."

"What you win from me is yours," Daylight went on.  "And, by thunder,
Jack, you can't give it back that way.  I won't bet with you.  You're
trying to give me money.  But I tell you-all one thing, Jack, I got
another hunch.  I'm goin' to win it back some one of these days.
You-all just wait till the big strike up river.  Then you and me'll
take the roof off and sit in a game that'll be full man's size.  Is it
a go?"

They shook hands.

"Of course he'll make it," Kearns whispered in Bettles' ear. "And
there's five hundred Daylight's back in sixty days," he added aloud.

Billy Rawlins closed with the wager, and Bettles hugged Kearns
ecstatically.

"By Yupiter, I ban take that bet," Olaf Henderson said, dragging
Daylight away from Bettles and Kearns.

"Winner pays!" Daylight shouted, closing the wager.

"And I'm sure going to win, and sixty days is a long time between
drinks, so I pay now.  Name your brand, you hoochinoos!  Name your
brand!"

Bettles, a glass of whiskey in hand, climbed back on his chair, and
swaying back and forth, sang the one song he knew:--

   "O, it's Henry Ward Beecher
   And Sunday-school teachers
   All sing of the sassafras-root;
   But you bet all the same,
   If it had its right name
   It's the juice of the forbidden fruit."

The crowd roared out the chorus:--

   "But you bet all the same
   If it had its right name
   It's the juice of the forbidden fruit."

Somebody opened the outer door.  A vague gray light filtered in.

"Burning daylight, burning daylight," some one called warningly.

Daylight paused for nothing, heading for the door and pulling down his
ear-flaps.  Kama stood outside by the sled, a long, narrow affair,
sixteen inches wide and seven and a half feet in length, its slatted
bottom raised six inches above the steel-shod runners.  On it, lashed
with thongs of moose-hide, were the light canvas bags that contained
the mail, and the food and gear for dogs and men.  In front of it, in a
single line, lay curled five frost-rimed dogs.  They were huskies,
matched in size and color, all unusually large and all gray.  From
their cruel jaws to their bushy tails they were as like as peas in
their likeness to timber-wolves.  Wolves they were, domesticated, it
was true, but wolves in appearance and in all their characteristics.
On top the sled load, thrust under the lashings and ready for immediate
use, were two pairs of snowshoes.

Bettles pointed to a robe of Arctic hare skins, the end of which showed
in the mouth of a bag.

"That's his bed," he said.  "Six pounds of rabbit skins.  Warmest thing
he ever slept under, but I'm damned if it could keep me warm, and I can
go some myself.  Daylight's a hell-fire furnace, that's what he is."

"I'd hate to be that Indian," Doc Watson remarked.

"He'll kill'm, he'll kill'm sure," Bettles chanted exultantly. "I know.
I've ben with Daylight on trail.  That man ain't never ben tired in his
life.  Don't know what it means.  I seen him travel all day with wet
socks at forty-five below.  There ain't another man living can do that."

While this talk went on, Daylight was saying good-by to those that
clustered around him.  The Virgin wanted to kiss him, and, fuddled
slightly though he was with the whiskey, he saw his way out without
compromising with the apron-string.  He kissed the Virgin, but he
kissed the other three women with equal partiality.  He pulled on his
long mittens, roused the dogs to their feet, and took his Place at the
gee-pole.[4]

"Mush, you beauties!" he cried.

The animals threw their weights against their breastbands on the
instant, crouching low to the snow, and digging in their claws. They
whined eagerly, and before the sled had gone half a dozen lengths both
Daylight and Kama (in the rear) were running to keep up.  And so,
running, man and dogs dipped over the bank and down to the frozen bed
of the Yukon, and in the gray light were gone.


[1] Tenderfeet.

[2] Old-timers.

[3] Muc-luc: a water-tight, Eskimo boot, made from walrus-hide and
trimmed with fur.

[4] A gee-pole: stout pole projecting forward from one side of the
front end of the sled, by which the sled is steered.



CHAPTER IV

On the river, where was a packed trail and where snowshoes were
unnecessary, the dogs averaged six miles an hour.  To keep up with
them, the two men were compelled to run.  Daylight and Kama relieved
each other regularly at the gee-pole, for here was the hard work of
steering the flying sled and of keeping in advance of it.  The man
relieved dropped behind the sled, occasionally leaping upon it and
resting.

It was severe work, but of the sort that was exhilarating.

They were flying, getting over the ground, making the most of the
packed trail.  Later on they would come to the unbroken trail, where
three miles an hour would constitute good going.  Then there would be
no riding and resting, and no running.  Then the gee-pole would be the
easier task, and a man would come back to it to rest after having
completed his spell to the fore, breaking trail with the snowshoes for
the dogs.  Such work was far from exhilarating also, they must expect
places where for miles at a time they must toil over chaotic ice-jams,
where they would be fortunate if they made two miles an hour.  And
there would be the inevitable bad jams, short ones, it was true, but so
bad that a mile an hour would require terrific effort.  Kama and
Daylight did not talk.  In the nature of the work they could not, nor
in their own natures were they given to talking while they worked. At
rare intervals, when necessary, they addressed each other in
monosyllables, Kama, for the most part, contenting himself with grunts.
Occasionally a dog whined or snarled, but in the main the team kept
silent.  Only could be heard the sharp, jarring grate of the steel
runners over the hard surface and the creak of the straining sled.

As if through a wall, Daylight had passed from the hum and roar of the
Tivoli into another world--a world of silence and immobility.  Nothing
stirred.  The Yukon slept under a coat of ice three feet thick.  No
breath of wind blew.  Nor did the sap move in the hearts of the spruce
trees that forested the river banks on either hand.  The trees,
burdened with the last infinitesimal pennyweight of snow their branches
could hold, stood in absolute petrifaction.  The slightest tremor would
have dislodged the snow, and no snow was dislodged.  The sled was the
one point of life and motion in the midst of the solemn quietude, and
the harsh churn of its runners but emphasized the silence through which
it moved.

It was a dead world, and furthermore, a gray world.  The weather was
sharp and clear; there was no moisture in the atmosphere, no fog nor
haze; yet the sky was a gray pall.  The reason for this was that,
though there was no cloud in the sky to dim the brightness of day,
there was no sun to give brightness.  Far to the south the sun climbed
steadily to meridian, but between it and the frozen Yukon intervened
the bulge of the earth.  The Yukon lay in a night shadow, and the day
itself was in reality a long twilight-light.  At a quarter before
twelve, where a wide bend of the river gave a long vista south, the sun
showed its upper rim above the sky-line.  But it did not rise
perpendicularly.  Instead, it rose on a slant, so that by high noon it
had barely lifted its lower rim clear of the horizon.  It was a dim,
wan sun.  There was no heat to its rays, and a man could gaze squarely
into the full orb of it without hurt to his eyes.  No sooner had it
reached meridian than it began its slant back beneath the horizon, and
at quarter past twelve the earth threw its shadow again over the land.

The men and dogs raced on.  Daylight and Kama were both savages so far
as their stomachs were concerned.  They could eat irregularly in time
and quantity, gorging hugely on occasion, and on occasion going long
stretches without eating at all.  As for the dogs, they ate but once a
day, and then rarely did they receive more than a pound each of dried
fish.  They were ravenously hungry and at the same time splendidly in
condition. Like the wolves, their forebears, their nutritive processes
were rigidly economical and perfect.  There was no waste.  The last
least particle of what they consumed was transformed into energy.

And Kama and Daylight were like them.  Descended themselves from the
generations that had endured, they, too, endured.  Theirs was the
simple, elemental economy.  A little food equipped them with prodigious
energy.  Nothing was lost.  A man of soft civilization, sitting at a
desk, would have grown lean and woe-begone on the fare that kept Kama
and Daylight at the top-notch of physical efficiency.  They knew, as
the man at the desk never knows, what it is to be normally hungry all
the time, so that they could eat any time.  Their appetites were always
with them and on edge, so that they bit voraciously into whatever
offered and with an entire innocence of indigestion.

By three in the afternoon the long twilight faded into night. The stars
came out, very near and sharp and bright, and by their light dogs and
men still kept the trail.  They were indefatigable.  And this was no
record run of a single day, but the first day of sixty such days.
Though Daylight had passed a night without sleep, a night of dancing
and carouse, it seemed to have left no effect.  For this there were two
explanations first, his remarkable vitality; and next, the fact that
such nights were rare in his experience.  Again enters the man at the
desk, whose physical efficiency would be more hurt by a cup of coffee
at bedtime than could Daylight's by a whole night long of strong drink
and excitement.

Daylight travelled without a watch, feeling the passage of time and
largely estimating it by subconscious processes.  By what he considered
must be six o'clock, he began looking for a camping-place.  The trail,
at a bend, plunged out across the river.  Not having found a likely
spot, they held on for the opposite bank a mile away.  But midway they
encountered an ice-jam which took an hour of heavy work to cross.  At
last Daylight glimpsed what he was looking for, a dead tree close by
the bank.  The sled was run in and up.  Kama grunted with satisfaction,
and the work of making camp was begun.

The division of labor was excellent.  Each knew what he must do. With
one ax Daylight chopped down the dead pine.  Kama, with a snowshoe and
the other ax, cleared away the two feet of snow above the Yukon ice and
chopped a supply of ice for cooking purposes.  A piece of dry birch
bark started the fire, and Daylight went ahead with the cooking while
the Indian unloaded the sled and fed the dogs their ration of dried
fish.  The food sacks he slung high in the trees beyond leaping-reach
of the huskies.  Next, he chopped down a young spruce tree and trimmed
off the boughs.  Close to the fire he trampled down the soft snow and
covered the packed space with the boughs.  On this flooring he tossed
his own and Daylight's gear-bags, containing dry socks and underwear
and their sleeping-robes.  Kama, however, had two robes of rabbit skin
to Daylight's one.

They worked on steadily, without speaking, losing no time.  Each did
whatever was needed, without thought of leaving to the other the least
task that presented itself to hand.  Thus, Kama saw when more ice was
needed and went and got it, while a snowshoe, pushed over by the lunge
of a dog, was stuck on end again by Daylight.  While coffee was
boiling, bacon frying, and flapjacks were being mixed, Daylight found
time to put on a big pot of beans.  Kama came back, sat down on the
edge of the spruce boughs, and in the interval of waiting, mended
harness.

"I t'ink dat Skookum and Booga make um plenty fight maybe," Kama
remarked, as they sat down to eat.

"Keep an eye on them," was Daylight's answer.

And this was their sole conversation throughout the meal.  Once, with a
muttered imprecation, Kama leaped away, a stick of firewood in hand,
and clubbed apart a tangle of fighting dogs. Daylight, between
mouthfuls, fed chunks of ice into the tin pot, where it thawed into
water.  The meal finished, Kama replenished the fire, cut more wood for
the morning, and returned to the spruce bough bed and his
harness-mending.  Daylight cut up generous chunks of bacon and dropped
them in the pot of bubbling beans.  The moccasins of both men were wet,
and this in spite of the intense cold; so when there was no further
need for them to leave the oasis of spruce boughs, they took off their
moccasins and hung them on short sticks to dry before the fire, turning
them about from time to time.  When the beans were finally cooked,
Daylight ran part of them into a bag of flour-sacking a foot and a half
long and three inches in diameter.  This he then laid on the snow to
freeze.  The remainder of the beans were left in the pot for breakfast.

It was past nine o'clock, and they were ready for bed.  The squabbling
and bickering among the dogs had long since died down, and the weary
animals were curled in the snow, each with his feet and nose bunched
together and covered by his wolf's brush of a tail.  Kama spread his
sleeping-furs and lighted his pipe. Daylight rolled a brown-paper
cigarette, and the second conversation of the evening took place.

"I think we come near sixty miles," said Daylight.

"Um, I t'ink so," said Kama.

They rolled into their robes, all-standing, each with a woolen Mackinaw
jacket on in place of the parkas[5] they had worn all day.  Swiftly,
almost on the instant they closed their eyes, they were asleep.  The
stars leaped and danced in the frosty air, and overhead the colored
bars of the aurora borealis were shooting like great searchlights.

In the darkness Daylight awoke and roused Kama.  Though the aurora
still flamed, another day had begun.  Warmed-over flapjacks,
warmed-over beans, fried bacon, and coffee composed the breakfast.  The
dogs got nothing, though they watched with wistful mien from a
distance, sitting up in the snow, their tails curled around their paws.
Occasionally they lifted one fore paw or the other, with a restless
movement, as if the frost tingled in their feet.  It was bitter cold,
at least sixty-five below zero, and when Kama harnessed the dogs with
naked hands he was compelled several times to go over to the fire and
warm the numbing finger-tips.  Together the two men loaded and lashed
the sled.  They warmed their hands for the last time, pulled on their
mittens, and mushed the dogs over the bank and down to the river-trail.
According to Daylight's estimate, it was around seven o'clock; but the
stars danced just as brilliantly, and faint, luminous streaks of
greenish aurora still pulsed overhead.

Two hours later it became suddenly dark--so dark that they kept to the
trail largely by instinct; and Daylight knew that his time-estimate had
been right.  It was the darkness before dawn, never anywhere more
conspicuous than on the Alaskan winter-trail.

Slowly the gray light came stealing through the gloom, imperceptibly at
first, so that it was almost with surprise that they noticed the vague
loom of the trail underfoot.  Next, they were able to see the
wheel-dog, and then the whole string of running dogs and snow-stretches
on either side.  Then the near bank loomed for a moment and was gone,
loomed a second time and remained.  In a few minutes the far bank, a
mile away, unobtrusively came into view, and ahead and behind, the
whole frozen river could be seen, with off to the left a wide-extending
range of sharp-cut, snow-covered mountains.  And that was all. No sun
arose.  The gray light remained gray.

Once, during the day, a lynx leaped lightly across the trail, under the
very nose of the lead-dog, and vanished in the white woods.  The dogs'
wild impulses roused.  They raised the hunting-cry of the pack, surged
against their collars, and swerved aside in pursuit.  Daylight, yelling
"Whoa!" struggled with the gee-pole and managed to overturn the sled
into the soft snow.  The dogs gave up, the sled was righted, and five
minutes later they were flying along the hard-packed trail again.  The
lynx was the only sign of life they had seen in two days, and it,
leaping velvet-footed and vanishing, had been more like an apparition.

At twelve o'clock, when the sun peeped over the earth-bulge, they
stopped and built a small fire on the ice.  Daylight, with the ax,
chopped chunks off the frozen sausage of beans.  These, thawed and
warmed in the frying-pan, constituted their meal. They had no coffee.
He did not believe in the burning of daylight for such a luxury.  The
dogs stopped wrangling with one another, and looked on wistfully.  Only
at night did they get their pound of fish.  In the meantime they worked.

The cold snap continued.  Only men of iron kept the trail at such low
temperatures, and Kama and Daylight were picked men of their races.
But Kama knew the other was the better man, and thus, at the start, he
was himself foredoomed to defeat.  Not that he slackened his effort or
willingness by the slightest conscious degree, but that he was beaten
by the burden he carried in his mind.  His attitude toward Daylight was
worshipful.  Stoical, taciturn, proud of his physical prowess, he found
all these qualities incarnated in his white companion.  Here was one
that excelled in the things worth excelling in, a man-god ready to
hand, and Kama could not but worship--withal he gave no signs of it.
No wonder the race of white men conquered, was his thought, when it
bred men like this man.  What chance had the Indian against such a
dogged, enduring breed?  Even the Indians did not travel at such low
temperatures, and theirs was the wisdom of thousands of generations;
yet here was this Daylight, from the soft Southland, harder than they,
laughing at their fears, and swinging along the trail ten and twelve
hours a day.  And this Daylight thought that he could keep up a day's
pace of thirty-three miles for sixty days!  Wait till a fresh fall of
snow came down, or they struck the unbroken trail or the rotten rim-ice
that fringed open water.

In the meantime Kama kept the pace, never grumbling, never shirking.
Sixty-five degrees below zero is very cold.  Since water freezes at
thirty-two above, sixty-five below meant ninety-seven degrees below
freezing-point.  Some idea of the significance of this may be gained by
conceiving of an equal difference of temperature in the opposite
direction.  One hundred and twenty-nine on the thermometer constitutes
a very hot day, yet such a temperature is but ninety-seven degrees
above freezing.  Double this difference, and possibly some slight
conception may be gained of the cold through which Kama and Daylight
travelled between dark and dark and through the dark.

Kama froze the skin on his cheek-bones, despite frequent rubbings, and
the flesh turned black and sore.  Also he slightly froze the edges of
his lung-tissues--a dangerous thing, and the basic reason why a man
should not unduly exert himself in the open at sixty-five below.  But
Kama never complained, and Daylight was a furnace of heat, sleeping as
warmly under his six pounds of rabbit skins as the other did under
twelve pounds.

On the second night, fifty more miles to the good, they camped in the
vicinity of the boundary between Alaska and the Northwest Territory.
The rest of the journey, save the last short stretch to Dyea, would be
travelled on Canadian territory.  With the hard trail, and in the
absence of fresh snow, Daylight planned to make the camp of Forty Mile
on the fourth night.  He told Kama as much, but on the third day the
temperature began to rise, and they knew snow was not far off; for on
the Yukon it must get warm in order to snow.  Also, on this day, they
encountered ten miles of chaotic ice-jams, where, a thousand times,
they lifted the loaded sled over the huge cakes by the strength of
their arms and lowered it down again.  Here the dogs were well-nigh
useless, and both they and the men were tried excessively by the
roughness of the way.  An hour's extra running that night caught up
only part of the lost time.

In the morning they awoke to find ten inches of snow on their robes.
The dogs were buried under it and were loath to leave their comfortable
nests.  This new snow meant hard going.  The sled runners would not
slide over it so well, while one of the men must go in advance of the
dogs and pack it down with snowshoes so that they should not wallow.
Quite different was it from the ordinary snow known to those of the
Southland.  It was hard, and fine, and dry.  It was more like sugar.
Kick it, and it flew with a hissing noise like sand.  There was no
cohesion among the particles, and it could not be moulded into
snowballs. It was not composed of flakes, but of crystals--tiny,
geometrical frost-crystals.  In truth, it was not snow, but frost.

The weather was warm, as well, barely twenty below zero, and the two
men, with raised ear-flaps and dangling mittens, sweated as they
toiled.  They failed to make Forty Mile that night, and when they
passed that camp next day Daylight paused only long enough to get the
mail and additional grub.  On the afternoon of the following day they
camped at the mouth of the Klondike River. Not a soul had they
encountered since Forty Mile, and they had made their own trail.  As
yet, that winter, no one had travelled the river south of Forty Mile,
and, for that matter, the whole winter through they might be the only
ones to travel it.  In that day the Yukon was a lonely land.  Between
the Klondike River and Salt Water at Dyea intervened six hundred miles
of snow-covered wilderness, and in all that distance there were but two
places where Daylight might look forward to meeting men.  Both were
isolated trading-posts, Sixty Mile and Fort Selkirk.  In the
summer-time Indians might be met with at the mouths of the Stewart and
White rivers, at the Big and Little Salmons, and on Lake Le Barge; but
in the winter, as he well knew, they would be on the trail of the
moose-herds, following them back into the mountains.

That night, camped at the mouth of the Klondike, Daylight did not turn
in when the evening's work was done.  Had a white man been present,
Daylight would have remarked that he felt his "hunch" working.  As it
was, he tied on his snowshoes, left the dogs curled in the snow and
Kama breathing heavily under his rabbit skins, and climbed up to the
big flat above the high earth-bank. But the spruce trees were too thick
for an outlook, and he threaded his way across the flat and up the
first steep slopes of the mountain at the back.  Here, flowing in from
the east at right angles, he could see the Klondike, and, bending
grandly from the south, the Yukon.  To the left, and downstream, toward
Moosehide Mountain, the huge splash of white, from which it took its
name, showing clearly in the starlight.  Lieutenant Schwatka had given
it its name, but he, Daylight, had first seen it long before that
intrepid explorer had crossed the Chilcoot and rafted down the Yukon.

But the mountain received only passing notice.  Daylight's interest was
centered in the big flat itself, with deep water all along its edge for
steamboat landings.

"A sure enough likely town site," he muttered.  "Room for a camp of
forty thousand men.  All that's needed is the gold-strike." He
meditated for a space.  "Ten dollars to the pan'll do it, and it'd be
the all-firedest stampede Alaska ever seen.  And if it don't come here,
it'll come somewhere hereabouts.  It's a sure good idea to keep an eye
out for town sites all the way up."

He stood a while longer, gazing out over the lonely flat and visioning
with constructive imagination the scene if the stampede did come.  In
fancy, he placed the sawmills, the big trading stores, the saloons, and
dance-halls, and the long streets of miners' cabins.  And along those
streets he saw thousands of men passing up and down, while before the
stores were the heavy freighting-sleds, with long strings of dogs
attached.  Also he saw the heavy freighters pulling down the main
street and heading up the frozen Klondike toward the imagined somewhere
where the diggings must be located.

He laughed and shook the vision from his eyes, descended to the level,
and crossed the flat to camp.  Five minutes after he had rolled up in
his robe, he opened his eyes and sat up, amazed that he was not already
asleep.  He glanced at the Indian sleeping beside him, at the embers of
the dying fire, at the five dogs beyond, with their wolf's brushes
curled over their noses, and at the four snowshoes standing upright in
the snow.

"It's sure hell the way that hunch works on me" he murmured. His mind
reverted to the poker game.  "Four kings!" He grinned reminiscently.
"That WAS a hunch!"

He lay down again, pulled the edge of the robe around his neck and over
his ear-flaps, closed his eyes, and this time fell asleep.


[5] Parka: a light, hooded, smock-like garment made of cotton drill.



CHAPTER V

At Sixty Mile they restocked provisions, added a few pounds of letters
to their load, and held steadily on.  From Forty Mile they had had
unbroken trail, and they could look forward only to unbroken trail
clear to Dyea.  Daylight stood it magnificently, but the killing pace
was beginning to tell on Kama.  His pride kept his mouth shut, but the
result of the chilling of his lungs in the cold snap could not be
concealed.  Microscopically small had been the edges of the lung-tissue
touched by the frost, but they now began to slough off, giving rise to
a dry, hacking cough.  Any unusually severe exertion precipitated
spells of coughing, during which he was almost like a man in a fit.
The blood congested in his eyes till they bulged, while the tears ran
down his cheeks.  A whiff of the smoke from frying bacon would start
him off for a half-hour's paroxysm, and he kept carefully to windward
when Daylight was cooking.

They plodded days upon days and without end over the soft, unpacked
snow.  It was hard, monotonous work, with none of the joy and
blood-stir that went with flying over hard surface.  Now one man to the
fore in the snowshoes, and now the other, it was a case of stubborn,
unmitigated plod.  A yard of powdery snow had to be pressed down, and
the wide-webbed shoe, under a man's weight, sank a full dozen inches
into the soft surface.  Snowshoe work, under such conditions, called
for the use of muscles other than those used in ordinary walking.  From
step to step the rising foot could not come up and forward on a slant.
It had to be raised perpendicularly.  When the snowshoe was pressed
into the snow, its nose was confronted by a vertical wall of snow
twelve inches high.  If the foot, in rising, slanted forward the
slightest bit, the nose of the shoe penetrated the obstructing wall and
tipped downward till the heel of the shoe struck the man's leg behind.
Thus up, straight up, twelve inches, each foot must be raised every
time and all the time, ere the forward swing from the knee could begin.

On this partially packed surface followed the dogs, the man at the
gee-pole, and the sled.  At the best, toiling as only picked men could
toil, they made no more than three miles an hour.  This meant longer
hours of travel, and Daylight, for good measure and for a margin
against accidents, hit the trail for twelve hours a day.  Since three
hours were consumed by making camp at night and cooking beans, by
getting breakfast in the morning and breaking camp, and by thawing
beans at the midday halt, nine hours were left for sleep and
recuperation, and neither men nor dogs wasted many minutes of those
nine hours.

At Selkirk, the trading post near Pelly River, Daylight suggested that
Kama lay over, rejoining him on the back trip from Dyea.  A strayed
Indian from Lake Le Barge was willing to take his place; but Kama was
obdurate.  He grunted with a slight intonation of resentment, and that
was all.  The dogs, however, Daylight changed, leaving his own
exhausted team to rest up against his return, while he went on with six
fresh dogs.

They travelled till ten o'clock the night they reached Selkirk, and at
six next morning they plunged ahead into the next stretch of wilderness
of nearly five hundred miles that lay between Selkirk and Dyea.  A
second cold snap came on, but cold or warm it was all the same, an
unbroken trail.  When the thermometer went down to fifty below, it was
even harder to travel, for at that low temperature the hard
frost-crystals were more like sand-grains in the resistance they
offered to the sled runners. The dogs had to pull harder than over the
same snow at twenty or thirty below zero.  Daylight increased the day's
travel to thirteen hours.  He jealously guarded the margin he had
gained, for he knew there were difficult stretches to come.

It was not yet quite midwinter, and the turbulent Fifty Mile River
vindicated his judgment.  In many places it ran wide open, with
precarious rim-ice fringing it on either side.  In numerous places,
where the water dashed against the steep-sided bluffs, rim-ice was
unable to form.  They turned and twisted, now crossing the river, now
coming back again, sometimes making half a dozen attempts before they
found a way over a particularly bad stretch.  It was slow work.  The
ice-bridges had to be tested, and either Daylight or Kama went in
advance, snowshoes on their feet, and long poles carried crosswise in
their hands.  Thus, if they broke through, they could cling to the pole
that bridged the hole made by their bodies.  Several such accidents
were the share of each.  At fifty below zero, a man wet to the waist
cannot travel without freezing; so each ducking meant delay.  As soon
as rescued, the wet man ran up and down to keep up his circulation,
while his dry companion built a fire.  Thus protected, a change of
garments could be made and the wet ones dried against the next
misadventure.

To make matters worse, this dangerous river travel could not be done in
the dark, and their working day was reduced to the six hours of
twilight.  Every moment was precious, and they strove never to lose
one.  Thus, before the first hint of the coming of gray day, camp was
broken, sled loaded, dogs harnessed, and the two men crouched waiting
over the fire.  Nor did they make the midday halt to eat.  As it was,
they were running far behind their schedule, each day eating into the
margin they had run up. There were days when they made fifteen miles,
and days when they made a dozen.  And there was one bad stretch where
in two days they covered nine miles, being compelled to turn their
backs three times on the river and to portage sled and outfit over the
mountains.

At last they cleared the dread Fifty Mile River and came out on Lake Le
Barge.  Here was no open water nor jammed ice.  For thirty miles or
more the snow lay level as a table; withal it lay three feet deep and
was soft as flour.  Three miles an hour was the best they could make,
but Daylight celebrated the passing of the Fifty Mile by traveling
late.  At eleven in the morning they emerged at the foot of the lake.
At three in the afternoon, as the Arctic night closed down, he caught
his first sight of the head of the lake, and with the first stars took
his bearings.  At eight in the evening they left the lake behind and
entered the mouth of the Lewes River.  Here a halt of half an hour was
made, while chunks of frozen boiled beans were thawed and the dogs were
given an extra ration of fish.  Then they pulled on up the river till
one in the morning, when they made their regular camp.

They had hit the trail sixteen hours on end that day, the dogs had come
in too tired to fight among themselves or even snarl, and Kama had
perceptibly limped the last several miles; yet Daylight was on trail
next morning at six o'clock.  By eleven he was at the foot of White
Horse, and that night saw him camped beyond the Box Canon, the last bad
river-stretch behind him, the string of lakes before him.

There was no let up in his pace.  Twelve hours a day, six in the
twilight, and six in the dark, they toiled on the trail.  Three hours
were consumed in cooking, repairing harnesses, and making and breaking
camp, and the remaining nine hours dogs and men slept as if dead.  The
iron strength of Kama broke.  Day by day the terrific toil sapped him.
Day by day he consumed more of his reserves of strength.  He became
slower of movement, the resiliency went out of his muscles, and his
limp became permanent.  Yet he labored stoically on, never shirking,
never grunting a hint of complaint.  Daylight was thin-faced and tired.

He looked tired; yet somehow, with that marvelous mechanism of a body
that was his, he drove on, ever on, remorselessly on.  Never was he
more a god in Kama's mind than in the last days of the south-bound
traverse, as the failing Indian watched him, ever to the fore, pressing
onward with urgency of endurance such as Kama had never seen nor
dreamed could thrive in human form.

The time came when Kama was unable to go in the lead and break trail,
and it was a proof that he was far gone when he permitted Daylight to
toil all day at the heavy snowshoe work.  Lake by lake they crossed the
string of lakes from Marsh to Linderman, and began the ascent of
Chilcoot.  By all rights, Daylight should have camped below the last
pitch of the pass at the dim end of day; but he kept on and over and
down to Sheep Camp, while behind him raged a snow-storm that would have
delayed him twenty-four hours.

This last excessive strain broke Kama completely.  In the morning he
could not travel.  At five, when called, he sat up after a struggle,
groaned, and sank back again.  Daylight did the camp work of both,
harnessed the dogs, and, when ready for the start, rolled the helpless
Indian in all three sleeping robes and lashed him on top of the sled.
The going was good; they were on the last lap; and he raced the dogs
down through Dyea Canon and along the hard-packed trail that led to
Dyea Post.  And running still, Kama groaning on top the load, and
Daylight leaping at the gee-pole to avoid going under the runners of
the flying sled, they arrived at Dyea by the sea.

True to his promise, Daylight did not stop.  An hour's time saw the
sled loaded with the ingoing mail and grub, fresh dogs harnessed, and a
fresh Indian engaged.  Kama never spoke from the time of his arrival
till the moment Daylight, ready to depart, stood beside him to say
good-by.  They shook hands.

"You kill um dat damn Indian," Kama said.  "Sawee, Daylight?  You kill
um."

"He'll sure last as far as Pelly," Daylight grinned.

Kama shook his head doubtfully, and rolled over on his side, turning
his back in token of farewell.

Daylight won across Chilcoot that same day, dropping down five hundred
feet in the darkness and the flurrying snow to Crater Lake, where he
camped.  It was a 'cold' camp, far above the timber-line, and he had
not burdened his sled with firewood. That night three feet of snow
covered them, and in the black morning, when they dug themselves out,
the Indian tried to desert.  He had had enough of traveling with what
he considered a madman.  But Daylight persuaded him in grim ways to
stay by the outfit, and they pulled on across Deep Lake and Long Lake
and dropped down to the level-going of Lake Linderman.  It was the same
killing pace going in as coming out, and the Indian did not stand it as
well as Kama.  He, too, never complained.  Nor did he try again to
desert.  He toiled on and did his best, while he renewed his resolve to
steer clear of Daylight in the future. The days slipped into days,
nights and twilight's alternating, cold snaps gave way to snow-falls,
and cold snaps came on again, and all the while, through the long
hours, the miles piled up behind them.

But on the Fifty Mile accident befell them.  Crossing an ice-bridge,
the dogs broke through and were swept under the down-stream ice.  The
traces that connected the team with the wheel-dog parted, and the team
was never seen again.  Only the one wheel-dog remained, and Daylight
harnessed the Indian and himself to the sled.  But a man cannot take
the place of a dog at such work, and the two men were attempting to do
the work of five dogs.  At the end of the first hour, Daylight
lightened up. Dog-food, extra gear, and the spare ax were thrown away.
Under the extraordinary exertion the dog snapped a tendon the following
day, and was hopelessly disabled.  Daylight shot it, and abandoned the
sled.  On his back he took one hundred and sixty pounds of mail and
grub, and on the Indian's put one hundred and twenty-five pounds.  The
stripping of gear was remorseless.  The Indian was appalled when he saw
every pound of worthless mail matter retained, while beans, cups,
pails, plates, and extra clothing were thrown by the board.  One robe
each was kept, one ax, one tin pail, and a scant supply of bacon and
flour.  Bacon could be eaten raw on a pinch, and flour, stirred in hot
water, could keep men going.  Even the rifle and the score of rounds of
ammunition were left behind.

And in this fashion they covered the two hundred miles to Selkirk.
Daylight travelled late and early, the hours formerly used by
camp-making and dog-tending being now devoted to the trail.  At night
they crouched over a small fire, wrapped in their robes, drinking flour
broth and thawing bacon on the ends of sticks; and in the morning
darkness, without a word, they arose, slipped on their packs, adjusted
head-straps, and hit the trail.  The last miles into Selkirk, Daylight
drove the Indian before him, a hollow-cheeked, gaunt-eyed wraith of a
man who else would have lain down and slept or abandoned his burden of
mail.

At Selkirk, the old team of dogs, fresh and in condition, were
harnessed, and the same day saw Daylight plodding on, alternating
places at the gee-pole, as a matter of course, with the Le Barge Indian
who had volunteered on the way out.  Daylight was two days behind his
schedule, and falling snow and unpacked trail kept him two days behind
all the way to Forty Mile.  And here the weather favored.  It was time
for a big cold snap, and he gambled on it, cutting down the weight of
grub for dogs and men.  The men of Forty Mile shook their heads
ominously, and demanded to know what he would do if the snow still fell.

"That cold snap's sure got to come," he laughed, and mushed out on the
trail.

A number of sleds had passed back and forth already that winter between
Forty Mile and Circle City, and the trail was well packed.  And the
cold snap came and remained, and Circle City was only two hundred miles
away.  The Le Barge Indian was a young man, unlearned yet in his own
limitations, and filled with pride.

He took Daylight's pace with joy, and even dreamed, at first, that he
would play the white man out.  The first hundred miles he looked for
signs of weakening, and marveled that he saw them not.

Throughout the second hundred miles he observed signs in himself, and
gritted his teeth and kept up.  And ever Daylight flew on and on,
running at the gee-pole or resting his spell on top the flying sled.
The last day, clearer and colder than ever, gave perfect going, and
they covered seventy miles.  It was ten at night when they pulled up
the earth-bank and flew along the main street of Circle City; and the
young Indian, though it was his spell to ride, leaped off and ran
behind the sled.  It was honorable braggadocio, and despite the fact
that he had found his limitations and was pressing desperately against
them, he ran gamely on.



CHAPTER VI

A crowd filled the Tivoli--the old crowd that had seen Daylight depart
two months before; for this was the night of the sixtieth day, and
opinion was divided as ever as to whether or not he would compass the
achievement.  At ten o'clock bets were still being made, though the
odds rose, bet by bet, against his success.  Down in her heart the
Virgin believed he had failed, yet she made a bet of twenty ounces with
Charley Bates, against forty ounces, that Daylight would arrive before
midnight.

She it was who heard the first yelps of the dogs.

"Listen!" she cried.  "It's Daylight!"

There was a general stampede for the door; but where the double
storm-doors were thrown wide open, the crowd fell back.  They heard the
eager whining of dogs, the snap of a dog-whip, and the voice of
Daylight crying encouragement as the weary animals capped all they had
done by dragging the sled in over the wooden floor.  They came in with
a rush, and with them rushed in the frost, a visible vapor of smoking
white, through which their heads and backs showed, as they strained in
the harness, till they had all the seeming of swimming in a river.
Behind them, at the gee-pole, came Daylight, hidden to the knees by the
swirling frost through which he appeared to wade.

He was the same old Daylight, withal lean and tired-looking, and his
black eyes were sparkling and flashing brighter than ever. His parka of
cotton drill hooded him like a monk, and fell in straight lines to his
knees.  Grimed and scorched by camp-smoke and fire, the garment in
itself told the story of his trip.  A two-months' beard covered his
face; and the beard, in turn, was matted with the ice of his breathing
through the long seventy-mile run.

His entry was spectacular, melodramatic; and he knew it.  It was his
life, and he was living it at the top of his bent.  Among his fellows
he was a great man, an Arctic hero.  He was proud of the fact, and it
was a high moment for him, fresh from two thousand miles of trail, to
come surging into that bar-room, dogs, sled, mail, Indian,
paraphernalia, and all.  He had performed one more exploit that would
make the Yukon ring with his name--he, Burning Daylight, the king of
travelers and dog-mushers.

He experienced a thrill of surprise as the roar of welcome went up and
as every familiar detail of the Tivoli greeted his vision--the long bar
and the array of bottles, the gambling games, the big stove, the
weigher at the gold-scales, the musicians, the men and women, the
Virgin, Celia, and Nellie, Dan MacDonald, Bettles, Billy Rawlins, Olaf
Henderson, Doc Watson,--all of them.

It was just as he had left it, and in all seeming it might well be the
very day he had left.  The sixty days of incessant travel through the
white wilderness suddenly telescoped, and had no existence in time.
They were a moment, an incident.  He had plunged out and into them
through the wall of silence, and back through the wall of silence he
had plunged, apparently the next instant, and into the roar and turmoil
of the Tivoli.

A glance down at the sled with its canvas mail-bags was necessary to
reassure him of the reality of those sixty days and the two thousand
miles over the ice.  As in a dream, he shook the hands that were thrust
out to him.  He felt a vast exaltation.  Life was magnificent.  He
loved it all.  A great sense of humanness and comradeship swept over
him.  These were all his, his own kind.  It was immense, tremendous.
He felt melting in the heart of him, and he would have liked to shake
hands with them all at once, to gather them to his breast in one mighty
embrace.

He drew a deep breath and cried: "The winner pays, and I'm the winner,
ain't I?  Surge up, you-all Malemutes and Siwashes, and name your
poison!  There's your Dyea mail, straight from Salt Water, and no
hornswogglin about it!  Cast the lashings adrift, you-all, and wade
into it!"

A dozen pairs of hands were at the sled-lashings, when the young Le
Barge Indian, bending at the same task, suddenly and limply
straightened up.  In his eyes was a great surprise.  He stared about
him wildly, for the thing he was undergoing was new to him.

He was profoundly struck by an unguessed limitation.  He shook as with
a palsy, and he gave at the knees, slowly sinking down to fall suddenly
across the sled and to know the smashing blow of darkness across his
consciousness.

"Exhaustion," said Daylight.  "Take him off and put him to bed, some of
you-all.  He's sure a good Indian."

"Daylight's right," was Doc Watson's verdict, a moment later. "The
man's plumb tuckered out."

The mail was taken charge of, the dogs driven away to quarters and fed,
and Bettles struck up the paean of the sassafras root as they lined up
against the long bar to drink and talk and collect their debts.

A few minutes later, Daylight was whirling around the dance-floor,
waltzing with the Virgin.  He had replaced his parka with his fur cap
and blanket-cloth coat, kicked off his frozen moccasins, and was
dancing in his stocking feet.  After wetting himself to the knees late
that afternoon, he had run on without changing his foot-gear, and to
the knees his long German socks were matted with ice.  In the warmth of
the room it began to thaw and to break apart in clinging chunks.  These
chunks rattled together as his legs flew around, and every little while
they fell clattering to the floor and were slipped upon by the other
dancers.  But everybody forgave Daylight.  He, who was one of the few
that made the Law in that far land, who set the ethical pace, and by
conduct gave the standard of right and wrong, was nevertheless above
the Law.  He was one of those rare and favored mortals who can do no
wrong.  What he did had to be right, whether others were permitted or
not to do the same things.  Of course, such mortals are so favored by
virtue of the fact that they almost always do the right and do it in
finer and higher ways than other men.  So Daylight, an elder hero in
that young land and at the same time younger than most of them, moved
as a creature apart, as a man above men, as a man who was greatly man
and all man.  And small wonder it was that the Virgin yielded herself
to his arms, as they danced dance after dance, and was sick at heart at
the knowledge that he found nothing in her more than a good friend and
an excellent dancer.  Small consolation it was to know that he had
never loved any woman.  She was sick with love of him, and he danced
with her as he would dance with any woman, as he would dance with a man
who was a good dancer and upon whose arm was tied a handkerchief to
conventionalize him into a woman.

One such man Daylight danced with that night.  Among frontiersmen it
has always been a test of endurance for one man to whirl another down;
and when Ben Davis, the faro-dealer, a gaudy bandanna on his arm, got
Daylight in a Virginia reel, the fun began.  The reel broke up and all
fell back to watch.  Around and around the two men whirled, always in
the one direction.  Word was passed on into the big bar-room, and bar
and gambling tables were deserted.  Everybody wanted to see, and they
packed and jammed the dance-room.  The musicians played on and on, and
on and on the two men whirled.  Davis was skilled at the trick, and on
the Yukon he had put many a strong man on his back.  But after a few
minutes it was clear that he, and not Daylight, was going.

For a while longer they spun around, and then Daylight suddenly stood
still, released his partner, and stepped back, reeling himself, and
fluttering his hands aimlessly, as if to support himself against the
air.  But Davis, a giddy smile of consternation on his face, gave
sideways, turned in an attempt to recover balance, and pitched headlong
to the floor.  Still reeling and staggering and clutching at the air
with his hands, Daylight caught the nearest girl and started on in a
waltz. Again he had done the big thing.  Weary from two thousand miles
over the ice and a run that day of seventy miles, he had whirled a
fresh man down, and that man Ben Davis.

Daylight loved the high places, and though few high places there were
in his narrow experience, he had made a point of sitting in the highest
he had ever glimpsed.  The great world had never heard his name, but it
was known far and wide in the vast silent North, by whites and Indians
and Eskimos, from Bering Sea to the Passes, from the head reaches of
remotest rivers to the tundra shore of Point Barrow.  Desire for
mastery was strong in him, and it was all one whether wrestling with
the elements themselves, with men, or with luck in a gambling game.  It
was all a game, life and its affairs.  And he was a gambler to the
core.  Risk and chance were meat and drink.  True, it was not
altogether blind, for he applied wit and skill and strength; but behind
it all was the everlasting Luck, the thing that at times turned on its
votaries and crushed the wise while it blessed the fools--Luck, the
thing all men sought and dreamed to conquer. And so he.  Deep in his
life-processes Life itself sang the siren song of its own majesty, ever
a-whisper and urgent, counseling him that he could achieve more than
other men, win out where they failed, ride to success where they
perished.  It was the urge of Life healthy and strong, unaware of
frailty and decay, drunken with sublime complacence, ego-mad, enchanted
by its own mighty optimism.

And ever in vaguest whisperings and clearest trumpet-calls came the
message that sometime, somewhere, somehow, he would run Luck down, make
himself the master of Luck, and tie it and brand it as his own.  When
he played poker, the whisper was of four aces and royal flushes.  When
he prospected, it was of gold in the grass-roots, gold on bed-rock, and
gold all the way down.  At the sharpest hazards of trail and river and
famine, the message was that other men might die, but that he would
pull through triumphant.  It was the old, old lie of Life fooling
itself, believing itself--immortal and indestructible, bound to achieve
over other lives and win to its heart's desire.

And so, reversing at times, Daylight waltzed off his dizziness and led
the way to the bar.  But a united protest went up.  His theory that the
winner paid was no longer to be tolerated.  It was contrary to custom
and common sense, and while it emphasized good-fellowship,
nevertheless, in the name of good-fellowship it must cease.  The drinks
were rightfully on Ben Davis, and Ben Davis must buy them.
Furthermore, all drinks and general treats that Daylight was guilty of
ought to be paid by the house, for Daylight brought much custom to it
whenever he made a night. Bettles was the spokesman, and his argument,
tersely and offensively vernacular, was unanimously applauded.

Daylight grinned, stepped aside to the roulette-table, and bought a
stack of yellow chips.  At the end of ten minutes he weighed in at the
scales, and two thousand dollars in gold-dust was poured into his own
and an extra sack.  Luck, a mere flutter of luck, but it was his.
Elation was added to elation.  He was living, and the night was his.
He turned upon his well-wishing critics.

"Now the winner sure does pay," he said.

And they surrendered.  There was no withstanding Daylight when he
vaulted on the back of life, and rode it bitted and spurred.

At one in the morning he saw Elijah Davis herding Henry Finn and Joe
Hines, the lumber-jack, toward the door.  Daylight interfered.

"Where are you-all going?" he demanded, attempting to draw them to the
bar.

"Bed," Elijah Davis answered.

He was a lean tobacco-chewing New Englander, the one daring spirit in
his family that had heard and answered the call of the West shouting
through the Mount Desert back odd-lots.  "Got to," Joe Hines added
apologetically.  "We're mushing out in the mornin'."

Daylight still detained them.  "Where to?  What's the excitement?"

"No excitement," Elijah explained.  "We're just a-goin' to play your
hunch, an' tackle the Upper Country.  Don't you want to come along?"

"I sure do," Daylight affirmed.

But the question had been put in fun, and Elijah ignored the acceptance.

"We're tacklin' the Stewart," he went on.  "Al Mayo told me he seen
some likely lookin' bars first time he come down the Stewart, and we're
goin' to sample 'em while the river's froze. You listen, Daylight, an'
mark my words, the time's comin' when winter diggin's'll be all the go.
There'll be men in them days that'll laugh at our summer stratchin' an'
ground-wallerin'."

At that time, winter mining was undreamed of on the Yukon.  From the
moss and grass the land was frozen to bed-rock, and frozen gravel, hard
as granite, defied pick and shovel.  In the summer the men stripped the
earth down as fast as the sun thawed it. Then was the time they did
their mining.  During the winter they freighted their provisions, went
moose-hunting, got all ready for the summer's work, and then loafed the
bleak, dark months through in the big central camps such as Circle City
and Forty Mile.

"Winter diggin's sure comin'," Daylight agreed.  "Wait till that big
strike is made up river.  Then you-all'll see a new kind of mining.
What's to prevent wood-burning and sinking shafts and drifting along
bed-rock?  Won't need to timber.  That frozen muck and gravel'll stand
till hell is froze and its mill-tails is turned to ice-cream.  Why,
they'll be working pay-streaks a hundred feet deep in them days that's
comin'.  I'm sure going along with you-all, Elijah."

Elijah laughed, gathered his two partners up, and was making a second
attempt to reach the door.

"Hold on," Daylight called.  "I sure mean it."

The three men turned back suddenly upon him, in their faces surprise,
delight, and incredulity.

"G'wan, you're foolin'," said Finn, the other lumberjack, a quiet,
steady, Wisconsin man.

"There's my dawgs and sled," Daylight answered.  "That'll make two
teams and halve the loads--though we-all'll have to travel easy for a
spell, for them dawgs is sure tired."

The three men were overjoyed, but still a trifle incredulous.

"Now look here," Joe Hines blurted out, "none of your foolin, Daylight.
We mean business.  Will you come?"

Daylight extended his hand and shook.

"Then you'd best be gettin' to bed," Elijah advised. "We're mushin' out
at six, and four hours' sleep is none so long."

"Mebbe we ought to lay over a day and let him rest up," Finn suggested.

Daylight's pride was touched.

"No you don't," he cried.  "We all start at six.  What time do you-all
want to be called?  Five?  All right, I'll rouse you-all out."

"You oughter have some sleep," Elijah counselled gravely.  "You can't
go on forever."

Daylight was tired, profoundly tired.  Even his iron body acknowledged
weariness.  Every muscle was clamoring for bed and rest, was appalled
at continuance of exertion and at thought of the trail again.  All this
physical protest welled up into his brain in a wave of revolt.  But
deeper down, scornful and defiant, was Life itself, the essential fire
of it, whispering that all Daylight's fellows were looking on, that now
was the time to pile deed upon deed, to flaunt his strength in the face
of strength.  It was merely Life, whispering its ancient lies. And in
league with it was whiskey, with all its consummate effrontery and
vain-glory.

"Mebbe you-all think I ain't weaned yet?" Daylight demanded. "Why, I
ain't had a drink, or a dance, or seen a soul in two months.  You-all
get to bed.  I'll call you-all at five."

And for the rest of the night he danced on in his stocking feet, and at
five in the morning, rapping thunderously on the door of his new
partners' cabin, he could be heard singing the song that had given him
his name:--

"Burning daylight, you-all Stewart River hunchers!  Burning daylight!
Burning daylight!  Burning daylight!"



CHAPTER VII

This time the trail was easier.  It was better packed, and they were
not carrying mail against time.  The day's run was shorter, and
likewise the hours on trail.  On his mail run Daylight had played out
three Indians; but his present partners knew that they must not be
played out when they arrived at the Stewart bars, so they set the
slower pace.  And under this milder toil, where his companions
nevertheless grew weary, Daylight recuperated and rested up.  At Forty
Mile they laid over two days for the sake of the dogs, and at Sixty
Mile Daylight's team was left with the trader.  Unlike Daylight, after
the terrible run from Selkirk to Circle City, they had been unable to
recuperate on the back trail.  So the four men pulled on from Sixty
Mile with a fresh team of dogs on Daylight's sled.

The following night they camped in the cluster of islands at the mouth
of the Stewart.  Daylight talked town sites, and, though the others
laughed at him, he staked the whole maze of high, wooded islands.

"Just supposing the big strike does come on the Stewart," he argued.
"Mebbe you-all'll be in on it, and then again mebbe you-all won't.  But
I sure will.  You-all'd better reconsider and go in with me on it."

But they were stubborn.

"You're as bad as Harper and Joe Ladue," said Joe Hines. "They're
always at that game.  You know that big flat jest below the Klondike
and under Moosehide Mountain?  Well, the recorder at Forty Mile was
tellin' me they staked that not a month ago--The Harper & Ladue Town
Site.  Ha! Ha! Ha!"

Elijah and Finn joined him in his laughter; but Daylight was gravely in
earnest.

"There she is!" he cried.  "The hunch is working!  It's in the air, I
tell you-all!  What'd they-all stake the big flat for if they-all
didn't get the hunch?  Wish I'd staked it."

The regret in his voice was provocative of a second burst of laughter.

"Laugh, you-all, laugh!  That's what's the trouble with you-all.
You-all think gold-hunting is the only way to make a stake.  But let me
tell you-all that when the big strike sure does come, you-all'll do a
little surface-scratchin' and muck-raking, but danged little you-all'll
have to show for it.  You-all laugh at quicksilver in the riffles and
think flour gold was manufactured by God Almighty for the express
purpose of fooling suckers and chechaquos.  Nothing but coarse gold for
you-all, that's your way, not getting half of it out of the ground and
losing into the tailings half of what you-all do get.

"But the men that land big will be them that stake the town sites,
organize the tradin' companies, start the banks--"

Here the explosion of mirth drowned him out.  Banks in Alaska! The idea
of it was excruciating.

"Yep, and start the stock exchanges--"

Again they were convulsed.  Joe Hines rolled over on his sleeping-robe,
holding his sides.

"And after them will come the big mining sharks that buy whole creeks
where you-all have been scratching like a lot of picayune hens, and
they-all will go to hydraulicking in summer and steam-thawing in
winter--"

Steam-thawing!  That was the limit.  Daylight was certainly exceeding
himself in his consummate fun-making. Steam-thawing--when even
wood-burning was an untried experiment, a dream in the air!

"Laugh, dang you, laugh! Why your eyes ain't open yet.  You-all are a
bunch of little mewing kittens.  I tell you-all if that strike comes on
Klondike, Harper and Ladue will be millionaires. And if it comes on
Stewart, you-all watch the Elam Harnish town site boom.  In them days,
when you-all come around makin' poor mouths..."  He heaved a sigh of
resignation.  "Well, I suppose I'll have to give you-all a grub-stake
or soup, or something or other."

Daylight had vision.  His scope had been rigidly limited, yet whatever
he saw, he saw big.  His mind was orderly, his imagination practical,
and he never dreamed idly.  When he superimposed a feverish metropolis
on a waste of timbered, snow-covered flat, he predicated first the
gold-strike that made the city possible, and next he had an eye for
steamboat landings, sawmill and warehouse locations, and all the needs
of a far-northern mining city.  But this, in turn, was the mere setting
for something bigger, namely, the play of temperament. Opportunities
swarmed in the streets and buildings and human and economic relations
of the city of his dream.  It was a larger table for gambling.  The
limit was the sky, with the Southland on one side and the aurora
borealis on the other.  The play would be big, bigger than any Yukoner
had ever imagined, and he, Burning Daylight, would see that he got in
on that play.

In the meantime there was naught to show for it but the hunch. But it
was coming.  As he would stake his last ounce on a good poker hand, so
he staked his life and effort on the hunch that the future held in
store a big strike on the Upper River.  So he and his three companions,
with dogs, and sleds, and snowshoes, toiled up the frozen breast of the
Stewart, toiled on and on through the white wilderness where the
unending stillness was never broken by the voices of men, the stroke of
an ax, or the distant crack of a rifle.  They alone moved through the
vast and frozen quiet, little mites of earth-men, crawling their score
of miles a day, melting the ice that they might have water to drink,
camping in the snow at night, their wolf-dogs curled in frost-rimed,
hairy bunches, their eight snowshoes stuck on end in the snow beside
the sleds.

No signs of other men did they see, though once they passed a rude
poling-boat, cached on a platform by the river bank. Whoever had cached
it had never come back for it; and they wondered and mushed on.
Another time they chanced upon the site of an Indian village, but the
Indians had disappeared; undoubtedly they were on the higher reaches of
the Stewart in pursuit of the moose-herds.  Two hundred miles up from
the Yukon, they came upon what Elijah decided were the bars mentioned
by Al Mayo.  A permanent camp was made, their outfit of food cached on
a high platform to keep it from the dogs, and they started work on the
bars, cutting their way down to gravel through the rim of ice.

It was a hard and simple life.  Breakfast over, and they were at work
by the first gray light; and when night descended, they did their
cooking and camp-chores, smoked and yarned for a while, then rolled up
in their sleeping-robes, and slept while the aurora borealis flamed
overhead and the stars leaped and danced in the great cold.  Their fare
was monotonous: sour-dough bread, bacon, beans, and an occasional dish
of rice cooked along with a handful of prunes.  Fresh meat they failed
to obtain.  There was an unwonted absence of animal life.  At rare
intervals they chanced upon the trail of a snowshoe rabbit or an
ermine; but in the main it seemed that all life had fled the land.  It
was a condition not unknown to them, for in all their experience, at
one time or another, they had travelled one year through a region
teeming with game, where, a year or two or three years later, no game
at all would be found.

Gold they found on the bars, but not in paying quantities. Elijah,
while on a hunt for moose fifty miles away, had panned the surface
gravel of a large creek and found good colors.  They harnessed their
dogs, and with light outfits sledded to the place.  Here, and possibly
for the first time in the history of the Yukon, wood-burning, in
sinking a shaft, was tried.  It was Daylight's initiative.  After
clearing away the moss and grass, a fire of dry spruce was built.  Six
hours of burning thawed eight inches of muck.  Their picks drove full
depth into it, and, when they had shoveled out, another fire was
started.  They worked early and late, excited over the success of the
experiment.  Six feet of frozen muck brought them to gravel, likewise
frozen. Here progress was slower.  But they learned to handle their
fires better, and were soon able to thaw five and six inches at a
burning.  Flour gold was in this gravel, and after two feet it gave
away again to muck.  At seventeen feet they struck a thin streak of
gravel, and in it coarse gold, testpans running as high as six and
eight dollars.  Unfortunately, this streak of gravel was not more than
an inch thick.  Beneath it was more muck, tangled with the trunks of
ancient trees and containing fossil bones of forgotten monsters.  But
gold they had found--coarse gold; and what more likely than that the
big deposit would be found on bed-rock?  Down to bed-rock they would
go, if it were forty feet away.  They divided into two shifts, working
day and night, on two shafts, and the smoke of their burning rose
continually.

It was at this time that they ran short of beans and that Elijah was
despatched to the main camp to bring up more grub.  Elijah was one of
the hard-bitten old-time travelers himself.  The round trip was a
hundred miles, but he promised to be back on the third day, one day
going light, two days returning heavy.  Instead, he arrived on the
night of the second day.  They had just gone to bed when they heard him
coming.

"What in hell's the matter now?" Henry Finn demanded, as the empty sled
came into the circle of firelight and as he noted that Elijah's long,
serious face was longer and even more serious.

Joe Hines threw wood on the fire, and the three men, wrapped in their
robes, huddled up close to the warmth.  Elijah's whiskered face was
matted with ice, as were his eyebrows, so that, what of his fur garb,
he looked like a New England caricature of Father Christmas.

"You recollect that big spruce that held up the corner of the cache
next to the river?" Elijah began.

The disaster was quickly told.  The big tree, with all the seeming of
hardihood, promising to stand for centuries to come, had suffered from
a hidden decay.  In some way its rooted grip on the earth had weakened.
The added burden of the cache and the winter snow had been too much for
it; the balance it had so long maintained with the forces of its
environment had been overthrown; it had toppled and crashed to the
ground, wrecking the cache and, in turn, overthrowing the balance with
environment that the four men and eleven dogs had been maintaining.
Their supply of grub was gone.  The wolverines had got into the wrecked
cache, and what they had not eaten they had destroyed.

"They plumb e't all the bacon and prunes and sugar and dog-food,"
Elijah reported, "and gosh darn my buttons, if they didn't gnaw open
the sacks and scatter the flour and beans and rice from Dan to
Beersheba.  I found empty sacks where they'd dragged them a quarter of
a mile away."

Nobody spoke for a long minute.  It was nothing less than a
catastrophe, in the dead of an Arctic winter and in a game-abandoned
land, to lose their grub.  They were not panic-stricken, but they were
busy looking the situation squarely in the face and considering.  Joe
Hines was the first to speak.

"We can pan the snow for the beans and rice... though there wa'n't
more'n eight or ten pounds of rice left."

"And somebody will have to take a team and pull for Sixty Mile,"
Daylight said next.

"I'll go," said Finn.

They considered a while longer.

"But how are we going to feed the other team and three men till he gets
back?" Hines demanded.

"Only one thing to it," was Elijah's contribution.  "You'll have to
take the other team, Joe, and pull up the Stewart till you find them
Indians.  Then you come back with a load of meat. You'll get here long
before Henry can make it from Sixty Mile, and while you're gone
there'll only be Daylight and me to feed, and we'll feed good and
small."

"And in the morning we-all'll pull for the cache and pan snow to find
what grub we've got."  Daylight lay back, as he spoke, and rolled in
his robe to sleep, then added: "Better turn in for an early start.  Two
of you can take the dogs down.  Elijah and me'll skin out on both sides
and see if we-all can scare up a moose on the way down."



CHAPTER VIII

No time was lost.  Hines and Finn, with the dogs, already on short
rations, were two days in pulling down.  At noon of the third day
Elijah arrived, reporting no moose sign.  That night Daylight came in
with a similar report.  As fast as they arrived, the men had started
careful panning of the snow all around the cache.  It was a large task,
for they found stray beans fully a hundred yards from the cache.  One
more day all the men toiled. The result was pitiful, and the four
showed their caliber in the division of the few pounds of food that had
been recovered. Little as it was, the lion's share was left with
Daylight and Elijah.  The men who pulled on with the dogs, one up the
Stewart and one down, would come more quickly to grub.  The two who
remained would have to last out till the others returned. Furthermore,
while the dogs, on several ounces each of beans a day, would travel
slowly, nevertheless, the men who travelled with them, on a pinch,
would have the dogs themselves to eat. But the men who remained, when
the pinch came, would have no dogs.  It was for this reason that
Daylight and Elijah took the more desperate chance.  They could not do
less, nor did they care to do less.  The days passed, and the winter
began merging imperceptibly into the Northland spring that comes like a
thunderbolt of suddenness.  It was the spring of 1896 that was
preparing.  Each day the sun rose farther east of south, remained
longer in the sky, and set farther to the west.  March ended and April
began, and Daylight and Elijah, lean and hungry, wondered what had
become of their two comrades.  Granting every delay, and throwing in
generous margins for good measure, the time was long since passed when
they should have returned.  Without doubt they had met with disaster.
The party had considered the possibility of disaster for one man, and
that had been the principal reason for despatching the two in different
directions.  But that disaster should have come to both of them was the
final blow.

In the meantime, hoping against hope, Daylight and Elija eked out a
meagre existence.  The thaw had not yet begun, so they were able to
gather the snow about the ruined cache and melt it in pots and pails
and gold pans.  Allowed to stand for a while, when poured off, a thin
deposit of slime was found on the bottoms of the vessels.  This was the
flour, the infinitesimal trace of it scattered through thousands of
cubic yards of snow.  Also, in this slime occurred at intervals a
water-soaked tea-leaf or coffee-ground, and there were in it fragments
of earth and litter.  But the farther they worked away from the site of
the cache, the thinner became the trace of flour, the smaller the
deposit of slime.

Elijah was the older man, and he weakened first, so that he came to lie
up most of the time in his furs.  An occasional tree-squirrel kept them
alive.  The hunting fell upon Daylight, and it was hard work.  With but
thirty rounds of ammunition, he dared not risk a miss; and, since his
rifle was a 45-90, he was compelled to shoot the small creatures
through the head.  There were very few of them, and days went by
without seeing one.  When he did see one, he took infinite precautions.
He would stalk it for hours.  A score of times, with arms that shook
from weakness, he would draw a sight on the animal and refrain from
pulling the trigger.  His inhibition was a thing of iron.  He was the
master. Not til absolute certitude was his did he shoot.  No matter how
sharp the pangs of hunger and desire for that palpitating morsel of
chattering life, he refused to take the slightest risk of a miss.  He,
born gambler, was gambling in the bigger way.  His life was the stake,
his cards were the cartridges, and he played as only a big gambler
could play, with infinite precaution, with infinite consideration.
Each shot meant a squirrel, and though days elapsed between shots, it
never changed his method of play.

Of the squirrels, nothing was lost.  Even the skins were boiled to make
broth, the bones pounded into fragments that could be chewed and
swallowed.  Daylight prospected through the snow, and found occasional
patches of mossberries.  At the best, mossberries were composed
practically of seeds and water, with a tough rind of skin about them;
but the berries he found were of the preceding year, dry and
shrivelled, and the nourishment they contained verged on the minus
quality.  Scarcely better was the bark of young saplings, stewed for an
hour and swallowed after prodigious chewing.

April drew toward its close, and spring smote the land.  The days
stretched out their length.  Under the heat of the sun, the snow began
to melt, while from down under the snow arose the trickling of tiny
streams.  For twenty-four hours the Chinook wind blew, and in that
twenty-four hours the snow was diminished fully a foot in depth.  In
the late afternoons the melting snow froze again, so that its surface
became ice capable of supporting a man's weight.  Tiny white snow-birds
appeared from the south, lingered a day, and resumed their journey into
the north.  Once, high in the air, looking for open water and ahead of
the season, a wedged squadron of wild geese honked northwards.  And
down by the river bank a clump of dwarf willows burst into bud.  These
young buds, stewed, seemed to posess an encouraging nutrition. Elijah
took heart of hope, though he was cast down again when Daylight failed
to find another clump of willows.

The sap was rising in the trees, and daily the trickle of unseen
streamlets became louder as the frozen land came back to life. But the
river held in its bonds of frost.  Winter had been long months in
riveting them, and not in a day were they to be broken, not even by the
thunderbolt of spring.  May came, and stray last-year's mosquitoes,
full-grown but harmless, crawled out of rock crevices and rotten logs.
Crickets began to chirp, and more geese and ducks flew overhead.  And
still the river held.  By May tenth, the ice of the Stewart, with a
great rending and snapping, tore loose from the banks and rose three
feet.  But it did not go down-stream.  The lower Yukon, up to where the
Stewart flowed into it, must first break and move on.  Until then the
ice of the Stewart could only rise higher and higher on the increasing
flood beneath.  When the Yukon would break was problematical.  Two
thousand miles away it flowed into Bering Sea, and it was the ice
conditions of Bering Sea that would determine when the Yukon could rid
itself of the millions of tons of ice that cluttered its breast.

On the twelfth of May, carrying their sleeping-robes, a pail, an ax,
and the precious rifle, the two men started down the river on the ice.
Their plan was to gain to the cached poling-boat they had seen, so that
at the first open water they could launch it and drift with the stream
to Sixty Mile.  In their weak condition, without food, the going was
slow and difficult. Elijah developed a habit of falling down and being
unable to rise.  Daylight gave of his own strength to lift him to his
feet, whereupon the older man would stagger automatically on until he
stumbled and fell again.

On the day they should have reached the boat, Elijah collapsed utterly.
When Daylight raised him, he fell again.  Daylight essayed to walk with
him, supporting him, but such was Daylight's own weakness that they
fell together.

Dragging Elijah to the bank, a rude camp was made, and Daylight started
out in search of squirrels.  It was at this time that he likewise
developed the falling habit.  In the evening he found his first
squirrel, but darkness came on without his getting a certain shot.
With primitive patience he waited till next day, and then, within the
hour, the squirrel was his.

The major portion he fed to Elijah, reserving for himself the tougher
parts and the bones.  But such is the chemistry of life, that this
small creature, this trifle of meat that moved, by being eaten,
transmuted to the meat of the men the same power to move.  No longer
did the squirrel run up spruce trees, leap from branch to branch, or
cling chattering to giddy perches.  Instead, the same energy that had
done these things flowed into the wasted muscles and reeling wills of
the men, making them move--nay, moving them--till they tottered the
several intervening miles to the cached boat, underneath which they
fell together and lay motionless a long time.

Light as the task would have been for a strong man to lower the small
boat to the ground, it took Daylight hours.  And many hours more, day
by day, he dragged himself around it, lying on his side to calk the
gaping seams with moss.  Yet, when this was done, the river still held.
Its ice had risen many feet, but would not start down-stream.  And one
more task waited, the launching of the boat when the river ran water to
receive it.  Vainly Daylight staggered and stumbled and fell and crept
through the snow that was wet with thaw, or across it when the night's
frost still crusted it beyond the weight of a man, searching for one
more squirrel, striving to achieve one more transmutation of furry leap
and scolding chatter into the lifts and tugs of a man's body that would
hoist the boat over the rim of shore-ice and slide it down into the
stream.

Not till the twentieth of May did the river break.  The down-stream
movement began at five in the morning, and already were the days so
long that Daylight sat up and watched the ice-run.  Elijah was too far
gone to be interested in the spectacle.  Though vaguely conscious, he
lay without movement while the ice tore by, great cakes of it caroming
against the bank, uprooting trees, and gouging out earth by hundreds of
tons.

All about them the land shook and reeled from the shock of these
tremendous collisions.  At the end of an hour the run stopped.
Somewhere below it was blocked by a jam.  Then the river began to rise,
lifting the ice on its breast till it was higher than the bank.  From
behind ever more water bore down, and ever more millions of tons of ice
added their weight to the congestion. The pressures and stresses became
terrific.  Huge cakes of ice were squeezed out till they popped into
the air like melon seeds squeezed from between the thumb and forefinger
of a child, while all along the banks a wall of ice was forced up.
When the jam broke, the noise of grinding and smashing redoubled.  For
another hour the run continued.  The river fell rapidly.  But the wall
of ice on top the bank, and extending down into the falling water,
remained.

The tail of the ice-run passed, and for the first time in six months
Daylight saw open water.  He knew that the ice had not yet passed out
from the upper reaches of the Stewart, that it lay in packs and jams in
those upper reaches, and that it might break loose and come down in a
second run any time; but the need was too desperate for him to linger.
Elijah was so far gone that he might pass at any moment.  As for
himself, he was not sure that enough strength remained in his wasted
muscles to launch the boat.  It was all a gamble.  If he waited for the
second ice-run, Elijah would surely die, and most probably himself.  If
he succeeded in launching the boat, if he kept ahead of the second
ice-run, if he did not get caught by some of the runs from the upper
Yukon; if luck favored in all these essential particulars, as well as
in a score of minor ones, they would reach Sixty Mile and be saved,
if--and again the if--he had strength enough to land the boat at Sixty
Mile and not go by.

He set to work.  The wall of ice was five feet above the ground on
which the boat rested.  First prospecting for the best launching-place,
he found where a huge cake of ice shelved upward from the river that
ran fifteen feet below to the top of the wall.  This was a score of
feet away, and at the end of an hour he had managed to get the boat
that far.  He was sick with nausea from his exertions, and at times it
seemed that blindness smote him, for he could not see, his eyes vexed
with spots and points of light that were as excruciating as
diamond-dust, his heart pounding up in his throat and suffocating him.
Elijah betrayed no interest, did not move nor open his eyes; and
Daylight fought out his battle alone.  At last, falling on his knees
from the shock of exertion, he got the boat poised on a secure balance
on top the wall.  Crawling on hands and knees, he placed in the boat
his rabbit-skin robe, the rifle, and the pail.  He did not bother with
the ax.  It meant an additional crawl of twenty feet and back, and if
the need for it should arise he well knew he would be past all need.

Elijah proved a bigger task than he had anticipated.  A few inches at a
time, resting in between, he dragged him over the ground and up a
broken rubble of ice to the side of the boat. But into the boat he
could not get him.  Elijah's limp body was far more difficult to lift
and handle than an equal weight of like dimensions but rigid.  Daylight
failed to hoist him, for the body collapsed at the middle like a
part-empty sack of corn. Getting into the boat, Daylight tried vainly
to drag his comrade in after him.  The best he could do was to get
Elijah's head and shoulders on top the gunwale.  When he released his
hold, to heave from farther down the body, Elijah promptly gave at the
middle and came down on the ice.

In despair, Daylight changed his tactics.  He struck the other in the
face.

"God Almighty, ain't you-all a man?" he cried.  "There! damn you-all!
there!"

At each curse he struck him on the cheeks, the nose, the mouth,
striving, by the shock of the hurt, to bring back the sinking soul and
far-wandering will of the man.  The eyes fluttered open.

"Now listen!" he shouted hoarsely.  "When I get your head to the
gunwale, hang on!  Hear me?  Hang on!  Bite into it with your teeth,
but HANG ON!"

The eyes fluttered down, but Daylight knew the message had been
received.  Again he got the helpless man's head and shoulders on the
gunwale.

"Hang on, damn you!  Bite in!" he shouted, as he shifted his grip lower
down.

One weak hand slipped off the gunwale, the fingers of the other hand
relaxed, but Elijah obeyed, and his teeth held on.  When the lift came,
his face ground forward, and the splintery wood tore and crushed the
skin from nose, lips, and chin; and, face downward, he slipped on and
down to the bottom of the boat till his limp middle collapsed across
the gunwale and his legs hung down outside.  But they were only his
legs, and Daylight shoved them in; after him.  Breathing heavily, he
turned Elijah over on his back, and covered him with his robes.

The final task remained--the launching of the boat.  This, of
necessity, was the severest of all, for he had been compelled to load
his comrade in aft of the balance.  It meant a supreme effort at
lifting.  Daylight steeled himself and began. Something must have
snapped, for, though he was unaware of it, the next he knew he was
lying doubled on his stomach across the sharp stern of the boat.
Evidently, and for the first time in his life, he had fainted.
Furthermore, it seemed to him that he was finished, that he had not one
more movement left in him, and that, strangest of all, he did not care.
Visions came to him, clear-cut and real, and concepts sharp as steel
cutting-edges. He, who all his days had looked on naked Life, had never
seen so much of Life's nakedness before.  For the first time he
experienced a doubt of his own glorious personality.  For the moment
Life faltered and forgot to lie.  After all, he was a little
earth-maggot, just like all the other earth-maggots, like the squirrel
he had eaten, like the other men he had seen fail and die, like Joe
Hines and Henry Finn, who had already failed and were surely dead, like
Elijah lying there uncaring, with his skinned face, in the bottom of
the boat.  Daylight's position was such that from where he lay he could
look up river to the bend, around which, sooner or later, the next
ice-run would come.  And as he looked he seemed to see back through the
past to a time when neither white man nor Indian was in the land, and
ever he saw the same Stewart River, winter upon winter, breasted with
ice, and spring upon spring bursting that ice asunder and running free.
And he saw also into an illimitable future, when the last generations
of men were gone from off the face of Alaska, when he, too, would be
gone, and he saw, ever remaining, that river, freezing and fresheting,
and running on and on.

Life was a liar and a cheat.  It fooled all creatures.  It had fooled
him, Burning Daylight, one of its chiefest and most joyous exponents.
He was nothing--a mere bunch of flesh and nerves and sensitiveness that
crawled in the muck for gold, that dreamed and aspired and gambled, and
that passed and was gone.  Only the dead things remained, the things
that were not flesh and nerves and sensitiveness, the sand and muck and
gravel, the stretching flats, the mountains, the river itself, freezing
and breaking, year by year, down all the years.  When all was said and
done, it was a scurvy game.  The dice were loaded.  Those that died did
not win, and all died.  Who won?  Not even Life, the stool-pigeon, the
arch-capper for the game--Life, the ever flourishing graveyard, the
everlasting funeral procession.

He drifted back to the immediate present for a moment and noted that
the river still ran wide open, and that a moose-bird, perched on the
bow of the boat, was surveying him impudently. Then he drifted dreamily
back to his meditations.

There was no escaping the end of the game.  He was doomed surely to be
out of it all.  And what of it?  He pondered that question again and
again.

Conventional religion had passed Daylight by.  He had lived a sort of
religion in his square dealing and right playing with other men, and he
had not indulged in vain metaphysics about future life.  Death ended
all.  He had always believed that, and been unafraid.  And at this
moment, the boat fifteen feet above the water and immovable, himself
fainting with weakness and without a particle of strength left in him,
he still believed that death ended all, and he was still unafraid.  His
views were too simply and solidly based to be overthrown by the first
squirm, or the last, of death-fearing life.

He had seen men and animals die, and into the field of his vision, by
scores, came such deaths.  He saw them over again, just as he had seen
them at the time, and they did not shake him.

What of it?  They were dead, and dead long since.  They weren't
bothering about it.  They weren't lying on their bellies across a boat
and waiting to die.  Death was easy--easier than he had ever imagined;
and, now that it was near, the thought of it made him glad.

A new vision came to him.  He saw the feverish city of his dream--the
gold metropolis of the North, perched above the Yukon on a high
earth-bank and far-spreading across the flat.  He saw the river
steamers tied to the bank and lined against it three deep; he saw the
sawmills working and the long dog-teams, with double sleds behind,
freighting supplies to the diggings.  And he saw, further, the
gambling-houses, banks, stock-exchanges, and all the gear and chips and
markers, the chances and opportunities, of a vastly bigger gambling
game than any he had ever seen.  It was sure hell, he thought, with the
hunch a-working and that big strike coming, to be out of it all.  Life
thrilled and stirred at the thought and once more began uttering his
ancient lies.

Daylight rolled over and off the boat, leaning against it as he sat on
the ice.  He wanted to be in on that strike.  And why shouldn't he?
Somewhere in all those wasted muscles of his was enough strength, if he
could gather it all at once, to up-end the boat and launch it.  Quite
irrelevantly the idea suggested itself of buying a share in the
Klondike town site from Harper and Joe Ladue.  They would surely sell a
third interest cheap.  Then, if the strike came on the Stewart, he
would be well in on it with the Elam Harnish town site; if on the
Klondike, he would not be quite out of it.

In the meantime, he would gather strength.  He stretched out on the ice
full length, face downward, and for half an hour he lay and rested.
Then he arose, shook the flashing blindness from his eyes, and took
hold of the boat.  He knew his condition accurately.  If the first
effort failed, the following efforts were doomed to fail.  He must pull
all his rallied strength into the one effort, and so thoroughly must he
put all of it in that there would be none left for other attempts.

He lifted, and he lifted with the soul of him as well as with the body,
consuming himself, body and spirit, in the effort.  The boat rose.  He
thought he was going to faint, but he continued to lift.  He felt the
boat give, as it started on its downward slide.  With the last shred of
his strength he precipitated himself into it, landing in a sick heap on
Elijah's legs.  He was beyond attempting to rise, and as he lay he
heard and felt the boat take the water.  By watching the tree-tops he
knew it was whirling.  A smashing shock and flying fragments of ice
told him that it had struck the bank.  A dozen times it whirled and
struck, and then it floated easily and free.

Daylight came to, and decided he had been asleep.  The sun denoted that
several hours had passed.  It was early afternoon. He dragged himself
into the stern and sat up.  The boat was in the middle of the stream.
The wooded banks, with their base-lines of flashing ice, were slipping
by.  Near him floated a huge, uprooted pine.  A freak of the current
brought the boat against it.  Crawling forward, he fastened the painter
to a root.

The tree, deeper in the water, was travelling faster, and the painter
tautened as the boat took the tow.  Then, with a last giddy look
around, wherein he saw the banks tilting and swaying and the sun
swinging in pendulum-sweep across the sky, Daylight wrapped himself in
his rabbit-skin robe, lay down in the bottom, and fell asleep.

When he awoke, it was dark night.  He was lying on his back, and he
could see the stars shining.  A subdued murmur of swollen waters could
be heard.  A sharp jerk informed him that the boat, swerving slack into
the painter, had been straightened out by the swifter-moving pine tree.
A piece of stray drift-ice thumped against the boat and grated along
its side.  Well, the following jam hadn't caught him yet, was his
thought, as he closed his eyes and slept again.

It was bright day when next he opened his eyes.  The sun showed it to
be midday.  A glance around at the far-away banks, and he knew that he
was on the mighty Yukon.  Sixty Mile could not be far away.  He was
abominably weak.  His movements were slow, fumbling, and inaccurate,
accompanied by panting and head-swimming, as he dragged himself into a
sitting-up position in the stern, his rifle beside him.  He looked a
long time at Elijah, but could not see whether he breathed or not, and
he was too immeasurably far away to make an investigation.

He fell to dreaming and meditating again, dreams and thoughts being
often broken by sketches of blankness, wherein he neither slept, nor
was unconscious, nor was aware of anything.  It seemed to him more like
cogs slipping in his brain.  And in this intermittent way he reviewed
the situation.  He was still alive, and most likely would be saved, but
how came it that he was not lying dead across the boat on top the
ice-rim?  Then he recollected the great final effort he had made.  But
why had he made it?  he asked himself.  It had not been fear of death.
He had not been afraid, that was sure.  Then he remembered the hunch
and the big strike he believed was coming, and he knew that the spur
had been his desire to sit in for a hand at that big game. And again
why?  What if he made his million?  He would die, just the same as
those that never won more than grub-stakes.  Then again why?  But the
blank stretches in his thinking process began to come more frequently,
and he surrendered to the delightful lassitude that was creeping over
him.

He roused with a start.  Something had whispered in him that he must
awake.  Abruptly he saw Sixty Mile, not a hundred feet away.

The current had brought him to the very door.  But the same current was
now sweeping him past and on into the down-river wilderness.  No one
was in sight.  The place might have been deserted, save for the smoke
he saw rising from the kitchen chimney.  He tried to call, but found he
had no voice left.  An unearthly guttural hiss alternately rattled and
wheezed in his throat.  He fumbled for the rifle, got it to his
shoulder, and pulled the trigger.  The recoil of the discharge tore
through his frame, racking it with a thousand agonies.  The rifle had
fallen across his knees, and an attempt to lift it to his shoulder
failed.  He knew he must be quick, and felt that he was fainting, so he
pulled the trigger of the gun where it lay.  This time it kicked off
and overboard.  But just before darkness rushed over him, he saw the
kitchen door open, and a woman look out of the big log house that was
dancing a monstrous jig among the trees.



CHAPTER IX

Ten days later, Harper and Joe Ladue arrived at Sixty Mile, and
Daylight, still a trifle weak, but strong enough to obey the hunch that
had come to him, traded a third interest in his Stewart town site for a
third interest in theirs on the Klondike.

They had faith in the Upper Country, and Harper left down-stream, with
a raft-load of supplies, to start a small post at the mouth of the
Klondike.

"Why don't you tackle Indian River, Daylight?" Harper advised, at
parting.  "There's whole slathers of creeks and draws draining in up
there, and somewhere gold just crying to be found.  That's my hunch.
There's a big strike coming, and Indian River ain't going to be a
million miles away."

"And the place is swarming with moose," Joe Ladue added.  "Bob
Henderson's up there somewhere, been there three years now, swearing
something big is going to happen, living off'n straight moose and
prospecting around like a crazy man."

Daylight decided to go Indian River a flutter, as he expressed it; but
Elijah could not be persuaded into accompanying him. Elijah's soul had
been seared by famine, and he was obsessed by fear of repeating the
experience.

"I jest can't bear to separate from grub," he explained.  "I know it's
downright foolishness, but I jest can't help it.  It's all I can do to
tear myself away from the table when I know I'm full to bustin' and
ain't got storage for another bite.  I'm going back to Circle to camp
by a cache until I get cured."

Daylight lingered a few days longer, gathering strength and arranging
his meagre outfit.  He planned to go in light, carrying a pack of
seventy-five pounds and making his five dogs pack as well, Indian
fashion, loading them with thirty pounds each. Depending on the report
of Ladue, he intended to follow Bob Henderson's example and live
practically on straight meat.  When Jack Kearns' scow, laden with the
sawmill from Lake Linderman, tied up at Sixty Mile, Daylight bundled
his outfit and dogs on board, turned his town-site application over to
Elijah to be filed, and the same day was landed at the mouth of Indian
River.

Forty miles up the river, at what had been described to him as Quartz
Creek, he came upon signs of Bob Henderson's work, and also at
Australia Creek, thirty miles farther on.  The weeks came and went, but
Daylight never encountered the other man.  However, he found moose
plentiful, and he and his dogs prospered on the meat diet.  He found
"pay" that was no more than "wages" on a dozen surface bars, and from
the generous spread of flour gold in the muck and gravel of a score of
creeks, he was more confident than ever that coarse gold in quantity
was waiting to be unearthed.  Often he turned his eyes to the northward
ridge of hills, and pondered if the gold came from them.  In the end,
he ascended Dominion Creek to its head, crossed the divide, and came
down on the tributary to the Klondike that was later to be called
Hunker Creek.  While on the divide, had he kept the big dome on his
right, he would have come down on the Gold Bottom, so named by Bob
Henderson, whom he would have found at work on it, taking out the first
pay-gold ever panned on the Klondike.  Instead, Daylight continued down
Hunker to the Klondike, and on to the summer fishing camp of the
Indians on the Yukon.

Here for a day he camped with Carmack, a squaw-man, and his Indian
brother-in-law, Skookum Jim, bought a boat, and, with his dogs on
board, drifted down the Yukon to Forty Mile.  August was drawing to a
close, the days were growing shorter, and winter was coming on.  Still
with unbounded faith in his hunch that a strike was coming in the Upper
Country, his plan was to get together a party of four or five, and, if
that was impossible, at least a partner, and to pole back up the river
before the freeze-up to do winter prospecting.  But the men of Forty
Mile were without faith.  The diggings to the westward were good enough
for them.

Then it was that Carmack, his brother-in-law, Skookum Jim, and Cultus
Charlie, another Indian, arrived in a canoe at Forty Mile, went
straight to the gold commissioner, and recorded three claims and a
discovery claim on Bonanza Creek.  After that, in the Sourdough Saloon,
that night, they exhibited coarse gold to the sceptical crowd.  Men
grinned and shook their heads.  They had seen the motions of a gold
strike gone through before.  This was too patently a scheme of Harper's
and Joe Ladue's, trying to entice prospecting in the vicinity of their
town site and trading post.  And who was Carmack?  A squaw-man.  And
who ever heard of a squaw-man striking anything?  And what was Bonanza
Creek? Merely a moose pasture, entering the Klondike just above its
mouth, and known to old-timers as Rabbit Creek.  Now if Daylight or Bob
Henderson had recorded claims and shown coarse gold, they'd known there
was something in it.  But Carmack, the squaw-man! And Skookum Jim!  And
Cultus Charlie!  No, no; that was asking too much.

Daylight, too, was sceptical, and this despite his faith in the Upper
Country.  Had he not, only a few days before, seen Carmack loafing with
his Indians and with never a thought of prospecting?

But at eleven that night, sitting on the edge of his bunk and unlacing
his moccasins, a thought came to him.  He put on his coat and hat and
went back to the Sourdough.  Carmack was still there, flashing his
coarse gold in the eyes of an unbelieving generation.  Daylight ranged
alongside of him and emptied Carmack's sack into a blower.  This he
studied for a long time. Then, from his own sack, into another blower,
he emptied several ounces of Circle City and Forty Mile gold.  Again,
for a long time, he studied and compared.  Finally, he pocketed his own
gold, returned Carmack's, and held up his hand for silence.

"Boys, I want to tell you-all something," he said.  "She's sure
come--the up-river strike.  And I tell you-all, clear and forcible,
this is it.  There ain't never been gold like that in a blower in this
country before.  It's new gold.  It's got more silver in it.  You-all
can see it by the color.  Carmack's sure made a strike.  Who-all's got
faith to come along with me?"

There were no volunteers.  Instead, laughter and jeers went up.

"Mebbe you got a town site up there," some one suggested.

"I sure have," was the retort, "and a third interest in Harper and
Ladue's.  And I can see my corner lots selling out for more than your
hen-scratching ever turned up on Birch Creek."

"That's all right, Daylight," one Curly Parson interposed soothingly.
"You've got a reputation, and we know you're dead sure on the square.
But you're as likely as any to be mistook on a flimflam game, such as
these loafers is putting up.  I ask you straight: When did Carmack do
this here prospecting?  You said yourself he was lying in camp, fishing
salmon along with his Siwash relations, and that was only the other
day."

"And Daylight told the truth," Carmack interrupted excitedly. "And I'm
telling the truth, the gospel truth.  I wasn't prospecting.  Hadn't no
idea of it.  But when Daylight pulls out, the very same day, who drifts
in, down river, on a raft-load of supplies, but Bob Henderson.  He'd
come out to Sixty Mile, planning to go back up Indian River and portage
the grub across the divide between Quartz Creek and Gold Bottom--"

"Where in hell's Gold Bottom?" Curly Parsons demanded.

"Over beyond Bonanza that was Rabbit Creek," the squaw-man went on.
"It's a draw of a big creek that runs into the Klondike. That's the way
I went up, but I come back by crossing the divide, keeping along the
crest several miles, and dropping down into Bonanza.  'Come along with
me, Carmack, and get staked,' says Bob Henderson to me.  'I've hit it
this time, on Gold Bottom.  I've took out forty-five ounces already.'
And I went along, Skookum Jim and Cultus Charlie, too.  And we all
staked on Gold Bottom. I come back by Bonanza on the chance of finding
a moose.  Along down Bonanza we stopped and cooked grub.  I went to
sleep, and what does Skookum Jim do but try his hand at prospecting.
He'd been watching Henderson, you see.  He goes right slap up to the
foot of a birch tree, first pan, fills it with dirt, and washes out
more'n a dollar coarse gold.  Then he wakes me up, and I goes at it.  I
got two and a half the first lick.  Then I named the creek 'Bonanza,'
staked Discovery, and we come here and recorded."

He looked about him anxiously for signs of belief, but found himself in
a circle of incredulous faces--all save Daylight, who had studied his
countenance while he told his story.

"How much is Harper and Ladue givin' you for manufacturing a stampede?"
some one asked.

"They don't know nothing about it," Carmack answered.  "I tell you it's
the God Almighty's truth.  I washed out three ounces in an hour."

"And there's the gold," Daylight said.  "I tell you-all boys they ain't
never been gold like that in the blower before.  Look at the color of
it."

"A trifle darker," Curly Parson said.  "Most likely Carmack's been
carrying a couple of silver dollars along in the same sack. And what's
more, if there's anything in it, why ain't Bob Henderson smoking along
to record?"

"He's up on Gold Bottom," Carmack explained.  "We made the strike
coming back."

A burst of laughter was his reward.

"Who-all'll go pardners with me and pull out in a poling-boat to-morrow
for this here Bonanza?" Daylight asked.

No one volunteered.

"Then who-all'll take a job from me, cash wages in advance, to pole up
a thousand pounds of grub?"

Curly Parsons and another, Pat Monahan, accepted, and, with his
customary speed, Daylight paid them their wages in advance and arranged
the purchase of the supplies, though he emptied his sack in doing so.
He was leaving the Sourdough, when he suddenly turned back to the bar
from the door.

"Got another hunch?" was the query.

"I sure have," he answered.  "Flour's sure going to be worth what a man
will pay for it this winter up on the Klondike.  Who'll lend me some
money?"

On the instant a score of the men who had declined to accompany him on
the wild-goose chase were crowding about him with proffered gold-sacks.

"How much flour do you want?" asked the Alaska Commercial Company's
storekeeper.

"About two ton."

The proffered gold-sacks were not withdrawn, though their owners were
guilty of an outrageous burst of merriment.

"What are you going to do with two tons?" the store-keeper demanded.

"Son," Daylight made reply, "you-all ain't been in this country long
enough to know all its curves.  I'm going to start a sauerkraut factory
and combined dandruff remedy."

He borrowed money right and left, engaging and paying six other men to
bring up the flour in half as many more poling-boats. Again his sack
was empty, and he was heavily in debt.

Curly Parsons bowed his head on the bar with a gesture of despair.

"What gets me," he moaned, "is what you're going to do with it all."

"I'll tell you-all in simple A, B, C and one, two, three." Daylight
held up one finger and began checking off.  "Hunch number one: a big
strike coming in Upper Country.  Hunch number two: Carmack's made it.
Hunch number three: ain't no hunch at all.  It's a cinch.  If one and
two is right, then flour just has to go sky-high.  If I'm riding
hunches one and two, I just got to ride this cinch, which is number
three.  If I'm right, flour'll balance gold on the scales this winter.
I tell you-all boys, when you-all got a hunch, play it for all it's
worth.  What's luck good for, if you-all ain't to ride it?  And when
you-all ride it, ride like hell.  I've been years in this country, just
waiting for the right hunch to come along.  And here she is. Well, I'm
going to play her, that's all.  Good night, you-all; good night."



CHAPTER X

Still men were without faith in the strike.  When Daylight, with his
heavy outfit of flour, arrived at the mouth of the Klondike, he found
the big flat as desolate and tenantless as ever.  Down close by the
river, Chief Isaac and his Indians were camped beside the frames on
which they were drying salmon. Several old-timers were also in camp
there.  Having finished their summer work on Ten Mile Creek, they had
come down the Yukon, bound for Circle City.  But at Sixty Mile they had
learned of the strike, and stopped off to look over the ground.  They
had just returned to their boat when Daylight landed his flour, and
their report was pessimistic.

"Damned moose-pasture," quoth one, Long Jim Harney, pausing to blow
into his tin mug of tea.  "Don't you have nothin' to do with it,
Daylight.  It's a blamed rotten sell.  They're just going through the
motions of a strike.  Harper and Ladue's behind it, and Carmack's the
stool-pigeon.  Whoever heard of mining a moose-pasture half a mile
between rim-rock and God alone knows how far to bed-rock!"

Daylight nodded sympathetically, and considered for a space.

"Did you-all pan any?" he asked finally.

"Pan hell!" was the indignant answer.  "Think I was born yesterday!
Only a chechaquo'd fool around that pasture long enough to fill a pan
of dirt.  You don't catch me at any such foolishness.  One look was
enough for me.  We're pulling on in the morning for Circle City.  I
ain't never had faith in this Upper Country.  Head-reaches of the
Tanana is good enough for me from now on, and mark my words, when the
big strike comes, she'll come down river.  Johnny, here, staked a
couple of miles below Discovery, but he don't know no better."  Johnny
looked shamefaced.

"I just did it for fun," he explained.  "I'd give my chance in the
creek for a pound of Star plug."

"I'll go you," Daylight said promptly.  "But don't you-all come
squealing if I take twenty or thirty thousand out of it."

Johnny grinned cheerfully.

"Gimme the tobacco," he said.

"Wish I'd staked alongside," Long Jim murmured plaintively.

"It ain't too late," Daylight replied.

"But it's a twenty-mile walk there and back."

"I'll stake it for you to-morrow when I go up," Daylight offered.

"Then you do the same as Johnny.  Get the fees from Tim Logan. He's
tending bar in the Sourdough, and he'll lend it to me.  Then fill in
your own name, transfer to me, and turn the papers over to Tim."

"Me, too," chimed in the third old-timer.

And for three pounds of Star plug chewing tobacco, Daylight bought
outright three five-hundred-foot claims on Bonanza.  He could still
stake another claim in his own name, the others being merely transfers.

"Must say you're almighty brash with your chewin' tobacco," Long Jim
grinned.  "Got a factory somewheres?"

"Nope, but I got a hunch," was the retort, "and I tell you-all it's
cheaper than dirt to ride her at the rate of three plugs for three
claims."

But an hour later, at his own camp, Joe Ladue strode in, fresh from
Bonanza Creek.  At first, non-committal over Carmack's strike, then,
later, dubious, he finally offered Daylight a hundred dollars for his
share in the town site.

"Cash?" Daylight queried.

"Sure.  There she is."

So saying, Ladue pulled out his gold-sack.  Daylight hefted it
absent-mindedly, and, still absent-mindedly, untied the strings and ran
some of the gold-dust out on his palm.  It showed darker than any dust
he had ever seen, with the exception of Carmack's. He ran the gold back
tied the mouth of the sack, and returned it to Ladue.

"I guess you-all need it more'n I do," was Daylight's comment.

"Nope; got plenty more," the other assured him.

"Where that come from?"

Daylight was all innocence as he asked the question, and Ladue received
the question as stolidly as an Indian.  Yet for a swift instant they
looked into each other's eyes, and in that instant an intangible
something seemed to flash out from all the body and spirit of Joe
Ladue.  And it seemed to Daylight that he had caught this flash, sensed
a secret something in the knowledge and plans behind the other's eyes.

"You-all know the creek better'n me," Daylight went on.  "And if my
share in the town site's worth a hundred to you-all with what you-all
know, it's worth a hundred to me whether I know it or not."

"I'll give you three hundred," Ladue offered desperately.

"Still the same reasoning.  No matter what I don't know, it's worth to
me whatever you-all are willing to pay for it."

Then it was that Joe Ladue shamelessly gave over.  He led Daylight away
from the camp and men and told him things in confidence.

"She's sure there," he said in conclusion.  "I didn't sluice it, or
cradle it.  I panned it, all in that sack, yesterday, on the rim-rock.
I tell you, you can shake it out of the grassroots. And what's on
bed-rock down in the bottom of the creek they ain't no way of tellin'.
But she's big, I tell you, big.  Keep it quiet, and locate all you can.
It's in spots, but I wouldn't be none surprised if some of them claims
yielded as high as fifty thousand.  The only trouble is that it's
spotted."

                         *   *  *

A month passed by, and Bonanza Creek remained quiet.  A sprinkling of
men had staked; but most of them, after staking, had gone on down to
Forty Mile and Circle City.  The few that possessed sufficient faith to
remain were busy building log cabins against the coming of winter.
Carmack and his Indian relatives were occupied in building a sluice box
and getting a head of water.  The work was slow, for they had to saw
their lumber by hand from the standing forest.  But farther down
Bonanza were four men who had drifted in from up river, Dan McGilvary,
Dave McKay, Dave Edwards, and Harry Waugh.  They were a quiet party,
neither asking nor giving confidences, and they herded by themselves.
But Daylight, who had panned the spotted rim of Carmack's claim and
shaken coarse gold from the grass-roots, and who had panned the rim at
a hundred other places up and down the length of the creek and found
nothing, was curious to know what lay on bed-rock.  He had noted the
four quiet men sinking a shaft close by the stream, and he had heard
their whip-saw going as they made lumber for the sluice boxes. He did
not wait for an invitation, but he was present the first day they
sluiced.  And at the end of five hours' shovelling for one man, he saw
them take out thirteen ounces and a half of gold.

It was coarse gold, running from pinheads to a twelve-dollar nugget,
and it had come from off bed-rock.  The first fall snow was flying that
day, and the Arctic winter was closing down; but Daylight had no eyes
for the bleak-gray sadness of the dying, short-lived summer.  He saw
his vision coming true, and on the big flat was upreared anew his
golden city of the snows.  Gold had been found on bed-rock.  That was
the big thing.  Carmack's strike was assured.  Daylight staked a claim
in his own name adjoining the three he had purchased with his plug
tobacco.  This gave him a block of property two thousand feet long and
extending in width from rim-rock to rim-rock.

Returning that night to his camp at the mouth of Klondike, he found in
it Kama, the Indian he had left at Dyea.  Kama was travelling by canoe,
bringing in the last mail of the year.  In his possession was some two
hundred dollars in gold-dust, which Daylight immediately borrowed.  In
return, he arranged to stake a claim for him, which he was to record
when he passed through Forty Mile.  When Kama departed next morning, he
carried a number of letters for Daylight, addressed to all the
old-timers down river, in which they were urged to come up immediately
and stake.

Also Kama carried letters of similar import, given him by the other men
on Bonanza.

"It will sure be the gosh-dangdest stampede that ever was," Daylight
chuckled, as he tried to vision the excited populations of Forty Mile
and Circle City tumbling into poling-boats and racing the hundreds of
miles up the Yukon; for he knew that his word would be unquestioningly
accepted.

With the arrival of the first stampeders, Bonanza Creek woke up, and
thereupon began a long-distance race between unveracity and truth,
wherein, lie no matter how fast, men were continually overtaken and
passed by truth.  When men who doubted Carmack's report of two and a
half to the pan, themselves panned two and a half, they lied and said
that they were getting an ounce.  And long ere the lie was fairly on
its way, they were getting not one ounce but five ounces.  This they
claimed was ten ounces; but when they filled a pan of dirt to prove the
lie, they washed out twelve ounces.  And so it went.  They continued
valiantly to lie, but the truth continued to outrun them.

One day in December Daylight filled a pan from bed rock on his own
claim and carried it into his cabin.  Here a fire burned and enabled
him to keep water unfrozen in a canvas tank.  He squatted over the tank
and began to wash.  Earth and gravel seemed to fill the pan.  As he
imparted to it a circular movement, the lighter, coarser particles
washed out over the edge.  At times he combed the surface with his
fingers, raking out handfuls of gravel.  The contents of the pan
diminished.  As it drew near to the bottom, for the purpose of fleeting
and tentative examination, he gave the pan a sudden sloshing movement,
emptying it of water.  And the whole bottom showed as if covered with
butter.  Thus the yellow gold flashed up as the muddy water was flirted
away.  It was gold--gold-dust, coarse gold, nuggets, large nuggets.  He
was all alone.  He set the pan down for a moment and thought long
thoughts.  Then he finished the washing, and weighed the result in his
scales.  At the rate of sixteen dollars to the ounce, the pan had
contained seven hundred and odd dollars.  It was beyond anything that
even he had dreamed.  His fondest anticipation's had gone no farther
than twenty or thirty thousand dollars to a claim; but here were claims
worth half a million each at the least, even if they were spotted.

He did not go back to work in the shaft that day, nor the next, nor the
next.  Instead, capped and mittened, a light stampeding outfit,
including his rabbit skin robe, strapped on his back, he was out and
away on a many-days' tramp over creeks and divides, inspecting the
whole neighboring territory.  On each creek he was entitled to locate
one claim, but he was chary in thus surrendering up his chances.  On
Hunker Creek only did he stake a claim.  Bonanza Creek he found staked
from mouth to source, while every little draw and pup and gulch that
drained into it was like-wise staked.  Little faith was had in these
side-streams. They had been staked by the hundreds of men who had
failed to get in on Bonanza.  The most popular of these creeks was
Adams.  The one least fancied was Eldorado, which flowed into Bonanza,
just above Karmack's Discovery claim.  Even Daylight disliked the looks
of Eldorado; but, still riding his hunch, he bought a half share in one
claim on it for half a sack of flour.  A month later he paid eight
hundred dollars for the adjoining claim.  Three months later, enlarging
this block of property, he paid forty thousand for a third claim; and,
though it was concealed in the future, he was destined, not long after,
to pay one hundred and fifty thousand for a fourth claim on the creek
that had been the least liked of all the creeks.

In the meantime, and from the day he washed seven hundred dollars from
a single pan and squatted over it and thought a long thought, he never
again touched hand to pick and shovel.  As he said to Joe Ladue the
night of that wonderful washing:--

"Joe, I ain't never going to work hard again.  Here's where I begin to
use my brains.  I'm going to farm gold.  Gold will grow gold if you-all
have the savvee and can get hold of some for seed.  When I seen them
seven hundred dollars in the bottom of the pan, I knew I had the seed
at last."

"Where are you going to plant it?" Joe Ladue had asked.

And Daylight, with a wave of his hand, definitely indicated the whole
landscape and the creeks that lay beyond the divides.

"There she is," he said, "and you-all just watch my smoke. There's
millions here for the man who can see them.  And I seen all them
millions this afternoon when them seven hundred dollars peeped up at me
from the bottom of the pan and chirruped, 'Well, if here ain't Burning
Daylight come at last.'"



CHAPTER XI

The hero of the Yukon in the younger days before the Carmack strike,
Burning Daylight now became the hero of the strike.  The story of his
hunch and how he rode it was told up and down the land.  Certainly he
had ridden it far and away beyond the boldest, for no five of the
luckiest held the value in claims that he held.  And, furthermore, he
was still riding the hunch, and with no diminution of daring.  The wise
ones shook their heads and prophesied that he would lose every ounce he
had won. He was speculating, they contended, as if the whole country
was made of gold, and no man could win who played a placer strike in
that fashion.

On the other hand, his holdings were reckoned as worth millions, and
there were men so sanguine that they held the man a fool who
coppered[6] any bet Daylight laid.  Behind his magnificent
free-handedness and careless disregard for money were hard, practical
judgment, imagination and vision, and the daring of the big gambler.
He foresaw what with his own eyes he had never seen, and he played to
win much or lose all.

"There's too much gold here in Bonanza to be just a pocket," he argued.
"It's sure come from a mother-lode somewhere, and other creeks will
show up.  You-all keep your eyes on Indian River. The creeks that drain
that side the Klondike watershed are just as likely to have gold as the
creeks that drain this side."

And he backed this opinion to the extent of grub-staking half a dozen
parties of prospectors across the big divide into the Indian River
region.  Other men, themselves failing to stake on lucky creeks, he put
to work on his Bonanza claims.  And he paid them well--sixteen dollars
a day for an eight-hour shift, and he ran three shifts.  He had grub to
start them on, and when, on the last water, the Bella arrived loaded
with provisions, he traded a warehouse site to Jack Kearns for a supply
of grub that lasted all his men through the winter of 1896.  And that
winter, when famine pinched, and flour sold for two dollars a pound, he
kept three shifts of men at work on all four of the Bonanza claims.
Other mine-owners paid fifteen dollars a day to their men; but he had
been the first to put men to work, and from the first he paid them a
full ounce a day.  One result was that his were picked men, and they
more than earned their higher pay.

One of his wildest plays took place in the early winter after the
freeze-up.  Hundreds of stampeders, after staking on other creeks than
Bonanza, had gone on disgruntled down river to Forty Mile and Circle
City.  Daylight mortgaged one of his Bonanza dumps with the Alaska
Commercial Company, and tucked a letter of credit into his pouch.  Then
he harnessed his dogs and went down on the ice at a pace that only he
could travel.  One Indian down, another Indian back, and four teams of
dogs was his record.  And at Forty Mile and Circle City he bought
claims by the score. Many of these were to prove utterly worthless, but
some few of them were to show up more astoundingly than any on Bonanza.
He bought right and left, paying as low as fifty dollars and as high as
five thousand.  This highest one he bought in the Tivoli Saloon.  It
was an upper claim on Eldorado, and when he agreed to the price, Jacob
Wilkins, an old-timer just returned from a look at the moose-pasture,
got up and left the room, saying:--

"Daylight, I've known you seven year, and you've always seemed sensible
till now.  And now you're just letting them rob you right and left.
That's what it is--robbery.  Five thousand for a claim on that damned
moose-pasture is bunco.  I just can't stay in the room and see you
buncoed that way."

"I tell you-all," Daylight answered, "Wilkins, Carmack's strike's so
big that we-all can't see it all.  It's a lottery.  Every claim I buy
is a ticket.  And there's sure going to be some capital prizes."

Jacob Wilkins, standing in the open door, sniffed incredulously.

"Now supposing, Wilkins," Daylight went on, "supposing you-all knew it
was going to rain soup.  What'd you-all do?  Buy spoons, of course.
Well, I'm sure buying spoons.  She's going to rain soup up there on the
Klondike, and them that has forks won't be catching none of it."

But Wilkins here slammed the door behind him, and Daylight broke off to
finish the purchase of the claim.

Back in Dawson, though he remained true to his word and never touched
hand to pick and shovel, he worked as hard as ever in his life.  He had
a thousand irons in the fire, and they kept him busy.  Representation
work was expensive, and he was compelled to travel often over the
various creeks in order to decide which claims should lapse and which
should be retained.  A quartz miner himself in his early youth, before
coming to Alaska, he dreamed of finding the mother-lode.  A placer camp
he knew was ephemeral, while a quartz camp abided, and he kept a score
of men in the quest for months.  The mother-lode was never found, and,
years afterward, he estimated that the search for it had cost him fifty
thousand dollars.

But he was playing big.  Heavy as were his expenses, he won more
heavily.  He took lays, bought half shares, shared with the men he
grub-staked, and made personal locations.  Day and night his dogs were
ready, and he owned the fastest teams; so that when a stampede to a new
discovery was on, it was Burning Daylight to the fore through the
longest, coldest nights till he blazed his stakes next to Discovery.
In one way or another (to say nothing of the many worthless creeks) he
came into possession of properties on the good creeks, such as Sulphur,
Dominion, Excelsis, Siwash, Cristo, Alhambra, and Doolittle.  The
thousands he poured out flowed back in tens of thousands.  Forty Mile
men told the story of his two tons of flour, and made calculations of
what it had returned him that ranged from half a million to a million.
One thing was known beyond all doubt, namely, that the half share in
the first Eldorado claim, bought by him for a half sack of flour, was
worth five hundred thousand.  On the other hand, it was told that when
Freda, the dancer, arrived from over the passes in a Peterborough canoe
in the midst of a drive of mush-ice on the Yukon, and when she offered
a thousand dollars for ten sacks and could find no sellers, he sent the
flour to her as a present without ever seeing her.  In the same way ten
sacks were sent to the lone Catholic priest who was starting the first
hospital.

His generosity was lavish.  Others called it insane.  At a time when,
riding his hunch, he was getting half a million for half a sack of
flour, it was nothing less than insanity to give twenty whole sacks to
a dancing-girl and a priest.  But it was his way. Money was only a
marker.  It was the game that counted with him. The possession of
millions made little change in him, except that he played the game more
passionately.  Temperate as he had always been, save on rare occasions,
now that he had the wherewithal for unlimited drinks and had daily
access to them, he drank even less.  The most radical change lay in
that, except when on trail, he no longer did his own cooking.  A
broken-down miner lived in his log cabin with him and now cooked for
him.  But it was the same food: bacon, beans, flour, prunes, dried
fruits, and rice. He still dressed as formerly: overalls, German socks,
moccasins, flannel shirt, fur cap, and blanket coat.  He did not take
up with cigars, which cost, the cheapest, from half a dollar to a
dollar each.  The same Bull Durham and brown-paper cigarette,
hand-rolled, contented him.  It was true that he kept more dogs, and
paid enormous prices for them.  They were not a luxury, but a matter of
business.  He needed speed in his travelling and stampeding.  And by
the same token, he hired a cook.  He was too busy to cook for himself,
that was all.  It was poor business, playing for millions, to spend
time building fires and boiling water.

Dawson grew rapidly that winter of 1896.  Money poured in on Daylight
from the sale of town lots.  He promptly invested it where it would
gather more.  In fact, he played the dangerous game of pyramiding, and
no more perilous pyramiding than in a placer camp could be imagined.
But he played with his eyes wide open.

"You-all just wait till the news of this strike reaches the Outside,"
he told his old-timer cronies in the Moosehorn Saloon. "The news won't
get out till next spring.  Then there's going to be three rushes.  A
summer rush of men coming in light; a fall rush of men with outfits;
and a spring rush, the next year after that, of fifty thousand.
You-all won't be able to see the landscape for chechaquos.  Well,
there's the summer and fall rush of 1897 to commence with.  What are
you-all going to do about it?"

"What are you going to do about it?" a friend demanded.

"Nothing," he answered.  "I've sure already done it.  I've got a dozen
gangs strung out up the Yukon getting out logs.  You-all'll see their
rafts coming down after the river breaks.  Cabins! They sure will be
worth what a man can pay for them next fall. Lumber! It will sure go to
top-notch.  I've got two sawmills freighting in over the passes.
They'll come down as soon as the lakes open up.  And if you-all are
thinking of needing lumber, I'll make you-all contracts right
now--three hundred dollars a thousand, undressed."

Corner lots in desirable locations sold that winter for from ten to
thirty thousand dollars.  Daylight sent word out over the trails and
passes for the newcomers to bring down log-rafts, and, as a result, the
summer of 1897 saw his sawmills working day and night, on three shifts,
and still he had logs left over with which to build cabins.  These
cabins, land included, sold at from one to several thousand dollars.
Two-story log buildings, in the business part of town, brought him from
forty to fifty thousand dollars apiece.  These fresh accretions of
capital were immediately invested in other ventures.  He turned gold
over and over, until everything that he touched seemed to turn to gold.

But that first wild winter of Carmack's strike taught Daylight many
things.  Despite the prodigality of his nature, he had poise.  He
watched the lavish waste of the mushroom millionaires, and failed quite
to understand it.  According to his nature and outlook, it was all very
well to toss an ante away in a night's frolic.  That was what he had
done the night of the poker-game in Circle City when he lost fifty
thousand--all that he possessed. But he had looked on that fifty
thousand as a mere ante.  When it came to millions, it was different.
Such a fortune was a stake, and was not to be sown on bar-room floors,
literally sown, flung broadcast out of the moosehide sacks by drunken
millionaires who had lost all sense of proportion.  There was McMann,
who ran up a single bar-room bill of thirty-eight thousand dollars; and
Jimmie the Rough, who spent one hundred thousand a month for four
months in riotous living, and then fell down drunk in the snow one
March night and was frozen to death; and Swiftwater Bill, who, after
spending three valuable claims in an extravagance of debauchery,
borrowed three thousand dollars with which to leave the country, and
who, out of this sum, because the lady-love that had jilted him liked
eggs, cornered the one hundred and ten dozen eggs on the Dawson market,
paying twenty-four dollars a dozen for them and promptly feeding them
to the wolf-dogs.

Champagne sold at from forty to fifty dollars a quart, and canned
oyster stew at fifteen dollars.  Daylight indulged in no such luxuries.
He did not mind treating a bar-room of men to whiskey at fifty cents a
drink, but there was somewhere in his own extravagant nature a sense of
fitness and arithmetic that revolted against paying fifteen dollars for
the contents of an oyster can.  On the other hand, he possibly spent
more money in relieving hard-luck cases than did the wildest of the new
millionaires on insane debauchery.  Father Judge, of the hospital,
could have told of far more important donations than that first ten
sacks of flour.  And old-timers who came to Daylight invariably went
away relieved according to their need. But fifty dollars for a quart of
fizzy champagne!  That was appalling.

And yet he still, on occasion, made one of his old-time hell-roaring
nights.  But he did so for different reasons. First, it was expected of
him because it had been his way in the old days.  And second, he could
afford it.  But he no longer cared quite so much for that form of
diversion.  He had developed, in a new way, the taste for power.  It
had become a lust with him.  By far the wealthiest miner in Alaska, he
wanted to be still wealthier.  It was a big game he was playing in, and
he liked it better than any other game.  In a way, the part he played
was creative.  He was doing something.  And at no time, striking
another chord of his nature, could he take the joy in a million-dollar
Eldorado dump that was at all equivalent to the joy he took in watching
his two sawmills working and the big down river log-rafts swinging into
the bank in the big eddy just above Moosehide Mountain.  Gold, even on
the scales, was, after all, an abstraction.  It represented things and
the power to do.  But the sawmills were the things themselves, concrete
and tangible, and they were things that were a means to the doing of
more things. They were dreams come true, hard and indubitable
realizations of fairy gossamers.

With the summer rush from the Outside came special correspondents for
the big newspapers and magazines, and one and all, using unlimited
space, they wrote Daylight up; so that, so far as the world was
concerned, Daylight loomed the largest figure in Alaska.  Of course,
after several months, the world became interested in the Spanish War,
and forgot all about him; but in the Klondike itself Daylight still
remained the most prominent figure.  Passing along the streets of
Dawson, all heads turned to follow him, and in the saloons chechaquos
watched him awesomely, scarcely taking their eyes from him as long as
he remained in their range of vision.  Not alone was he the richest man
in the country, but he was Burning Daylight, the pioneer, the man who,
almost in the midst of antiquity of that young land, had crossed the
Chilcoot and drifted down the Yukon to meet those elder giants, Al Mayo
and Jack McQuestion.  He was the Burning Daylight of scores of wild
adventures, the man who carried word to the ice-bound whaling fleet
across the tundra wilderness to the Arctic Sea, who raced the mail from
Circle to Salt Water and back again in sixty days, who saved the whole
Tanana tribe from perishing in the winter of '91--in short, the man who
smote the chechaquos' imaginations more violently than any other dozen
men rolled into one.

He had the fatal facility for self-advertisement.  Things he did, no
matter how adventitious or spontaneous, struck the popular imagination
as remarkable.  And the latest thing he had done was always on men's
lips, whether it was being first in the heartbreaking stampede to
Danish Creek, in killing the record baldface grizzly over on Sulphur
Creek, or in winning the single-paddle canoe race on the Queen's
Birthday, after being forced to participate at the last moment by the
failure of the sourdough representative to appear.  Thus, one night in
the Moosehorn, he locked horns with Jack Kearns in the long-promised
return game of poker.  The sky and eight o'clock in the morning were
made the limits, and at the close of the game Daylight's winnings were
two hundred and thirty thousand dollars.  To Jack Kearns, already a
several-times millionaire, this loss was not vital.  But the whole
community was thrilled by the size of the stakes, and each one of the
dozen correspondents in the field sent out a sensational article.


[6] To copper: a term in faro, meaning to play a card to lose.



CHAPTER XII

Despite his many sources of revenue, Daylight's pyramiding kept him
pinched for cash throughout the first winter.  The pay-gravel, thawed
on bed-rock and hoisted to the surface, immediately froze again.  Thus
his dumps, containing several millions of gold, were inaccessible.  Not
until the returning sun thawed the dumps and melted the water to wash
them was he able to handle the gold they contained.  And then he found
himself with a surplus of gold, deposited in the two newly organized
banks; and he was promptly besieged by men and groups of men to enlist
his capital in their enterprises.

But he elected to play his own game, and he entered combinations only
when they were generally defensive or offensive.  Thus, though he had
paid the highest wages, he joined the Mine-owners' Association,
engineered the fight, and effectually curbed the growing
insubordination of the wage-earners.  Times had changed. The old days
were gone forever.  This was a new era, and Daylight, the wealthy
mine-owner, was loyal to his class affiliations.  It was true, the
old-timers who worked for him, in order to be saved from the club of
the organized owners, were made foremen over the gang of chechaquos;
but this, with Daylight, was a matter of heart, not head.  In his heart
he could not forget the old days, while with his head he played the
economic game according to the latest and most practical methods.

But outside of such group-combinations of exploiters, he refused to
bind himself to any man's game.  He was playing a great lone hand, and
he needed all his money for his own backing.  The newly founded
stock-exchange interested him keenly.  He had never before seen such an
institution, but he was quick to see its virtues and to utilize it.
Most of all, it was gambling, and on many an occasion not necessary for
the advancement of his own schemes, he, as he called it, went the
stock-exchange a flutter, out of sheer wantonness and fun.

"It sure beats faro," was his comment one day, when, after keeping the
Dawson speculators in a fever for a week by alternate bulling and
bearing, he showed his hand and cleaned up what would have been a
fortune to any other man.

Other men, having made their strike, had headed south for the States,
taking a furlough from the grim Arctic battle.  But, asked when he was
going Outside, Daylight always laughed and said when he had finished
playing his hand.  He also added that a man was a fool to quit a game
just when a winning hand had been dealt him.

It was held by the thousands of hero-worshipping chechaquos that
Daylight was a man absolutely without fear.  But Bettles and Dan
MacDonald and other sourdoughs shook their heads and laughed as they
mentioned women.  And they were right.  He had always been afraid of
them from the time, himself a lad of seventeen, when Queen Anne, of
Juneau, made open and ridiculous love to him.  For that matter, he
never had known women.  Born in a mining-camp where they were rare and
mysterious, having no sisters, his mother dying while he was an infant,
he had never been in contact with them.  True, running away from Queen
Anne, he had later encountered them on the Yukon and cultivated an
acquaintance with them--the pioneer ones who crossed the passes on the
trail of the men who had opened up the first diggings.  But no lamb had
ever walked with a wolf in greater fear and trembling than had he
walked with them.  It was a matter of masculine pride that he should
walk with them, and he had done so in fair seeming; but women had
remained to him a closed book, and he preferred a game of solo or
seven-up any time.

And now, known as the King of the Klondike, carrying several other
royal titles, such as Eldorado King, Bonanza King, the Lumber Baron,
and the Prince of the Stampeders, not to omit the proudest appellation
of all, namely, the Father of the Sourdoughs, he was more afraid of
women than ever.  As never before they held out their arms to him, and
more women were flocking into the country day by day.  It mattered not
whether he sat at dinner in the gold commissioner's house, called for
the drinks in a dancehall, or submitted to an interview from the woman
representative of the New York Sun, one and all of them held out their
arms.

There was one exception, and that was Freda, the girl that danced, and
to whom he had given the flour.  She was the only woman in whose
company he felt at ease, for she alone never reached out her arms.  And
yet it was from her that he was destined to receive next to his
severest fright.  It came about in the fall of 1897.  He was returning
from one of his dashes, this time to inspect Henderson, a creek that
entered the Yukon just below the Stewart.  Winter had come on with a
rush, and he fought his way down the Yukon seventy miles in a frail
Peterborough canoe in the midst of a run of mush-ice.  Hugging the
rim-ice that had already solidly formed, he shot across the ice-spewing
mouth of the Klondike just in time to see a lone man dancing excitedly
on the rim and pointing into the water.  Next, he saw the fur-clad body
of a woman, face under, sinking in the midst of the driving mush-ice.
A lane opening in the swirl of the current, it was a matter of seconds
to drive the canoe to the spot, reach to the shoulder in the water, and
draw the woman gingerly to the canoe's side.  It was Freda.  And all
might yet have been well with him, had she not, later, when brought
back to consciousness, blazed at him with angry blue eyes and demanded:
"Why did you?  Oh, why did you?"

This worried him.  In the nights that followed, instead of sinking
immediately to sleep as was his wont, he lay awake, visioning her face
and that blue blaze of wrath, and conning her words over and over.
They rang with sincerity.  The reproach was genuine.  She had meant
just what she said.  And still he pondered.

The next time he encountered her she had turned away from him angrily
and contemptuously.  And yet again, she came to him to beg his pardon,
and she dropped a hint of a man somewhere, sometime,--she said not
how,--who had left her with no desire to live.  Her speech was frank,
but incoherent, and all he gleaned from it was that the event, whatever
it was, had happened years before.  Also, he gleaned that she had loved
the man.

That was the thing--love.  It caused the trouble.  It was more terrible
than frost or famine.  Women were all very well, in themselves good to
look upon and likable; but along came this thing called love, and they
were seared to the bone by it, made so irrational that one could never
guess what they would do next.

This Freda-woman was a splendid creature, full-bodied, beautiful, and
nobody's fool; but love had come along and soured her on the world,
driving her to the Klondike and to suicide so compellingly that she was
made to hate the man that saved her life.

Well, he had escaped love so far, just as he had escaped smallpox; yet
there it was, as contagious as smallpox, and a whole lot worse in
running its course.  It made men and women do such fearful and
unreasonable things.  It was like delirium tremens, only worse.  And if
he, Daylight, caught it, he might have it as badly as any of them.  It
was lunacy, stark lunacy, and contagious on top of it all.  A half
dozen young fellows were crazy over Freda.  They all wanted to marry
her.  Yet she, in turn, was crazy over that some other fellow on the
other side of the world, and would have nothing to do with them.

But it was left to the Virgin to give him his final fright.  She was
found one morning dead in her cabin.  A shot through the head had done
it, and she had left no message, no explanation.  Then came the talk.
Some wit, voicing public opinion, called it a case of too much
Daylight.  She had killed herself because of him.  Everybody knew this,
and said so.  The correspondents wrote it up, and once more Burning
Daylight, King of the Klondike, was sensationally featured in the
Sunday supplements of the United States.  The Virgin had straightened
up, so the feature-stories ran, and correctly so.  Never had she
entered a Dawson City dance-hall.  When she first arrived from Circle
City, she had earned her living by washing clothes.  Next, she had
bought a sewing-machine and made men's drill parkas, fur caps, and
moosehide mittens.  Then she had gone as a clerk into the First Yukon
Bank.  All this, and more, was known and told, though one and all were
agreed that Daylight, while the cause, had been the innocent cause of
her untimely end.

And the worst of it was that Daylight knew it was true.  Always would
he remember that last night he had seen her.  He had thought nothing of
it at the time; but, looking back, he was haunted by every little thing
that had happened.  In the light of the tragic event, he could
understand everything--her quietness, that calm certitude as if all
vexing questions of living had been smoothed out and were gone, and
that certain ethereal sweetness about all that she had said and done
that had been almost maternal.  He remembered the way she had looked at
him, how she had laughed when he narrated Mickey Dolan's mistake in
staking the fraction on Skookum Gulch.  Her laughter had been lightly
joyous, while at the same time it had lacked its oldtime robustness.
Not that she had been grave or subdued.  On the contrary, she had been
so patently content, so filled with peace.

She had fooled him, fool that he was.  He had even thought that night
that her feeling for him had passed, and he had taken delight in the
thought, and caught visions of the satisfying future friendship that
would be theirs with this perturbing love out of the way.

And then, when he stood at the door, cap in hand, and said good night.
It had struck him at the time as a funny and embarrassing thing, her
bending over his hand and kissing it.  He had felt like a fool, but he
shivered now when he looked back on it and felt again the touch of her
lips on his hand.  She was saying good-by, an eternal good-by, and he
had never guessed.  At that very moment, and for all the moments of the
evening, coolly and deliberately, as he well knew her way, she had been
resolved to die.  If he had only known it!  Untouched by the contagious
malady himself, nevertheless he would have married her if he had had
the slightest inkling of what she contemplated.  And yet he knew,
furthermore, that hers was a certain stiff-kneed pride that would not
have permitted her to accept marriage as an act of philanthropy.  There
had really been no saving her, after all. The love-disease had fastened
upon her, and she had been doomed from the first to perish of it.

Her one possible chance had been that he, too, should have caught it.
And he had failed to catch it.  Most likely, if he had, it would have
been from Freda or some other woman.  There was Dartworthy, the college
man who had staked the rich fraction on Bonanza above Discovery.
Everybody knew that old Doolittle's daughter, Bertha, was madly in love
with him.  Yet, when he contracted the disease, of all women, it had
been with the wife of Colonel Walthstone, the great Guggenhammer mining
expert. Result, three lunacy cases: Dartworthy selling out his mine for
one-tenth its value; the poor woman sacrificing her respectability and
sheltered nook in society to flee with him in an open boat down the
Yukon; and Colonel Walthstone, breathing murder and destruction, taking
out after them in another open boat.  The whole impending tragedy had
moved on down the muddy Yukon, passing Forty Mile and Circle and losing
itself in the wilderness beyond.  But there it was, love, disorganizing
men's and women's lives, driving toward destruction and death, turning
topsy-turvy everything that was sensible and considerate, making bawds
or suicides out of virtuous women, and scoundrels and murderers out of
men who had always been clean and square.

For the first time in his life Daylight lost his nerve.  He was badly
and avowedly frightened.  Women were terrible creatures, and the
love-germ was especially plentiful in their neighborhood.

And they were so reckless, so devoid of fear.  THEY were not frightened
by what had happened to the Virgin.  They held out their arms to him
more seductively than ever.  Even without his fortune, reckoned as a
mere man, just past thirty, magnificently strong and equally
good-looking and good-natured, he was a prize for most normal women.
But when to his natural excellences were added the romance that linked
with his name and the enormous wealth that was his, practically every
free woman he encountered measured him with an appraising and delighted
eye, to say nothing of more than one woman who was not free.  Other men
might have been spoiled by this and led to lose their heads; but the
only effect on him was to increase his fright.  As a result he refused
most invitations to houses where women might be met, and frequented
bachelor boards and the Moosehorn Saloon, which had no dance-hall
attached.



CHAPTER XIII

Six thousand spent the winter of 1897 in Dawson, work on the creeks
went on apace, while beyond the passes it was reported that one hundred
thousand more were waiting for the spring.  Late one brief afternoon,
Daylight, on the benches between French Hill and Skookum Hill, caught a
wider vision of things.  Beneath him lay the richest part of Eldorado
Creek, while up and down Bonanza he could see for miles.  It was a
scene of a vast devastation. The hills, to their tops, had been shorn
of trees, and their naked sides showed signs of goring and perforating
that even the mantle of snow could not hide.  Beneath him, in every
direction were the cabins of men.  But not many men were visible.  A
blanket of smoke filled the valleys and turned the gray day to
melancholy twilight.  Smoke arose from a thousand holes in the snow,
where, deep down on bed-rock, in the frozen muck and gravel, men crept
and scratched and dug, and ever built more fires to break the grip of
the frost.  Here and there, where new shafts were starting, these fires
flamed redly.  Figures of men crawled out of the holes, or disappeared
into them, or, on raised platforms of hand-hewn timber, windlassed the
thawed gravel to the surface, where it immediately froze.  The wreckage
of the spring washing appeared everywhere--piles of sluice-boxes,
sections of elevated flumes, huge water-wheels,--all the debris of an
army of gold-mad men.

"It-all's plain gophering," Daylight muttered aloud.

He looked at the naked hills and realized the enormous wastage of wood
that had taken place.  From this bird's-eye view he realized the
monstrous confusion of their excited workings.  It was a gigantic
inadequacy.  Each worked for himself, and the result was chaos.  In
this richest of diggings it cost out by their feverish, unthinking
methods another dollar was left hopelessly in the earth.  Given another
year, and most of the claims would be worked out, and the sum of the
gold taken out would no more than equal what was left behind.

Organization was what was needed, he decided; and his quick imagination
sketched Eldorado Creek, from mouth to source, and from mountain top to
mountain top, in the hands of one capable management.  Even
steam-thawing, as yet untried, but bound to come, he saw would be a
makeshift.  What should be done was to hydraulic the valley sides and
benches, and then, on the creek bottom, to use gold-dredges such as he
had heard described as operating in California.

There was the very chance for another big killing.  He had wondered
just what was precisely the reason for the Guggenhammers and the big
English concerns sending in their high-salaried experts.  That was
their scheme.  That was why they had approached him for the sale of
worked-out claims and tailings. They were content to let the small
mine-owners gopher out what they could, for there would be millions in
the leavings.

And, gazing down on the smoky inferno of crude effort, Daylight
outlined the new game he would play, a game in which the Guggenhammers
and the rest would have to reckon with him.  Cut along with the delight
in the new conception came a weariness. He was tired of the long Arctic
years, and he was curious about the Outside--the great world of which
he had heard other men talk and of which he was as ignorant as a child.
There were games out there to play.  It was a larger table, and there
was no reason why he with his millions should not sit in and take a
hand.  So it was, that afternoon on Skookum Hill, that he resolved to
play this last best Klondike hand and pull for the Outside.

It took time, however.  He put trusted agents to work on the heels of
great experts, and on the creeks where they began to buy he likewise
bought.  Wherever they tried to corner a worked-out creek, they found
him standing in the way, owning blocks of claims or artfully scattered
claims that put all their plans to naught.

"I play you-all wide open to win--am I right" he told them once, in a
heated conference.

Followed wars, truces, compromises, victories, and defeats.  By 1898,
sixty thousand men were on the Klondike and all their fortunes and
affairs rocked back and forth and were affected by the battles Daylight
fought.  And more and more the taste for the larger game urged in
Daylight's mouth.  Here he was already locked in grapples with the
great Guggenhammers, and winning, fiercely winning.  Possibly the
severest struggle was waged on Ophir, the veriest of moose-pastures,
whose low-grade dirt was valuable only because of its vastness.  The
ownership of a block of seven claims in the heart of it gave Daylight
his grip and they could not come to terms.  The Guggenhammer experts
concluded that it was too big for him to handle, and when they gave him
an ultimatum to that effect he accepted and bought them out.

The plan was his own, but he sent down to the States for competent
engineers to carry it out.  In the Rinkabilly watershed, eighty miles
away, he built his reservoir, and for eighty miles the huge wooden
conduit carried the water across country to Ophir.  Estimated at three
millions, the reservoir and conduit cost nearer four.  Nor did he stop
with this.  Electric power plants were installed, and his workings were
lighted as well as run by electricity.  Other sourdoughs, who had
struck it rich in excess of all their dreams, shook their heads
gloomily, warned him that he would go broke, and declined to invest in
so extravagant a venture.

But Daylight smiled, and sold out the remainder of his town-site
holdings.  He sold at the right time, at the height of the placer boom.
When he prophesied to his old cronies, in the Moosehorn Saloon, that
within five years town lots in Dawson could not be given away, while
the cabins would be chopped up for firewood, he was laughed at roundly,
and assured that the mother-lode would be found ere that time.  But he
went ahead, when his need for lumber was finished, selling out his
sawmills as well.  Likewise, he began to get rid of his scattered
holdings on the various creeks, and without thanks to any one he
finished his conduit, built his dredges, imported his machinery, and
made the gold of Ophir immediately accessible.  And he, who five years
before had crossed over the divide from Indian River and threaded the
silent wilderness, his dogs packing Indian fashion, himself living
Indian fashion on straight moose meat, now heard the hoarse whistles
calling his hundreds of laborers to work, and watched them toil under
the white glare of the arc-lamps.

But having done the thing, he was ready to depart.  And when he let the
word go out, the Guggenhammers vied with the English concerns and with
a new French company in bidding for Ophir and all its plant.  The
Guggenhammers bid highest, and the price they paid netted Daylight a
clean million.  It was current rumor that he was worth anywhere from
twenty to thirty millions.  But he alone knew just how he stood, and
that, with his last claim sold and the table swept clean of his
winnings, he had ridden his hunch to the tune of just a trifle over
eleven millions.

His departure was a thing that passed into the history of the Yukon
along with his other deeds.  All the Yukon was his guest, Dawson the
seat of the festivity.  On that one last night no man's dust save his
own was good.  Drinks were not to be purchased.  Every saloon ran open,
with extra relays of exhausted bartenders, and the drinks were given
away.  A man who refused this hospitality, and persisted in paying,
found a dozen fights on his hands.  The veriest chechaquos rose up to
defend the name of Daylight from such insult.  And through it all, on
moccasined feet, moved Daylight, hell-roaring Burning Daylight,
over-spilling with good nature and camaraderie, howling his he-wolf
howl and claiming the night as his, bending men's arms down on the
bars, performing feats of strength, his bronzed face flushed with
drink, his black eyes flashing, clad in overalls and blanket coat, his
ear-flaps dangling and his gauntleted mittens swinging from the cord
across the shoulders.  But this time it was neither an ante nor a stake
that he threw away, but a mere marker in the game that he who held so
many markers would not miss.

As a night, it eclipsed anything that Dawson had ever seen.  It was
Daylight's desire to make it memorable, and his attempt was a success.
A goodly portion of Dawson got drunk that night.  The fall weather was
on, and, though the freeze-up of the Yukon still delayed, the
thermometer was down to twenty-five below zero and falling.  Wherefore,
it was necessary to organize gangs of life-savers, who patrolled the
streets to pick up drunken men from where they fell in the snow and
where an hour's sleep would be fatal.  Daylight, whose whim it was to
make them drunk by hundreds and by thousands, was the one who initiated
this life saving.  He wanted Dawson to have its night, but, in his
deeper processes never careless nor wanton, he saw to it that it was a
night without accident.  And, like his olden nights, his ukase went
forth that there should be no quarrelling nor fighting, offenders to be
dealt with by him personally.  Nor did he have to deal with any.
Hundreds of devoted followers saw to it that the evilly disposed were
rolled in the snow and hustled off to bed. In the great world, where
great captains of industry die, all wheels under their erstwhile
management are stopped for a minute.

But in the Klondike, such was its hilarious sorrow at the departure of
its captain, that for twenty-four hours no wheels revolved.  Even great
Ophir, with its thousand men on the pay-roll, closed down.  On the day
after the night there were no men present or fit to go to work.

Next morning, at break of day, Dawson said good-by.  The thousands that
lined the bank wore mittens and their ear-flaps pulled down and tied.
It was thirty below zero, the rim-ice was thickening, and the Yukon
carried a run of mush-ice.  From the deck of the Seattle, Daylight
waved and called his farewells.  As the lines were cast off and the
steamer swung out into the current, those near him saw the moisture
well up in Daylight's eyes.  In a way, it was to him departure from his
native land, this grim Arctic region which was practically the only
land he had known.  He tore off his cap and waved it.

"Good-by, you-all!" he called.  "Good-by, you-all!"





PART II



CHAPTER I

In no blaze of glory did Burning Daylight descend upon San Francisco.
Not only had he been forgotten, but the Klondike along with him.  The
world was interested in other things, and the Alaskan adventure, like
the Spanish War, was an old story.  Many things had happened since
then.  Exciting things were happening every day, and the
sensation-space of newspapers was limited. The effect of being ignored,
however, was an exhilaration.  Big man as he had been in the Arctic
game, it merely showed how much bigger was this new game, when a man
worth eleven millions, and with a history such as his, passed unnoticed.

He settled down in St. Francis Hotel, was interviewed by the
cub-reporters on the hotel-run, and received brief paragraphs of notice
for twenty-four hours.  He grinned to himself, and began to look around
and get acquainted with the new order of beings and things.  He was
very awkward and very self-possessed.  In addition to the stiffening
afforded his backbone by the conscious ownership of eleven millions, he
possessed an enormous certitude.

Nothing abashed him, nor was he appalled by the display and culture and
power around him.  It was another kind of wilderness, that was all; and
it was for him to learn the ways of it, the signs and trails and
water-holes where good hunting lay, and the bad stretches of field and
flood to be avoided.  As usual, he fought shy of the women.  He was
still too badly scared to come to close quarters with the dazzling and
resplendent creatures his own millions made accessible.

They looked and longed, but he so concealed his timidity that he had
all the seeming of moving boldly among them.  Nor was it his wealth
alone that attracted them.  He was too much a man, and too much an
unusual type of man.  Young yet, barely thirty-six, eminently handsome,
magnificently strong, almost bursting with a splendid virility, his
free trail-stride, never learned on pavements, and his black eyes,
hinting of great spaces and unwearied with the close perspective of the
city dwellers, drew many a curious and wayward feminine glance.  He
saw, grinned knowingly to himself, and faced them as so many dangers,
with a cool demeanor that was a far greater personal achievement than
had they been famine, frost, or flood.

He had come down to the States to play the man's game, not the woman's
game; and the men he had not yet learned.  They struck him as
soft--soft physically; yet he divined them hard in their dealings, but
hard under an exterior of supple softness.  It struck him that there
was something cat-like about them.  He met them in the clubs, and
wondered how real was the good-fellowship they displayed and how
quickly they would unsheathe their claws and gouge and rend.  "That's
the proposition," he repeated to himself; "what will they-all do when
the play is close and down to brass tacks?"  He felt unwarrantably
suspicious of them. "They're sure slick," was his secret judgment; and
from bits of gossip dropped now and again he felt his judgment well
buttressed.  On the other hand, they radiated an atmosphere of
manliness and the fair play that goes with manliness.  They might gouge
and rend in a fight--which was no more than natural; but he felt,
somehow, that they would gouge and rend according to rule. This was the
impression he got of them--a generalization tempered by knowledge that
there was bound to be a certain percentage of scoundrels among them.

Several months passed in San Francisco during which time he studied the
game and its rules, and prepared himself to take a hand.  He even took
private instruction in English, and succeeded in eliminating his worst
faults, though in moments of excitement he was prone to lapse into
"you-all," "knowed," "sure," and similar solecisms.  He learned to eat
and dress and generally comport himself after the manner of civilized
man; but through it all he remained himself, not unduly reverential nor
considerative, and never hesitating to stride rough-shod over any
soft-faced convention if it got in his way and the provocation were
great enough.  Also, and unlike the average run of weaker men coming
from back countries and far places, he failed to reverence the
particular tin gods worshipped variously by the civilized tribes of
men.  He had seen totems before, and knew them for what they were.

Tiring of being merely an onlooker, he ran up to Nevada, where the new
gold-mining boom was fairly started--"just to try a flutter," as he
phrased it to himself.  The flutter on the Tonopah Stock Exchange
lasted just ten days, during which time his smashing, wild-bull game
played ducks and drakes with the more stereotyped gamblers, and at the
end of which time, having gambled Floridel into his fist, he let go for
a net profit of half a million.  Whereupon, smacking his lips, he
departed for San Francisco and the St. Francis Hotel.  It tasted good,
and his hunger for the game became more acute.

And once more the papers sensationalized him.  BURNING DAYLIGHT was a
big-letter headline again.  Interviewers flocked about him.

Old files of magazines and newspapers were searched through, and the
romantic and historic Elam Harnish, Adventurer of the Frost, King of
the Klondike, and father of the Sourdoughs, strode upon the breakfast
table of a million homes along with the toast and breakfast foods.
Even before his elected time, he was forcibly launched into the game.
Financiers and promoters, and all the flotsam and jetsam of the sea of
speculation surged upon the shores of his eleven millions.  In
self-defence he was compelled to open offices.  He had made them sit up
and take notice, and now, willy-nilly, they were dealing him hands and
clamoring for him to play.  Well, play he would; he'd show 'em; even
despite the elated prophesies made of how swiftly he would be
trimmed--prophesies coupled with descriptions of the bucolic game he
would play and of his wild and woolly appearance.

He dabbled in little things at first--"stalling for time," as he
explained it to Holdsworthy, a friend he had made at the Alta-Pacific
Club.  Daylight himself was a member of the club, and Holdsworthy had
proposed him.  And it was well that Daylight played closely at first,
for he was astounded by the multitudes of sharks--"ground-sharks," he
called them--that flocked about him.

He saw through their schemes readily enough, and even marveled that
such numbers of them could find sufficient prey to keep them going.
Their rascality and general dubiousness was so transparent that he
could not understand how any one could be taken in by them.

And then he found that there were sharks and sharks.  Holdsworthy
treated him more like a brother than a mere fellow-clubman, watching
over him, advising him, and introducing him to the magnates of the
local financial world.  Holdsworthy's family lived in a delightful
bungalow near Menlo Park, and here Daylight spent a number of weekends,
seeing a fineness and kindness of home life of which he had never
dreamed.  Holdsworthy was an enthusiast over flowers, and a half
lunatic over raising prize poultry; and these engrossing madnesses were
a source of perpetual joy to Daylight, who looked on in tolerant good
humor. Such amiable weaknesses tokened the healthfulness of the man,
and drew Daylight closer to him.  A prosperous, successful business man
without great ambition, was Daylight's estimate of him--a man too
easily satisfied with the small stakes of the game ever to launch out
in big play.

On one such week-end visit, Holdsworthy let him in on a good thing, a
good little thing, a brickyard at Glen Ellen.  Daylight listened
closely to the other's description of the situation.  It was a most
reasonable venture, and Daylight's one objection was that it was so
small a matter and so far out of his line; and he went into it only as
a matter of friendship, Holdsworthy explaining that he was himself
already in a bit, and that while it was a good thing, he would be
compelled to make sacrifices in other directions in order to develop
it.  Daylight advanced the capital, fifty thousand dollars, and, as he
laughingly explained afterward, "I was stung, all right, but it wasn't
Holdsworthy that did it half as much as those blamed chickens and
fruit-trees of his."

It was a good lesson, however, for he learned that there were few
faiths in the business world, and that even the simple, homely faith of
breaking bread and eating salt counted for little in the face of a
worthless brickyard and fifty thousand dollars in cash.

But the sharks and sharks of various orders and degrees, he concluded,
were on the surface.  Deep down, he divined, were the integrities and
the stabilities.  These big captains of industry and masters of
finance, he decided, were the men to work with. By the very nature of
their huge deals and enterprises they had to play fair.  No room there
for little sharpers' tricks and bunco games.  It was to be expected
that little men should salt gold-mines with a shotgun and work off
worthless brick-yards on their friends, but in high finance such
methods were not worth while.  There the men were engaged in developing
the country, organizing its railroads, opening up its mines, making
accessible its vast natural resources.  Their play was bound to be big
and stable.  "They sure can't afford tin-horn tactics," was his summing
up.

So it was that he resolved to leave the little men, the Holdsworthys,
alone; and, while he met them in good-fellowship, he chummed with none,
and formed no deep friendships.  He did not dislike the little men, the
men of the Alta-Pacific, for instance.  He merely did not elect to
choose them for partners in the big game in which he intended to play.
What that big game was, even he did not know.  He was waiting to find
it.  And in the meantime he played small hands, investing in several
arid-lands reclamation projects and keeping his eyes open for the big
chance when it should come along.

And then he met John Dowsett, the great John Dowsett.  The whole thing
was fortuitous.  This cannot be doubted, as Daylight himself knew, it
was by the merest chance, when in Los Angeles, that he heard the tuna
were running strong at Santa Catalina, and went over to the island
instead of returning directly to San Francisco as he had planned.
There he met John Dowsett, resting off for several days in the middle
of a flying western trip. Dowsett had of course heard of the
spectacular Klondike King and his rumored thirty millions, and he
certainly found himself interested by the man in the acquaintance that
was formed. Somewhere along in this acquaintanceship the idea must have
popped into his brain.  But he did not broach it, preferring to mature
it carefully.  So he talked in large general ways, and did his best to
be agreeable and win Daylight's friendship.

It was the first big magnate Daylight had met face to face, and he was
pleased and charmed.  There was such a kindly humanness about the man,
such a genial democraticness, that Daylight found it hard to realize
that this was THE John Dowsett, president of a string of banks,
insurance manipulator, reputed ally of the lieutenants of Standard Oil,
and known ally of the Guggenhammers.

Nor did his looks belie his reputation and his manner.

Physically, he guaranteed all that Daylight knew of him.  Despite his
sixty years and snow-white hair, his hand-shake was firmly hearty, and
he showed no signs of decrepitude, walking with a quick, snappy step,
making all movements definitely and decisively.  His skin was a healthy
pink, and his thin, clean lips knew the way to writhe heartily over a
joke.  He had honest blue eyes of palest blue; they looked out at one
keenly and frankly from under shaggy gray brows.  His mind showed
itself disciplined and orderly, and its workings struck Daylight as
having all the certitude of a steel trap.  He was a man who KNEW and
who never decorated his knowledge with foolish frills of sentiment or
emotion.  That he was accustomed to command was patent, and every word
and gesture tingled with power.  Combined with this was his sympathy
and tact, and Daylight could note easily enough all the earmarks that
distinguished him from a little man of the Holdsworthy caliber.
Daylight knew also his history, the prime old American stock from which
he had descended, his own war record, the John Dowsett before him who
had been one of the banking buttresses of the Cause of the Union, the
Commodore Dowsett of the War of 1812 the General Dowsett of
Revolutionary fame, and that first far Dowsett, owner of lands and
slaves in early New England.

"He's sure the real thing," he told one of his fellow-clubmen
afterwards, in the smoking-room of the Alta-Pacific.  "I tell you,
Gallon, he was a genuine surprise to me.  I knew the big ones had to be
like that, but I had to see him to really know it. He's one of the
fellows that does things.  You can see it sticking out all over him.
He's one in a thousand, that's straight, a man to tie to.  There's no
limit to any game he plays, and you can stack on it that he plays right
up to the handle.  I bet he can lose or win half a dozen million
without batting an eye."

Gallon puffed at his cigar, and at the conclusion of the panegyric
regarded the other curiously; but Daylight, ordering cocktails, failed
to note this curious stare.

"Going in with him on some deal, I suppose," Gallon remarked.

"Nope, not the slightest idea.  Here's kindness.  I was just explaining
that I'd come to understand how these big fellows do big things.  Why,
d'ye know, he gave me such a feeling that he knew everything, that I
was plumb ashamed of myself."

"I guess I could give him cards and spades when it comes to driving a
dog-team, though," Daylight observed, after a meditative pause.  "And I
really believe I could put him on to a few wrinkles in poker and placer
mining, and maybe in paddling a birch canoe.  And maybe I stand a
better chance to learn the game he's been playing all his life than he
would stand of learning the game I played up North."



CHAPTER II

It was not long afterward that Daylight came on to New York.  A letter
from John Dowsett had been the cause--a simple little typewritten
letter of several lines.  But Daylight had thrilled as he read it.  He
remembered the thrill that was his, a callow youth of fifteen, when, in
Tempas Butte, through lack of a fourth man, Tom Galsworthy, the
gambler, had said, "Get in, Kid; take a hand."  That thrill was his
now.  The bald, typewritten sentences seemed gorged with mystery.  "Our
Mr. Howison will call upon you at your hotel.  He is to be trusted.  We
must not be seen together.  You will understand after we have had our
talk."  Daylight conned the words over and over.  That was it. The big
game had arrived, and it looked as if he were being invited to sit in
and take a hand.  Surely, for no other reason would one man so
peremptorily invite another man to make a journey across the continent.

They met--thanks to "our" Mr. Howison,--up the Hudson, in a magnificent
country home.  Daylight, according to instructions, arrived in a
private motor-car which had been furnished him. Whose car it was he did
not know any more than did he know the owner of the house, with its
generous, rolling, tree-studded lawns.  Dowsett was already there, and
another man whom Daylight recognized before the introduction was begun.
It was Nathaniel Letton, and none other.  Daylight had seen his face a
score of times in the magazines and newspapers, and read about his
standing in the financial world and about his endowed University of
Daratona.  He, likewise, struck Daylight as a man of power, though he
was puzzled in that he could find no likeness to Dowsett.  Except in
the matter of cleanness,--a cleanness that seemed to go down to the
deepest fibers of him,--Nathaniel Letton was unlike the other in every
particular.  Thin to emaciation, he seemed a cold flame of a man, a man
of a mysterious, chemic sort of flame, who, under a glacier-like
exterior, conveyed, somehow, the impression of the ardent heat of a
thousand suns.  His large gray eyes were mainly responsible for this
feeling, and they blazed out feverishly from what was almost a
death's-head, so thin was the face, the skin of which was a ghastly,
dull, dead white.  Not more than fifty, thatched with a sparse growth
of iron-gray hair, he looked several times the age of Dowsett.  Yet
Nathaniel Letton possessed control--Daylight could see that plainly.
He was a thin-faced ascetic, living in a state of high, attenuated
calm--a molten planet under a transcontinental ice sheet.  And yet,
above all most of all, Daylight was impressed by the terrific and
almost awful cleanness of the man.  There was no dross in him.  He had
all the seeming of having been purged by fire.  Daylight had the
feeling that a healthy man-oath would be a deadly offence to his ears,
a sacrilege and a blasphemy.

They drank--that is, Nathaniel Letton took mineral water served by the
smoothly operating machine of a lackey who inhabited the place, while
Dowsett took Scotch and soda and Daylight a cocktail.  Nobody seemed to
notice the unusualness of a Martini at midnight, though Daylight looked
sharply for that very thing; for he had long since learned that
Martinis had their strictly appointed times and places.  But he liked
Martinis, and, being a natural man, he chose deliberately to drink when
and how he pleased.  Others had noticed this peculiar habit of his, but
not so Dowsett and Letton; and Daylight's secret thought was: "They
sure wouldn't bat an eye if I called for a glass of corrosive
sublimate."

Leon Guggenhammer arrived in the midst of the drink, and ordered
Scotch.  Daylight studied him curiously.  This was one of the great
Guggenhammer family; a younger one, but nevertheless one of the crowd
with which he had locked grapples in the North.  Nor did Leon
Guggenhammer fail to mention cognizance of that old affair.  He
complimented Daylight on his prowess--"The echoes of Ophir came down to
us, you know.  And I must say, Mr. Daylight--er, Mr. Harnish, that you
whipped us roundly in that affair."

Echoes!  Daylight could not escape the shock of the phrase--echoes had
come down to them of the fight into which he had flung all his strength
and the strength of his Klondike millions.  The Guggenhammers sure must
go some when a fight of that dimension was no more than a skirmish of
which they deigned to hear echoes.

"They sure play an almighty big game down here," was his conclusion,
accompanied by a corresponding elation that it was just precisely that
almighty big game in which he was about to be invited to play a hand.
For the moment he poignantly regretted that rumor was not true, and
that his eleven millions were not in reality thirty millions.  Well,
that much he would be frank about; he would let them know exactly how
many stacks of chips he could buy.

Leon Guggenhammer was young and fat.  Not a day more than thirty, his
face, save for the adumbrated puff sacks under the eyes, was as smooth
and lineless as a boy's.  He, too, gave the impression of cleanness.
He showed in the pink of health; his unblemished, smooth-shaven skin
shouted advertisement of his splendid physical condition.  In the face
of that perfect skin, his very fatness and mature, rotund paunch could
be nothing other than normal.  He was constituted to be prone to
fatness, that was all.

The talk soon centred down to business, though Guggenhammer had first
to say his say about the forthcoming international yacht race and about
his own palatial steam yacht, the Electra, whose recent engines were
already antiquated.  Dowsett broached the plan, aided by an occasional
remark from the other two, while Daylight asked questions.  Whatever
the proposition was, he was going into it with his eyes open.  And they
filled his eyes with the practical vision of what they had in mind.

"They will never dream you are with us," Guggenhammer interjected, as
the outlining of the matter drew to a close, his handsome Jewish eyes
flashing enthusiastically.  "They'll think you are raiding on your own
in proper buccaneer style."

"Of course, you understand, Mr. Harnish, the absolute need for keeping
our alliance in the dark," Nathaniel Letton warned gravely.

Daylight nodded his head.  "And you also understand," Letton went on,
"that the result can only be productive of good.  The thing is
legitimate and right, and the only ones who may be hurt are the stock
gamblers themselves.  It is not an attempt to smash the market.  As you
see yourself, you are to bull the market.  The honest investor will be
the gainer."

"Yes, that's the very thing," Dowsett said.  "The commercial need for
copper is continually increasing.  Ward Valley Copper, and all that it
stands for,--practically one-quarter of the world's supply, as I have
shown you,--is a big thing, how big, even we can scarcely estimate.
Our arrangements are made.  We have plenty of capital ourselves, and
yet we want more.  Also, there is too much Ward Valley out to suit our
present plans.  Thus we kill both birds with one stone--"

"And I am the stone," Daylight broke in with a smile.

"Yes, just that.  Not only will you bull Ward Valley, but you will at
the same time gather Ward Valley in.  This will be of inestimable
advantage to us, while you and all of us will profit by it as well.
And as Mr. Letton has pointed out, the thing is legitimate and square.
On the eighteenth the directors meet, and, instead of the customary
dividend, a double dividend will be declared."

"And where will the shorts be then?" Leon Guggenhammer cried excitedly.

"The shorts will be the speculators," Nathaniel Letton explained, "the
gamblers, the froth of Wall Street--you understand.  The genuine
investors will not be hurt.  Furthermore, they will have learned for
the thousandth time to have confidence in Ward Valley.  And with their
confidence we can carry through the large developments we have outlined
to you."

"There will be all sorts of rumors on the street," Dowsett warned
Daylight, "but do not let them frighten you.  These rumors may even
originate with us.  You can see how and why clearly.  But rumors are to
be no concern of yours.  You are on the inside. All you have to do is
buy, buy, buy, and keep on buying to the last stroke, when the
directors declare the double dividend. Ward Valley will jump so that it
won't be feasible to buy after that."

"What we want," Letton took up the strain, pausing significantly to sip
his mineral water, "what we want is to take large blocks of Ward Valley
off the hands of the public.  We could do this easily enough by
depressing the market and frightening the holders.  And we could do it
more cheaply in such fashion.  But we are absolute masters of the
situation, and we are fair enough to buy Ward Valley on a rising
market.  Not that we are philanthropists, but that we need the
investors in our big development scheme.  Nor do we lose directly by
the transaction. The instant the action of the directors becomes known,
Ward Valley will rush heavenward.  In addition, and outside the
legitimate field of the transaction, we will pinch the shorts for a
very large sum.  But that is only incidental, you understand, and in a
way, unavoidable.  On the other hand, we shall not turn up our noses at
that phase of it.  The shorts shall be the veriest gamblers, of course,
and they will get no more than they deserve."

"And one other thing, Mr. Harnish," Guggenhammer said, "if you exceed
your available cash, or the amount you care to invest in the venture,
don't fail immediately to call on us.  Remember, we are behind you."

"Yes, we are behind you," Dowsett repeated.

Nathaniel Letton nodded his head in affirmation.

"Now about that double dividend on the eighteenth--" John Dowsett drew
a slip of paper from his note-book and adjusted his glasses.

"Let me show you the figures.  Here, you see..."

And thereupon he entered into a long technical and historical
explanation of the earnings and dividends of Ward Valley from the day
of its organization.

The whole conference lasted not more than an hour, during which time
Daylight lived at the topmost of the highest peak of life that he had
ever scaled.  These men were big players.  They were powers.  True, as
he knew himself, they were not the real inner circle.  They did not
rank with the Morgans and Harrimans.  And yet they were in touch with
those giants and were themselves lesser giants.  He was pleased, too,
with their attitude toward him.  They met him deferentially, but not
patronizingly.  It was the deference of equality, and Daylight could
not escape the subtle flattery of it; for he was fully aware that in
experience as well as wealth they were far and away beyond him.

"We'll shake up the speculating crowd," Leon Guggenhammer proclaimed
jubilantly, as they rose to go.  "And you are the man to do it, Mr.
Harnish.  They are bound to think you are on your own, and their shears
are all sharpened for the trimming of newcomers like you."

"They will certainly be misled," Letton agreed, his eerie gray eyes
blazing out from the voluminous folds of the huge Mueller with which he
was swathing his neck to the ears.  "Their minds run in ruts.  It is
the unexpected that upsets their stereotyped calculations--any new
combination, any strange factor, any fresh variant.  And you will be
all that to them, Mr. Harnish.  And I repeat, they are gamblers, and
they will deserve all that befalls them.  They clog and cumber all
legitimate enterprise.  You have no idea of the trouble they cause men
like us--sometimes, by their gambling tactics, upsetting the soundest
plans, even overturning the stablest institutions."

Dowsett and young Guggenhammer went away in one motor-car, and Letton
by himself in another.  Daylight, with still in the forefront of his
consciousness all that had occurred in the preceding hour, was deeply
impressed by the scene at the moment of departure.  The three machines
stood like weird night monsters at the gravelled foot of the wide
stairway under the unlighted porte-cochere.  It was a dark night, and
the lights of the motor-cars cut as sharply through the blackness as
knives would cut through solid substance.  The obsequious lackey--the
automatic genie of the house which belonged to none of the three
men,--stood like a graven statue after having helped them in. The
fur-coated chauffeurs bulked dimly in their seats.  One after the
other, like spurred steeds, the cars leaped into the blackness, took
the curve of the driveway, and were gone.

Daylight's car was the last, and, peering out, he caught a glimpse of
the unlighted house that loomed hugely through the darkness like a
mountain.  Whose was it?  he wondered.  How came they to use it for
their secret conference?  Would the lackey talk?  How about the
chauffeurs?  Were they trusted men like "our" Mr. Howison?  Mystery?
The affair was alive with it.  And hand in hand with mystery walked
Power.  He leaned back and inhaled his cigarette.  Big things were
afoot.  The cards were shuffled even then for a mighty deal, and he was
in on it.  He remembered back to his poker games with Jack Kearns, and
laughed aloud.  He had played for thousands in those days on the turn
of a card; but now he was playing for millions.  And on the eighteenth,
when that dividend was declared, he chuckled at the confusion that
would inevitably descend upon the men with the sharpened shears waiting
to trim him--him, Burning Daylight.



CHAPTER III

Back at his hotel, though nearly two in the morning, he found the
reporters waiting to interview him.  Next morning there were more.  And
thus, with blare of paper trumpet, was he received by New York.  Once
more, with beating of toms-toms and wild hullaballoo, his picturesque
figure strode across the printed sheet.  The King of the Klondike, the
hero of the Arctic, the thirty-million-dollar millionaire of the North,
had come to New York.  What had he come for?  To trim the New Yorkers
as he had trimmed the Tonopah crowd in Nevada?  Wall Street had best
watch out, for the wild man of Klondike had just come to town.  Or,
perchance, would Wall Street trim him?  Wall Street had trimmed many
wild men; would this be Burning Daylight's fate?  Daylight grinned to
himself, and gave out ambiguous interviews.  It helped the game, and he
grinned again, as he meditated that Wall Street would sure have to go
some before it trimmed him.

They were prepared for him to play, and, when heavy buying of Ward
Valley began, it was quickly decided that he was the operator.
Financial gossip buzzed and hummed.  He was after the Guggenhammers
once more.  The story of Ophir was told over again and sensationalized
until even Daylight scarcely recognized it. Still, it was all grist to
his mill.  The stock gamblers were clearly befooled.  Each day he
increased his buying, and so eager were the sellers that Ward Valley
rose but slowly.  "It sure beats poker," Daylight whispered gleefully
to himself, as he noted the perturbation he was causing.  The
newspapers hazarded countless guesses and surmises, and Daylight was
constantly dogged by a small battalion of reporters.  His own
interviews were gems.  Discovering the delight the newspapers took in
his vernacular, in his "you-alls," and "sures," and "surge-ups," he
even exaggerated these particularities of speech, exploiting the
phrases he had heard other frontiersmen use, and inventing occasionally
a new one of his own.

A wildly exciting time was his during the week preceding Thursday the
eighteenth.  Not only was he gambling as he had never gambled before,
but he was gambling at the biggest table in the world and for stakes so
large that even the case-hardened habitues of that table were compelled
to sit up.  In spite of the unlimited selling, his persistent buying
compelled Ward Valley steadily to rise, and as Thursday approached, the
situation became acute. Something had to smash.  How much Ward Valley
was this Klondike gambler going to buy?  How much could he buy?  What
was the Ward Valley crowd doing all this time?  Daylight appreciated
the interviews with them that appeared--interviews delightfully placid
and non-committal.  Leon Guggenhammer even hazarded the opinion that
this Northland Croesus might possibly be making a mistake. But not that
they cared, John Dowsett explained.  Nor did they object.  While in the
dark regarding his intentions, of one thing they were certain; namely,
that he was bulling Ward Valley.  And they did not mind that.  No
matter what happened to him and his spectacular operations, Ward Valley
was all right, and would remain all right, as firm as the Rock of
Gibraltar.  No; they had no Ward Valley to sell, thank you.  This
purely fictitious state of the market was bound shortly to pass, and
Ward Valley was not to be induced to change the even tenor of its way
by any insane stock exchange flurry.  "It is purely gambling from
beginning to end," were Nathaniel Letton's words; "and we refuse to
have anything to do with it or to take notice of it in any way."

During this time Daylight had several secret meetings with his
partners--one with Leon Guggenhammer, one with John Dowsett, and two
with Mr. Howison.  Beyond congratulations, they really amounted to
nothing; for, as he was informed, everything was going satisfactorily.

But on Tuesday morning a rumor that was disconcerting came to
Daylight's ears.  It was also published in the Wall Street Journal, and
it was to the effect, on apparently straight inside information, that
on Thursday, when the directors of Ward Valley met, instead of the
customary dividend being declared, an assessment would be levied.  It
was the first check Daylight had received.  It came to him with a shock
that if the thing were so he was a broken man.  And it also came to him
that all this colossal operating of his was being done on his own
money. Dowsett, Guggenhammer, and Letton were risking nothing.  It was
a panic, short-lived, it was true, but sharp enough while it lasted to
make him remember Holdsworthy and the brick-yard, and to impel him to
cancel all buying orders while he rushed to a telephone.

"Nothing in it--only a rumor," came Leon Guggenhammer's throaty voice
in the receiver.  "As you know," said Nathaniel Letton, "I am one of
the directors, and I should certainly be aware of it were such action
contemplated."  And John Dowsett: "I warned you against just such
rumors.  There is not an iota of truth in it--certainly not.  I tell
you on my honor as a gentleman."

Heartily ashamed of himself for his temporary loss of nerve, Daylight
returned to his task.  The cessation of buying had turned the Stock
Exchange into a bedlam, and down all the line of stocks the bears were
smashing.  Ward Valley, as the ape, received the brunt of the shock,
and was already beginning to tumble.  Daylight calmly doubled his
buying orders.  And all through Tuesday and Wednesday, and Thursday
morning, he went on buying, while Ward Valley rose triumphantly higher.
Still they sold, and still he bought, exceeding his power to buy many
times over, when delivery was taken into account.  What of that?  On
this day the double dividend would be declared, he assured himself.
The pinch of delivery would be on the shorts.  They would be making
terms with him.

And then the thunderbolt struck.  True to the rumor, Ward Valley levied
the assessment.  Daylight threw up his arms.  He verified the report
and quit.  Not alone Ward Valley, but all securities were being
hammered down by the triumphant bears.  As for Ward Valley, Daylight
did not even trouble to learn if it had fetched bottom or was still
tumbling.  Not stunned, not even bewildered, while Wall Street went
mad, Daylight withdrew from the field to think it over.  After a short
conference with his brokers, he proceeded to his hotel, on the way
picking up the evening papers and glancing at the head-lines.  BURNING
DAYLIGHT CLEANED OUT, he read; DAYLIGHT GETS HIS; ANOTHER WESTERNER
FAILS TO FIND EASY MONEY.  As he entered his hotel, a later edition
announced the suicide of a young man, a lamb, who had followed
Daylight's play.

What in hell did he want to kill himself for?  was Daylight's muttered
comment.

He passed up to his rooms, ordered a Martini cocktail, took off his
shoes, and sat down to think.  After half an hour he roused himself to
take the drink, and as he felt the liquor pass warmingly through his
body, his features relaxed into a slow, deliberate, yet genuine grin.
He was laughing at himself.

"Buncoed, by gosh!" he muttered.

Then the grin died away, and his face grew bleak and serious. Leaving
out his interests in the several Western reclamation projects (which
were still assessing heavily), he was a ruined man.  But harder hit
than this was his pride.  He had been so easy.  They had gold-bricked
him, and he had nothing to show for it.  The simplest farmer would have
had documents, while he had nothing but a gentleman's agreement, and a
verbal one at that. Gentleman's agreement.  He snorted over it.  John
Dowsett's voice, just as he had heard it in the telephone receiver,
sounded in his ears the words, "On my honor as a gentleman."  They were
sneak-thieves and swindlers, that was what they were, and they had
given him the double-cross.  The newspapers were right.  He had come to
New York to be trimmed, and Messrs. Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer
had done it.  He was a little fish, and they had played with him ten
days--ample time in which to swallow him, along with his eleven
millions.  Of course, they had been unloading on him all the time, and
now they were buying Ward Valley back for a song ere the market righted
itself.  Most probably, out of his share of the swag, Nathaniel Letton
would erect a couple of new buildings for that university of his.  Leon
Guggenhammer would buy new engines for that yacht, or a whole fleet of
yachts.  But what the devil Dowsett would do with his whack, was beyond
him--most likely start another string of banks.

And Daylight sat and consumed cocktails and saw back in his life to
Alaska, and lived over the grim years in which he had battled for his
eleven millions.  For a while murder ate at his heart, and wild ideas
and sketchy plans of killing his betrayers flashed through his mind.
That was what that young man should have done instead of killing
himself.  He should have gone gunning. Daylight unlocked his grip and
took out his automatic pistol--a big Colt's .44.  He released the
safety catch with his thumb, and operating the sliding outer barrel,
ran the contents of the clip through the mechanism.  The eight
cartridges slid out in a stream.  He refilled the clip, threw a
cartridge into the chamber, and, with the trigger at full cock, thrust
up the safety ratchet.  He shoved the weapon into the side pocket of
his coat, ordered another Martini, and resumed his seat.

He thought steadily for an hour, but he grinned no more.  Lines formed
in his face, and in those lines were the travail of the North, the bite
of the frost, all that he had achieved and suffered--the long, unending
weeks of trail, the bleak tundra shore of Point Barrow, the smashing
ice-jam of the Yukon, the battles with animals and men, the
lean-dragged days of famine, the long months of stinging hell among the
mosquitoes of the Koyokuk, the toil of pick and shovel, the scars and
mars of pack-strap and tump-line, the straight meat diet with the dogs,
and all the long procession of twenty full years of toil and sweat and
endeavor.

At ten o'clock he arose and pored over the city directory.  Then he put
on his shoes, took a cab, and departed into the night. Twice he changed
cabs, and finally fetched up at the night office of a detective agency.
He superintended the thing himself, laid down money in advance in
profuse quantities, selected the six men he needed, and gave them their
instructions.  Never, for so simple a task, had they been so well paid;
for, to each, in addition to office charges, he gave a
five-hundred-dollar bill, with the promise of another if he succeeded.
Some time next day, he was convinced, if not sooner, his three silent
partners would come together.  To each one two of his detectives were
to be attached.  Time and place was all he wanted to learn.

"Stop at nothing, boys," were his final instructions.  "I must have
this information.  Whatever you do, whatever happens, I'll sure see you
through."

Returning to his hotel, he changed cabs as before, went up to his room,
and with one more cocktail for a nightcap, went to bed and to sleep.
In the morning he dressed and shaved, ordered breakfast and the
newspapers sent up, and waited.  But he did not drink.  By nine o'clock
his telephone began to ring and the reports to come in.  Nathaniel
Letton was taking the train at Tarrytown.  John Dowsett was coming down
by the subway.  Leon Guggenhammer had not stirred out yet, though he
was assuredly within.  And in this fashion, with a map of the city
spread out before him, Daylight followed the movements of his three men
as they drew together.  Nathaniel Letton was at his offices in the
Mutual-Solander Building.  Next arrived Guggenhammer.  Dowsett was
still in his own offices.  But at eleven came the word that he also had
arrived, and several minutes later Daylight was in a hired motor-car
and speeding for the Mutual-Solander Building.



CHAPTER IV

Nathaniel Letton was talking when the door opened; he ceased, and with
his two companions gazed with controlled perturbation at Burning
Daylight striding into the room.  The free, swinging movements of the
trail-traveler were unconsciously exaggerated in that stride of his.
In truth, it seemed to him that he felt the trail beneath his feet.

"Howdy, gentlemen, howdy," he remarked, ignoring the unnatural calm
with which they greeted his entrance.  He shook hands with them in
turn, striding from one to another and gripping their hands so heartily
that Nathaniel Letton could not forbear to wince.  Daylight flung
himself into a massive chair and sprawled lazily, with an appearance of
fatigue.  The leather grip he had brought into the room he dropped
carelessly beside him on the floor.

"Goddle mighty, but I've sure been going some," he sighed.  "We sure
trimmed them beautiful.  It was real slick.  And the beauty of the play
never dawned on me till the very end.  It was pure and simple knock
down and drag out.  And the way they fell for it was amazin'."

The geniality in his lazy Western drawl reassured them.  He was not so
formidable, after all.  Despite the act that he had effected an
entrance in the face of Letton's instructions to the outer office, he
showed no indication of making a scene or playing rough.

"Well," Daylight demanded good-humoredly, "ain't you-all got a good
word for your pardner?  Or has his sure enough brilliance plumb dazzled
you-all?"

Letton made a dry sound in his throat.  Dowsett sat quietly and waited,
while Leon Guggenhammer struggled into articulation.

"You have certainly raised Cain," he said.

Daylight's black eyes flashed in a pleased way.

"Didn't I, though!" he proclaimed jubilantly.  "And didn't we fool'em!
I was totally surprised.  I never dreamed they would be that easy.

"And now," he went on, not permitting the pause to grow awkward,
"we-all might as well have an accounting.  I'm pullin' West this
afternoon on that blamed Twentieth Century."  He tugged at his grip,
got it open, and dipped into it with both his hands.  "But don't
forget, boys, when you-all want me to hornswoggle Wall Street another
flutter, all you-all have to do is whisper the word.  I'll sure be
right there with the goods."

His hands emerged, clutching a great mass of stubs, check-books, and
broker's receipts.  These he deposited in a heap on the big table, and
dipping again, he fished out the stragglers and added them to the pile.
He consulted a slip of paper, drawn from his coat pocket, and read
aloud:--

"Ten million twenty-seven thousand and forty-two dollars and
sixty-eight cents is my figurin' on my expenses.  Of course that-all's
taken from the winnings before we-all get to figurin' on the whack-up.
Where's your figures?  It must a' been a Goddle mighty big clean-up."

The three men looked their bepuzzlement at one another.  The man was a
bigger fool than they had imagined, or else he was playing a game which
they could not divine.

Nathaniel Letton moistened his lips and spoke up.

"It will take some hours yet, Mr. Harnish, before the full accounting
can be made.  Mr. Howison is at work upon it now. We--ah--as you say,
it has been a gratifying clean-up.  Suppose we have lunch together and
talk it over.  I'll have the clerks work through the noon hour, so that
you will have ample time to catch your train."

Dowsett and Guggenhammer manifested a relief that was almost obvious.
The situation was clearing.  It was disconcerting, under the
circumstances, to be pent in the same room with this heavy-muscled,
Indian-like man whom they had robbed.  They remembered unpleasantly the
many stories of his strength and recklessness.  If Letton could only
put him off long enough for them to escape into the policed world
outside the office door, all would be well; and Daylight showed all the
signs of being put off.

"I'm real glad to hear that," he said.  "I don't want to miss that
train, and you-all have done me proud, gentlemen, letting me in on this
deal.  I just do appreciate it without being able to express my
feelings.  But I am sure almighty curious, and I'd like terrible to
know, Mr. Letton, what your figures of our winning is.  Can you-all
give me a rough estimate?"

Nathaniel Letton did not look appealingly at his two friends, but in
the brief pause they felt that appeal pass out from him. Dowsett, of
sterner mould than the others, began to divine that the Klondiker was
playing.  But the other two were still under the blandishment of his
child-like innocence.

"It is extremely--er--difficult," Leon Guggenhammer began.  "You see,
Ward Valley has fluctuated so, er--"

"That no estimate can possibly be made in advance," Letton supplemented.

"Approximate it, approximate it," Daylight counselled cheerfully.

"It don't hurt if you-all are a million or so out one side or the
other.  The figures'll straighten that up.  But I'm that curious I'm
just itching all over.  What d'ye say?"

"Why continue to play at cross purposes?" Dowsett demanded abruptly and
coldly.  "Let us have the explanation here and now. Mr. Harnish is
laboring under a false impression, and he should be set straight.  In
this deal--"

But Daylight interrupted.  He had played too much poker to be unaware
or unappreciative of the psychological factor, and he headed Dowsett
off in order to play the denouncement of the present game in his own
way.

"Speaking of deals," he said, "reminds me of a poker game I once seen
in Reno, Nevada.  It wa'n't what you-all would call a square game.
They-all was tin-horns that sat in.  But they was a
tenderfoot--short-horns they-all are called out there.  He stands
behind the dealer and sees that same dealer give hisself four aces
offen the bottom of the deck.  The tenderfoot is sure shocked.  He
slides around to the player facin' the dealer across the table.

"'Say,' he whispers, 'I seen the dealer deal hisself four aces.'

"'Well, an' what of it?" says the player.

"'I'm tryin' to tell you-all because I thought you-all ought to know,'
says the tenderfoot.  'I tell you-all I seen him deal hisself four
aces.'

"'Say, mister,' says the player, 'you-all'd better get outa here.
You-all don't understand the game.  It's his deal, ain't it?'"

The laughter that greeted his story was hollow and perfunctory, but
Daylight appeared not to notice it.

"Your story has some meaning, I suppose," Dowsett said pointedly.

Daylight looked at him innocently and did not reply.  He turned
jovially to Nathaniel Letton.

"Fire away," he said.  "Give us an approximation of our winning. As I
said before, a million out one way or the other won't matter, it's
bound to be such an almighty big winning."  By this time Letton was
stiffened by the attitude Dowsett had taken, and his answer was prompt
and definite.

"I fear you are under a misapprehension, Mr. Harnish.  There are no
winnings to be divided with you.  Now don't get excited, I beg of you.
I have but to press this button..."

Far from excited, Daylight had all the seeming of being stunned. He
felt absently in his vest pocket for a match, lighted it, and
discovered that he had no cigarette.  The three men watched him with
the tense closeness of cats.  Now that it had come, they knew that they
had a nasty few minutes before them.

"Do you-all mind saying that over again?" Daylight said.  "Seems to me
I ain't got it just exactly right.  You-all said...?"

He hung with painful expectancy on Nathaniel Letton's utterance.

"I said you were under a misapprehension, Mr. Harnish, that was all.
You have been stock gambling, and you have been hard hit. But neither
Ward Valley, nor I, nor my associates, feel that we owe you anything."

Daylight pointed at the heap of receipts and stubs on the table.

"That-all represents ten million twenty-seven thousand and forty-two
dollars and sixty-eight cents, hard cash.  Ain't it good for anything
here?"

Letton smiled and shrugged his shoulders.

Daylight looked at Dowsett and murmured:--

"I guess that story of mine had some meaning, after all."  He laughed
in a sickly fashion.  "It was your deal all right, and you-all dole
them right, too.  Well, I ain't kicking.  I'm like the player in that
poker game.  It was your deal, and you-all had a right to do your best.
And you done it--cleaned me out slicker'n a whistle."

He gazed at the heap on the table with an air of stupefaction.

"And that-all ain't worth the paper it's written on. Gol dast it,
you-all can sure deal 'em 'round when you get a chance. Oh, no, I ain't
a-kicking.  It was your deal, and you-all certainly done me, and a man
ain't half a man that squeals on another man's deal.  And now the hand
is played out, and the cards are on the table, and the deal's over,
but..."

His hand, dipping swiftly into his inside breast pocket, appeared with
the big Colt's automatic.

"As I was saying, the old deal's finished.  Now it's MY deal, and I'm
a-going to see if I can hold them four aces--

"Take your hand away, you whited sepulchre!" he cried sharply.

Nathaniel Letton's hand, creeping toward the push-button on the desk,
was abruptly arrested.

"Change chairs," Daylight commanded.  "Take that chair over there, you
gangrene-livered skunk.  Jump! By God! or I'll make you leak till
folks'll think your father was a water hydrant and your mother a
sprinkling-cart.  You-all move your chair alongside, Guggenhammer; and
you-all Dowsett, sit right there, while I just irrelevantly explain the
virtues of this here automatic.  She's loaded for big game and she goes
off eight times.  She's a sure hummer when she gets started.

"Preliminary remarks being over, I now proceed to deal. Remember, I
ain't making no remarks about your deal.  You done your darndest, and
it was all right.  But this is my deal, and it's up to me to do my
darndest.  In the first place, you-all know me.  I'm Burning
Daylight--savvee?  Ain't afraid of God, devil, death, nor destruction.
Them's my four aces, and they sure copper your bets.  Look at that
there living skeleton. Letton, you're sure afraid to die.  Your bones
is all rattling together you're that scared.  And look at that fat Jew
there. This little weapon's sure put the fear of God in his heart.
He's yellow as a sick persimmon.  Dowsett, you're a cool one.  You-all
ain't batted an eye nor turned a hair.  That's because you're great on
arithmetic.  And that makes you-all dead easy in this deal of mine.
You're sitting there and adding two and two together, and you-all know
I sure got you skinned.  You know me, and that I ain't afraid of
nothing.  And you-all adds up all your money and knows you ain't
a-going to die if you can help it."

"I'll see you hanged," was Dowsett's retort.

"Not by a damned sight.  When the fun starts, you're the first I plug.
I'll hang all right, but you-all won't live to see it. You-all die here
and now while I'll die subject to the law's delay--savvee?  Being dead,
with grass growing out of your carcasses, you won't know when I hang,
but I'll sure have the pleasure a long time of knowing you-all beat me
to it."

Daylight paused.

"You surely wouldn't kill us?" Letton asked in a queer, thin voice.

Daylight shook his head.

"It's sure too expensive.  You-all ain't worth it.  I'd sooner have my
chips back.  And I guess you-all'd sooner give my chips back than go to
the dead-house."

A long silence followed.

"Well, I've done dealt.  It's up to you-all to play.  But while you're
deliberating, I want to give you-all a warning: if that door opens and
any one of you cusses lets on there's anything unusual, right here and
then I sure start plugging.  They ain't a soul'll get out the room
except feet first."

A long session of three hours followed.  The deciding factor was not
the big automatic pistol, but the certitude that Daylight would use it.
Not alone were the three men convinced of this, but Daylight himself
was convinced.  He was firmly resolved to kill the men if his money was
not forthcoming.  It was not an easy matter, on the spur of the moment,
to raise ten millions in paper currency, and there were vexatious
delays.  A dozen times Mr. Howison and the head clerk were summoned
into the room.  On these occasions the pistol lay on Daylight's lap,
covered carelessly by a newspaper, while he was usually engaged in
rolling or lighting his brown-paper cigarettes.  But in the end, the
thing was accomplished.  A suit-case was brought up by one of the
clerks from the waiting motor-car, and Daylight snapped it shut on the
last package of bills.  He paused at the door to make his final remarks.

"There's three several things I sure want to tell you-all.  When I get
outside this door, you-all'll be set free to act, and I just want to
warn you-all about what to do.  In the first place, no warrants for my
arrest--savvee?  This money's mine, and I ain't robbed you of it.  If
it gets out how you gave me the double-cross and how I done you back
again, the laugh'll be on you, and it'll sure be an almighty big laugh.
You-all can't afford that laugh. Besides, having got back my stake that
you-all robbed me of, if you arrest me and try to rob me a second time,
I'll go gunning for you-all, and I'll sure get you.  No little
fraid-cat shrimps like you-all can skin Burning Daylight.  If you win
you lose, and there'll sure be some several unexpected funerals around
this burg.

"Just look me in the eye, and you-all'll savvee I mean business. Them
stubs and receipts on the table is all yourn.  Good day."

As the door shut behind him, Nathaniel Letton sprang for the telephone,
and Dowsett intercepted him.

"What are you going to do?" Dowsett demanded.

"The police.  It's downright robbery.  I won't stand it.  I tell you I
won't stand it."

Dowsett smiled grimly, but at the same time bore the slender financier
back and down into his chair.

"We'll talk it over," he said; and in Leon Guggenhammer he found an
anxious ally.

And nothing ever came of it.  The thing remained a secret with the
three men.  Nor did Daylight ever give the secret away, though that
afternoon, leaning back in his stateroom on the Twentieth Century, his
shoes off, and feet on a chair, he chuckled long and heartily.  New
York remained forever puzzled over the affair; nor could it hit upon a
rational explanation. By all rights, Burning Daylight should have gone
broke, yet it was known that he immediately reappeared in San Francisco
possessing an apparently unimpaired capital.  This was evidenced by the
magnitude of the enterprises he engaged in, such as, for instance,
Panama Mail, by sheer weight of money and fighting power wresting the
control away from Shiftily and selling out in two months to the
Harriman interests at a rumored enormous advance.



CHAPTER V

Back in San Francisco, Daylight quickly added to his reputation In ways
it was not an enviable reputation.  Men were afraid of him.  He became
known as a fighter, a fiend, a tiger.  His play was a ripping and
smashing one, and no one knew where or how his next blow would fall.
The element of surprise was large.  He balked on the unexpected, and,
fresh from the wild North, his mind not operating in stereotyped
channels, he was able in unusual degree to devise new tricks and
stratagems.  And once he won the advantage, he pressed it
remorselessly.  "As relentless as a Red Indian," was said of him, and
it was said truly.

On the other hand, he was known as "square."  His word was as good as
his bond, and this despite the fact that he accepted nobody's word.  He
always shied at propositions based on gentlemen's agreements, and a man
who ventured his honor as a gentleman, in dealing with Daylight,
inevitably was treated to an unpleasant time.  Daylight never gave his
own word unless he held the whip-hand.  It was a case with the other
fellow taking it or nothing.

Legitimate investment had no place in Daylight's play.  It tied up his
money, and reduced the element of risk.  It was the gambling side of
business that fascinated him, and to play in his slashing manner
required that his money must be ready to hand. It was never tied up
save for short intervals, for he was principally engaged in turning it
over and over, raiding here, there, and everywhere, a veritable pirate
of the financial main. A five-per cent safe investment had no
attraction for him; but to risk millions in sharp, harsh skirmish,
standing to lose everything or to win fifty or a hundred per cent, was
the savor of life to him.  He played according to the rules of the
game, but he played mercilessly.  When he got a man or a corporation
down and they squealed, he gouged no less hard.  Appeals for financial
mercy fell on deaf ears.  He was a free lance, and had no friendly
business associations.  Such alliances as were formed from time to time
were purely affairs of expediency, and he regarded his allies as men
who would give him the double-cross or ruin him if a profitable chance
presented.  In spite of this point of view, he was faithful to his
allies.  But he was faithful just as long as they were and no longer.
The treason had to come from them, and then it was 'Ware Daylight.

The business men and financiers of the Pacific coast never forgot the
lesson of Charles Klinkner and the California & Altamont Trust Company.
Klinkner was the president.  In partnership with Daylight, the pair
raided the San Jose Interurban.  The powerful Lake Power & Electric
Lighting corporation came to the rescue, and Klinkner, seeing what he
thought was the opportunity, went over to the enemy in the thick of the
pitched battle.  Daylight lost three millions before he was done with
it, and before he was done with it he saw the California & Altamont
Trust Company hopelessly wrecked, and Charles Klinkner a suicide in a
felon's cell.  Not only did Daylight lose his grip on San Jose
Interurban, but in the crash of his battle front he lost heavily all
along the line.  It was conceded by those competent to judge that he
could have compromised and saved much.  But, instead, he deliberately
threw up the battle with San Jose Interurban and Lake Power, and,
apparently defeated, with Napoleonic suddenness struck at Klinkner.  It
was the last unexpected thing Klinkner would have dreamed of, and
Daylight knew it.  He knew, further, that the California & Altamont
Trust Company has an intrinsically sound institution, but that just
then it was in a precarious condition due to Klinkner's speculations
with its money.  He knew, also, that in a few months the Trust Company
would be more firmly on its feet than ever, thanks to those same
speculations, and that if he were to strike he must strike immediately.
"It's just that much money in pocket and a whole lot more," he was
reported to have said in connection with his heavy losses.  "It's just
so much insurance against the future.  Henceforth, men who go in with
me on deals will think twice before they try to double-cross me, and
then some."

The reason for his savageness was that he despised the men with whom he
played.  He had a conviction that not one in a hundred of them was
intrinsically square; and as for the square ones, he prophesied that,
playing in a crooked game, they were sure to lose and in the long run
go broke.  His New York experience had opened his eyes.  He tore the
veils of illusion from the business game, and saw its nakedness.  He
generalized upon industry and society somewhat as follows:--

Society, as organized, was a vast bunco game.  There were many
hereditary inefficients--men and women who were not weak enough to be
confined in feeble-minded homes, but who were not strong enough to be
ought else than hewers of wood and drawers of water.

Then there were the fools who took the organized bunco game seriously,
honoring and respecting it.  They were easy game for the others, who
saw clearly and knew the bunco game for what it was.

Work, legitimate work, was the source of all wealth.  That was to say,
whether it was a sack of potatoes, a grand piano, or a seven-passenger
touring car, it came into being only by the performance of work.  Where
the bunco came in was in the distribution of these things after labor
had created them.  He failed to see the horny-handed sons of toil
enjoying grand pianos or riding in automobiles.  How this came about
was explained by the bunco.  By tens of thousands and hundreds of
thousands men sat up nights and schemed how they could get between the
workers and the things the workers produced.  These schemers were the
business men.  When they got between the worker and his product, they
took a whack out of it for themselves The size of the whack was
determined by no rule of equity; but by their own strength and
swinishness.  It was always a case of "all the traffic can bear."  He
saw all men in the business game doing this.

One day, in a mellow mood (induced by a string of cocktails and a
hearty lunch), he started a conversation with Jones, the elevator boy.
Jones was a slender, mop-headed, man-grown, truculent flame of an
individual who seemed to go out of his way to insult his passengers.
It was this that attracted Daylight's interest, and he was not long in
finding out what was the matter with Jones.  He was a proletarian,
according to his own aggressive classification, and he had wanted to
write for a living.  Failing to win with the magazines, and compelled
to find himself in food and shelter, he had gone to the little valley
of Petacha, not a hundred miles from Los Angeles.  Here, toiling in the
day-time, he planned to write and study at night.  But the railroad
charged all the traffic would bear.  Petacha was a desert valley, and
produced only three things: cattle, fire-wood, and charcoal.  For
freight to Los Angeles on a carload of cattle the railroad charged
eight dollars.  This, Jones explained, was due to the fact that the
cattle had legs and could be driven to Los Angeles at a cost equivalent
to the charge per car load.  But firewood had no legs, and the railroad
charged just precisely twenty-four dollars a carload.

This was a fine adjustment, for by working hammer-and-tongs through a
twelve-hour day, after freight had been deducted from the selling price
of the wood in Los Angeles, the wood-chopper received one dollar and
sixty cents.  Jones had thought to get ahead of the game by turning his
wood into charcoal.  His estimates were satisfactory.  But the railroad
also made estimates.  It issued a rate of forty-two dollars a car on
charcoal.  At the end of three months, Jones went over his figures, and
found that he was still making one dollar and sixty cents a day.

"So I quit," Jones concluded.  "I went hobbling for a year, and I got
back at the railroads.  Leaving out the little things, I came across
the Sierras in the summer and touched a match to the snow-sheds.  They
only had a little thirty-thousand-dollar fire. I guess that squared up
all balances due on Petacha."

"Son, ain't you afraid to be turning loose such information?" Daylight
gravely demanded.

"Not on your life," quoth Jones.  "They can't prove it.  You could say
I said so, and I could say I didn't say so, and a hell of a lot that
evidence would amount to with a jury."

Daylight went into his office and meditated awhile.  That was it: all
the traffic would bear.  From top to bottom, that was the rule of the
game; and what kept the game going was the fact that a sucker was born
every minute.  If a Jones were born every minute, the game wouldn't
last very long.  Lucky for the players that the workers weren't Joneses.

But there were other and larger phases of the game.  Little business
men, shopkeepers, and such ilk took what whack they could out of the
product of the worker; but, after all, it was the large business men
who formed the workers through the little business men.  When all was
said and done, the latter, like Jones in Petacha Valley, got no more
than wages out of their whack.  In truth, they were hired men for the
large business men.  Still again, higher up, were the big fellows.
They used vast and complicated paraphernalia for the purpose, on a
large scale of getting between hundreds of thousands of workers and
their products.  These men were not so much mere robbers as gamblers.
And, not content with their direct winnings, being essentially
gamblers, they raided one another.  They called this feature of the
game HIGH FINANCE.  They were all engaged primarily in robbing the
worker, but every little while they formed combinations and robbed one
another of the accumulated loot. This explained the
fifty-thousand-dollar raid on him by Holdsworthy and the
ten-million-dollar raid on him by Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer.
And when he raided Panama Mail he had done exactly the same thing.
Well, he concluded, it was finer sport robbing the robbers than robbing
the poor stupid workers.

Thus, all unread in philosophy, Daylight preempted for himself the
position and vocation of a twentieth-century superman.  He found, with
rare and mythical exceptions, that there was no noblesse oblige among
the business and financial supermen.  As a clever traveler had
announced in an after-dinner speech at the Alta-Pacific, "There was
honor amongst thieves, and this was what distinguished thieves from
honest men."  That was it.  It hit the nail on the head.  These modern
supermen were a lot of sordid banditti who had the successful
effrontery to preach a code of right and wrong to their victims which
they themselves did not practise.  With them, a man's word was good
just as long as he was compelled to keep it.  THOU SHALT NOT STEAL was
only applicable to the honest worker.  They, the supermen, were above
such commandments.  They certainly stole and were honored by their
fellows according to the magnitude of their stealings.

The more Daylight played the game, the clearer the situation grew.
Despite the fact that every robber was keen to rob every other robber,
the band was well organized.  It practically controlled the political
machinery of society, from the ward politician up to the Senate of the
United States.  It passed laws that gave it privilege to rob.  It
enforced these laws by means of the police, the marshals, the militia
and regular army, and the courts.  And it was a snap.  A superman's
chiefest danger was his fellow-superman.  The great stupid mass of the
people did not count.  They were constituted of such inferior clay that
the veriest chicanery fooled them.  The superman manipulated the
strings, and when robbery of the workers became too slow or monotonous,
they turned loose and robbed one another.

Daylight was philosophical, but not a philosopher.  He had never read
the books.  He was a hard-headed, practical man, and farthest from him
was any intention of ever reading the books. He had lived life in the
simple, where books were not necessary for an understanding of life,
and now life in the complex appeared just as simple.  He saw through
its frauds and fictions, and found it as elemental as on the Yukon.
Men were made of the same stuff.  They had the same passions and
desires.  Finance was poker on a larger scale.  The men who played were
the men who had stakes.  The workers were the fellows toiling for
grubstakes.  He saw the game played out according to the everlasting
rules, and he played a hand himself.  The gigantic futility of humanity
organized and befuddled by the bandits did not shock him.  It was the
natural order.  Practically all human endeavors were futile. He had
seen so much of it.  His partners had starved and died on the Stewart.
Hundreds of old-timers had failed to locate on Bonanza and Eldorado,
while Swedes and chechaquos had come in on the moose-pasture and
blindly staked millions.  It was life, and life was a savage
proposition at best.  Men in civilization robbed because they were so
made.  They robbed just as cats scratched, famine pinched, and frost
bit.

So it was that Daylight became a successful financier.  He did not go
in for swindling the workers.  Not only did he not have the heart for
it, but it did not strike him as a sporting proposition.  The workers
were so easy, so stupid. It was more like slaughtering fat hand-reared
pheasants on the English preserves he had heard about.  The sport to
him, was in waylaying the successful robbers and taking their spoils
from them.  There was fun and excitement in that, and sometimes they
put up the very devil of a fight. Like Robin Hood of old, Daylight
proceeded to rob the rich; and, in a small way, to distribute to the
needy.

But he was charitable after his own fashion.  The great mass of human
misery meant nothing to him.  That was part of the everlasting order.
He had no patience with the organized charities and the professional
charity mongers.  Nor, on the other hand, was what he gave a conscience
dole.  He owed no man, and restitution was unthinkable.  What he gave
was a largess, a free, spontaneous gift; and it was for those about
him.  He never contributed to an earthquake fund in Japan nor to an
open-air fund in New York City.  Instead, he financed Jones, the
elevator boy, for a year that he might write a book.  When he learned
that the wife of his waiter at the St. Francis was suffering from
tuberculosis, he sent her to Arizona, and later, when her case was
declared hopeless, he sent the husband, too, to be with her to the end.
Likewise, he bought a string of horse-hair bridles from a convict in a
Western penitentiary, who spread the good news until it seemed to
Daylight that half the convicts in that institution were making bridles
for him.  He bought them all, paying from twenty to fifty dollars each
for them.  They were beautiful and honest things, and he decorated all
the available wall-space of his bedroom with them.

The grim Yukon life had failed to make Daylight hard.  It required
civilization to produce this result.  In the fierce, savage game he now
played, his habitual geniality imperceptibly slipped away from him, as
did his lazy Western drawl.  As his speech became sharp and nervous, so
did his mental processes.  In the swift rush of the game he found less
and less time to spend on being merely good-natured.  The change marked
his face itself.

The lines grew sterner.  Less often appeared the playful curl of his
lips, the smile in the wrinkling corners of his eyes.  The eyes
themselves, black and flashing, like an Indian's, betrayed glints of
cruelty and brutal consciousness of power.  His tremendous vitality
remained, and radiated from all his being, but it was vitality under
the new aspect of the man-trampling man-conqueror.  His battles with
elemental nature had been, in a way, impersonal; his present battles
were wholly with the males of his species, and the hardships of the
trail, the river, and the frost marred him far less than the bitter
keenness of the struggle with his fellows.

He still had recrudescence of geniality, but they were largely
periodical and forced, and they were usually due to the cocktails he
took prior to meal-time.  In the North, he had drunk deeply and at
irregular intervals; but now his drinking became systematic and
disciplined.  It was an unconscious development, but it was based upon
physical and mental condition.  The cocktails served as an inhibition.
Without reasoning or thinking about it, the strain of the office, which
was essentially due to the daring and audacity of his ventures,
required check or cessation; and he found, through the weeks and
months, that the cocktails supplied this very thing.  They constituted
a stone wall.  He never drank during the morning, nor in office hours;
but the instant he left the office he proceeded to rear this wall of
alcoholic inhibition athwart his consciousness.  The office became
immediately a closed affair.  It ceased to exist.  In the afternoon,
after lunch, it lived again for one or two hours, when, leaving it, he
rebuilt the wall of inhibition.  Of course, there were exceptions to
this; and, such was the rigor of his discipline, that if he had a
dinner or a conference before him in which, in a business way, he
encountered enemies or allies and planned or prosecuted campaigns, he
abstained from drinking.  But the instant the business was settled, his
everlasting call went out for a Martini, and for a double-Martini at
that, served in a long glass so as not to excite comment.



CHAPTER VI

Into Daylight's life came Dede Mason.  She came rather imperceptibly.
He had accepted her impersonally along with the office furnishing, the
office boy, Morrison, the chief, confidential, and only clerk, and all
the rest of the accessories of a superman's gambling place of business.
Had he been asked any time during the first months she was in his
employ, he would have been unable to tell the color of her eyes.  From
the fact that she was a demiblonde, there resided dimly in his
subconsciousness a conception that she was a brunette.  Likewise he had
an idea that she was not thin, while there was an absence in his mind
of any idea that she was fat.  As to how she dressed, he had no ideas
at all.  He had no trained eye in such matters, nor was he interested.
He took it for granted, in the lack of any impression to the contrary,
that she was dressed some how.  He knew her as "Miss Mason," and that
was all, though he was aware that as a stenographer she seemed quick
and accurate.  This impression, however, was quite vague, for he had
had no experience with other stenographers, and naturally believed that
they were all quick and accurate.

One morning, signing up letters, he came upon an I shall. Glancing
quickly over the page for similar constructions, he found a number of I
wills.  The I shall was alone.  It stood out conspicuously.  He pressed
the call-bell twice, and a moment later Dede Mason entered.  "Did I say
that, Miss Mason?" he asked, extending the letter to her and pointing
out the criminal phrase.  A shade of annoyance crossed her face.  She
stood convicted.

"My mistake," she said.  "I am sorry.  But it's not a mistake, you
know," she added quickly.

"How do you make that out?" challenged Daylight.  "It sure don't sound
right, in my way of thinking."

She had reached the door by this time, and now turned the offending
letter in her hand.  "It's right just the same."

"But that would make all those I wills wrong, then," he argued.

"It does," was her audacious answer.  "Shall I change them?"

"I shall be over to look that affair up on Monday."  Daylight repeated
the sentence from the letter aloud.  He did it with a grave, serious
air, listening intently to the sound of his own voice.  He shook his
head.  "It don't sound right, Miss Mason. It just don't sound right.
Why, nobody writes to me that way. They all say I will--educated men,
too, some of them.  Ain't that so?"

"Yes," she acknowledged, and passed out to her machine to make the
correction.

It chanced that day that among the several men with whom he sat at
luncheon was a young Englishman, a mining engineer.  Had it happened
any other time it would have passed unnoticed, but, fresh from the tilt
with his stenographer, Daylight was struck immediately by the
Englishman's I shall.  Several times, in the course of the meal, the
phrase was repeated, and Daylight was certain there was no mistake
about it.

After luncheon he cornered Macintosh, one of the members whom he knew
to have been a college man, because of his football reputation.

"Look here, Bunny," Daylight demanded, "which is right, I shall be over
to look that affair up on Monday, or I will be over to look that affair
up on Monday?"

The ex-football captain debated painfully for a minute.  "Blessed if I
know," he confessed.  "Which way do I say it?"

"Oh, I will, of course."

"Then the other is right, depend upon it.  I always was rotten on
grammar."

On the way back to the office, Daylight dropped into a bookstore and
bought a grammar; and for a solid hour, his feet up on the desk, he
toiled through its pages.  "Knock off my head with little apples if the
girl ain't right," he communed aloud at the end of the session.  For
the first time it struck him that there was something about his
stenographer.  He had accepted her up to then, as a female creature and
a bit of office furnishing.  But now, having demonstrated that she knew
more grammar than did business men and college graduates, she became an
individual. She seemed to stand out in his consciousness as
conspicuously as the I shall had stood out on the typed page, and he
began to take notice.

He managed to watch her leaving that afternoon, and he was aware for
the first time that she was well-formed, and that her manner of dress
was satisfying.  He knew none of the details of women's dress, and he
saw none of the details of her neat shirt-waist and well-cut tailor
suit.  He saw only the effect in a general, sketchy way.  She looked
right.  This was in the absence of anything wrong or out of the way.

"She's a trim little good-looker," was his verdict, when the outer
office door closed on her.

The next morning, dictating, he concluded that he liked the way she did
her hair, though for the life of him he could have given no description
of it.  The impression was pleasing, that was all.

She sat between him and the window, and he noted that her hair was
light brown, with hints of golden bronze.  A pale sun, shining in,
touched the golden bronze into smouldering fires that were very
pleasing to behold.  Funny, he thought, that he had never observed this
phenomenon before.

In the midst of the letter he came to the construction which had caused
the trouble the day before.  He remembered his wrestle with the
grammar, and dictated.

"I shall meet you halfway this proposition--"

Miss Mason gave a quick look up at him.  The action was purely
involuntary, and, in fact, had been half a startle of surprise. The
next instant her eyes had dropped again, and she sat waiting to go on
with the dictation.  But in that moment of her glance Daylight had
noted that her eyes were gray.  He was later to learn that at times
there were golden lights in those same gray eyes; but he had seen
enough, as it was, to surprise him, for he became suddenly aware that
he had always taken her for a brunette with brown eyes, as a matter of
course.

"You were right, after all," he confessed, with a sheepish grin that
sat incongruously on his stern, Indian-like features.

Again he was rewarded by an upward glance and an acknowledging smile,
and this time he verified the fact that her eyes were gray.

"But it don't sound right, just the same," he complained.  At this she
laughed outright.

"I beg your pardon," she hastened to make amends, and then spoiled it
by adding, "but you are so funny."

Daylight began to feel a slight awkwardness, and the sun would persist
in setting her hair a-smouldering.

"I didn't mean to be funny," he said.

"That was why I laughed.  But it is right, and perfectly good grammar."

"All right," he sighed--"I shall meet you halfway in this
proposition--got that?" And the dictation went on.  He discovered that
in the intervals, when she had nothing to do, she read books and
magazines, or worked on some sort of feminine fancy work.

Passing her desk, once, he picked up a volume of Kipling's poems and
glanced bepuzzled through the pages.  "You like reading, Miss Mason?"
he said, laying the book down.

"Oh, yes," was her answer; "very much."

Another time it was a book of Wells', The Wheels of Change. "What's it
all about?" Daylight asked.

"Oh, it's just a novel, a love-story."  She stopped, but he still stood
waiting, and she felt it incumbent to go on.

"It's about a little Cockney draper's assistant, who takes a vacation
on his bicycle, and falls in with a young girl very much above him.
Her mother is a popular writer and all that.  And the situation is very
curious, and sad, too, and tragic.  Would you care to read it?"

"Does he get her?" Daylight demanded.

"No; that's the point of it.  He wasn't--"

"And he doesn't get her, and you've read all them pages, hundreds of
them, to find that out?" Daylight muttered in amazement.

Miss Mason was nettled as well as amused.

"But you read the mining and financial news by the hour," she retorted.

"But I sure get something out of that.  It's business, and it's
different.  I get money out of it.  What do you get out of books?"

"Points of view, new ideas, life."

"Not worth a cent cash."

"But life's worth more than cash," she argued.

"Oh, well," he said, with easy masculine tolerance, "so long as you
enjoy it.  That's what counts, I suppose; and there's no accounting for
taste."

Despite his own superior point of view, he had an idea that she knew a
lot, and he experienced a fleeting feeling like that of a barbarian
face to face with the evidence of some tremendous culture.  To Daylight
culture was a worthless thing, and yet, somehow, he was vaguely
troubled by a sense that there was more in culture than he imagined.

Again, on her desk, in passing, he noticed a book with which he was
familiar.  This time he did not stop, for he had recognized the cover.
It was a magazine correspondent's book on the Klondike, and he knew
that he and his photograph figured in it and he knew, also, of a
certain sensational chapter concerned with a woman's suicide, and with
one "Too much Daylight."

After that he did not talk with her again about books.  He imagined
what erroneous conclusions she had drawn from that particular chapter,
and it stung him the more in that they were undeserved. Of all unlikely
things, to have the reputation of being a lady-killer,--he, Burning
Daylight,--and to have a woman kill herself out of love for him.  He
felt that he was a most unfortunate man and wondered by what luck that
one book of all the thousands of books should have fallen into his
stenographer's hands.  For some days afterward he had an uncomfortable
sensation of guiltiness whenever he was in Miss Mason's presence; and
once he was positive that he caught her looking at him with a curious,
intent gaze, as if studying what manner of man he was.

He pumped Morrison, the clerk, who had first to vent his personal
grievance against Miss Mason before he could tell what little he knew
of her.

"She comes from Siskiyou County.  She's very nice to work with in the
office, of course, but she's rather stuck on herself--exclusive, you
know."

"How do you make that out?" Daylight queried.

"Well, she thinks too much of herself to associate with those she works
with, in the office here, for instance.  She won't have anything to do
with a fellow, you see.  I've asked her out repeatedly, to the theatre
and the chutes and such things.  But nothing doing.  Says she likes
plenty of sleep, and can't stay up late, and has to go all the way to
Berkeley--that's where she lives."

This phase of the report gave Daylight a distinct satisfaction. She was
a bit above the ordinary, and no doubt about it.  But Morrison's next
words carried a hurt.

"But that's all hot air.  She's running with the University boys,
that's what she's doing.  She needs lots of sleep and can't go to the
theatre with me, but she can dance all hours with them.  I've heard it
pretty straight that she goes to all their hops and such things.
Rather stylish and high-toned for a stenographer, I'd say.  And she
keeps a horse, too.  She rides astride all over those hills out there.
I saw her one Sunday myself.  Oh, she's a high-flyer, and I wonder how
she does it.  Sixty-five a month don't go far.  Then she has a sick
brother, too."

"Live with her people?" Daylight asked.

"No; hasn't got any.  They were well to do, I've heard.  They must have
been, or that brother of hers couldn't have gone to the University of
California.  Her father had a big cattle-ranch, but he got to fooling
with mines or something, and went broke before he died.  Her mother
died long before that.  Her brother must cost a lot of money.  He was a
husky once, played football, was great on hunting and being out in the
mountains and such things. He got his accident breaking horses, and
then rheumatism or something got into him.  One leg is shorter than the
other and withered up some.  He has to walk on crutches.  I saw her out
with him once--crossing the ferry.  The doctors have been experimenting
on him for years, and he's in the French Hospital now, I think."

All of which side-lights on Miss Mason went to increase Daylight's
interest in her.  Yet, much as he desired, he failed to get acquainted
with her.  He had thoughts of asking her to luncheon, but his was the
innate chivalry of the frontiersman, and the thoughts never came to
anything.  He knew a self-respecting, square-dealing man was not
supposed to take his stenographer to luncheon.  Such things did happen,
he knew, for he heard the chaffing gossip of the club; but he did not
think much of such men and felt sorry for the girls.  He had a strange
notion that a man had less rights over those he employed than over mere
acquaintances or strangers.  Thus, had Miss Mason not been his
employee, he was confident that he would have had her to luncheon or
the theatre in no time.  But he felt that it was an imposition for an
employer, because he bought the time of an employee in working hours,
to presume in any way upon any of the rest of that employee's time.  To
do so was to act like a bully. The situation was unfair.  It was taking
advantage of the fact that the employee was dependent on one for a
livelihood.  The employee might permit the imposition through fear of
angering the employer and not through any personal inclination at all.

In his own case he felt that such an imposition would be peculiarly
obnoxious, for had she not read that cursed Klondike correspondent's
book?  A pretty idea she must have of him, a girl that was too
high-toned to have anything to do with a good-looking, gentlemanly
fellow like Morrison.  Also, and down under all his other reasons,
Daylight was timid.  The only thing he had ever been afraid of in his
life was woman, and he had been afraid all his life.  Nor was that
timidity to be put easily to flight now that he felt the first
glimmering need and desire for woman.  The specter of the apron-string
still haunted him, and helped him to find excuses for getting on no
forwarder with Dede Mason.



CHAPTER VII

Not being favored by chance in getting acquainted with Dede Mason,
Daylight's interest in her slowly waned.  This was but natural, for he
was plunged deep in hazardous operations, and the fascinations of the
game and the magnitude of it accounted for all the energy that even his
magnificent organism could generate.

Such was his absorption that the pretty stenographer slowly and
imperceptibly faded from the forefront of his consciousness. Thus, the
first faint spur, in the best sense, of his need for woman ceased to
prod.  So far as Dede Mason was concerned, he possessed no more than a
complacent feeling of satisfaction in that he had a very nice
stenographer.  And, completely to put the quietus on any last lingering
hopes he might have had of her, he was in the thick of his spectacular
and intensely bitter fight with the Coastwise Steam Navigation Company,
and the Hawaiian, Nicaraguan, and Pacific-Mexican Steamship-Company.
He stirred up a bigger muss than he had anticipated, and even he was
astounded at the wide ramifications of the struggle and at the
unexpected and incongruous interests that were drawn into it. Every
newspaper in San Francisco turned upon him.  It was true, one or two of
them had first intimated that they were open to subsidization, but
Daylight's judgment was that the situation did not warrant such
expenditure.  Up to this time the press had been amusingly tolerant and
good-naturedly sensational about him, but now he was to learn what
virulent scrupulousness an antagonized press was capable of.  Every
episode of his life was resurrected to serve as foundations for
malicious fabrications.  Daylight was frankly amazed at the new
interpretation put upon all he had accomplished and the deeds he had
done.  From an Alaskan hero he was metamorphosed into an Alaskan bully,
liar, desperado, and all around "bad Man."  Not content with this, lies
upon lies, out of whole cloth, were manufactured about him.  He never
replied, though once he went to the extent of disburdening his mind to
half a dozen reporters.  "Do your damnedest," he told them. "Burning
Daylight's bucked bigger things than your dirty, lying sheets.  And I
don't blame you, boys... that is, not much. You can't help it.  You've
got to live.  There's a mighty lot of women in this world that make
their living in similar fashion to yours, because they're not able to
do anything better. Somebody's got to do the dirty work, and it might
as well be you. You're paid for it, and you ain't got the backbone to
rustle cleaner jobs."

The socialist press of the city jubilantly exploited this utterance,
scattering it broadcast over San Francisco in tens of thousands of
paper dodgers.  And the journalists, stung to the quick, retaliated
with the only means in their power-printer's ink abuse.  The attack
became bitterer than ever.  The whole affair sank to the deeper deeps
of rancor and savageness.  The poor woman who had killed herself was
dragged out of her grave and paraded on thousands of reams of paper as
a martyr and a victim to Daylight's ferocious brutality.  Staid,
statistical articles were published, proving that he had made his start
by robbing poor miners of their claims, and that the capstone to his
fortune had been put in place by his treacherous violation of faith
with the Guggenhammers in the deal on Ophir.  And there were editorials
written in which he was called an enemy of society, possessed of the
manners and culture of a caveman, a fomenter of wasteful business
troubles, the destroyer of the city's prosperity in commerce and trade,
an anarchist of dire menace; and one editorial gravely recommended that
hanging would be a lesson to him and his ilk, and concluded with the
fervent hope that some day his big motor-car would smash up and smash
him with it.

He was like a big bear raiding a bee-hive and, regardless of the
stings, he obstinately persisted in pawing for the honey.  He gritted
his teeth and struck back.  Beginning with a raid on two steamship
companies, it developed into a pitched battle with a city, a state, and
a continental coastline.  Very well; they wanted fight, and they would
get it.  It was what he wanted, and he felt justified in having come
down from the Klondike, for here he was gambling at a bigger table than
ever the Yukon had supplied.  Allied with him, on a splendid salary,
with princely pickings thrown in, was a lawyer, Larry Hegan, a young
Irishman with a reputation to make, and whose peculiar genius had been
unrecognized until Daylight picked up with him.  Hegan had Celtic
imagination and daring, and to such degree that Daylight's cooler head
was necessary as a check on his wilder visions.  Hegan's was a
Napoleonic legal mind, without balance, and it was just this balance
that Daylight supplied.  Alone, the Irishman was doomed to failure, but
directed by Daylight, he was on the highroad to fortune and
recognition.  Also, he was possessed of no more personal or civic
conscience than Napoleon.

It was Hegan who guided Daylight through the intricacies of modern
politics, labor organization, and commercial and corporation law.  It
was Hegan, prolific of resource and suggestion, who opened Daylight's
eyes to undreamed possibilities in twentieth-century warfare; and it
was Daylight, rejecting, accepting, and elaborating, who planned the
campaigns and prosecuted them.  With the Pacific coast from Peugeot
Sound to Panama, buzzing and humming, and with San Francisco furiously
about his ears, the two big steamship companies had all the appearance
of winning.  It looked as if Burning Daylight was being beaten slowly
to his knees.  And then he struck--at the steamship companies, at San
Francisco, at the whole Pacific coast.

It was not much of a blow at first.  A Christian Endeavor convention
being held in San Francisco, a row was started by Express Drivers'
Union No. 927 over the handling of a small heap of baggage at the Ferry
Building.  A few heads were broken, a score of arrests made, and the
baggage was delivered.  No one would have guessed that behind this
petty wrangle was the fine Irish hand of Hegan, made potent by the
Klondike gold of Burning Daylight.  It was an insignificant affair at
best--or so it seemed.  But the Teamsters' Union took up the quarrel,
backed by the whole Water Front Federation.  Step by step, the strike
became involved.  A refusal of cooks and waiters to serve scab
teamsters or teamsters' employers brought out the cooks and waiters.
The butchers and meat-cutters refused to handle meat destined for
unfair restaurants.  The combined Employers' Associations put up a
solid front, and found facing them the 40,000 organized laborers of San
Francisco.  The restaurant bakers and the bakery wagon drivers struck,
followed by the milkers, milk drivers, and chicken pickers.  The
building trades asserted its position in unambiguous terms, and all San
Francisco was in turmoil.

But still, it was only San Francisco.  Hegan's intrigues were masterly,
and Daylight's campaign steadily developed.  The powerful fighting
organization known as the Pacific Slope Seaman's Union refused to work
vessels the cargoes of which were to be handled by scab longshoremen
and freight-handlers.  The union presented its ultimatum, and then
called a strike.  This had been Daylight's objective all the time.
Every incoming coastwise vessel was boarded by the union officials and
its crew sent ashore.  And with the Seamen went the firemen, the
engineers, and the sea cooks and waiters.  Daily the number of idle
steamers increased.  It was impossible to get scab crews, for the men
of the Seaman's Union were fighters trained in the hard school of the
sea, and when they went out it meant blood and death to scabs.  This
phase of the strike spread up and down the entire Pacific coast, until
all the ports were filled with idle ships, and sea transportation was
at a standstill.  The days and weeks dragged out, and the strike held.
The Coastwise Steam Navigation Company, and the Hawaiian, Nicaraguan,
and Pacific-Mexican Steamship Company were tied up completely.  The
expenses of combating the strike were tremendous, and they were earning
nothing, while daily the situation went from bad to worse, until "peace
at any price" became the cry.  And still there was no peace, until
Daylight and his allies played out their hand, raked in the winnings,
and allowed a goodly portion of a continent to resume business.

It was noted, in following years, that several leaders of workmen built
themselves houses and blocks of renting flats and took trips to the old
countries, while, more immediately, other leaders and "dark horses"
came to political preferment and the control of the municipal
government and the municipal moneys.  In fact, San Francisco's
boss-ridden condition was due in greater degree to Daylight's
widespreading battle than even San Francisco ever dreamed.  For the
part he had played, the details of which were practically all rumor and
guesswork, quickly leaked out, and in consequence he became a
much-execrated and well-hated man. Nor had Daylight himself dreamed
that his raid on the steamship companies would have grown to such
colossal proportions.

But he had got what he was after.  He had played an exciting hand and
won, beating the steamship companies down into the dust and mercilessly
robbing the stockholders by perfectly legal methods before he let go.
Of course, in addition to the large sums of money he had paid over, his
allies had rewarded themselves by gobbling the advantages which later
enabled them to loot the city.  His alliance with a gang of cutthroats
had brought about a lot of cutthroating.  But his conscience suffered
no twinges.  He remembered what he had once heard an old preacher
utter, namely, that they who rose by the sword perished by the sword.
One took his chances when he played with cutting throats, and his,
Daylight's, throat was still intact.  That was it!  And he had won.  It
was all gamble and war between the strong men.  The fools did not
count.  They were always getting hurt; and that they always had been
getting hurt was the conclusion he drew from what little he knew of
history.  San Francisco had wanted war, and he had given it war.  It
was the game.  All the big fellows did the same, and they did much
worse, too.

"Don't talk to me about morality and civic duty," he replied to a
persistent interviewer.  "If you quit your job tomorrow and went to
work on another paper, you would write just what you were told to
write.  It's morality and civic duty now with you; on the new job it
would be backing up a thieving railroad with... morality and civic
duty, I suppose.  Your price, my son, is just about thirty per week.
That's what you sell for.  But your paper would sell for a bit more.
Pay its price to-day, and it would shift its present rotten policy to
some other rotten policy; but it would never let up on morality and
civic duty.

"And all because a sucker is born every minute.  So long as the people
stand for it, they'll get it good and plenty, my son.  And the
shareholders and business interests might as well shut up squawking
about how much they've been hurt.  You never hear ary squeal out of
them when they've got the other fellow down and are gouging him.  This
is the time THEY got gouged, and that's all there is to it.  Talk about
mollycoddles!  Son, those same fellows would steal crusts from starving
men and pull gold fillings from the mouths of corpses, yep, and squawk
like Sam Scratch if some blamed corpse hit back.  They're all tarred
with the same brush, little and big.  Look at your Sugar Trust--with
all its millions stealing water like a common thief from New York City,
and short-weighing the government on its phoney scales. Morality and
civic duty!  Son, forget it."



CHAPTER VIII

Daylight's coming to civilization had not improved him.  True, he wore
better clothes, had learned slightly better manners, and spoke better
English.  As a gambler and a man-trampler he had developed remarkable
efficiency.  Also, he had become used to a higher standard of living,
and he had whetted his wits to razor sharpness in the fierce,
complicated struggle of fighting males. But he had hardened, and at the
expense of his old-time, whole-souled geniality.  Of the essential
refinements of civilization he knew nothing.  He did not know they
existed.  He had become cynical, bitter, and brutal.  Power had its
effect on him that it had on all men.  Suspicious of the big
exploiters, despising the fools of the exploited herd, he had faith
only in himself.  This led to an undue and erroneous exaltation of his
ego, while kindly consideration of others--nay, even simple
respect--was destroyed, until naught was left for him but to worship at
the shrine of self.  Physically, he was not the man of iron muscles who
had come down out of the Arctic.  He did not exercise sufficiently, ate
more than was good for him, and drank altogether too much.  His muscles
were getting flabby, and his tailor called attention to his increasing
waistband.  In fact, Daylight was developing a definite paunch.  This
physical deterioration was manifest likewise in his face.  The lean
Indian visage was suffering a city change.  The slight hollows in the
cheeks under the high cheek-bones had filled out.  The beginning of
puff-sacks under the eyes was faintly visible.  The girth of the neck
had increased, and the first crease and fold of a double chin were
becoming plainly discernible.  The old effect of asceticism, bred of
terrific hardships and toil, had vanished; the features had become
broader and heavier, betraying all the stigmata of the life he lived,
advertising the man's self-indulgence, harshness, and brutality.

Even his human affiliations were descending.  Playing a lone hand,
contemptuous of most of the men with whom he played, lacking in
sympathy or understanding of them, and certainly independent of them,
he found little in common with those to be encountered, say at the
Alta-Pacific.  In point of fact, when the battle with the steamship
companies was at its height and his raid was inflicting incalculable
damage on all business interests, he had been asked to resign from the
Alta-Pacific. The idea had been rather to his liking, and he had found
new quarters in clubs like the Riverside, organized and practically
maintained by the city bosses.  He found that he really liked such men
better.  They were more primitive and simple, and they did not put on
airs.  They were honest buccaneers, frankly in the game for what they
could get out of it, on the surface more raw and savage, but at least
not glossed over with oily or graceful hypocrisy.  The Alta-Pacific had
suggested that his resignation be kept a private matter, and then had
privily informed the newspapers.  The latter had made great capital out
of the forced resignation, but Daylight had grinned and silently gone
his way, though registering a black mark against more than one club
member who was destined to feel, in the days to come, the crushing
weight of the Klondiker's financial paw.

The storm-centre of a combined newspaper attack lasting for months,
Daylight's character had been torn to shreds.  There was no fact in his
history that had not been distorted into a criminality or a vice.  This
public making of him over into an iniquitous monster had pretty well
crushed any lingering hope he had of getting acquainted with Dede
Mason.  He felt that there was no chance for her ever to look kindly on
a man of his caliber, and, beyond increasing her salary to seventy-five
dollars a month, he proceeded gradually to forget about her.  The
increase was made known to her through Morrison, and later she thanked
Daylight, and that was the end of it.

One week-end, feeling heavy and depressed and tired of the city and its
ways, he obeyed the impulse of a whim that was later to play an
important part in his life.  The desire to get out of the city for a
whiff of country air and for a change of scene was the cause.  Yet, to
himself, he made the excuse of going to Glen Ellen for the purpose of
inspecting the brickyard with which Holdsworthy had goldbricked him.

He spent the night in the little country hotel, and on Sunday morning,
astride a saddle-horse rented from the Glen Ellen butcher, rode out of
the village.  The brickyard was close at hand on the flat beside the
Sonoma Creek.  The kilns were visible among the trees, when he glanced
to the left and caught sight of a cluster of wooded knolls half a mile
away, perched on the rolling slopes of Sonoma Mountain.  The mountain,
itself wooded, towered behind.  The trees on the knolls seemed to
beckon to him.

The dry, early-summer air, shot through with sunshine, was wine to him.
Unconsciously he drank it in deep breaths.  The prospect of the
brickyard was uninviting.  He was jaded with all things business, and
the wooded knolls were calling to him.  A horse was between his legs--a
good horse, he decided; one that sent him back to the cayuses he had
ridden during his eastern Oregon boyhood. He had been somewhat of a
rider in those early days, and the champ of bit and creak of
saddle-leather sounded good to him now.

Resolving to have his fun first, and to look over the brickyard
afterward, he rode on up the hill, prospecting for a way across country
to get to the knolls.  He left the country road at the first gate he
came to and cantered through a hayfield.  The grain was waist-high on
either side the wagon road, and he sniffed the warm aroma of it with
delighted nostrils.  Larks flew up before him, and from everywhere came
mellow notes.  From the appearance of the road it was patent that it
had been used for hauling clay to the now idle brickyard.  Salving his
conscience with the idea that this was part of the inspection, he rode
on to the clay-pit--a huge scar in a hillside.  But he did not linger
long, swinging off again to the left and leaving the road.  Not a
farm-house was in sight, and the change from the city crowding was
essentially satisfying.  He rode now through open woods, across little
flower-scattered glades, till he came upon a spring.  Flat on the
ground, he drank deeply of the clear water, and, looking about him,
felt with a shock the beauty of the world.  It came to him like a
discovery; he had never realized it before, he concluded, and also, he
had forgotten much.  One could not sit in at high finance and keep
track of such things.  As he drank in the air, the scene, and the
distant song of larks, he felt like a poker-player rising from a
night-long table and coming forth from the pent atmosphere to taste the
freshness of the morn.

At the base of the knolls he encountered a tumble-down stake-and-rider
fence.  From the look of it he judged it must be forty years old at
least--the work of some first pioneer who had taken up the land when
the days of gold had ended.  The woods were very thick here, yet fairly
clear of underbrush, so that, while the blue sky was screened by the
arched branches, he was able to ride beneath.  He now found himself in
a nook of several acres, where the oak and manzanita and madrono gave
way to clusters of stately redwoods.  Against the foot of a
steep-sloped knoll he came upon a magnificent group of redwoods that
seemed to have gathered about a tiny gurgling spring.

He halted his horse, for beside the spring uprose a wild California
lily.  It was a wonderful flower, growing there in the cathedral nave
of lofty trees.  At least eight feet in height, its stem rose straight
and slender, green and bare for two-thirds its length, and then burst
into a shower of snow-white waxen bells.  There were hundreds of these
blossoms, all from the one stem, delicately poised and ethereally
frail.  Daylight had never seen anything like it.  Slowly his gaze
wandered from it to all that was about him.  He took off his hat, with
almost a vague religious feeling.  This was different.  No room for
contempt and evil here.  This was clean and fresh and
beautiful-something he could respect.  It was like a church.  The
atmosphere was one of holy calm.  Here man felt the prompting of nobler
things.  Much of this and more was in Daylight's heart as he looked
about him. But it was not a concept of his mind.  He merely felt it
without thinking about it at all.

On the steep incline above the spring grew tiny maidenhair ferns, while
higher up were larger ferns and brakes.  Great, moss-covered trunks of
fallen trees lay here and there, slowly sinking back and merging into
the level of the forest mould. Beyond, in a slightly clearer space,
wild grape and honeysuckle swung in green riot from gnarled old oak
trees.  A gray Douglas squirrel crept out on a branch and watched him.
From somewhere came the distant knocking of a woodpecker.  This sound
did not disturb the hush and awe of the place.  Quiet woods, noises
belonged there and made the solitude complete.  The tiny bubbling
ripple of the spring and the gray flash of tree-squirrel were as
yardsticks with which to measure the silence and motionless repose.

"Might be a million miles from anywhere," Daylight whispered to himself.

But ever his gaze returned to the wonderful lily beside the bubbling
spring.

He tethered the horse and wandered on foot among the knolls. Their tops
were crowned with century-old spruce trees, and their sides clothed
with oaks and madronos and native holly.  But to the perfect redwoods
belonged the small but deep canon that threaded its way among the
knolls.  Here he found no passage out for his horse, and he returned to
the lily beside the spring.  On foot, tripping, stumbling, leading the
animal, he forced his way up the hillside.  And ever the ferns carpeted
the way of his feet, ever the forest climbed with him and arched
overhead, and ever the clean joy and sweetness stole in upon his senses.

On the crest he came through an amazing thicket of velvet-trunked young
madronos, and emerged on an open hillside that led down into a tiny
valley.  The sunshine was at first dazzling in its brightness, and he
paused and rested, for he was panting from the exertion.  Not of old
had he known shortness of breath such as this, and muscles that so
easily tired at a stiff climb.  A tiny stream ran down the tiny valley
through a tiny meadow that was carpeted knee-high with grass and blue
and white nemophila.  The hillside was covered with Mariposa lilies and
wild hyacinth, down through which his horse dropped slowly, with
circumspect feet and reluctant gait.

Crossing the stream, Daylight followed a faint cattle trail over a low,
rocky hill and through a wine-wooded forest of manzanita, and emerged
upon another tiny valley, down which filtered another spring-fed,
meadow-bordered streamlet.  A jack-rabbit bounded from a bush under his
horse's nose, leaped the stream, and vanished up the opposite hillside
of scrub-oak.  Daylight watched it admiringly as he rode on to the head
of the meadow.  Here he startled up a many-pronged buck, that seemed to
soar across the meadow, and to soar over the stake-and-rider fence,
and, still soaring, disappeared in a friendly copse beyond.

Daylight's delight was unbounded.  It seemed to him that he had never
been so happy.  His old woods' training was aroused, and he was keenly
interested in everything in the moss on the trees and branches; in the
bunches of mistletoe hanging in the oaks; in the nest of a wood-rat; in
the water-cress growing in the sheltered eddies of the little stream;
in the butterflies drifting through the rifted sunshine and shadow; in
the blue jays that flashed in splashes of gorgeous color across the
forest aisles; in the tiny birds, like wrens, that hopped among the
bushes and imitated certain minor quail-calls; and in the
crimson-crested woodpecker that ceased its knocking and cocked its head
on one side to survey him.  Crossing the stream, he struck faint
vestiges of a wood-road, used, evidently, a generation back, when the
meadow had been cleared of its oaks.  He found a hawk's nest on the
lightning-shattered tipmost top of a six-foot redwood.  And to complete
it all his horse stumbled upon several large broods of half-grown
quail, and the air was filled with the thrum of their flight.  He
halted and watched the young ones "petrifying" and disappearing on the
ground before his eyes, and listening to the anxious calls of the old
ones hidden in the thickets.

"It sure beats country places and bungalows at Menlo Park," he communed
aloud; "and if ever I get the hankering for country life, it's me for
this every time."

The old wood-road led him to a clearing, where a dozen acres of grapes
grew on wine-red soil.  A cow-path, more trees and thickets, and he
dropped down a hillside to the southeast exposure.  Here, poised above
a big forested canon, and looking out upon Sonoma Valley, was a small
farm-house.  With its barn and outhouses it snuggled into a nook in the
hillside, which protected it from west and north.  It was the erosion
from this hillside, he judged, that had formed the little level stretch
of vegetable garden.  The soil was fat and black, and there was water
in plenty, for he saw several faucets running wide open.

Forgotten was the brickyard.  Nobody was at home, but Daylight
dismounted and ranged the vegetable garden, eating strawberries and
green peas, inspecting the old adobe barn and the rusty plough and
harrow, and rolling and smoking cigarettes while he watched the antics
of several broods of young chickens and the mother hens.  A foottrail
that led down the wall of the big canyon invited him, and he proceeded
to follow it.  A water-pipe, usually above ground, paralleled the
trail, which he concluded led upstream to the bed of the creek.  The
wall of the canon was several hundred feet from top to bottom, and
magnificent were the untouched trees that the place was plunged in
perpetual shade.  He measured with his eye spruces five and six feet in
diameter and redwoods even larger.  One such he passed, a twister that
was at least ten or eleven feet through. The trail led straight to a
small dam where was the intake for the pipe that watered the vegetable
garden.  Here, beside the stream, were alders and laurel trees, and he
walked through fern-brakes higher than his head.  Velvety moss was
everywhere, out of which grew maiden-hair and gold-back ferns.

Save for the dam, it was a virgin wild.  No ax had invaded, and the
trees died only of old age and stress of winter storm.  The huge trunks
of those that had fallen lay moss-covered, slowly resolving back into
the soil from which they sprang.  Some had lain so long that they were
quite gone, though their faint outlines, level with the mould, could
still be seen.  Others bridged the stream, and from beneath the bulk of
one monster half a dozen younger trees, overthrown and crushed by the
fall, growing out along the ground, still lived and prospered, their
roots bathed by the stream, their upshooting branches catching the
sunlight through the gap that had been made in the forest roof.

Back at the farm-house, Daylight mounted and rode on away from the
ranch and into the wilder canons and steeper steeps beyond. Nothing
could satisfy his holiday spirit now but the ascent of Sonoma Mountain.
And here on the crest, three hours afterward, he emerged, tired and
sweaty, garments torn and face and hands scratched, but with sparkling
eyes and an unwonted zestfulness of expression.  He felt the illicit
pleasure of a schoolboy playing truant.  The big gambling table of San
Francisco seemed very far away.  But there was more than illicit
pleasure in his mood.  It was as though he were going through a sort of
cleansing bath.  No room here for all the sordidness, meanness, and
viciousness that filled the dirty pool of city existence.  Without
pondering in detail upon the matter at all, his sensations were of
purification and uplift.  Had he been asked to state how he felt, he
would merely have said that he was having a good time; for he was
unaware in his self-consciousness of the potent charm of nature that
was percolating through his city-rotted body and brain--potent, in that
he came of an abysmal past of wilderness dwellers, while he was himself
coated with but the thinnest rind of crowded civilization.

There were no houses in the summit of Sonoma Mountain, and, all alone
under the azure California sky, he reined in on the southern edge of
the peak.  He saw open pasture country, intersected with wooded canons,
descending to the south and west from his feet, crease on crease and
roll on roll, from lower level to lower level, to the floor of Petaluma
Valley, flat as a billiard-table, a cardboard affair, all patches and
squares of geometrical regularity where the fat freeholds were farmed.
Beyond, to the west, rose range on range of mountains cuddling purple
mists of atmosphere in their valleys; and still beyond, over the last
range of all, he saw the silver sheen of the Pacific.  Swinging his
horse, he surveyed the west and north, from Santa Rosa to St. Helena,
and on to the east, across Sonoma to the chaparral-covered range that
shut off the view of Napa Valley.  Here, part way up the eastern wall
of Sonoma Valley, in range of a line intersecting the little village of
Glen Ellen, he made out a scar upon a hillside.  His first thought was
that it was the dump of a mine tunnel, but remembering that he was not
in gold-bearing country, he dismissed the scar from his mind and
continued the circle of his survey to the southeast, where, across the
waters of San Pablo Bay, he could see, sharp and distant, the twin
peaks of Mount Diablo.  To the south was Mount Tamalpais, and, yes, he
was right, fifty miles away, where the draughty winds of the Pacific
blew in the Golden Gate, the smoke of San Francisco made a low-lying
haze against the sky.

"I ain't seen so much country all at once in many a day," he thought
aloud.

He was loath to depart, and it was not for an hour that he was able to
tear himself away and take the descent of the mountain. Working out a
new route just for the fun of it, late afternoon was upon him when he
arrived back at the wooded knolls.  Here, on the top of one of them,
his keen eyes caught a glimpse of a shade of green sharply
differentiated from any he had seen all day. Studying it for a minute,
he concluded that it was composed of three cypress trees, and he knew
that nothing else than the hand of man could have planted them there.
Impelled by curiosity purely boyish, he made up his mind to
investigate.  So densely wooded was the knoll, and so steep, that he
had to dismount and go up on foot, at times even on hands and knees
struggling hard to force a way through the thicker underbrush.  He came
out abruptly upon the cypresses.  They were enclosed in a small square
of ancient fence; the pickets he could plainly see had been hewn and
sharpened by hand.  Inside were the mounds of two children's graves.
Two wooden headboards, likewise hand-hewn, told the state Little David,
born 1855, died 1859; and Little Roy, born 1853, died 1860.

"The poor little kids," Daylight muttered.  The graves showed signs of
recent care.  Withered bouquets of wild flowers were on the mounds, and
the lettering on the headboards was freshly painted.  Guided by these
clews, Daylight cast about for a trail, and found one leading down the
side opposite to his ascent. Circling the base of the knoll, he picked
up with his horse and rode on to the farm-house.  Smoke was rising from
the chimney and he was quickly in conversation with a nervous, slender
young man, who, he learned, was only a tenant on the ranch.  How large
was it?  A matter of one hundred and eighty acres, though it seemed
much larger.  This was because it was so irregularly shaped. Yes, it
included the clay-pit and all the knolls, and its boundary that ran
along the big canon was over a mile long.

"You see," the young man said, "it was so rough and broken that when
they began to farm this country the farmers bought in the good land to
the edge of it.  That's why its boundaries are all gouged and jagged.

"Oh, yes, he and his wife managed to scratch a living without working
too hard.  They didn't have to pay much rent.  Hillard, the owner,
depended on the income from the clay-pit.  Hillard was well off, and
had big ranches and vineyards down on the flat of the valley.  The
brickyard paid ten cents a cubic yard for the clay.  As for the rest of
the ranch, the land was good in patches, where it was cleared, like the
vegetable garden and the vineyard, but the rest of it was too much
up-and-down."

"You're not a farmer," Daylight said.  The young man laughed and shook
his head.  "No; I'm a telegraph operator.  But the wife and I decided
to take a two years' vacation, and ... here we are. But the time's
about up.  I'm going back into the office this fall after I get the
grapes off."

Yes, there were about eleven acres in the vineyard--wine grapes. The
price was usually good.  He grew most of what they ate.  If he owned
the place, he'd clear a patch of land on the side-hill above the
vineyard and plant a small home orchard.  The soil was good.  There was
plenty of pasturage all over the ranch, and there were several cleared
patches, amounting to about fifteen acres in all, where he grew as much
mountain hay as could be found.  It sold for three to five dollars more
a ton than the rank-stalked valley hay.

Daylight listened, there came to him a sudden envy of this young fellow
living right in the midst of all this which Daylight had travelled
through the last few hours.

"What in thunder are you going back to the telegraph office for?" he
demanded.

The young man smiled with a certain wistfulness.  "Because we can't get
ahead here..." (he hesitated an instant), "and because there are added
expenses coming.  The rent, small as it is, counts; and besides, I'm
not strong enough to effectually farm the place.  If I owned it, or if
I were a real husky like you, I'd ask nothing better.  Nor would the
wife."  Again the wistful smile hovered on his face.  "You see, we're
country born, and after bucking with cities for a few years, we kind of
feel we like the country best.  We've planned to get ahead, though, and
then some day we'll buy a patch of land and stay with it."

The graves of the children?  Yes, he had relettered them and hoed the
weeds out.  It had become the custom.  Whoever lived on the ranch did
that.  For years, the story ran, the father and mother had returned
each summer to the graves.  But there had come a time when they came no
more, and then old Hillard started the custom.  The scar across the
valley?  An old mine.  It had never paid.  The men had worked on it,
off and on, for years, for the indications had been good.  But that was
years and years ago.  No paying mine had ever been struck in the
valley, though there had been no end of prospect-holes put down and
there had been a sort of rush there thirty years back.

A frail-looking young woman came to the door to call the young man to
supper.  Daylight's first thought was that city living had not agreed
with her.  And then he noted the slight tan and healthy glow that
seemed added to her face, and he decided that the country was the place
for her.  Declining an invitation to supper, he rode on for Glen Ellen
sitting slack-kneed in the saddle and softly humming forgotten songs.
He dropped down the rough, winding road through covered pasture, with
here and there thickets of manzanita and vistas of open glades.  He
listened greedily to the quail calling, and laughed outright, once, in
sheer joy, at a tiny chipmunk that fled scolding up a bank, slipping on
the crumbly surface and falling down, then dashing across the road
under his horse's nose and, still scolding, scrabbling up a protecting
oak.

Daylight could not persuade himself to keep to the travelled roads that
day, and another cut across country to Glen Ellen brought him upon a
canon that so blocked his way that he was glad to follow a friendly
cow-path.  This led him to a small frame cabin.  The doors and windows
were open, and a cat was nursing a litter of kittens in the doorway,
but no one seemed at home.  He descended the trail that evidently
crossed the canon.  Part way down, he met an old man coming up through
the sunset.  In his hand he carried a pail of foamy milk.  He wore no
hat, and in his face, framed with snow-white hair and beard, was the
ruddy glow and content of the passing summer day.  Daylight thought
that he had never seen so contented-looking a being.

"How old are you, daddy?" he queried.

"Eighty-four," was the reply.  "Yes, sirree, eighty-four, and spryer
than most."

"You must a' taken good care of yourself," Daylight suggested.

"I don't know about that.  I ain't loafed none.  I walked across the
Plains with an ox-team and fit Injuns in '51, and I was a family man
then with seven youngsters.  I reckon I was as old then as you are now,
or pretty nigh on to it."

"Don't you find it lonely here?"

The old man shifted the pail of milk and reflected.  "That all
depends," he said oracularly.  "I ain't never been lonely except when
the old wife died.  Some fellers are lonely in a crowd, and I'm one of
them.  That's the only time I'm lonely, is when I go to 'Frisco.  But I
don't go no more, thank you 'most to death. This is good enough for me.
I've ben right here in this valley since '54--one of the first settlers
after the Spaniards."

Daylight started his horse, saying:--

"Well, good night, daddy.  Stick with it.  You got all the young bloods
skinned, and I guess you've sure buried a mighty sight of them."

The old man chuckled, and Daylight rode on, singularly at peace with
himself and all the world.  It seemed that the old contentment of trail
and camp he had known on the Yukon had come back to him.  He could not
shake from his eyes the picture of the old pioneer coming up the trail
through the sunset light.  He was certainly going some for eighty-four.
The thought of following his example entered Daylight's mind, but the
big game of San Francisco vetoed the idea.

"Well, anyway," he decided, "when I get old and quit the game, I'll
settle down in a place something like this, and the city can go to
hell."



CHAPTER IX

Instead of returning to the city on Monday, Daylight rented the
butcher's horse for another day and crossed the bed of the valley to
its eastern hills to look at the mine.  It was dryer and rockier here
than where he had been the day before, and the ascending slopes
supported mainly chaparral, scrubby and dense and impossible to
penetrate on horseback.  But in the canyons water was plentiful and
also a luxuriant forest growth.  The mine was an abandoned affair, but
he enjoyed the half-hour's scramble around.  He had had experience in
quartz-mining before he went to Alaska, and he enjoyed the
recrudescence of his old wisdom in such matters.  The story was simple
to him: good prospects that warranted the starting of the tunnel into
the sidehill; the three months' work and the getting short of money;
the lay-off while the men went away and got jobs; then the return and a
new stretch of work, with the "pay" ever luring and ever receding into
the mountain, until, after years of hope, the men had given up and
vanished.  Most likely they were dead by now, Daylight thought, as he
turned in the saddle and looked back across the canyon at the ancient
dump and dark mouth of the tunnel.

As on the previous day, just for the joy of it, he followed
cattle-trails at haphazard and worked his way up toward the summits.
Coming out on a wagon road that led upward, he followed it for several
miles, emerging in a small, mountain-encircled valley, where half a
dozen poor ranchers farmed the wine-grapes on the steep slopes.
Beyond, the road pitched upward.  Dense chaparral covered the exposed
hillsides but in the creases of the canons huge spruce trees grew, and
wild oats and flowers.

Half an hour later, sheltering under the summits themselves, he came
out on a clearing.  Here and there, in irregular patches where the
steep and the soil favored, wine grapes were growing. Daylight could
see that it had been a stiff struggle, and that wild nature showed
fresh signs of winning--chaparral that had invaded the clearings;
patches and parts of patches of vineyard, unpruned, grassgrown, and
abandoned; and everywhere old stake-and-rider fences vainly striving to
remain intact.  Here, at a small farm-house surrounded by large
outbuildings, the road ended.  Beyond, the chaparral blocked the way.

He came upon an old woman forking manure in the barnyard, and reined in
by the fence.

"Hello, mother," was his greeting; "ain't you got any men-folk around
to do that for you?"

She leaned on her pitchfork, hitched her skirt in at the waist, and
regarded him cheerfully.  He saw that her toil-worn, weather-exposed
hands were like a man's, callused, large-knuckled, and gnarled, and
that her stockingless feet were thrust into heavy man's brogans.

"Nary a man," she answered.  "And where be you from, and all the way up
here?  Won't you stop and hitch and have a glass of wine?"

Striding clumsily but efficiently, like a laboring-man, she led him
into the largest building, where Daylight saw a hand-press and all the
paraphernalia on a small scale for the making of wine.  It was too far
and too bad a road to haul the grapes to the valley wineries, she
explained, and so they were compelled to do it themselves.  "They," he
learned, were she and her daughter, the latter a widow of forty-odd.
It had been easier before the grandson died and before he went away to
fight savages in the Philippines.  He had died out there in battle.

Daylight drank a full tumbler of excellent Riesling, talked a few
minutes, and accounted for a second tumbler.  Yes, they just managed
not to starve.  Her husband and she had taken up this government land
in '57 and cleared it and farmed it ever since, until he died, when she
had carried it on.  It actually didn't pay for the toil, but what were
they to do?  There was the wine trust, and wine was down.  That
Riesling?  She delivered it to the railroad down in the valley for
twenty-two cents a gallon.  And it was a long haul.  It took a day for
the round trip.  Her daughter was gone now with a load.

Daylight knew that in the hotels, Riesling, not quite so good even, was
charged for at from a dollar and a half to two dollars a quart.  And
she got twenty-two cents a gallon.  That was the game.  She was one of
the stupid lowly, she and her people before her--the ones that did the
work, drove their oxen across the Plains, cleared and broke the virgin
land, toiled all days and all hours, paid their taxes, and sent their
sons and grandsons out to fight and die for the flag that gave them
such ample protection that they were able to sell their wine for
twenty-two cents.  The same wine was served to him at the St. Francis
for two dollars a quart, or eight dollars a short gallon.  That was it.

Between her and her hand-press on the mountain clearing and him
ordering his wine in the hotel was a difference of seven dollars and
seventy-eight cents.  A clique of sleek men in the city got between her
and him to just about that amount.  And, besides them, there was a
horde of others that took their whack.  They called it railroading,
high finance, banking, wholesaling, real estate, and such things, but
the point was that they got it, while she got what was
left,--twenty-two cents.  Oh, well, a sucker was born every minute, he
sighed to himself, and nobody was to blame; it was all a game, and only
a few could win, but it was damned hard on the suckers.

"How old are you, mother?" he asked.

"Seventy-nine come next January."

"Worked pretty hard, I suppose?"

"Sense I was seven.  I was bound out in Michigan state until I was
woman-grown.  Then I married, and I reckon the work got harder and
harder."

"When are you going to take a rest?"

She looked at him, as though she chose to think his question facetious,
and did not reply.

"Do you believe in God?"

She nodded her head.

"Then you get it all back," he assured her; but in his heart he was
wondering about God, that allowed so many suckers to be born and that
did not break up the gambling game by which they were robbed from the
cradle to the grave.

"How much of that Riesling you got?"

She ran her eyes over the casks and calculated.  "Just short of eight
hundred gallons."

He wondered what he could do with all of it, and speculated as to whom
he could give it away.

"What would you do if you got a dollar a gallon for it?" he asked.

"Drop dead, I suppose."

"No; speaking seriously."

"Get me some false teeth, shingle the house, and buy a new wagon. The
road's mighty hard on wagons."

"And after that?"

"Buy me a coffin."

"Well, they're yours, mother, coffin and all."

She looked her incredulity.

"No; I mean it.  And there's fifty to bind the bargain.  Never mind the
receipt.  It's the rich ones that need watching, their memories being
so infernal short, you know.  Here's my address. You've got to deliver
it to the railroad.  And now, show me the way out of here.  I want to
get up to the top."

On through the chaparral he went, following faint cattle trails and
working slowly upward till he came out on the divide and gazed down
into Napa Valley and back across to Sonoma Mountain... "A sweet land,"
he muttered, "an almighty sweet land."

Circling around to the right and dropping down along the cattle-trails,
he quested for another way back to Sonoma Valley; but the cattle-trails
seemed to fade out, and the chaparral to grow thicker with a deliberate
viciousness and even when he won through in places, the canon and small
feeders were too precipitous for his horse, and turned him back.  But
there was no irritation about it.  He enjoyed it all, for he was back
at his old game of bucking nature.  Late in the afternoon he broke
through, and followed a well-defined trail down a dry canon. Here he
got a fresh thrill.  He had heard the baying of the hound some minutes
before, and suddenly, across the bare face of the hill above him, he
saw a large buck in flight.  And not far behind came the deer-hound, a
magnificent animal.  Daylight sat tense in his saddle and watched until
they disappeared, his breath just a trifle shorter, as if he, too, were
in the chase, his nostrils distended, and in his bones the old hunting
ache and memories of the days before he came to live in cities.

The dry canon gave place to one with a slender ribbon of running water.
The trail ran into a wood-road, and the wood-road emerged across a
small flat upon a slightly travelled county road.  There were no farms
in this immediate section, and no houses.  The soil was meagre, the
bed-rock either close to the surface or constituting the surface
itself.  Manzanita and scrub-oak, however, flourished and walled the
road on either side with a jungle growth.  And out a runway through
this growth a man suddenly scuttled in a way that reminded Daylight of
a rabbit.

He was a little man, in patched overalls; bareheaded, with a cotton
shirt open at the throat and down the chest.  The sun was ruddy-brown
in his face, and by it his sandy hair was bleached on the ends to
peroxide blond.  He signed to Daylight to halt, and held up a letter.
"If you're going to town, I'd be obliged if you mail this."

"I sure will." Daylight put it into his coat pocket.

"Do you live hereabouts, stranger?"

But the little man did not answer.  He was gazing at Daylight in a
surprised and steadfast fashion.

"I know you," the little man announced.  "You're Elam Harnish--Burning
Daylight, the papers call you.  Am I right?"

Daylight nodded.

"But what under the sun are you doing here in the chaparral?"

Daylight grinned as he answered, "Drumming up trade for a free rural
delivery route."

"Well, I'm glad I wrote that letter this afternoon," the little man
went on, "or else I'd have missed seeing you.  I've seen your photo in
the papers many a time, and I've a good memory for faces.  I recognized
you at once.  My name's Ferguson."

"Do you live hereabouts?" Daylight repeated his query.

"Oh, yes. I've got a little shack back here in the bush a hundred
yards, and a pretty spring, and a few fruit trees and berry bushes.
Come in and take a look.  And that spring is a dandy.  You never tasted
water like it.  Come in and try it."

Walking and leading his horse, Daylight followed the quick-stepping
eager little man through the green tunnel and emerged abruptly upon the
clearing, if clearing it might be called, where wild nature and man's
earth-scratching were inextricably blended.  It was a tiny nook in the
hills, protected by the steep walls of a canon mouth.  Here were
several large oaks, evidencing a richer soil.  The erosion of ages from
the hillside had slowly formed this deposit of fat earth.  Under the
oaks, almost buried in them, stood a rough, unpainted cabin, the wide
verandah of which, with chairs and hammocks, advertised an out-of doors
bedchamber.  Daylight's keen eyes took in every thing.  The clearing
was irregular, following the patches of the best soil, and every fruit
tree and berry bush, and even each vegetable plant, had the water
personally conducted to it.  The tiny irrigation channels were every
where, and along some of them the water was running.

Ferguson looked eagerly into his visitor's face for signs of
approbation.

"What do you think of it, eh?"

"Hand-reared and manicured, every blessed tree," Daylight laughed, but
the joy and satisfaction that shone in his eyes contented the little
man.

"Why, d'ye know, I know every one of those trees as if they were sons
of mine.  I planted them, nursed them, fed them, and brought them up.
Come on and peep at the spring."

"It's sure a hummer," was Daylight's verdict, after due inspection and
sampling, as they turned back for the house.

The interior was a surprise.  The cooking being done in the small,
lean-to kitchen, the whole cabin formed a large living room.  A great
table in the middle was comfortably littered with books and magazines.
All the available wall space, from floor to ceiling, was occupied by
filled bookshelves.  It seemed to Daylight that he had never seen so
many books assembled in one place.  Skins of wildcat, 'coon, and deer
lay about on the pine-board floor.

"Shot them myself, and tanned them, too," Ferguson proudly asserted.

The crowning feature of the room was a huge fireplace of rough stones
and boulders.

"Built it myself," Ferguson proclaimed, "and, by God, she drew! Never a
wisp of smoke anywhere save in the pointed channel, and that during the
big southeasters."

Daylight found himself charmed and made curious by the little man.  Why
was he hiding away here in the chaparral, he and his books?  He was
nobody's fool, anybody could see that.  Then why? The whole affair had
a tinge of adventure, and Daylight accepted an invitation to supper,
half prepared to find his host a raw-fruit-and-nut-eater or some
similar sort of health faddest. At table, while eating rice and
jack-rabbit curry (the latter shot by Ferguson), they talked it over,
and Daylight found the little man had no food "views."  He ate whatever
he liked, and all he wanted, avoiding only such combinations that
experience had taught him disagreed with his digestion.

Next, Daylight surmised that he might be touched with religion; but,
quest about as he would, in a conversation covering the most divergent
topics, he could find no hint of queerness or unusualness.  So it was,
when between them they had washed and wiped the dishes and put them
away, and had settled down to a comfortable smoke, that Daylight put
his question.

"Look here, Ferguson.  Ever since we got together, I've been casting
about to find out what's wrong with you, to locate a screw loose
somewhere, but I'll be danged if I've succeeded. What are you doing
here, anyway?  What made you come here?  What were you doing for a
living before you came here?  Go ahead and elucidate yourself."

Ferguson frankly showed his pleasure at the questions.

"First of all," he began, "the doctors wound up by losing all hope for
me.  Gave me a few months at best, and that, after a course in
sanatoriums and a trip to Europe and another to Hawaii.  They tried
electricity, and forced feeding, and fasting. I was a graduate of about
everything in the curriculum.  They kept me poor with their bills while
I went from bad to worse. The trouble with me was two fold: first, I
was a born weakling; and next, I was living unnaturally--too much work,
and responsibility, and strain.  I was managing editor of the
Times-Tribune--"

Daylight gasped mentally, for the Times-Tribune was the biggest and
most influential paper in San Francisco, and always had been so.

"--and I wasn't strong enough for the strain.  Of course my body went
back on me, and my mind, too, for that matter.  It had to be bolstered
up with whiskey, which wasn't good for it any more than was the living
in clubs and hotels good for my stomach and the rest of me.  That was
what ailed me; I was living all wrong."

He shrugged his shoulders and drew at his pipe.

"When the doctors gave me up, I wound up my affairs and gave the
doctors up.  That was fifteen years ago.  I'd been hunting through here
when I was a boy, on vacations from college, and when I was all down
and out it seemed a yearning came to me to go back to the country.  So
I quit, quit everything, absolutely, and came to live in the Valley of
the Moon--that's the Indian name, you know, for Sonoma Valley.  I lived
in the lean-to the first year; then I built the cabin and sent for my
books.  I never knew what happiness was before, nor health.  Look at me
now and dare to tell me that I look forty-seven."

"I wouldn't give a day over forty," Daylight confessed.

"Yet the day I came here I looked nearer sixty, and that was fifteen
years ago."

They talked along, and Daylight looked at the world from new angles.
Here was a man, neither bitter nor cynical, who laughed at the
city-dwellers and called them lunatics; a man who did not care for
money, and in whom the lust for power had long since died.  As for the
friendship of the city-dwellers, his host spoke in no uncertain terms.

"What did they do, all the chaps I knew, the chaps in the clubs with
whom I'd been cheek by jowl for heaven knows how long?  I was not
beholden to them for anything, and when I slipped out there was not one
of them to drop me a line and say, 'How are you, old man?  Anything I
can do for you?' For several weeks it was: 'What's become of Ferguson?'
After that I became a reminiscence and a memory.  Yet every last one of
them knew I had nothing but my salary and that I'd always lived a lap
ahead of it."

"But what do you do now?" was Daylight's query.  "You must need cash to
buy clothes and magazines?"

"A week's work or a month's work, now and again, ploughing in the
winter, or picking grapes in the fall, and there's always odd jobs with
the farmers through the summer.  I don't need much, so I don't have to
work much.  Most of my time I spend fooling around the place.  I could
do hack work for the magazines and newspapers; but I prefer the
ploughing and the grape picking. Just look at me and you can see why.
I'm hard as rocks.  And I like the work.  But I tell you a chap's got
to break in to it. It's a great thing when he's learned to pick grapes
a whole long day and come home at the end of it with that tired happy
feeling, instead of being in a state of physical collapse.  That
fireplace--those big stones--I was soft, then, a little, anemic,
alcoholic degenerate, with the spunk of a rabbit and about one per cent
as much stamina, and some of those big stones nearly broke my back and
my heart.  But I persevered, and used my body in the way Nature
intended it should be used--not bending over a desk and swilling
whiskey... and, well, here I am, a better man for it, and there's the
fireplace, fine and dandy, eh?

"And now tell me about the Klondike, and how you turned San Francisco
upside down with that last raid of yours.  You're a bonny fighter, you
know, and you touch my imagination, though my cooler reason tells me
that you are a lunatic like the rest.  The lust for power! It's a
dreadful affliction.  Why didn't you stay in your Klondike?  Or why
don't you clear out and live a natural life, for instance, like mine?
You see, I can ask questions, too.  Now you talk and let me listen for
a while."

It was not until ten o'clock that Daylight parted from Ferguson. As he
rode along through the starlight, the idea came to him of buying the
ranch on the other side of the valley.  There was no thought in his
mind of ever intending to live on it.  His game was in San Francisco.
But he liked the ranch, and as soon as he got back to the office he
would open up negotiations with Hillard. Besides, the ranch included
the clay-pit, and it would give him the whip-hand over Holdsworthy if
he ever tried to cut up any didoes.



CHAPTER X

The time passed, and Daylight played on at the game.  But the game had
entered upon a new phase.  The lust for power in the mere gambling and
winning was metamorphosing into the lust for power in order to revenge.
There were many men in San Francisco against whom he had registered
black marks, and now and again, with one of his lightning strokes, he
erased such a mark.  He asked no quarter; he gave no quarter.  Men
feared and hated him, and no one loved him, except Larry Hegan, his
lawyer, who would have laid down his life for him.  But he was the only
man with whom Daylight was really intimate, though he was on terms of
friendliest camaraderie with the rough and unprincipled following of
the bosses who ruled the Riverside Club.

On the other hand, San Francisco's attitude toward Daylight had
undergone a change.  While he, with his slashing buccaneer methods, was
a distinct menace to the more orthodox financial gamblers, he was
nevertheless so grave a menace that they were glad enough to leave him
alone.  He had already taught them the excellence of letting a sleeping
dog lie.  Many of the men, who knew that they were in danger of his big
bear-paw when it reached out for the honey vats, even made efforts to
placate him, to get on the friendly side of him.  The Alta-Pacific
approached him confidentially with an offer of reinstatement, which he
promptly declined.  He was after a number of men in that club, and,
whenever opportunity offered, he reached out for them and mangled them.
Even the newspapers, with one or two blackmailing exceptions, ceased
abusing him and became respectful.  In short, he was looked upon as a
bald-faced grizzly from the Arctic wilds to whom it was considered
expedient to give the trail.  At the time he raided the steamship
companies, they had yapped at him and worried him, the whole pack of
them, only to have him whirl around and whip them in the fiercest
pitched battle San Francisco had ever known.  Not easily forgotten was
the Pacific Slope Seaman's strike and the giving over of the municipal
government to the labor bosses and grafters.  The destruction of
Charles Klinkner and the California and Altamont Trust Company had been
a warning.  But it was an isolated case; they had been confident in
strength in numbers--until he taught them better.

Daylight still engaged in daring speculations, as, for instance, at the
impending outbreak of the Japanese-Russian War, when, in the face of
the experience and power of the shipping gamblers, he reached out and
clutched practically a monopoly of available steamer-charters.  There
was scarcely a battered tramp on the Seven Seas that was not his on
time charter.  As usual, his position was, "You've got to come and see
me"; which they did, and, to use another of his phrases, they "paid
through the nose" for the privilege.  And all his venturing and
fighting had now but one motive.  Some day, as he confided to Hegan,
when he'd made a sufficient stake, he was going back to New York and
knock the spots out of Messrs. Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer.  He'd
show them what an all-around general buzz-saw he was and what a mistake
they'd made ever to monkey with him.  But he never lost his head, and
he knew that he was not yet strong enough to go into death-grapples
with those three early enemies.  In the meantime the black marks
against them remained for a future easement day.

Dede Mason was still in the office.  He had made no more overtures,
discussed no more books and no more grammar.  He had no active interest
in her, and she was to him a pleasant memory of what had never
happened, a joy, which, by his essential nature, he was barred from
ever knowing.  Yet, while his interest had gone to sleep and his energy
was consumed in the endless battles he waged, he knew every trick of
the light on her hair, every quick denote mannerism of movement, every
line of her figure as expounded by her tailor-made gowns.  Several
times, six months or so apart, he had increased her salary, until now
she was receiving ninety dollars a month.  Beyond this he dared not go,
though he had got around it by making the work easier.  This he had
accomplished after her return from a vacation, by retaining her
substitute as an assistant.  Also, he had changed his office suite, so
that now the two girls had a room by themselves.

His eye had become quite critical wherever Dede Mason was concerned.
He had long since noted her pride of carriage.  It was unobtrusive, yet
it was there.  He decided, from the way she carried it, that she deemed
her body a thing to be proud of, to be cared for as a beautiful and
valued possession.  In this, and in the way she carried her clothes, he
compared her with her assistant, with the stenographers he encountered
in other offices, with the women he saw on the sidewalks.  "She's sure
well put up," he communed with himself; "and she sure knows how to
dress and carry it off without being stuck on herself and without
laying it on thick."

The more he saw of her, and the more he thought he knew of her, the
more unapproachable did she seem to him.  But since he had no intention
of approaching her, this was anything but an unsatisfactory fact.  He
was glad he had her in his office, and hoped she'd stay, and that was
about all.

Daylight did not improve with the passing years.  The life was not good
for him.  He was growing stout and soft, and there was unwonted
flabbiness in his muscles.  The more he drank cocktails, the more he
was compelled to drink in order to get the desired result, the
inhibitions that eased him down from the concert pitch of his
operations.  And with this went wine, too, at meals, and the long
drinks after dinner of Scotch and soda at the Riverside.  Then, too,
his body suffered from lack of exercise; and, from lack of decent human
associations, his moral fibres were weakening.  Never a man to hide
anything, some of his escapades became public, such as speeding, and of
joy-rides in his big red motor-car down to San Jose with companions
distinctly sporty--incidents that were narrated as good fun and
comically in the newspapers.

Nor was there anything to save him.  Religion had passed him by. "A
long time dead" was his epitome of that phase of speculation. He was
not interested in humanity.  According to his rough-hewn sociology, it
was all a gamble.  God was a whimsical, abstract, mad thing called
Luck.  As to how one happened to be born--whether a sucker or a
robber--was a gamble to begin with; Luck dealt out the cards, and the
little babies picked up the hands allotted them. Protest was vain.
Those were their cards and they had to play them, willy-nilly,
hunchbacked or straight backed, crippled or clean-limbed, addle-pated
or clear-headed.  There was no fairness in it.  The cards most picked
up put them into the sucker class; the cards of a few enabled them to
become robbers.  The playing of the cards was life--the crowd of
players, society.

The table was the earth, and the earth, in lumps and chunks, from
loaves of bread to big red motor-cars, was the stake.  And in the end,
lucky and unlucky, they were all a long time dead.

It was hard on the stupid lowly, for they were coppered to lose from
the start; but the more he saw of the others, the apparent winners, the
less it seemed to him that they had anything to brag about.  They, too,
were a long time dead, and their living did not amount to much.  It was
a wild animal fight; the strong trampled the weak, and the strong, he
had already discovered,--men like Dowsett, and Letton, and
Guggenhammer,--were not necessarily the best.  He remembered his miner
comrades of the Arctic.  They were the stupid lowly, they did the hard
work and were robbed of the fruit of their toil just as was the old
woman making wine in the Sonoma hills; and yet they had finer qualities
of truth, and loyalty, and square-dealing than did the men who robbed
them.  The winners seemed to be the crooked ones, the unfaithful ones,
the wicked ones.  And even they had no say in the matter.  They played
the cards that were given them; and Luck, the monstrous, mad-god thing,
the owner of the whole shebang, looked on and grinned.  It was he who
stacked the universal card-deck of existence.

There was no justice in the deal.  The little men that came, the little
pulpy babies, were not even asked if they wanted to try a flutter at
the game.  They had no choice.  Luck jerked them into life, slammed
them up against the jostling table, and told them: "Now play, damn you,
play!"  And they did their best, poor little devils.  The play of some
led to steam yachts and mansions; of others, to the asylum or the
pauper's ward.  Some played the one same card, over and over, and made
wine all their days in the chaparral, hoping, at the end, to pull down
a set of false teeth and a coffin.  Others quit the game early, having
drawn cards that called for violent death, or famine in the Barrens, or
loathsome and lingering disease.  The hands of some called for kingship
and irresponsible and numerated power; other hands called for ambition,
for wealth in untold sums, for disgrace and shame, or for women and
wine.

As for himself, he had drawn a lucky hand, though he could not see all
the cards.  Somebody or something might get him yet.  The mad god,
Luck, might be tricking him along to some such end.  An unfortunate set
of circumstances, and in a month's time the robber gang might be
war-dancing around his financial carcass. This very day a street-car
might run him down, or a sign fall from a building and smash in his
skull.  Or there was disease, ever rampant, one of Luck's grimmest
whims.  Who could say? To-morrow, or some other day, a ptomaine bug, or
some other of a thousand bugs, might jump out upon him and drag him
down.  There was Doctor Bascom, Lee Bascom who had stood beside him a
week ago and talked and argued, a picture of magnificent youth, and
strength, and health.  And in three days he was dead--pneumonia,
rheumatism of the heart, and heaven knew what else--at the end
screaming in agony that could be heard a block away.  That had been
terrible.  It was a fresh, raw stroke in Daylight's consciousness.  And
when would his own turn come?  Who could say?

In the meantime there was nothing to do but play the cards he could see
in his hand, and they were BATTLE, REVENGE, AND COCKTAILS.  And Luck
sat over all and grinned.



CHAPTER XI

One Sunday, late in the afternoon, found Daylight across the bay in the
Piedmont hills back of Oakland.  As usual, he was in a big motor-car,
though not his own, the guest of Swiftwater Bill, Luck's own darling,
who had come down to spend the clean-up of the seventh fortune wrung
from the frozen Arctic gravel.  A notorious spender, his latest pile
was already on the fair road to follow the previous six.  He it was, in
the first year of Dawson, who had cracked an ocean of champagne at
fifty dollars a quart; who, with the bottom of his gold-sack in sight,
had cornered the egg-market, at twenty-four dollars per dozen, to the
tune of one hundred and ten dozen, in order to pique the lady-love who
had jilted him; and he it was, paying like a prince for speed, who had
chartered special trains and broken all records between San Francisco
and New York.  And here he was once more, the "luck-pup of hell," as
Daylight called him, throwing his latest fortune away with the same
old-time facility.

It was a merry party, and they had made a merry day of it, circling the
bay from San Francisco around by San Jose and up to Oakland, having
been thrice arrested for speeding, the third time, however, on the
Haywards stretch, running away with their captor.  Fearing that a
telephone message to arrest them had been flashed ahead, they had
turned into the back-road through the hills, and now, rushing in upon
Oakland by a new route, were boisterously discussing what disposition
they should make of the constable.

"We'll come out at Blair Park in ten minutes," one of the men
announced.  "Look here, Swiftwater, there's a crossroads right ahead,
with lots of gates, but it'll take us backcountry clear into Berkeley.
Then we can come back into Oakland from the other side, sneak across on
the ferry, and send the machine back around to-night with the
chauffeur."

But Swiftwater Bill failed to see why he should not go into Oakland by
way of Blair Park, and so decided.

The next moment, flying around a bend, the back-road they were not
going to take appeared.  Inside the gate leaning out from her saddle
and just closing it, was a young woman on a chestnut sorrel.  With his
first glimpse, Daylight felt there was something strangely familiar
about her.  The next moment, straightening up in the saddle with a
movement he could not fail to identify, she put the horse into a
gallop, riding away with her back toward them.  It was Dede Mason--he
remembered what Morrison had told him about her keeping a riding horse,
and he was glad she had not seen him in this riotous company.
Swiftwater Bill stood up, clinging with one hand to the back of the
front seat and waving the other to attract her attention. His lips were
pursed for the piercing whistle for which he was famous and which
Daylight knew of old, when Daylight, with a hook of his leg and a yank
on the shoulder, slammed the startled Bill down into his seat.

"You m-m-must know the lady," Swiftwater Bill spluttered.

"I sure do," Daylight answered, "so shut up."

"Well, I congratulate your good taste, Daylight.  She's a peach, and
she rides like one, too."

Intervening trees at that moment shut her from view, and Swiftwater
Bill plunged into the problem of disposing of their constable, while
Daylight, leaning back with closed eyes, was still seeing Dede Mason
gallop off down the country road. Swiftwater Bill was right.  She
certainly could ride.  And, sitting astride, her seat was perfect.
Good for Dede!  That was an added point, her having the courage to ride
in the only natural and logical manner.  Her head as screwed on right,
that was one thing sure.

On Monday morning, coming in for dictation, he looked at her with new
interest, though he gave no sign of it; and the stereotyped business
passed off in the stereotyped way.  But the following Sunday found him
on a horse himself, across the bay and riding through the Piedmont
hills.  He made a long day of it, but no glimpse did he catch of Dede
Mason, though he even took the back-road of many gates and rode on into
Berkeley.  Here, along the lines of multitudinous houses, up one street
and down another, he wondered which of them might be occupied by her.
Morrison had said long ago that she lived in Berkeley, and she had been
headed that way in the late afternoon of the previous Sunday--evidently
returning home.

It had been a fruitless day, so far as she was concerned; and yet not
entirely fruitless, for he had enjoyed the open air and the horse under
him to such purpose that, on Monday, his instructions were out to the
dealers to look for the best chestnut sorrel that money could buy.  At
odd times during the week he examined numbers of chestnut sorrels,
tried several, and was unsatisfied. It was not till Saturday that he
came upon Bob.  Daylight knew him for what he wanted the moment he laid
eyes on him.  A large horse for a riding animal, he was none too large
for a big man like Daylight.  In splendid condition, Bob's coat in the
sunlight was a flame of fire, his arched neck a jeweled conflagration.

"He's a sure winner," was Daylight's comment; but the dealer was not so
sanguine.  He was selling the horse on commission, and its owner had
insisted on Bob's true character being given.  The dealer gave it.

"Not what you'd call a real vicious horse, but a dangerous one. Full of
vinegar and all-round cussedness, but without malice. Just as soon kill
you as not, but in a playful sort of way, you understand, without
meaning to at all.  Personally, I wouldn't think of riding him.  But
he's a stayer.  Look at them lungs. And look at them legs.  Not a
blemish.  He's never been hurt or worked.  Nobody ever succeeded in
taking it out of him.  Mountain horse, too, trail-broke and all that,
being raised in rough country.  Sure-footed as a goat, so long as he
don't get it into his head to cut up.  Don't shy.  Ain't really afraid,
but makes believe.  Don't buck, but rears.  Got to ride him with a
martingale.  Has a bad trick of whirling around without cause It's his
idea of a joke on his rider.  It's all just how he feels One day he'll
ride along peaceable and pleasant for twenty miles. Next day, before
you get started, he's well-nigh unmanageable. Knows automobiles so he
can lay down alongside of one and sleep or eat hay out of it.  He'll
let nineteen go by without batting an eye, and mebbe the twentieth,
just because he's feeling frisky, he'll cut up over like a range
cayuse.  Generally speaking, too lively for a gentleman, and too
unexpected. Present owner nicknamed him Judas Iscariot, and refuses to
sell without the buyer knowing all about him first.  There, that's
about all I know, except look at that mane and tail.  Ever see anything
like it?  Hair as fine as a baby's."

The dealer was right.  Daylight examined the mane and found it finer
than any horse's hair he had ever seen.  Also, its color was unusual in
that it was almost auburn.  While he ran his fingers through it, Bob
turned his head and playfully nuzzled Daylight's shoulder.

"Saddle him up, and I'll try him," he told the dealer.  "I wonder if
he's used to spurs.  No English saddle, mind.  Give me a good Mexican
and a curb bit--not too severe, seeing as he likes to rear."

Daylight superintended the preparations, adjusting the curb strap and
the stirrup length, and doing the cinching.  He shook his head at the
martingale, but yielded to the dealer's advice and allowed it to go on.
And Bob, beyond spirited restlessness and a few playful attempts, gave
no trouble.  Nor in the hour's ride that followed, save for some
permissible curveting and prancing, did he misbehave.  Daylight was
delighted; the purchase was immediately made; and Bob, with riding gear
and personal equipment, was despatched across the bay forthwith to take
up his quarters in the stables of the Oakland Riding Academy.

The next day being Sunday, Daylight was away early, crossing on the
ferry and taking with him Wolf, the leader of his sled team, the one
dog which he had selected to bring with him when he left Alaska.  Quest
as he would through the Piedmont hills and along the many-gated
back-road to Berkeley, Daylight saw nothing of Dede Mason and her
chestnut sorrel.  But he had little time for disappointment, for his
own chestnut sorrel kept him busy.  Bob proved a handful of impishness
and contrariety, and he tried out his rider as much as his rider tried
him out.  All of Daylight's horse knowledge and horse sense was called
into play, while Bob, in turn, worked every trick in his lexicon.
Discovering that his martingale had more slack in it than usual, he
proceeded to give an exhibition of rearing and hind-leg walking.  After
ten hopeless minutes of it, Daylight slipped off and tightened the
martingale, whereupon Bob gave an exhibition of angelic goodness.

He fooled Daylight completely.  At the end of half an hour of goodness,
Daylight, lured into confidence, was riding along at a walk and rolling
a cigarette, with slack knees and relaxed seat, the reins lying on the
animal's neck.  Bob whirled abruptly and with lightning swiftness,
pivoting on his hind legs, his fore legs just lifted clear of the
ground.  Daylight found himself with his right foot out of the stirrup
and his arms around the animal's neck; and Bob took advantage of the
situation to bolt down the road.  With a hope that he should not
encounter Dede Mason at that moment, Daylight regained his seat and
checked in the horse.

Arrived back at the same spot, Bob whirled again.  This time Daylight
kept his seat, but, beyond a futile rein across the neck, did nothing
to prevent the evolution.  He noted that Bob whirled to the right, and
resolved to keep him straightened out by a spur on the left.  But so
abrupt and swift was the whirl that warning and accomplishment were
practically simultaneous.

"Well, Bob," he addressed the animal, at the same time wiping the sweat
from his own eyes, "I'm free to confess that you're sure the blamedest
all-fired quickest creature I ever saw.  I guess the way to fix you is
to keep the spur just a-touching--ah! you brute!"

For, the moment the spur touched him, his left hind leg had reached
forward in a kick that struck the stirrup a smart blow. Several times,
out of curiosity, Daylight attempted the spur, and each time Bob's hoof
landed the stirrup.  Then Daylight, following the horse's example of
the unexpected, suddenly drove both spurs into him and reached him
underneath with the quirt.

"You ain't never had a real licking before," he muttered as Bob, thus
rudely jerked out of the circle of his own impish mental processes,
shot ahead.

Half a dozen times spurs and quirt bit into him, and then Daylight
settled down to enjoy the mad magnificent gallop.  No longer punished,
at the end of a half mile Bob eased down into a fast canter.  Wolf,
toiling in the rear, was catching up, and everything was going nicely.

"I'll give you a few pointers on this whirling game, my boy," Daylight
was saying to him, when Bob whirled.

He did it on a gallop, breaking the gallop off short by fore legs
stiffly planted.  Daylight fetched up against his steed's neck with
clasped arms, and at the same instant, with fore feet clear of the
ground, Bob whirled around.  Only an excellent rider could have escaped
being unhorsed, and as it was, Daylight was nastily near to it.  By the
time he recovered his seat, Bob was in full career, bolting the way he
had come, and making Wolf side-jump to the bushes.

"All right, darn you!" Daylight grunted, driving in spurs and quirt
again and again.  "Back-track you want to go, and back-track you sure
will go till you're dead sick of it."

When, after a time, Bob attempted to ease down the mad pace, spurs and
quirt went into him again with undiminished vim and put him to renewed
effort.  And when, at last, Daylight decided that the horse had had
enough, he turned him around abruptly and put him into a gentle canter
on the forward track.  After a time he reined him in to a stop to see
if he were breathing painfully.

Standing for a minute, Bob turned his head and nuzzled his rider's
stirrup in a roguish, impatient way, as much as to intimate that it was
time they were going on.

"Well, I'll be plumb gosh darned!" was Daylight's comment.  "No
ill-will, no grudge, no nothing-and after that lambasting! You're sure
a hummer, Bob."

Once again Daylight was lulled into fancied security.  For an hour Bob
was all that could be desired of a spirited mount, when, and as usual
without warning, he took to whirling and bolting. Daylight put a stop
to this with spurs and quirt, running him several punishing miles in
the direction of his bolt.  But when he turned him around and started
forward, Bob proceeded to feign fright at trees, cows, bushes, Wolf,
his own shadow--in short, at every ridiculously conceivable object.  At
such times, Wolf lay down in the shade and looked on, while Daylight
wrestled it out.

So the day passed.  Among other things, Bob developed a trick of making
believe to whirl and not whirling.  This was as exasperating as the
real thing, for each time Daylight was fooled into tightening his leg
grip and into a general muscular tensing of all his body.  And then,
after a few make-believe attempts, Bob actually did whirl and caught
Daylight napping again and landed him in the old position with clasped
arms around the neck.

And to the end of the day, Bob continued to be up to one trick or
another; after passing a dozen automobiles on the way into Oakland,
suddenly electing to go mad with fright at a most ordinary little
runabout.  And just before he arrived back at the stable he capped the
day with a combined whirling and rearing that broke the martingale and
enabled him to gain a perpendicular position on his hind legs.  At this
juncture a rotten stirrup leather parted, and Daylight was all but
unhorsed.

But he had taken a liking to the animal, and repented not of his
bargain.  He realized that Bob was not vicious nor mean, the trouble
being that he was bursting with high spirits and was endowed with more
than the average horse's intelligence.  It was the spirits and the
intelligence, combined with inordinate roguishness, that made him what
he was.  What was required to control him was a strong hand, with
tempered sternness and yet with the requisite touch of brutal dominance.

"It's you or me, Bob," Daylight told him more than once that day.

And to the stableman, that night:--

"My, but ain't he a looker! Ever see anything like him?  Best piece of
horseflesh I ever straddled, and I've seen a few in my time."

And to Bob, who had turned his head and was up to his playful
nuzzling:--

"Good-by, you little bit of all right.  See you again next Sunday A.M.,
and just you bring along your whole basket of tricks, you old
son-of-a-gun."



CHAPTER XII

Throughout the week Daylight found himself almost as much interested in
Bob as in Dede; and, not being in the thick of any big deals, he was
probably more interested in both of them than in the business game.
Bob's trick of whirling was of especial moment to him.  How to overcome
it,--that was the thing.  Suppose he did meet with Dede out in the
hills; and suppose, by some lucky stroke of fate, he should manage to
be riding alongside of her; then that whirl of Bob's would be most
disconcerting and embarrassing.  He was not particularly anxious for
her to see him thrown forward on Bob's neck.  On the other hand,
suddenly to leave her and go dashing down the back-track, plying quirt
and spurs, wouldn't do, either.

What was wanted was a method wherewith to prevent that lightning whirl.
He must stop the animal before it got around.  The reins would not do
this.  Neither would the spurs.  Remained the quirt.

But how to accomplish it?  Absent-minded moments were many that week,
when, sitting in his office chair, in fancy he was astride the
wonderful chestnut sorrel and trying to prevent an anticipated whirl.
One such moment, toward the end of the week, occurred in the middle of
a conference with Hegan.  Hegan, elaborating a new and dazzling legal
vision, became aware that Daylight was not listening.  His eyes had
gone lack-lustre, and he, too, was seeing with inner vision.

"Got it" he cried suddenly.  "Hegan, congratulate me.  It's as simple
as rolling off a log.  All I've got to do is hit him on the nose, and
hit him hard."

Then he explained to the startled Hegan, and became a good listener
again, though he could not refrain now and again from making audible
chuckles of satisfaction and delight.  That was the scheme.  Bob always
whirled to the right.  Very well.  He would double the quirt in his
hand and, the instant of the whirl, that doubled quirt would rap Bob on
the nose.  The horse didn't live, after it had once learned the lesson,
that would whirl in the face of the doubled quirt.

More keenly than ever, during that week in the office did Daylight
realize that he had no social, nor even human contacts with Dede.  The
situation was such that he could not ask her the simple question
whether or not she was going riding next Sunday. It was a hardship of a
new sort, this being the employer of a pretty girl.  He looked at her
often, when the routine work of the day was going on, the question he
could not ask her tickling at the founts of speech--Was she going
riding next Sunday?  And as he looked, he wondered how old she was, and
what love passages she had had, must have had, with those college
whippersnappers with whom, according to Morrison, she herded and
danced.  His mind was very full of her, those six days between the
Sundays, and one thing he came to know thoroughly well; he wanted her.
And so much did he want her that his old timidity of the apron-string
was put to rout.  He, who had run away from women most of his life, had
now grown so courageous as to pursue.  Some Sunday, sooner or later, he
would meet her outside the office, somewhere in the hills, and then, if
they did not get acquainted, it would be because she did not care to
get acquainted.

Thus he found another card in the hand the mad god had dealt him.

How important that card was to become he did not dream, yet he decided
that it was a pretty good card.  In turn, he doubted. Maybe it was a
trick of Luck to bring calamity and disaster upon him.  Suppose Dede
wouldn't have him, and suppose he went on loving her more and more,
harder and harder?  All his old generalized terrors of love revived.
He remembered the disastrous love affairs of men and women he had known
in the past.  There was Bertha Doolittle, old Doolittle's daughter, who
had been madly in love with Dartworthy, the rich Bonanza fraction
owner; and Dartworthy, in turn, not loving Bertha at all, but madly
loving Colonel Walthstone's wife and eloping down the Yukon with her;
and Colonel Walthstone himself, madly loving his own wife and lighting
out in pursuit of the fleeing couple.  And what had been the outcome?
Certainly Bertha's love had been unfortunate and tragic, and so had the
love of the other three. Down below Minook, Colonel Walthstone and
Dartworthy had fought it out.  Dartworthy had been killed.  A bullet
through the Colonel's lungs had so weakened him that he died of
pneumonia the following spring.  And the Colonel's wife had no one left
alive on earth to love.

And then there was Freda, drowning herself in the running mush-ice
because of some man on the other side of the world, and hating him,
Daylight, because he had happened along and pulled her out of the
mush-ice and back to life.  And the Virgin.... The old memories
frightened him.  If this love-germ gripped him good and hard, and if
Dede wouldn't have him, it might be almost as bad as being gouged out
of all he had by Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer.  Had his nascent
desire for Dede been less, he might well have been frightened out of
all thought of her.  As it was, he found consolation in the thought
that some love affairs did come out right.  And for all he knew, maybe
Luck had stacked the cards for him to win.  Some men were born lucky,
lived lucky all their days, and died lucky.  Perhaps, too, he was such
a man, a born luck-pup who could not lose.

Sunday came, and Bob, out in the Piedmont hills, behaved like an angel.
His goodness, at times, was of the spirited prancing order, but
otherwise he was a lamb.  Daylight, with doubled quirt ready in his
right hand, ached for a whirl, just one whirl, which Bob, with an
excellence of conduct that was tantalizing, refused to perform.  But no
Dede did Daylight encounter.  He vainly circled about among the hill
roads and in the afternoon took the steep grade over the divide of the
second range and dropped into Maraga Valley.  Just after passing the
foot of the descent, he heard the hoof beats of a cantering horse.  It
was from ahead and coming toward him.  What if it were Dede?  He turned
Bob around and started to return at a walk.  If it were Dede, he was
born to luck, he decided; for the meeting couldn't have occurred under
better circumstances.  Here they were, both going in the same
direction, and the canter would bring her up to him just where the
stiff grade would compel a walk.  There would be nothing else for her
to do than ride with him to the top of the divide; and, once there, the
equally stiff descent on the other side would compel more walking.

The canter came nearer, but he faced straight ahead until he heard the
horse behind check to a walk.  Then he glanced over his shoulder.  It
was Dede.  The recognition was quick, and, with her, accompanied by
surprise.  What more natural thing than that, partly turning his horse,
he should wait till she caught up with him; and that, when abreast they
should continue abreast on up the grade?  He could have sighed with
relief.  The thing was accomplished, and so easily.  Greetings had been
exchanged; here they were side by side and going in the same direction
with miles and miles ahead of them.

He noted that her eye was first for the horse and next for him.

"Oh, what a beauty" she had cried at sight of Bob.  From the shining
light in her eyes, and the face filled with delight, he would scarcely
have believed that it belonged to a young woman he had known in the
office, the young woman with the controlled, subdued office face.

"I didn't know you rode," was one of her first remarks.  "I imagined
you were wedded to get-there-quick machines."

"I've just taken it up lately," was his answer.  "Beginning to get
stout; you know, and had to take it off somehow."

She gave a quick sidewise glance that embraced him from head to heel,
including seat and saddle, and said:--

"But you've ridden before."

She certainly had an eye for horses and things connected with horses
was his thought, as he replied:--

"Not for many years.  But I used to think I was a regular rip-snorter
when I was a youngster up in Eastern Oregon, sneaking away from camp to
ride with the cattle and break cayuses and that sort of thing."

Thus, and to his great relief, were they launched on a topic of mutual
interest.  He told her about Bob's tricks, and of the whirl and his
scheme to overcome it; and she agreed that horses had to be handled
with a certain rational severity, no matter how much one loved them.
There was her Mab, which she had for eight years and which she had had
break of stall-kicking.  The process had been painful for Mab, but it
had cured her.

"You've ridden a lot," Daylight said.

"I really can't remember the first time I was on a horse," she told
him.  "I was born on a ranch, you know, and they couldn't keep me away
from the horses.  I must have been born with the love for them.  I had
my first pony, all my own, when I was six. When I was eight I knew what
it was to be all day in the saddle along with Daddy.  By the time I was
eleven he was taking me on my first deer hunts.  I'd be lost without a
horse.  I hate indoors, and without Mab here I suppose I'd have been
sick and dead long ago."

"You like the country?" he queried, at the same moment catching his
first glimpse of a light in her eyes other than gray.  "As much as I
detest the city," she answered.  "But a woman can't earn a living in
the country.  So I make the best of it--along with Mab."

And thereat she told him more of her ranch life in the days before her
father died.  And Daylight was hugely pleased with himself.  They were
getting acquainted.  The conversation had not lagged in the full half
hour they had been together.

"We come pretty close from the same part of the country," he said.  "I
was raised in Eastern Oregon, and that's none so far from Siskiyou."

The next moment he could have bitten out his tongue for her quick
question was:--

"How did you know I came from Siskiyou?  I'm sure I never mentioned it."

"I don't know," he floundered temporarily.  "I heard somewhere that you
were from thereabouts."

Wolf, sliding up at that moment, sleek-footed and like a shadow, caused
her horse to shy and passed the awkwardness off, for they talked
Alaskan dogs until the conversation drifted back to horses.  And horses
it was, all up the grade and down the other side.

When she talked, he listened and followed her, and yet all the while he
was following his own thoughts and impressions as well. It was a nervy
thing for her to do, this riding astride, and he didn't know, after
all, whether he liked it or not.  His ideas of women were prone to be
old-fashioned; they were the ones he had imbibed in the early-day,
frontier life of his youth, when no woman was seen on anything but a
side-saddle.  He had grown up to the tacit fiction that women on
horseback were not bipeds.  It came to him with a shock, this sight of
her so manlike in her saddle.  But he had to confess that the sight
looked good to him just then.

Two other immediate things about her struck him.  First, there were the
golden spots in her eyes.  Queer that he had never noticed them before.
Perhaps the light in the office had not been right, and perhaps they
came and went.  No; they were glows of color--a sort of diffused,
golden light.  Nor was it golden, either, but it was nearer that than
any color he knew.  It certainly was not any shade of yellow.  A
lover's thoughts are ever colored, and it is to be doubted if any one
else in the world would have called Dede's eyes golden.  But Daylight's
mood verged on the tender and melting, and he preferred to think of
them as golden, and therefore they were golden.

And then she was so natural.  He had been prepared to find her a most
difficult young woman to get acquainted with.  Yet here it was proving
so simple.  There was nothing highfalutin about her company manners--it
was by this homely phrase that he differentiated this Dede on horseback
from the Dede with the office manners whom he had always known.  And
yet, while he was delighted with the smoothness with which everything
was going, and with the fact that they had found plenty to talk about,
he was aware of an irk under it all.  After all, this talk was empty
and idle.  He was a man of action, and he wanted her, Dede Mason, the
woman; he wanted her to love him and to be loved by him; and he wanted
all this glorious consummation then and there.  Used to forcing issues
used to gripping men and things and bending them to his will, he felt,
now, the same compulsive prod of mastery. He wanted to tell her that he
loved her and that there was nothing else for her to do but marry him.
And yet he did not obey the prod.  Women were fluttery creatures, and
here mere mastery would prove a bungle.  He remembered all his hunting
guile, the long patience of shooting meat in famine when a hit or a
miss meant life or death.  Truly, though this girl did not yet mean
quite that, nevertheless she meant much to him--more, now, than ever,
as he rode beside her, glancing at her as often as he dared, she in her
corduroy riding-habit, so bravely manlike, yet so essentially and
revealingly woman, smiling, laughing, talking, her eyes sparkling, the
flush of a day of sun and summer breeze warm in her cheeks.



CHAPTER XIII

Another Sunday man and horse and dog roved the Piedmont hills. And
again Daylight and Dede rode together.  But this time her surprise at
meeting him was tinctured with suspicion; or rather, her surprise was
of another order.  The previous Sunday had been quite accidental, but
his appearing a second time among her favorite haunts hinted of more
than the fortuitous.  Daylight was made to feel that she suspected him,
and he, remembering that he had seen a big rock quarry near Blair Park,
stated offhand that he was thinking of buying it.  His one-time
investment in a brickyard had put the idea into his head--an idea that
he decided was a good one, for it enabled him to suggest that she ride
along with him to inspect the quarry.

So several hours he spent in her company, in which she was much the
same girl as before, natural, unaffected, lighthearted, smiling and
laughing, a good fellow, talking horses with unflagging enthusiasm,
making friends with the crusty-tempered Wolf, and expressing the desire
to ride Bob, whom she declared she was more in love with than ever.  At
this last Daylight demurred.  Bob was full of dangerous tricks, and he
wouldn't trust any one on him except his worst enemy.

"You think, because I'm a girl, that I don't know anything about
horses," she flashed back.  "But I've been thrown off and bucked off
enough not to be over-confident.  And I'm not a fool. I wouldn't get on
a bucking horse.  I've learned better.  And I'm not afraid of any other
kind.  And you say yourself that Bob doesn't buck."

"But you've never seen him cutting up didoes," Daylight said.

"But you must remember I've seen a few others, and I've been on several
of them myself.  I brought Mab here to electric cars, locomotives, and
automobiles.  She was a raw range colt when she came to me.  Broken to
saddle that was all.  Besides, I won't hurt your horse."

Against his better judgment, Daylight gave in, and, on an unfrequented
stretch of road, changed saddles and bridles.

"Remember, he's greased lightning," he warned, as he helped her to
mount.

She nodded, while Bob pricked up his ears to the knowledge that he had
a strange rider on his back.  The fun came quickly enough--too quickly
for Dede, who found herself against Bob's neck as he pivoted around and
bolted the other way.  Daylight followed on her horse and watched.  He
saw her check the animal quickly to a standstill, and immediately, with
rein across neck and a decisive prod of the left spur, whirl him back
the way he had come and almost as swiftly.

"Get ready to give him the quirt on the nose," Daylight called.

But, too quickly for her, Bob whirled again, though this time, by a
severe effort, she saved herself from the undignified position against
his neck.  His bolt was more determined, but she pulled him into a
prancing walk, and turned him roughly back with her spurred heel.
There was nothing feminine in the way she handled him; her method was
imperative and masculine.  Had this not been so, Daylight would have
expected her to say she had had enough. But that little preliminary
exhibition had taught him something of Dede's quality.  And if it had
not, a glance at her gray eyes, just perceptibly angry with herself,
and at her firm-set mouth, would have told him the same thing.
Daylight did not suggest anything, while he hung almost gleefully upon
her actions in anticipation of what the fractious Bob was going to get.
And Bob got it, on his next whirl, or attempt, rather, for he was no
more than halfway around when the quirt met him smack on his tender
nose.  There and then, in his bewilderment, surprise, and pain, his
fore feet, just skimming above the road, dropped down.

"Great!" Daylight applauded.  "A couple more will fix him.  He's too
smart not to know when he's beaten."

Again Bob tried.  But this time he was barely quarter around when the
doubled quirt on his nose compelled him to drop his fore feet to the
road.  Then, with neither rein nor spur, but by the mere threat of the
quirt, she straightened him out.

Dede looked triumphantly at Daylight.

"Let me give him a run?" she asked.

Daylight nodded, and she shot down the road.  He watched her out of
sight around the bend, and watched till she came into sight returning.
She certainly could sit her horse, was his thought, and she was a sure
enough hummer.  God, she was the wife for a man!  Made most of them
look pretty slim.  And to think of her hammering all week at a
typewriter.  That was no place for her. She should be a man's wife,
taking it easy, with silks and satins and diamonds (his frontier notion
of what befitted a wife beloved), and dogs, and horses, and such
things--"And we'll see, Mr. Burning Daylight, what you and me can do
about it," he murmured to himself! and aloud to her:--

"You'll do, Miss Mason; you'll do.  There's nothing too good in
horseflesh you don't deserve, a woman who can ride like that. No; stay
with him, and we'll jog along to the quarry."  He chuckled.  "Say, he
actually gave just the least mite of a groan that last time you fetched
him.  Did you hear it?  And did you see the way he dropped his feet to
the road--just like he'd struck a stone wall.  And he's got savvee
enough to know from now on that that same stone wall will be always
there ready for him to lam into."

When he parted from her that afternoon, at the gate of the road that
led to Berkeley, he drew off to the edge of the intervening clump of
trees, where, unobserved, he watched her out of sight. Then, turning to
ride back into Oakland, a thought came to him that made him grin
ruefully as he muttered: "And now it's up to me to make good and buy
that blamed quarry.  Nothing less than that can give me an excuse for
snooping around these hills."

But the quarry was doomed to pass out of his plans for a time, for on
the following Sunday he rode alone.  No Dede on a chestnut sorrel came
across the back-road from Berkeley that day, nor the day a week later.
Daylight was beside himself with impatience and apprehension, though in
the office he contained himself.  He noted no change in her, and strove
to let none show in himself. The same old monotonous routine went on,
though now it was irritating and maddening.  Daylight found a big
quarrel on his hands with a world that wouldn't let a man behave toward
his stenographer after the way of all men and women.  What was the good
of owning millions anyway?  he demanded one day of the desk-calendar,
as she passed out after receiving his dictation.

As the third week drew to a close and another desolate Sunday
confronted him, Daylight resolved to speak, office or no office. And as
was his nature, he went simply and directly to the point She had
finished her work with him, and was gathering her note pad and pencils
together to depart, when he said:--

"Oh, one thing more, Miss Mason, and I hope you won't mind my being
frank and straight out.  You've struck me right along as a
sensible-minded girl, and I don't think you'll take offence at what I'm
going to say.  You know how long you've been in the office--it's years,
now, several of them, anyway; and you know I've always been straight
and aboveboard with you.  I've never what you call--presumed.  Because
you were in my office I've tried to be more careful than if--if you
wasn't in my office--you understand.  But just the same, it don't make
me any the less human.  I'm a lonely sort of a fellow--don't take that
as a bid for kindness.  What I mean by it is to try and tell you just
how much those two rides with you have meant.  And now I hope you won't
mind my just asking why you haven't been out riding the last two
Sundays?"

He came to a stop and waited, feeling very warm and awkward, the
perspiration starting in tiny beads on his forehead.  She did not speak
immediately, and he stepped across the room and raised the window
higher.

"I have been riding," she answered; "in other directions."

"But why...?"  He failed somehow to complete the question.  "Go ahead
and be frank with me," he urged.  "Just as frank as I am with you.  Why
didn't you ride in the Piedmont hills?  I hunted for you everywhere.

"And that is just why."  She smiled, and looked him straight in the
eyes for a moment, then dropped her own.  "Surely, you understand, Mr.
Harnish."

He shook his head glumly.

"I do, and I don't.  I ain't used to city ways by a long shot. There's
things one mustn't do, which I don't mind as long as I don't want to do
them."

"But when you do?" she asked quickly.

"Then I do them." His lips had drawn firmly with this affirmation of
will, but the next instant he was amending the statement "That is, I
mostly do.  But what gets me is the things you mustn't do when they're
not wrong and they won't hurt anybody--this riding, for instance."

She played nervously with a pencil for a time, as if debating her
reply, while he waited patiently.

"This riding," she began; "it's not what they call the right thing. I
leave it to you.  You know the world.  You are Mr. Harnish, the
millionaire--"

"Gambler," he broke in harshly

She nodded acceptance of his term and went on.

"And I'm a stenographer in your office--"

"You're a thousand times better than me--" he attempted to interpolate,
but was in turn interrupted.

"It isn't a question of such things.  It's a simple and fairly common
situation that must be considered.  I work for you.  And it isn't what
you or I might think, but what other persons will think.  And you don't
need to be told any more about that.  You know yourself."

Her cool, matter-of-fact speech belied her--or so Daylight thought,
looking at her perturbed feminineness, at the rounded lines of her
figure, the breast that deeply rose and fell, and at the color that was
now excited in her cheeks.

"I'm sorry I frightened you out of your favorite stamping ground," he
said rather aimlessly.

"You didn't frighten me," she retorted, with a touch of fire. "I'm not
a silly seminary girl.  I've taken care of myself for a long time now,
and I've done it without being frightened.  We were together two
Sundays, and I'm sure I wasn't frightened of Bob, or you.  It isn't
that.  I have no fears of taking care of myself, but the world insists
on taking care of one as well. That's the trouble.  It's what the world
would have to say about me and my employer meeting regularly and riding
in the hills on Sundays.  It's funny, but it's so.  I could ride with
one of the clerks without remark, but with you--no."

"But the world don't know and don't need to know," he cried.

"Which makes it worse, in a way, feeling guilty of nothing and yet
sneaking around back-roads with all the feeling of doing something
wrong.  It would be finer and braver for me publicly..."

"To go to lunch with me on a week-day," Daylight said, divining the
drift of her uncompleted argument.

She nodded.

"I didn't have that quite in mind, but it will do.  I'd prefer doing
the brazen thing and having everybody know it, to doing the furtive
thing and being found out.  Not that I'm asking to be invited to
lunch," she added, with a smile; "but I'm sure you understand my
position."

"Then why not ride open and aboveboard with me in the hills?" he urged.

She shook her head with what he imagined was just the faintest hint of
regret, and he went suddenly and almost maddeningly hungry for her.

"Look here, Miss Mason, I know you don't like this talking over of
things in the office.  Neither do I.  It's part of the whole thing, I
guess; a man ain't supposed to talk anything but business with his
stenographer.  Will you ride with me next Sunday, and we can talk it
over thoroughly then and reach some sort of a conclusion.  Out in the
hills is the place where you can talk something besides business.  I
guess you've seen enough of me to know I'm pretty square.  I--I do
honor and respect you, and ... and all that, and I..."  He was
beginning to flounder, and the hand that rested on the desk blotter was
visibly trembling. He strove to pull himself together.  "I just want to
harder than anything ever in my life before.  I--I--I can't explain
myself, but I do, that's all.  Will you?--Just next Sunday?  To-morrow?"

Nor did he dream that her low acquiescence was due, as much as anything
else, to the beads of sweat on his forehead, his trembling hand, and
his all too-evident general distress.



CHAPTER XIV

"Of course, there's no way of telling what anybody wants from what they
say."   Daylight rubbed Bob's rebellious ear with his quirt and
pondered with dissatisfaction the words he had just uttered.  They did
not say what he had meant them to say.  "What I'm driving at is that
you say flatfooted that you won't meet me again, and you give your
reasons, but how am I to know they are your real reasons?  Mebbe you
just don't want to get acquainted with me, and won't say so for fear of
hurting my feelings.  Don't you see?  I'm the last man in the world to
shove in where I'm not wanted.  And if I thought you didn't care a
whoop to see anything more of me, why, I'd clear out so blamed quick
you couldn't see me for smoke."

Dede smiled at him in acknowledgment of his words, but rode on
silently.  And that smile, he thought, was the most sweetly wonderful
smile he had ever seen.  There was a difference in it, he assured
himself, from any smile she had ever given him before.

It was the smile of one who knew him just a little bit, of one who was
just the least mite acquainted with him.  Of course, he checked himself
up the next moment, it was unconscious on her part.  It was sure to
come in the intercourse of any two persons.

Any stranger, a business man, a clerk, anybody after a few casual
meetings would show similar signs of friendliness.  It was bound to
happen, but in her case it made more impression on him; and, besides,
it was such a sweet and wonderful smile.  Other women he had known had
never smiled like that; he was sure of it.

It had been a happy day.  Daylight had met her on the back-road from
Berkeley, and they had had hours together.  It was only now, with the
day drawing to a close and with them approaching the gate of the road
to Berkeley, that he had broached the important subject.

She began her answer to his last contention, and he listened gratefully.

"But suppose, just suppose, that the reasons I have given are the only
ones?--that there is no question of my not wanting to know you?"

"Then I'd go on urging like Sam Scratch," he said quickly. "Because,
you see, I've always noticed that folks that incline to anything are
much more open to hearing the case stated.  But if you did have that
other reason up your sleeve, if you didn't want to know me, if--if,
well, if you thought my feelings oughtn't to be hurt just because you
had a good job with me..."  Here, his calm consideration of a
possibility was swamped by the fear that it was an actuality, and he
lost the thread of his reasoning. "Well, anyway, all you have to do is
to say the word and I'll clear out.

"And with no hard feelings; it would be just a case of bad luck for me.
So be honest, Miss Mason, please, and tell me if that's the reason--I
almost got a hunch that it is."

She glanced up at him, her eyes abruptly and slightly moist, half with
hurt, half with anger.

"Oh, but that isn't fair," she cried.  "You give me the choice of lying
to you and hurting you in order to protect myself by getting rid of
you, or of throwing away my protection by telling you the truth, for
then you, as you said yourself, would stay and urge."

Her cheeks were flushed, her lips tremulous, but she continued to look
him frankly in the eyes.

Daylight smiled grimly with satisfaction.

"I'm real glad, Miss Mason, real glad for those words."

"But they won't serve you," she went on hastily.  "They can't serve
you.  I refuse to let them.  This is our last ride, and... here is the
gate."

Ranging her mare alongside, she bent, slid the catch, and followed the
opening gate.

"No; please, no," she said, as Daylight started to follow.

Humbly acquiescent, he pulled Bob back, and the gate swung shut between
them.  But there was more to say, and she did not ride on.

"Listen, Miss Mason," he said, in a low voice that shook with
sincerity; "I want to assure you of one thing.  I'm not just trying to
fool around with you.  I like you, I want you, and I was never more in
earnest in my life.  There's nothing wrong in my intentions or anything
like that.  What I mean is strictly honorable--"

But the expression of her face made him stop.  She was angry, and she
was laughing at the same time.

"The last thing you should have said," she cried.  "It's like a--a
matrimonial bureau: intentions strictly honorable; object, matrimony.
But it's no more than I deserved.  This is what I suppose you call
urging like Sam Scratch."

The tan had bleached out of Daylight's skin since the time he came to
live under city roofs, so that the flush of blood showed readily as it
crept up his neck past the collar and overspread his face.  Nor in his
exceeding discomfort did he dream that she was looking upon him at that
moment with more kindness than at any time that day.  It was not in her
experience to behold big grown-up men who blushed like boys, and
already she repented the sharpness into which she had been surprised.

"Now, look here, Miss Mason," he began, slowly and stumblingly at
first, but accelerating into a rapidity of utterance that was almost
incoherent; "I'm a rough sort of a man, I know that, and I know I don't
know much of anything.  I've never had any training in nice things.
I've never made love before, and I've never been in love before
either--and I don't know how to go about it any more than a thundering
idiot.  What you want to do is get behind my tomfool words and get a
feel of the man that's behind them. That's me, and I mean all right, if
I don't know how to go about it."

Dede Mason had quick, birdlike ways, almost flitting from mood to mood;
and she was all contrition on the instant.

"Forgive me for laughing," she said across the gate.  "It wasn't really
laughter.  I was surprised off my guard, and hurt, too. You see, Mr.
Harnish, I've not been..."

She paused, in sudden fear of completing the thought into which her
birdlike precipitancy had betrayed her.

"What you mean is that you've not been used to such sort of proposing,"
Daylight said; "a sort of on-the-run, 'Howdy,
glad-to-make-your-acquaintance, won't-you-be-mine' proposition."

She nodded and broke into laughter, in which he joined, and which
served to pass the awkwardness away.  He gathered heart at this, and
went on in greater confidence, with cooler head and tongue.

"There, you see, you prove my case.  You've had experience in such
matters.  I don't doubt you've had slathers of proposals. Well, I
haven't, and I'm like a fish out of water.  Besides, this ain't a
proposal.  It's a peculiar situation, that's all, and I'm in a corner.
I've got enough plain horse-sense to know a man ain't supposed to argue
marriage with a girl as a reason for getting acquainted with her.  And
right there was where I was in the hole.  Number one, I can't get
acquainted with you in the office.  Number two, you say you won't see
me out of the office to give me a chance.  Number three, your reason is
that folks will talk because you work for me.  Number four, I just got
to get acquainted with you, and I just got to get you to see that I
mean fair and all right.  Number five, there you are on one side the
gate getting ready to go, and me here on the other side the gate pretty
desperate and bound to say something to make you reconsider.  Number
six, I said it.  And now and finally, I just do want you to reconsider."

And, listening to him, pleasuring in the sight of his earnest,
perturbed face and in the simple, homely phrases that but emphasized
his earnestness and marked the difference between him and the average
run of men she had known, she forgot to listen and lost herself in her
own thoughts.  The love of a strong man is ever a lure to a normal
woman, and never more strongly did Dede feel the lure than now, looking
across the closed gate at Burning Daylight.  Not that she would ever
dream of marrying him--she had a score of reasons against it; but why
not at least see more of him?  He was certainly not repulsive to her.
On the contrary, she liked him, had always liked him from the day she
had first seen him and looked upon his lean Indian face and into his
flashing Indian eyes.  He was a figure of a man in more ways than his
mere magnificent muscles.  Besides, Romance had gilded him, this
doughty, rough-hewn adventurer of the North, this man of many deeds and
many millions, who had come down out of the Arctic to wrestle and fight
so masterfully with the men of the South.

Savage as a Red Indian, gambler and profligate, a man without morals,
whose vengeance was never glutted and who stamped on the faces of all
who opposed him--oh, yes, she knew all the hard names he had been
called.  Yet she was not afraid of him.  There was more than that in
the connotation of his name.  Burning Daylight called up other things
as well.  They were there in the newspapers, the magazines, and the
books on the Klondike.  When all was said, Burning Daylight had a
mighty connotation--one to touch any woman's imagination, as it touched
hers, the gate between them, listening to the wistful and impassioned
simplicity of his speech.  Dede was after all a woman, with a woman's
sex-vanity, and it was this vanity that was pleased by the fact that
such a man turned in his need to her.

And there was more that passed through her mind--sensations of
tiredness and loneliness; trampling squadrons and shadowy armies of
vague feelings and vaguer prompting; and deeper and dimmer whisperings
and echoings, the flutterings of forgotten generations crystallized
into being and fluttering anew and always, undreamed and unguessed,
subtle and potent, the spirit and essence of life that under a thousand
deceits and masks forever makes for life.  It was a strong temptation,
just to ride with this man in the hills.  It would be that only and
nothing more, for she was firmly convinced that his way of life could
never be her way.  On the other hand, she was vexed by none of the
ordinary feminine fears and timidities.  That she could take care of
herself under any and all circumstances she never doubted.  Then why
not?  It was such a little thing, after all.

She led an ordinary, humdrum life at best.  She ate and slept and
worked, and that was about all.  As if in review, her anchorite
existence passed before her: six days of the week spent in the office
and in journeying back and forth on the ferry; the hours stolen before
bedtime for snatches of song at the piano, for doing her own special
laundering, for sewing and mending and casting up of meagre accounts;
the two evenings a week of social diversion she permitted herself; the
other stolen hours and Saturday afternoons spent with her brother at
the hospital; and the seventh day, Sunday, her day of solace, on Mab's
back, out among the blessed hills.  But it was lonely, this solitary
riding.  Nobody of her acquaintance rode.  Several girls at the
University had been persuaded into trying it, but after a Sunday or two
on hired livery hacks they had lost interest.  There was Madeline, who
bought her own horse and rode enthusiastically for several months, only
to get married and go away to live in Southern California.  After years
of it, one did get tired of this eternal riding alone.

He was such a boy, this big giant of a millionaire who had half the
rich men of San Francisco afraid of him.  Such a boy!  She had never
imagined this side of his nature.

"How do folks get married?" he was saying.  "Why, number one, they
meet; number two, like each other's looks; number three, get
acquainted; and number four, get married or not, according to how they
like each other after getting acquainted.  But how in thunder we're to
have a chance to find out whether we like each other enough is beyond
my savvee, unless we make that chance ourselves.  I'd come to see you,
call on you, only I know you're just rooming or boarding, and that
won't do."

Suddenly, with a change of mood, the situation appeared to Dede
ridiculously absurd.  She felt a desire to laugh--not angrily, not
hysterically, but just jolly.  It was so funny.  Herself, the
stenographer, he, the notorious and powerful gambling millionaire, and
the gate between them across which poured his argument of people
getting acquainted and married.  Also, it was an impossible situation.
On the face of it, she could not go on with it.  This program of
furtive meetings in the hills would have to discontinue.  There would
never be another meeting.  And if, denied this, he tried to woo her in
the office, she would be compelled to lose a very good position, and
that would be an end of the episode.  It was not nice to contemplate;
but the world of men, especially in the cities, she had not found
particularly nice.  She had not worked for her living for years without
losing a great many of her illusions.

"We won't do any sneaking or hiding around about it," Daylight was
explaining.  "We'll ride around as bold if you please, and if anybody
sees us, why, let them.  If they talk--well, so long as our consciences
are straight we needn't worry.  Say the word, and Bob will have on his
back the happiest man alive."

She shook her head, pulled in the mare, who was impatient to be off for
home, and glanced significantly at the lengthening shadows.

"It's getting late now, anyway," Daylight hurried on, "and we've
settled nothing after all.  Just one more Sunday, anyway--that's not
asking much--to settle it in."

"We've had all day," she said.

"But we started to talk it over too late.  We'll tackle it earlier next
time.  This is a big serious proposition with me, I can tell you.  Say
next Sunday?"

"Are men ever fair?" she asked.  "You know thoroughly well that by
'next Sunday' you mean many Sundays."

"Then let it be many Sundays," he cried recklessly, while she thought
that she had never seen him looking handsomer.  "Say the word.  Only
say the word.  Next Sunday at the quarry..."

She gathered the reins into her hand preliminary to starting.

"Good night," she said, "and--"

"Yes," he whispered, with just the faintest touch of impressiveness.

"Yes," she said, her voice low but distinct.

At the same moment she put the mare into a canter and went down the
road without a backward glance, intent on an analysis of her own
feelings.  With her mind made up to say no--and to the last instant she
had been so resolved--her lips nevertheless had said yes.  Or at least
it seemed the lips.  She had not intended to consent.  Then why had
she?  Her first surprise and bewilderment at so wholly unpremeditated
an act gave way to consternation as she considered its consequences.
She knew that Burning Daylight was not a man to be trifled with, that
under his simplicity and boyishness he was essentially a dominant male
creature, and that she had pledged herself to a future of inevitable
stress and storm.  And again she demanded of herself why she had said
yes at the very moment when it had been farthest from her intention.



CHAPTER XV

Life at the office went on much the way it had always gone. Never, by
word or look, did they acknowledge that the situation was in any wise
different from what it had always been.  Each Sunday saw the
arrangement made for the following Sunday's ride; nor was this ever
referred to in the office.  Daylight was fastidiously chivalrous on
this point.  He did not want to lose her from the office.  The sight of
her at her work was to him an undiminishing joy.  Nor did he abuse this
by lingering over dictation or by devising extra work that would detain
her longer before his eyes.  But over and beyond such sheer selfishness
of conduct was his love of fair play.  He scorned to utilize the
accidental advantages of the situation.  Somewhere within him was a
higher appeasement of love than mere possession.  He wanted to be loved
for himself, with a fair field for both sides.

On the other hand, had he been the most artful of schemers he could not
have pursued a wiser policy.  Bird-like in her love of individual
freedom, the last woman in the world to be bullied in her affections,
she keenly appreciated the niceness of his attitude.  She did this
consciously, but deeper than all consciousness, and intangible as
gossamer, were the effects of this.  All unrealizable, save for some
supreme moment, did the web of Daylight's personality creep out and
around her.  Filament by filament, these secret and undreamable bonds
were being established.  They it was that could have given the cue to
her saying yes when she had meant to say no.  And in some such fashion,
in some future crisis of greater moment, might she not, in violation of
all dictates of sober judgment, give another unintentional consent?

Among other good things resulting from his growing intimacy with Dede,
was Daylight's not caring to drink so much as formerly. There was a
lessening in desire for alcohol of which even he at last became aware.
In a way she herself was the needed inhibition.  The thought of her was
like a cocktail.  Or, at any rate, she substituted for a certain
percentage of cocktails. From the strain of his unnatural city
existence and of his intense gambling operations, he had drifted on to
the cocktail route.  A wall must forever be built to give him easement
from the high pitch, and Dede became a part of this wall.  Her
personality, her laughter, the intonations of her voice, the impossible
golden glow of her eyes, the light on her hair, her form, her dress,
her actions on horseback, her merest physical mannerisms--all, pictured
over and over in his mind and dwelt upon, served to take the place of
many a cocktail or long Scotch and soda.

In spite of their high resolve, there was a very measurable degree of
the furtive in their meetings.  In essence, these meetings were stolen.
They did not ride out brazenly together in the face of the world.  On
the contrary, they met always unobserved, she riding across the
many-gated backroad from Berkeley to meet him halfway.  Nor did they
ride on any save unfrequented roads, preferring to cross the second
range of hills and travel among a church-going farmer folk who would
scarcely have recognized even Daylight from his newspaper photographs.

He found Dede a good horsewoman--good not merely in riding but in
endurance.  There were days when they covered sixty, seventy, and even
eighty miles; nor did Dede ever claim any day too long, nor--another
strong recommendation to Daylight--did the hardest day ever the
slightest chafe of the chestnut sorrel's back.  "A sure enough hummer,"
was Daylight's stereotyped but ever enthusiastic verdict to himself.

They learned much of each other on these long, uninterrupted rides.
They had nothing much to talk about but themselves, and, while she
received a liberal education concerning Arctic travel and gold-mining,
he, in turn, touch by touch, painted an ever clearer portrait of her.
She amplified the ranch life of her girlhood, prattling on about horses
and dogs and persons and things until it was as if he saw the whole
process of her growth and her becoming.  All this he was able to trace
on through the period of her father's failure and death, when she had
been compelled to leave the university and go into office work.  The
brother, too, she spoke of, and of her long struggle to have him cured
and of her now fading hopes.  Daylight decided that it was easier to
come to an understanding of her than he had anticipated, though he was
always aware that behind and under all he knew of her was the
mysterious and baffling woman and sex. There, he was humble enough to
confess to himself, was a chartless, shoreless sea, about which he knew
nothing and which he must nevertheless somehow navigate.

His lifelong fear of woman had originated out of non-understanding and
had also prevented him from reaching any understanding.  Dede on
horseback, Dede gathering poppies on a summer hillside, Dede taking
down dictation in her swift shorthand strokes--all this was
comprehensible to him.  But he did not know the Dede who so quickly
changed from mood to mood, the Dede who refused steadfastly to ride
with him and then suddenly consented, the Dede in whose eyes the golden
glow forever waxed and waned and whispered hints and messages that were
not for his ears.  In all such things he saw the glimmering
profundities of sex, acknowledged their lure, and accepted them as
incomprehensible.

There was another side of her, too, of which he was consciously
ignorant.  She knew the books, was possessed of that mysterious and
awful thing called "culture."  And yet, what continually surprised him
was that this culture was never obtruded on their intercourse.  She did
not talk books, nor art, nor similar folderols.  Homely minded as he
was himself, he found her almost equally homely minded.  She liked the
simple and the out-of-doors, the horses and the hills, the sunlight and
the flowers.  He found himself in a partly new flora, to which she was
the guide, pointing out to him all the varieties of the oaks, making
him acquainted with the madrono and the manzanita, teaching him the
names, habits, and habitats of unending series of wild flowers, shrubs,
and ferns.  Her keen woods eye was another delight to him.  It had been
trained in the open, and little escaped it.  One day, as a test, they
strove to see which could discover the greater number of birds' nests.
And he, who had always prided himself on his own acutely trained
observation, found himself hard put to keep his score ahead.  At the
end of the day he was but three nests in the lead, one of which she
challenged stoutly and of which even he confessed serious doubt. He
complimented her and told her that her success must be due to the fact
that she was a bird herself, with all a bird's keen vision and
quick-flashing ways.

The more he knew her the more he became convinced of this birdlike
quality in her.  That was why she liked to ride, he argued.  It was the
nearest approach to flying.  A field of poppies, a glen of ferns, a row
of poplars on a country lane, the tawny brown of a hillside, the shaft
of sunlight on a distant peak--all such were provocative of quick joys
which seemed to him like so many outbursts of song.  Her joys were in
little things, and she seemed always singing.  Even in sterner things
it was the same.  When she rode Bob and fought with that magnificent
brute for mastery, the qualities of an eagle were uppermost in her.

These quick little joys of hers were sources of joy to him.  He joyed
in her joy, his eyes as excitedly fixed on her as hers were fixed on
the object of her attention.  Also through her he came to a closer
discernment and keener appreciation of nature. She showed him colors in
the landscape that he would never have dreamed were there.  He had
known only the primary colors.  All colors of red were red.  Black was
black, and brown was just plain brown until it became yellow, when it
was no longer brown. Purple he had always imagined was red, something
like blood, until she taught him better.  Once they rode out on a high
hill brow where wind-blown poppies blazed about their horses' knees,
and she was in an ecstasy over the lines of the many distances. Seven,
she counted, and he, who had gazed on landscapes all his life, for the
first time learned what a "distance" was.  After that, and always, he
looked upon the face of nature with a more seeing eye, learning a
delight of his own in surveying the serried ranks of the upstanding
ranges, and in slow contemplation of the purple summer mists that
haunted the languid creases of the distant hills.

But through it all ran the golden thread of love.  At first he had been
content just to ride with Dede and to be on comradely terms with her;
but the desire and the need for her increased. The more he knew of her,
the higher was his appraisal.  Had she been reserved and haughty with
him, or been merely a giggling, simpering creature of a woman, it would
have been different. Instead, she amazed him with her simplicity and
wholesomeness, with her great store of comradeliness.  This latter was
the unexpected.  He had never looked upon woman in that way.  Woman,
the toy; woman, the harpy; woman, the necessary wife and mother of the
race's offspring,--all this had been his expectation and understanding
of woman.  But woman, the comrade and playfellow and joyfellow--this
was what Dede had surprised him in.  And the more she became worth
while, the more ardently his love burned, unconsciously shading his
voice with caresses, and with equal unconsciousness flaring up signal
fires in his eyes.  Nor was she blind to it yet, like many women before
her, she thought to play with the pretty fire and escape the consequent
conflagration.

"Winter will soon be coming on," she said regretfully, and with
provocation, one day, "and then there won't be any more riding."

"But I must see you in the winter just the same," he cried hastily.

She shook her head.

"We have been very happy and all that," she said, looking at him with
steady frankness.  "I remember your foolish argument for getting
acquainted, too; but it won't lead to anything; it can't. I know myself
too well to be mistaken."

Her face was serious, even solicitous with desire not to hurt, and her
eyes were unwavering, but in them was the light, golden and
glowing--the abyss of sex into which he was now unafraid to gaze.

"I've been pretty good," he declared.  "I leave it to you if I haven't.
It's been pretty hard, too, I can tell you.  You just think it over.
Not once have I said a word about love to you, and me loving you all
the time.  That's going some for a man that's used to having his own
way.  I'm somewhat of a rusher when it comes to travelling.  I reckon
I'd rush God Almighty if it came to a race over the ice.  And yet I
didn't rush you.  I guess this fact is an indication of how much I do
love you.  Of course I want you to marry me.  Have I said a word about
it, though? Nary a chirp, nary a flutter.  I've been quiet and good,
though it's almost made me sick at times, this keeping quiet.  I
haven't asked you to marry me.  I'm not asking you now.  Oh, not but
what you satisfy me.  I sure know you're the wife for me.  But how
about myself?  Do you know me well enough know your own mind?" He
shrugged his shoulders.  "I don't know, and I ain't going to take
chances on it now.  You've got to know for sure whether you think you
could get along with me or not, and I'm playing a slow conservative
game.  I ain't a-going to lose for overlooking my hand."

This was love-making of a sort beyond Dede's experience.  Nor had she
ever heard of anything like it.  Furthermore, its lack of ardor carried
with it a shock which she could overcome only by remembering the way
his hand had trembled in the past, and by remembering the passion she
had seen that very day and every day in his eyes, or heard in his
voice.  Then, too, she recollected what he had said to her weeks
before: "Maybe you don't know what patience is," he had said, and
thereat told her of shooting squirrels with a big rifle the time he and
Elijah Davis had starved on the Stewart River.

"So you see," he urged, "just for a square deal we've got to see some
more of each other this winter.  Most likely your mind ain't made up
yet--"

"But it is," she interrupted.  "I wouldn't dare permit myself to care
for you.  Happiness, for me, would not lie that way.  I like you, Mr.
Harnish, and all that, but it can never be more than that."

"It's because you don't like my way of living," he charged, thinking in
his own mind of the sensational joyrides and general profligacy with
which the newspapers had credited him--thinking this, and wondering
whether or not, in maiden modesty, she would disclaim knowledge of it.

To his surprise, her answer was flat and uncompromising.

"No; I don't."

"I know I've been brash on some of those rides that got into the
papers," he began his defense, "and that I've been travelling with a
lively crowd."

"I don't mean that," she said, "though I know about it too, and can't
say that I like it.  But it is your life in general, your business.
There are women in the world who could marry a man like you and be
happy, but I couldn't.  And the more I cared for such a man, the more
unhappy I should be.  You see, my unhappiness, in turn, would tend to
make him unhappy.  I should make a mistake, and he would make an equal
mistake, though his would not be so hard on him because he would still
have his business."

"Business!" Daylight gasped.  "What's wrong with my business?  I play
fair and square.  There's nothing under hand about it, which can't be
said of most businesses, whether of the big corporations or of the
cheating, lying, little corner-grocerymen.  I play the straight rules
of the game, and I don't have to lie or cheat or break my word."

Dede hailed with relief the change in the conversation and at the same
time the opportunity to speak her mind.

"In ancient Greece," she began pedantically, "a man was judged a good
citizen who built houses, planted trees--"  She did not complete the
quotation, but drew the conclusion hurriedly.  "How many houses have
you built?  How many trees have you planted?"

He shook his head noncommittally, for he had not grasped the drift of
the argument.

"Well," she went on, "two winters ago you cornered coal--"

"Just locally," he grinned reminiscently, "just locally.  And I took
advantage of the car shortage and the strike in British Columbia."

"But you didn't dig any of that coal yourself.  Yet you forced it up
four dollars a ton and made a lot of money.  That was your business.
You made the poor people pay more for their coal.  You played fair, as
you said, but you put your hands down into all their pockets and took
their money away from them.  I know.  I burn a grate fire in my
sitting-room at Berkeley.  And instead of eleven dollars a ton for Rock
Wells, I paid fifteen dollars that winter.  You robbed me of four
dollars.  I could stand it.  But there were thousands of the very poor
who could not stand it. You might call it legal gambling, but to me it
was downright robbery."

Daylight was not abashed.  This was no revelation to him.  He
remembered the old woman who made wine in the Sonoma hills and the
millions like her who were made to be robbed.

"Now look here, Miss Mason, you've got me there slightly, I grant.  But
you've seen me in business a long time now, and you know I don't make a
practice of raiding the poor people.  I go after the big fellows.
They're my meat.  They rob the poor, and I rob them.  That coal deal
was an accident.  I wasn't after the poor people in that, but after the
big fellows, and I got them, too.  The poor people happened to get in
the way and got hurt, that was all.

"Don't you see," he went on, "the whole game is a gamble. Everybody
gambles in one way or another.  The farmer gambles against the weather
and the market on his crops.  So does the United States Steel
Corporation.  The business of lots of men is straight robbery of the
poor people.  But I've never made that my business.  You know that.
I've always gone after the robbers."

"I missed my point," she admitted. "Wait a minute."

And for a space they rode in silence.

"I see it more clearly than I can state it, but it's something like
this.  There is legitimate work, and there's work that--well, that
isn't legitimate.  The farmer works the soil and produces grain.  He's
making something that is good for humanity.  He actually, in a way,
creates something, the grain that will fill the mouths of the hungry."

"And then the railroads and market-riggers and the rest proceed to rob
him of that same grain,"--Daylight broke in Dede smiled and held up her
hand.

"Wait a minute.  You'll make me lose my point.  It doesn't hurt if they
rob him of all of it so that he starves to death.  The point is that
the wheat he grew is still in the world.  It exists.  Don't you see?
The farmer created something, say ten tons of wheat, and those ten tons
exist.  The railroads haul the wheat to market, to the mouths that will
eat it.  This also is legitimate.  It's like some one bringing you a
glass of water, or taking a cinder out of your eye.  Something has been
done, in a way been created, just like the wheat."

"But the railroads rob like Sam Scratch," Daylight objected.

"Then the work they do is partly legitimate and partly not.  Now we
come to you.  You don't create anything.  Nothing new exists when
you're done with your business.  Just like the coal.  You didn't dig
it.  You didn't haul it to market.  You didn't deliver it.  Don't you
see?  that's what I meant by planting the trees and building the
houses.  You haven't planted one tree nor built a single house."

"I never guessed there was a woman in the world who could talk business
like that," he murmured admiringly.  "And you've got me on that point.
But there's a lot to be said on my side just the same.  Now you listen
to me.  I'm going to talk under three heads.  Number one: We live a
short time, the best of us, and we're a long time dead.  Life is a big
gambling game.  Some are born lucky and some are born unlucky.
Everybody sits in at the table, and everybody tries to rob everybody
else.  Most of them get robbed.  They're born suckers.

"Fellow like me comes along and sizes up the proposition.  I've got two
choices.  I can herd with the suckers, or I can herd with the robbers.
As a sucker, I win nothing.  Even the crusts of bread are snatched out
of my mouth by the robbers.  I work hard all my days, and die working.
And I ain't never had a flutter.  I've had nothing but work, work,
work.  They talk about the dignity of labor.  I tell you there ain't no
dignity in that sort of labor. My other choice is to herd with the
robbers, and I herd with them. I play that choice wide open to win.  I
get the automobiles, and the porterhouse steaks, and the soft beds.

"Number two: There ain't much difference between playing halfway robber
like the railroad hauling that farmer's wheat to market, and playing
all robber and robbing the robbers like I do.  And, besides, halfway
robbery is too slow a game for me to sit in. You don't win quick enough
for me."

"But what do you want to win for?" Dede demanded.  "You have millions
and millions, already.  You can't ride in more than one automobile at a
time, sleep in more than one bed at a time."

"Number three answers that," he said, "and here it is:  Men and things
are so made that they have different likes.  A rabbit likes a
vegetarian diet.  A lynx likes meat.  Ducks swim; chickens are scairt
of water.  One man collects postage stamps, another man collects
butterflies.  This man goes in for paintings, that man goes in for
yachts, and some other fellow for hunting big game.  One man thinks
horse-racing is It, with a big I, and another man finds the biggest
satisfaction in actresses. They can't help these likes.  They have
them, and what are they going to do about it?  Now I like gambling.  I
like to play the game.  I want to play it big and play it quick.  I'm
just made that way.  And I play it."

"But why can't you do good with all your money?"

Daylight laughed.

"Doing good with your money!  It's like slapping God in the face, as
much as to tell him that he don't know how to run his world and that
you'll be much obliged if he'll stand out of the way and give you a
chance.  Thinking about God doesn't keep me sitting up nights, so I've
got another way of looking at it.  Ain't it funny, to go around with
brass knuckles and a big club breaking folks' heads and taking their
money away from them until I've got a pile, and then, repenting of my
ways, going around and bandaging up the heads the other robbers are
breaking?  I leave it to you.  That's what doing good with money
amounts to.  Every once in a while some robber turns soft-hearted and
takes to driving an ambulance.  That's what Carnegie did.  He smashed
heads in pitched battles at Homestead, regular wholesale head-breaker
he was, held up the suckers for a few hundred million, and now he goes
around dribbling it back to them.  Funny?  I leave it to you."

He rolled a cigarette and watched her half curiously, half amusedly.
His replies and harsh generalizations of a harsh school were
disconcerting, and she came back to her earlier position.

"I can't argue with you, and you know that.  No matter how right a
woman is, men have such a way about them well, what they say sounds
most convincing, and yet the woman is still certain they are wrong.
But there is one thing--the creative joy.  Call it gambling if you
will, but just the same it seems to me more satisfying to create
something, make something, than just to roll dice out of a dice-box all
day long.  Why, sometimes, for exercise, or when I've got to pay
fifteen dollars for coal, I curry Mab and give her a whole half hour's
brushing.  And when I see her coat clean and shining and satiny, I feel
a satisfaction in what I've done.  So it must be with the man who
builds a house or plants a tree.  He can look at it.  He made it.  It's
his handiwork.  Even if somebody like you comes along and takes his
tree away from him, still it is there, and still did he make it. You
can't rob him of that, Mr. Harnish, with all your millions. It's the
creative joy, and it's a higher joy than mere gambling. Haven't you
ever made things yourself--a log cabin up in the Yukon, or a canoe, or
raft, or something?  And don't you remember how satisfied you were, how
good you felt, while you were doing it and after you had it done?"

While she spoke his memory was busy with the associations she recalled.
He saw the deserted flat on the river bank by the Klondike, and he saw
the log cabins and warehouses spring up, and all the log structures he
had built, and his sawmills working night and day on three shifts.

"Why, dog-gone it, Miss Mason, you're right--in a way.  I've built
hundreds of houses up there, and I remember I was proud and glad to see
them go up.  I'm proud now, when I remember them. And there was
Ophir--the most God-forsaken moose-pasture of a creek you ever laid
eyes on.  I made that into the big Ophir. Why, I ran the water in there
from the Rinkabilly, eighty miles away.  They all said I couldn't, but
I did it, and I did it by myself.  The dam and the flume cost me four
million.  But you should have seen that Ophir--power plants, electric
lights, and hundreds of men on the pay-roll, working night and day.  I
guess I do get an inkling of what you mean by making a thing.  I made
Ophir, and by God, she was a sure hummer--I beg your pardon.  I didn't
mean to cuss.  But that Ophir!--I sure am proud of her now, just as the
last time I laid eyes on her."

"And you won something there that was more than mere money," Dede
encouraged.  "Now do you know what I would do if I had lots of money
and simply had to go on playing at business?  Take all the southerly
and westerly slopes of these bare hills.  I'd buy them in and plant
eucalyptus on them.  I'd do it for the joy of doing it anyway; but
suppose I had that gambling twist in me which you talk about, why, I'd
do it just the same and make money out of the trees.  And there's my
other point again.  Instead of raising the price of coal without adding
an ounce of coal to the market supply, I'd be making thousands and
thousands of cords of firewood--making something where nothing was
before.  And everybody who ever crossed on the ferries would look up at
these forested hills and be made glad.  Who was made glad by your
adding four dollars a ton to Rock Wells?"

It was Daylight's turn to be silent for a time while she waited an
answer.

"Would you rather I did things like that?" he asked at last.

"It would be better for the world, and better for you," she answered
noncommittally.



CHAPTER XVI

All week every one in the office knew that something new and big was
afoot in Daylight's mind.  Beyond some deals of no importance, he had
not been interested in anything for several months.  But now he went
about in an almost unbroken brown study, made unexpected and lengthy
trips across the bay to Oakland, or sat at his desk silent and
motionless for hours.  He seemed particularly happy with what occupied
his mind.  At times men came in and conferred with him--and with new
faces and differing in type from those that usually came to see him.

On Sunday Dede learned all about it.  "I've been thinking a lot of our
talk," he began, "and I've got an idea I'd like to give it a flutter.
And I've got a proposition to make your hair stand up.  It's what you
call legitimate, and at the same time it's the gosh-dangdest gamble a
man ever went into.  How about planting minutes wholesale, and making
two minutes grow where one minute grew before?  Oh, yes, and planting a
few trees, too--say several million of them.  You remember the quarry I
made believe I was looking at?  Well, I'm going to buy it.  I'm going
to buy these hills, too, clear from here around to Berkeley and down
the other way to San Leandro.  I own a lot of them already, for that
matter.  But mum is the word.  I'll be buying a long time to come
before anything much is guessed about it, and I don't want the market
to jump up out of sight.  You see that hill over there. It's my hill
running clear down its slopes through Piedmont and halfway along those
rolling hills into Oakland.  And it's nothing to all the things I'm
going to buy."

He paused triumphantly.  "And all to make two minutes grow where one
grew before?" Dede queried, at the same time laughing heartily at his
affectation of mystery.

He stared at her fascinated.  She had such a frank, boyish way of
throwing her head back when she laughed.  And her teeth were an
unending delight to him.  Not small, yet regular and firm, without a
blemish, he considered them the healthiest, whitest, prettiest teeth he
had ever seen.  And for months he had been comparing them with the
teeth of every woman he met.

It was not until her laughter was over that he was able to continue.

"The ferry system between Oakland and San Francisco is the worst
one-horse concern in the United States.  You cross on it every day, six
days in the week.  That's say, twenty-five days a month, or three
hundred a year.  How long does it take you one way? Forty minutes, if
you're lucky.  I'm going to put you across in twenty minutes.  If that
ain't making two minutes grow where one grew before, knock off my head
with little apples.  I'll save you twenty minutes each way.  That's
forty minutes a day, times three hundred, equals twelve thousand
minutes a year, just for you, just for one person.  Let's see: that's
two hundred whole hours. Suppose I save two hundred hours a year for
thousands of other folks,--that's farming some, ain't it?"

Dede could only nod breathlessly.  She had caught the contagion of his
enthusiasm, though she had no clew as to how this great time-saving was
to be accomplished.

"Come on," he said.  "Let's ride up that hill, and when I get you out
on top where you can see something, I'll talk sense."

A small footpath dropped down to the dry bed of the canon, which they
crossed before they began the climb.  The slope was steep and covered
with matted brush and bushes, through which the horses slipped and
lunged.  Bob, growing disgusted, turned back suddenly and attempted to
pass Mab.  The mare was thrust sidewise into the denser bush, where she
nearly fell.  Recovering, she flung her weight against Bob.  Both
riders' legs were caught in the consequent squeeze, and, as Bob plunged
ahead down hill, Dede was nearly scraped off.  Daylight threw his horse
on to its haunches and at the same time dragged Dede back into the
saddle. Showers of twigs and leaves fell upon them, and predicament
followed predicament, until they emerged on the hilltop the worse for
wear but happy and excited.  Here no trees obstructed the view.  The
particular hill on which they were, out-jutted from the regular line of
the range, so that the sweep of their vision extended over
three-quarters of the circle.  Below, on the flat land bordering the
bay, lay Oakland, and across the bay was San Francisco.  Between the
two cities they could see the white ferry-boats on the water.  Around
to their right was Berkeley, and to their left the scattered villages
between Oakland and San Leandro.  Directly in the foreground was
Piedmont, with its desultory dwellings and patches of farming land, and
from Piedmont the land rolled down in successive waves upon Oakland.

"Look at it," said Daylight, extending his arm in a sweeping gesture.
"A hundred thousand people there, and no reason there shouldn't be half
a million.  There's the chance to make five people grow where one grows
now.  Here's the scheme in a nutshell.  Why don't more people live in
Oakland?  No good service with San Francisco, and, besides, Oakland is
asleep. It's a whole lot better place to live in than San Francisco.
Now, suppose I buy in all the street railways of Oakland, Berkeley,
Alameda, San Leandro, and the rest,--bring them under one head with a
competent management?  Suppose I cut the time to San Francisco one-half
by building a big pier out there almost to Goat Island and establishing
a ferry system with modern up-to-date boats?  Why, folks will want to
live over on this side.  Very good.  They'll need land on which to
build.  So, first I buy up the land.  But the land's cheap now.  Why?
Because it's in the country, no electric roads, no quick communication,
nobody guessing that the electric roads are coming.  I'll build the
roads. That will make the land jump up.  Then I'll sell the land as
fast as the folks will want to buy because of the improved ferry system
and transportation facilities.

"You see, I give the value to the land by building the roads. Then I
sell the land and get that value back, and after that, there's the
roads, all carrying folks back and forth and earning big money.  Can't
lose.  And there's all sorts of millions in it.

"I'm going to get my hands on some of that water front and the
tide-lands.  Take between where I'm going to build my pier and the old
pier.  It's shallow water.  I can fill and dredge and put in a system
of docks that will handle hundreds of ships.  San Francisco's water
front is congested.  No more room for ships. With hundreds of ships
loading and unloading on this side right into the freight cars of three
big railroads, factories will start up over here instead of crossing to
San Francisco.  That means factory sites.  That means me buying in the
factory sites before anybody guesses the cat is going to jump, much
less, which way.  Factories mean tens of thousands of workingmen and
their families.  That means more houses and more land, and that means
me, for I'll be there to sell them the land.  And tens of thousands of
families means tens of thousands of nickels every day for my electric
cars.  The growing population will mean more stores, more banks, more
everything.  And that'll mean me, for I'll be right there with business
property as well as home property.  What do you think of it?"

Before she could answer, he was off again, his mind's eye filled
with this new city of his dream which he builded on the Alameda hills
by the gateway to the Orient.

"Do you know--I've been looking it up--the Firth Of Clyde, where all
the steel ships are built, isn't half as wide as Oakland Creek down
there, where all those old hulks lie?  Why ain't it a Firth of Clyde?
Because the Oakland City Council spends its time debating about prunes
and raisins.  What is needed is somebody to see things, and, after
that, organization.  That's me.  I didn't make Ophir for nothing.  And
once things begin to hum, outside capital will pour in.  All I do is
start it going.  'Gentlemen,' I say, 'here's all the natural advantages
for a great metropolis. God Almighty put them advantages here, and he
put me here to see them.  Do you want to land your tea and silk from
Asia and ship it straight East?  Here's the docks for your steamers,
and here's the railroads.  Do you want factories from which you can
ship direct by land or water?  Here's the site, and here's the modern,
up-to-date city, with the latest improvements for yourselves and your
workmen, to live in.'"

"Then there's the water.  I'll come pretty close to owning the
watershed.  Why not the waterworks too?  There's two water companies in
Oakland now, fighting like cats and dogs and both about broke.  What a
metropolis needs is a good water system. They can't give it.  They're
stick-in-the-muds.  I'll gobble them up and deliver the right article
to the city.  There's money there, too--money everywhere.  Everything
works in with everything else.  Each improvement makes the value of
everything else pump up.  It's people that are behind the value.  The
bigger the crowd that herds in one place, the more valuable is the real
estate.  And this is the very place for a crowd to herd.  Look at it.
Just look at it!  You could never find a finer site for a great city.
All it needs is the herd, and I'll stampede a couple of hundred
thousand people in here inside two years.  And what's more it won't be
one of these wild cat land booms.  It will be legitimate.  Twenty years
from now there'll be a million people on this side the bay.  Another
thing is hotels.  There isn't a decent one in the town.  I'll build a
couple of up-to-date ones that'll make them sit up and take notice.  I
won't care if they don't pay for years.  Their effect will more than
give me my money back out of the other holdings.  And, oh, yes, I'm
going to plant eucalyptus, millions of them, on these hills."

"But how are you going to do it?" Dede asked.  "You haven't enough
money for all that you've planned."

"I've thirty million, and if I need more I can borrow on the land and
other things.  Interest on mortgages won't anywhere near eat up the
increase in land values, and I'll be selling land right along."

In the weeks that followed, Daylight was a busy man.  He spent most of
his time in Oakland, rarely coming to the office.  He planned to move
the office to Oakland, but, as he told Dede, the secret preliminary
campaign of buying had to be put through first.  Sunday by Sunday, now
from this hilltop and now from that, they looked down upon the city and
its farming suburbs, and he pointed out to her his latest acquisitions.
At first it was patches and sections of land here and there; but as the
weeks passed it was the unowned portions that became rare, until at
last they stood as islands surrounded by Daylight's land.

It meant quick work on a colossal scale, for Oakland and the adjacent
country was not slow to feel the tremendous buying.  But Daylight had
the ready cash, and it had always been his policy to strike quickly.
Before the others could get the warning of the boom, he quietly
accomplished many things.  At the same time that his agents were
purchasing corner lots and entire blocks in the heart of the business
section and the waste lands for factory sites, he was rushing
franchises through the city council, capturing the two exhausted water
companies and the eight or nine independent street railways, and
getting his grip on the Oakland Creek and the bay tide-lands for his
dock system.  The tide-lands had been in litigation for years, and he
took the bull by the horns--buying out the private owners and at the
same time leasing from the city fathers.

By the time that Oakland was aroused by this unprecedented activity in
every direction and was questioning excitedly the meaning of it,
Daylight secretly bought the chief Republican newspaper and the chief
Democratic organ, and moved boldly into his new offices.  Of necessity,
they were on a large scale, occupying four floors of the only modern
office building in the town--the only building that wouldn't have to be
torn down later on, as Daylight put it.  There was department after
department, a score of them, and hundreds of clerks and stenographers.
As he told Dede: "I've got more companies than you can shake a stick
at.  There's the Alameda & Contra Costa Land Syndicate, the
Consolidated Street Railways, the Yerba Buena Ferry Company, the United
Water Company, the Piedmont Realty Company, the Fairview and Portola
Hotel Company, and half a dozen more that I've got to refer to a
notebook to remember.  There's the Piedmont Laundry Farm, and Redwood
Consolidated Quarries.  Starting in with our quarry, I just kept
a-going till I got them all.  And there's the ship-building company I
ain't got a name for yet.  Seeing as I had to have ferry-boats, I
decided to build them myself.  They'll be done by the time the pier is
ready for them.  Phew!  It all sure beats poker.  And I've had the fun
of gouging the robber gangs as well.  The water company bunches are
squealing yet.  I sure got them where the hair was short.  They were
just about all in when I came along and finished them off."

"But why do you hate them so?" Dede asked.

"Because they're such cowardly skunks."

"But you play the same game they do."

"Yes; but not in the same way."  Daylight regarded her thoughtfully.
"When I say cowardly skunks, I mean just that,--cowardly skunks.  They
set up for a lot of gamblers, and there ain't one in a thousand of them
that's got the nerve to be a gambler.  They're four-flushers, if you
know what that means. They're a lot of little cottontail rabbits making
believe they're big rip-snorting timber wolves.  They set out to
everlastingly eat up some proposition but at the first sign of trouble
they turn tail and stampede for the brush.  Look how it works.  When
the big fellows wanted to unload Little Copper, they sent Jakey Fallow
into the New York Stock Exchange to yell out: 'I'll buy all or any part
of Little Copper at fifty five,' Little Copper being at fifty-four.
And in thirty minutes them cottontails--financiers, some folks call
them--bid up Little Copper to sixty. And an hour after that, stampeding
for the brush, they were throwing Little Copper overboard at forty-five
and even forty.

"They're catspaws for the big fellows.  Almost as fast as they rob the
suckers, the big fellows come along and hold them up.  Or else the big
fellows use them in order to rob each other.  That's the way the
Chattanooga Coal and Iron Company was swallowed up by the trust in the
last panic.  The trust made that panic.  It had to break a couple of
big banking companies and squeeze half a dozen big fellows, too, and it
did it by stampeding the cottontails.  The cottontails did the rest all
right, and the trust gathered in Chattanooga Coal and Iron.  Why, any
man, with nerve and savvee, can start them cottontails jumping for the
brush.  I don't exactly hate them myself, but I haven't any regard for
chicken-hearted four-flushers."



CHAPTER XVII

For months Daylight was buried in work.  The outlay was terrific, and
there was nothing coming in.  Beyond a general rise in land values,
Oakland had not acknowledged his irruption on the financial scene.  The
city was waiting for him to show what he was going to do, and he lost
no time about it.  The best skilled brains on the market were hired by
him for the different branches of the work.  Initial mistakes he had no
patience with, and he was determined to start right, as when he engaged
Wilkinson, almost doubling his big salary, and brought him out from
Chicago to take charge of the street railway organization.  Night and
day the road gangs toiled on the streets.  And night and day the
pile-drivers hammered the big piles down into the mud of San Francisco
Bay.  The pier was to be three miles long, and the Berkeley hills were
denuded of whole groves of mature eucalyptus for the piling.

At the same time that his electric roads were building out through the
hills, the hay-fields were being surveyed and broken up into city
squares, with here and there, according to best modern methods, winding
boulevards and strips of park.  Broad streets, well graded, were made,
with sewers and water-pipes ready laid, and macadamized from his own
quarries.  Cement sidewalks were also laid, so that all the purchaser
had to do was to select his lot and architect and start building.  The
quick service of Daylight's new electric roads into Oakland made this
big district immediately accessible, and long before the ferry system
was in operation hundreds of residences were going up.

The profit on this land was enormous.  In a day, his onslaught of
wealth had turned open farming country into one of the best residential
districts of the city.

But this money that flowed in upon him was immediately poured back into
his other investments.  The need for electric cars was so great that he
installed his own shops for building them.  And even on the rising land
market, he continued to buy choice factory sites and building
properties.  On the advice of Wilkinson, practically every electric
road already in operation was rebuilt.  The light, old fashioned rails
were torn out and replaced by the heaviest that were manufactured.
Corner lots, on the sharp turns of narrow streets, were bought and
ruthlessly presented to the city in order to make wide curves for his
tracks and high speed for his cars.  Then, too, there were the
main-line feeders for his ferry system, tapping every portion of
Oakland, Alameda, and Berkeley, and running fast expresses to the pier
end.  The same large-scale methods were employed in the water system.
Service of the best was needed, if his huge land investment was to
succeed.  Oakland had to be made into a worth-while city, and that was
what he intended to do.  In addition to his big hotels, he built
amusement parks for the common people, and art galleries and club-house
country inns for the more finicky classes.  Even before there was any
increase in population, a marked increase in street-railway traffic
took place.  There was nothing fanciful about his schemes.  They were
sound investments.

"What Oakland wants is a first class theatre," he said, and, after
vainly trying to interest local capital, he started the building of the
theatre himself; for he alone had vision for the two hundred thousand
new people that were coming to the town.

But no matter what pressure was on Daylight, his Sundays he reserved
for his riding in the hills.  It was not the winter weather, however,
that brought these rides with Dede to an end. One Saturday afternoon in
the office she told him not to expect to meet her next day, and, when
he pressed for an explanation:

"I've sold Mab."

Daylight was speechless for the moment.  Her act meant one of so many
serious things that he couldn't classify it.  It smacked almost of
treachery.  She might have met with financial disaster.

It might be her way of letting him know she had seen enough of him.
Or...

"What's the matter?" he managed to ask.

"I couldn't afford to keep her with hay forty-five dollars a ton," Dede
answered.

"Was that your only reason?" he demanded, looking at her steadily; for
he remembered her once telling him how she had brought the mare through
one winter, five years before, when hay had gone as high as sixty
dollars a ton.

"No.  My brother's expenses have been higher, as well, and I was driven
to the conclusion that since I could not afford both, I'd better let
the mare go and keep the brother."

Daylight felt inexpressibly saddened.  He was suddenly aware of a great
emptiness.  What would a Sunday be without Dede?  And Sundays without
end without her?  He drummed perplexedly on the desk with his fingers.

"Who bought her?" he asked.  Dede's eyes flashed in the way long since
familiar to him when she was angry.

"Don't you dare buy her back for me," she cried.  "And don't deny that
that was what you had in mind."

"I won't deny it.  It was my idea to a tee.  But I wouldn't have done
it without asking you first, and seeing how you feel about it, I won't
even ask you.  But you thought a heap of that mare, and it's pretty
hard on you to lose her.  I'm sure sorry.  And I'm sorry, too, that you
won't be riding with me tomorrow.  I'll be plumb lost.  I won't know
what to do with myself."

"Neither shall I," Dede confessed mournfully, "except that I shall be
able to catch up with my sewing."

"But I haven't any sewing."

Daylight's tone was whimsically plaintive, but secretly he was
delighted with her confession of loneliness.  It was almost worth the
loss of the mare to get that out of her.  At any rate, he meant
something to her.  He was not utterly unliked.

"I wish you would reconsider, Miss Mason," he said softly.  "Not alone
for the mare's sake, but for my sake.  Money don't cut any ice in this.
For me to buy that mare wouldn't mean as it does to most men to send a
bouquet of flowers or a box of candy to a young lady.  And I've never
sent you flowers or candy."  He observed the warning flash of her eyes,
and hurried on to escape refusal.  "I'll tell you what we'll do.
Suppose I buy the mare and own her myself, and lend her to you when you
want to ride. There's nothing wrong in that.  Anybody borrows a horse
from anybody, you know."

Agin he saw refusal, and headed her off.

"Lots of men take women buggy-riding.  There's nothing wrong in that.
And the man always furnishes the horse and buggy. Well, now, what's the
difference between my taking you buggy-riding and furnishing the horse
and buggy, and taking you horse-back-riding and furnishing the horses?"

She shook her head, and declined to answer, at the same time looking at
the door as if to intimate that it was time for this unbusinesslike
conversation to end.  He made one more effort.

"Do you know, Miss Mason, I haven't a friend in the world outside you?
I mean a real friend, man or woman, the kind you chum with, you know,
and that you're glad to be with and sorry to be away from.  Hegan is
the nearest man I get to, and he's a million miles away from me.
Outside business, we don't hitch.  He's got a big library of books, and
some crazy kind of culture, and he spends all his off times reading
things in French and German and other outlandish lingoes--when he ain't
writing plays and poetry. There's nobody I feel chummy with except you,
and you know how little we've chummed--once a week, if it didn't rain,
on Sunday. I've grown kind of to depend on you.  You're a sort
of--of--of--"

"A sort of habit," she said with a smile.

"That's about it.  And that mare, and you astride of her, coming along
the road under the trees or through the sunshine--why, with both you
and the mare missing, there won't be anything worth waiting  through
the week for.  If you'd just let me buy her back--"

"No, no; I tell you no."  Dede rose impatiently, but her eyes were
moist with the memory of her pet.  "Please don't mention her to me
again.  If you think it was easy to part with her, you are mistaken.
But I've seen the last of her, and I want to forget her."

Daylight made no answer, and the door closed behind him.

Half an hour later he was conferring with Jones, the erstwhile elevator
boy and rabid proletarian whom Daylight long before had grubstaked to
literature for a year.  The resulting novel had been a failure.
Editors and publishers would not look at it, and now Daylight was using
the disgruntled author in a little private secret service system he had
been compelled to establish for himself.  Jones, who affected to be
surprised at nothing after his crushing experience with railroad
freight rates on firewood and charcoal, betrayed no surprise now when
the task was given to him to locate the purchaser of a certain sorrel
mare.

"How high shall I pay for her?" he asked.

"Any price.  You've got to get her, that's the point.  Drive a sharp
bargain so as not to excite suspicion, but buy her.  Then you deliver
her to that address up in Sonoma County.  The man's the caretaker on a
little ranch I have there.  Tell him he's to take whacking good care of
her.  And after that forget all about it. Don't tell me the name of the
man you buy her from.  Don't tell me anything about it except that
you've got her and delivered her. Savvee?"

But the week had not passed, when Daylight noted the flash in Dede's
eyes that boded trouble.

"Something's gone wrong--what is it?" he asked boldly.

"Mab," she said.  "The man who bought her has sold her already. If I
thought you had anything to do with it--"

"I don't even know who you sold her to," was Daylight's answer. "And
what's more, I'm not bothering my head about her.  She was your mare,
and it's none of my business what you did with her. You haven't got
her, that's sure and worse luck.  And now, while we're on touchy
subjects, I'm going to open another one with you. And you needn't get
touchy about it, for it's not really your business at all."

She waited in the pause that followed, eyeing him almost suspiciously.

"It's about that brother of yours.  He needs more than you can do for
him.  Selling that mare of yours won't send him to Germany. And that's
what his own doctors say he needs--that crack German specialist who
rips a man's bones and muscles into pulp and then molds them all over
again.  Well, I want to send him to Germany and give that crack a
flutter, that's all."

"If it were only possible" she said, half breathlessly, and wholly
without anger.  "Only it isn't, and you know it isn't.  I can't accept
money from you--"

"Hold on, now," he interrupted.  "Wouldn't you accept a drink of water
from one of the Twelve Apostles if you was dying of thirst? Or would
you be afraid of his evil intentions"--she made a gesture of dissent
"--or of what folks might say about it?"

"But that's different," she began.

"Now look here, Miss Mason.  You've got to get some foolish notions out
of your head.  This money notion is one of the funniest things I've
seen. Suppose you was falling over a cliff, wouldn't it be all right
for me to reach out and hold you by the arm?  Sure it would.  But
suppose you needed another sort of help--instead of the strength of arm,
the strength of my pocket? That would be all and that's what they all
say.  But why do they say it.  Because the robber gangs want all the
suckers to be honest and respect money.  If the suckers weren't honest
and didn't respect money, where would the robbers be?  Don't you see?
The robbers don't deal in arm-holds; they deal in dollars. Therefore
arm-holds are just common and ordinary, while dollars are sacred--so
sacred that you didn't let me lend you a hand with a few.

"Or here's another way," he continued, spurred on by her mute protest.
"It's all right for me to give the strength of my arm when you're
falling over a cliff.  But if I take that same strength of arm and use
it at pick-and-shovel work for a day and earn two dollars, you won't
have anything to do with the two dollars.  Yet it's the same old
strength of arm in a new form, that's all.  Besides, in this
proposition it won't be a claim on you.  It ain't even a loan to you.
It's an arm-hold I'm giving your brother--just the same sort of
arm-hold as if he was falling over a cliff.  And a nice one you are, to
come running out and yell 'Stop!' at me, and let your brother go on
over the cliff. What he needs to save his legs is that crack in
Germany, and that's the arm-hold I'm offering.

"Wish you could see my rooms.  Walls all decorated with horsehair
bridles--scores of them--hundreds of them.  They're no use to me, and
they cost like Sam Scratch.  But there's a lot of convicts making them,
and I go on buying.  Why, I've spent more money in a single night on
whiskey than would get the best specialists and pay all the expenses of
a dozen cases like your brother's.  And remember, you've got nothing to
do with this.  If your brother wants to look on it as a loan, all
right.  It's up to him, and you've got to stand out of the way while I
pull him back from that cliff."

Still Dede refused, and Daylight's argument took a more painful turn.

"I can only guess that you're standing in your brother's way on account
of some mistaken idea in your head that this is my idea of courting.
Well, it ain't.  You might as well think I'm courting all those
convicts I buy bridles from.  I haven't asked you to marry me, and if I
do I won't come trying to buy you into consenting.  And there won't be
anything underhand when I come a-asking."

Dede's face was flushed and angry.  "If you knew how ridiculous you
are, you'd stop," she blurted out.  "You can make me more uncomfortable
than any man I ever knew.  Every little while you give me to understand
that you haven't asked me to marry you yet. I'm not waiting to be
asked, and I warned you from the first that you had no chance.  And yet
you hold it over my head that some time, some day, you're going to ask
me to marry you.  Go ahead and ask me now, and get your answer and get
it over and done with."

He looked at her in honest and pondering admiration.  "I want you so
bad, Miss Mason, that I don't dast to ask you now," he said, with such
whimsicality and earnestness as to make her throw her head back in a
frank boyish laugh.  "Besides, as I told you, I'm green at it.  I never
went a-courting before, and I don't want to make any mistakes."

"But you're making them all the time," she cried impulsively. "No man
ever courted a woman by holding a threatened proposal over her head
like a club."

"I won't do it any more," he said humbly.  "And anyway, we're off the
argument.  My straight talk a minute ago still holds.  You're standing
in your brother's way.  No matter what notions you've got in your head,
you've got to get out of the way and give him a chance.  Will you let
me go and see him and talk it over with him?  I'll make it a hard and
fast business proposition.  I'll stake him to get well, that's all, and
charge him interest."

She visibly hesitated.

"And just remember one thing, Miss Mason: it's HIS leg, not yours."

Still she refrained from giving her answer, and Daylight went on
strengthening his position.

"And remember, I go over to see him alone.  He's a man, and I can deal
with him better without womenfolks around.  I'll go over to-morrow
afternoon."



CHAPTER XVIII

Daylight had been wholly truthful when he told Dede that he had no real
friends.  On speaking terms with thousands, on fellowship and drinking
terms with hundreds, he was a lonely man.  He failed to find the one
man, or group of several men, with whom he could be really intimate.
Cities did not make for comradeship as did the Alaskan trail.  Besides,
the types of men were different. Scornful and contemptuous of business
men on the one hand, on the other his relations with the San Francisco
bosses had been more an alliance of expediency than anything else.  He
had felt more of kinship for the franker brutality of the bosses and
their captains, but they had failed to claim any deep respect.  They
were too prone to crookedness.  Bonds were better than men's word in
this modern world, and one had to look carefully to the bonds.

In the old Yukon days it had been different.  Bonds didn't go.  A man
said he had so much, and even in a poker game his appeasement was
accepted.

Larry Hegan, who rose ably to the largest demands of Daylight's
operations and who had few illusions and less hypocrisy, might have
proved a chum had it not been for his temperamental twist. Strange
genius that he was, a Napoleon of the law, with a power of visioning
that far exceeded Daylight's, he had nothing in common with Daylight
outside the office.  He spent his time with books, a thing Daylight
could not abide.  Also, he devoted himself to the endless writing of
plays which never got beyond manuscript form, and, though Daylight only
sensed the secret taint of it, was a confirmed but temperate eater of
hasheesh. Hegan lived all his life cloistered with books in a world of
agitation.  With the out-of-door world he had no understanding nor
tolerance.  In food and drink he was abstemious as a monk, while
exercise was a thing abhorrent.  Daylight's friendships, in lieu of
anything closer, were drinking friendships and roistering friendships.
And with the passing of the Sunday rides with Dede, he fell back more
and more upon these for diversion.  The cocktail wall of inhibition he
reared more assiduously than ever.

The big red motor-car was out more frequently now, while a stable hand
was hired to give Bob exercise.  In his early San Francisco days, there
had been intervals of easement between his deals, but in this present
biggest deal of all the strain was unremitting. Not in a month, or two,
or three, could his huge land investment be carried to a successful
consummation.  And so complete and wide-reaching was it that
complications and knotty situations constantly arose.  Every day
brought its problems, and when he had solved them in his masterful way,
he left the office in his big car, almost sighing with relief at
anticipation of the approaching double Martini.  Rarely was he made
tipsy.  His constitution was too strong for that.  Instead, he was that
direst of all drinkers, the steady drinker, deliberate and controlled,
who averaged a far higher quantity of alcohol than the irregular and
violent drinker.  For six weeks hard-running he had seen nothing of
Dede except in the office, and there he resolutely refrained from
making approaches.  But by the seventh Sunday his hunger for her
overmastered him.  It was a stormy day.

A heavy southeast gale was blowing, and squall after squall of rain and
wind swept over the city.  He could not take his mind off of her, and a
persistent picture came to him of her sitting by a window and sewing
feminine fripperies of some sort.  When the time came for his first
pre-luncheon cocktail to be served to him in his rooms, he did not take
it.

Filled with a daring determination, he glanced at his note book for
Dede's telephone number, and called for the switch.

At first it was her landlady's daughter who was raised, but in a minute
he heard the voice he had been hungry to hear.

"I just wanted to tell you that I'm coming out to see you," he said.
"I didn't want to break in on you without warning, that was all."

"Has something happened?" came her voice.

"I'll tell you when I get there," he evaded.

He left the red car two blocks away and arrived on foot at the pretty,
three-storied, shingled Berkeley house.  For an instant only, he was
aware of an inward hesitancy, but the next moment he rang the bell.  He
knew that what he was doing was in direct violation of her wishes, and
that he was setting her a difficult task to receive as a Sunday caller
the multimillionaire and notorious Elam Harnish of newspaper fame.  On
the other hand, the one thing he did not expect of her was what he
would have termed "silly female capers."

And in this he was not disappointed.

She came herself to the door to receive him and shake hands with him.
He hung his mackintosh and hat on the rack in the comfortable square
hall and turned to her for direction.

"They are busy in there," she said, indicating the parlor from which
came the boisterous voices of young people, and through the open door
of which he could see several college youths.  "So you will have to
come into my rooms."

She led the way through the door opening out of the hall to the right,
and, once inside, he stood awkwardly rooted to the floor, gazing about
him and at her and all the time trying not to gaze. In his perturbation
he failed to hear and see her invitation to a seat.  So these were her
quarters.  The intimacy of it and her making no fuss about it was
startling, but it was no more than he would have expected of her.  It
was almost two rooms in one, the one he was in evidently the
sitting-room, and the one he could see into, the bedroom.  Beyond an
oaken dressing-table, with an orderly litter of combs and brushes and
dainty feminine knickknacks, there was no sign of its being used as a
bedroom. The broad couch, with a cover of old rose and banked high with
cushions, he decided must be the bed, but it was farthest from any
experience of a civilized bed he had ever had.

Not that he saw much of detail in that awkward moment of standing.  His
general impression was one of warmth and comfort and beauty.  There
were no carpets, and on the hardwood floor he caught a glimpse of
several wolf and coyote skins.  What captured and perceptibly held his
eye for a moment was a Crouched Venus that stood on a Steinway upright
against a background of mountain-lion skin on the wall.

But it was Dede herself that smote most sharply upon sense and
perception.  He had always cherished the idea that she was very much a
woman--the lines of her figure, her hair, her eyes, her voice, and
birdlike laughing ways had all contributed to this; but here, in her
own rooms, clad in some flowing, clinging gown, the emphasis of sex was
startling.  He had been accustomed to her only in trim tailor suits and
shirtwaists, or in riding costume of velvet corduroy, and he was not
prepared for this new revelation.  She seemed so much softer, so much
more pliant, and tender, and lissome.  She was a part of this
atmosphere of quietude and beauty.  She fitted into it just as she had
fitted in with the sober office furnishings.

"Won't you sit down?" she repeated.

He felt like an animal long denied food.  His hunger for her welled up
in him, and he proceeded to "wolf" the dainty morsel before him.  Here
was no patience, no diplomacy.  The straightest, direct way was none
too quick for him and, had he known it, the least unsuccessful way he
could have chosen.

"Look here," he said, in a voice that shook with passion, "there's one
thing I won't do, and that's propose to you in the office.  That's why
I'm here.  Dede Mason, I want you.  I just want you."

While he spoke he advanced upon her, his black eyes burning with bright
fire, his aroused blood swarthy in his cheek.

So precipitate was he, that she had barely time to cry out her
involuntary alarm and to step back, at the same time catching one of
his hands as he attempted to gather her into his arms.

In contrast to him, the blood had suddenly left her cheeks.  The hand
that had warded his hand off and that still held it, was trembling.  She
relaxed her fingers, and his arm dropped to his side.  She wanted to
say something, do something, to pass on from the awkwardness of the
situation, but no intelligent thought nor action came into her mind.
She was aware only of a desire to laugh.  This impulse was party
hysterical and partly spontaneous humor--the latter growing from
instant to instant.  Amazing as the affair was, the ridiculous side of
it was not veiled to her. She felt like one who had suffered the terror
of the onslaught of a murderous footpad only to find out that it was an
innocent pedestrian asking the time.

Daylight was the quicker to achieve action.  "Oh, I know I'm a sure
enough fool," he said.  "I--I guess I'll sit down.  Don't be scairt,
Miss Mason.  I'm not real dangerous."

"I'm not afraid," she answered, with a smile, slipping down herself
into a chair, beside which, on the floor, stood a sewing-basket from
which, Daylight noted, some white fluffy thing of lace and muslin
overflowed.  Again she smiled.  "Though I confess you did startle me
for the moment."

"It's funny," Daylight sighed, almost with regret; "here I am, strong
enough to bend you around and tie knots in you.  Here I am, used to
having my will with man and beast and anything.  And here I am sitting
in this chair, as weak and helpless as a little lamb.  You sure take
the starch out of me."

Dede vainly cudgeled her brains in quest of a reply to these remarks.
Instead, her thought dwelt insistently upon the significance of his
stepping aside, in the middle of a violent proposal, in order to make
irrelevant remarks.  What struck her was the man's certitude.  So
little did he doubt that he would have her, that he could afford to
pause and generalize upon love and the effects of love.

She noted his hand unconsciously slipping in the familiar way into the
side coat pocket where she knew he carried his tobacco and brown papers.

"You may smoke, if you want to," she said.  He withdrew his hand with a
jerk, as if something in the pocket had stung him.

"No, I wasn't thinking of smoking.  I was thinking of you. What's a man
to do when he wants a woman but ask her to marry him?  That's all that
I'm doing.  I can't do it in style.  I know that.  But I can use
straight English, and that's good enough for me.  I sure want you
mighty bad, Miss Mason.  You're in my mind 'most all the time, now.
And what I want to know is--well, do you want me?  That's all."

"I--I wish you hadn't asked," she said softly.

"Mebbe it's best you should know a few things before you give me an
answer," he went on, ignoring the fact that the answer had already been
given.  "I never went after a woman before in my life, all reports to
the contrary not withstanding.  The stuff you read about me in the
papers and books, about me being a lady-killer, is all wrong. There's
not an iota of truth in it.  I guess I've done more than my share of
card-playing and whiskey-drinking, but women I've let alone.  There was
a woman that killed herself, but I didn't know she wanted me that bad
or else I'd have married her--not for love, but to keep her from
killing herself.  She was the best of the boiling, but I never gave her
any encouragement.  I'm telling you all this because you've read about
it, and I want you to get it straight from me.

"Lady-killer!" he snorted.  "Why, Miss Mason, I don't mind telling you
that I've sure been scairt of women all my life. You're the first one
I've not been afraid of.  That's the strange thing about it.  I just
plumb worship you, and yet I'm not afraid of you.  Mebbe it's because
you're different from the women I know.  You've never chased me.
Lady-killer!  Why, I've been running away from ladies ever since I can
remember, and I guess all that saved me was that I was strong in the
wind and that I never fell down and broke a leg or anything.

"I didn't ever want to get married until after I met you, and until a
long time after I met you.  I cottoned to you from the start; but I
never thought it would get as bad as marriage.  Why, I can't get to
sleep nights, thinking of you and wanting you."

He came to a stop and waited.  She had taken the lace and muslin from
the basket, possibly to settle her nerves and wits, and was sewing upon
it.  As she was not looking at him, he devoured her with his eyes.  He
noted the firm, efficient hands--hands that could control a horse like
Bob, that could run a typewriter almost as fast as a man could talk,
that could sew on dainty garments, and that, doubtlessly, could play on
the piano over there in the corner.  Another ultra-feminine detail he
noticed--her slippers.  They were small and bronze.  He had never
imagined she had such a small foot.  Street shoes and riding boots were
all that he had ever seen on her feet, and they had given no
advertisement of this.  The bronze slippers fascinated him, and to them
his eyes repeatedly turned.

A knock came at the door, which she answered.  Daylight could not help
hearing the conversation.  She was wanted at the telephone.

"Tell him to call up again in ten minutes," he heard her say, and the
masculine pronoun caused in him a flashing twinge of jealousy.  Well,
he decided, whoever it was, Burning Daylight would give him a run for
his money.  The marvel to him was that a girl like Dede hadn't been
married long since.

She came back, smiling to him, and resumed her sewing.  His eyes
wandered from the efficient hands to the bronze slippers and back
again, and he swore to himself that there were mighty few stenographers
like her in existence.  That was because she must have come of pretty
good stock, and had a pretty good raising. Nothing else could explain
these rooms of hers and the clothes she wore and the way she wore them.

"Those ten minutes are flying," he suggested.

"I can't marry you," she said.

"You don't love me?"

She shook her head.

"Do you like me--the littlest bit?"

This time she nodded, at the same time allowing the smile of amusement
to play on her lips.  But it was amusement without contempt.  The
humorous side of a situation rarely appealed in vain to her.

"Well, that's something to go on," he announced.  "You've got to make a
start to get started.  I just liked you at first, and look what it's
grown into.  You recollect, you said you didn't like my way of life.
Well, I've changed it a heap.  I ain't gambling like I used to.  I've
gone into what you called the legitimate, making two minutes grow where
one grew before, three hundred thousand folks where only a hundred
thousand grew before.  And this time next year there'll be two million
eucalyptus growing on the hills.  Say do you like me more than the
littlest bit?"

She raised her eyes from her work and looked at him as she answered:

"I like you a great deal, but--"

He waited a moment for her to complete the sentence, failing which, he
went on himself.

"I haven't an exaggerated opinion of myself, so I know I ain't bragging
when I say I'll make a pretty good husband.  You'd find I was no hand
at nagging and fault-finding. I can guess what it must be for a woman
like you to be independent.  Well, you'd be independent as my wife.  No
strings on you.  You could follow your own sweet will, and nothing
would be too good for you.  I'd give you everything your heart
desired--"

"Except yourself," she interrupted suddenly, almost sharply.

Daylight's astonishment was momentary.

"I don't know about that.  I'd be straight and square, and live true.
I don't hanker after divided affections."

"I don't mean that," she said.  "Instead of giving yourself to your
wife, you would give yourself to the three hundred thousand people of
Oakland, to your street railways and ferry-routes, to the two million
trees on the hills to everything business--and--and to all that that
means."

"I'd see that I didn't," he declared stoutly.  "I'd be yours to
command."

"You think so, but it would turn out differently."  She suddenly became
nervous.  "We must stop this talk.  It is too much like attempting to
drive a bargain.  'How much will you give?'  'I'll give so much.' 'I
want more,' and all that.  I like you, but not enough to marry you, and
I'll never like you enough to marry you."

"How do you know that?" he demanded.

"Because I like you less and less."

Daylight sat dumfounded.  The hurt showed itself plainly in his face.

"Oh, you don't understand," she cried wildly, beginning to lose
self-control--"It's not that way I mean.  I do like you; the more I've
known you the more I've liked you.  And at the same time the more I've
known you the less would I care to marry you."

This enigmatic utterance completed Daylight's perplexity.

"Don't you see?" she hurried on.  "I could have far easier married the
Elam Harnish fresh from Klondike, when I first laid eyes on him long
ago, than marry you sitting before me now."

He shook his head slowly.  "That's one too many for me.  The more you
know and like a man the less you want to marry him. Familiarity breeds
contempt--I guess that's what you mean."

"No, no," she cried, but before she could continue, a knock came on the
door.

"The ten minutes is up," Daylight said.

His eyes, quick with observation like an Indian's, darted about the
room while she was out.  The impression of warmth and comfort and
beauty predominated, though he was unable to analyze it; while the
simplicity delighted him--expensive simplicity, he decided, and most of
it leftovers from the time her father went broke and died.  He had
never before appreciated a plain hardwood floor with a couple of
wolfskins; it sure beat all the carpets in creation.  He stared
solemnly at a bookcase containing a couple of hundred books.  There was
mystery.  He could not understand what people found so much to write
about.

Writing things and reading things were not the same as doing things,
and himself primarily a man of action, doing things was alone
comprehensible.

His gaze passed on from the Crouched Venus to a little tea-table with
all its fragile and exquisite accessories, and to a shining copper
kettle and copper chafing-dish.  Chafing dishes were not unknown to
him, and he wondered if she concocted suppers on this one for some of
those University young men he had heard whispers about.  One or two
water-colors on the wall made him conjecture that she had painted them
herself.  There were photographs of horses and of old masters, and the
trailing purple of a Burial of Christ held him for a time.  But ever
his gaze returned to that Crouched Venus on the piano.  To his homely,
frontier-trained mind, it seemed curious that a nice young woman should
have such a bold, if not sinful, object on display in her own room.
But he reconciled himself to it by an act of faith.  Since it was Dede,
it must be eminently all right.  Evidently such things went along with
culture.  Larry Hegan had similar casts and photographs in his
book-cluttered quarters.  But then, Larry Hegan was different.  There
was that hint of unhealth about him that Daylight invariably sensed in
his presence, while Dede, on the contrary, seemed always so robustly
wholesome, radiating an atmosphere compounded of the sun and wind and
dust of the open road.  And yet, if such a clean, healthy woman as she
went in for naked women crouching on her piano, it must be all right.
Dede made it all right.  She could come pretty close to making anything
all right.  Besides, he didn't understand culture anyway.

She reentered the room, and as she crossed it to her chair, he admired
the way she walked, while the bronze slippers were maddening.

"I'd like to ask you several questions," he began immediately "Are you
thinking of marrying somebody?"

She laughed merrily and shook her head.

"Do you like anybody else more than you like me?--that man at the
'phone just now, for instance?"

"There isn't anybody else.  I don't know anybody I like well enough to
marry.  For that matter, I don't think I am a marrying woman.  Office
work seems to spoil one for that."

Daylight ran his eyes over her, from her face to the tip of a bronze
slipper, in a way that made the color mantle in her cheeks.  At the
same time he shook his head sceptically.

"It strikes me that you're the most marryingest woman that ever made a
man sit up and take notice.  And now another question. You see, I've
just got to locate the lay of the land.  Is there anybody you like as
much as you like me?"

But Dede had herself well in hand.

"That's unfair," she said.  "And if you stop and consider, you will
find that you are doing the very thing you disclaimed--namely, nagging.
I refuse to answer any more of your questions.  Let us talk about other
things. How is Bob?"

Half an hour later, whirling along through the rain on Telegraph Avenue
toward Oakland, Daylight smoked one of his brown-paper cigarettes and
reviewed what had taken place.  It was not at all bad, was his summing
up, though there was much about it that was baffling.  There was that
liking him the more she knew him and at the same time wanting to marry
him less.  That was a puzzler.

But the fact that she had refused him carried with it a certain
elation.  In refusing him she had refused his thirty million dollars.
That was going some for a ninety dollar-a-month stenographer who had
known better times.  She wasn't after money, that was patent.  Every
woman he had encountered had seemed willing to swallow him down for the
sake of his money.  Why, he had doubled his fortune, made fifteen
millions, since the day she first came to work for him, and behold, any
willingness to marry him she might have possessed had diminished as his
money had increased.

"Gosh!" he muttered.  "If I clean up a hundred million on this land
deal she won't even be on speaking terms with me."

But he could not smile the thing away.  It remained to baffle him, that
enigmatic statement of hers that she could more easily have married the
Elam Harnish fresh from the Klondike than the present Elam Harnish.
Well, he concluded, the thing to do was for him to become more like
that old-time Daylight who had come down out of the North to try his
luck at the bigger game.  But that was impossible.  He could not set
back the flight of time. Wishing wouldn't do it, and there was no other
way.  He might as well wish himself a boy again.

Another satisfaction he cuddled to himself from their interview. He had
heard of stenographers before, who refused their employers, and who
invariably quit their positions immediately afterward.  But Dede had
not even hinted at such a thing.  No matter how baffling she was, there
was no nonsensical silliness about her.  She was level headed.  But,
also, he had been level-headed and was partly responsible for this.  He
hadn't taken advantage of her in the office.  True, he had twice
overstepped the bounds, but he had not followed it up and made a
practice of it.  She knew she could trust him.  But in spite of all
this he was confident that most young women would have been silly
enough to resign a position with a man they had turned down.  And
besides, after he had put it to her in the right light, she had not
been silly over his sending her brother to Germany.

"Gee!" he concluded, as the car drew up before his hotel.  "If I'd only
known it as I do now, I'd have popped the question the first day she
came to work.  According to her say-so, that would have been the proper
moment.  She likes me more and more, and the more she likes me the less
she'd care to marry me!  Now what do you think of that?  She sure must
be fooling."



CHAPTER XIX

Once again, on a rainy Sunday, weeks afterward, Daylight proposed to
Dede.  As on the first time, he restrained himself until his hunger for
her overwhelmed him and swept him away in his red automobile to
Berkeley.  He left the machine several blocks away and proceeded to the
house on foot.  But Dede was out, the landlady's daughter told him, and
added, on second thought, that she was out walking in the hills.
Furthermore, the young lady directed him where Dede's walk was most
likely to extend.

Daylight obeyed the girl's instructions, and soon the street he
followed passed the last house and itself ceased where began the first
steep slopes of the open hills.  The air was damp with the on-coming of
rain, for the storm had not yet burst, though the rising wind
proclaimed its imminence.  As far as he could see, there was no sign of
Dede on the smooth, grassy hills.  To the right, dipping down into a
hollow and rising again, was a large, full-grown eucalyptus grove.
Here all was noise and movement, the lofty, slender trunked trees
swaying back and forth in the wind and clashing their branches
together.  In the squalls, above all the minor noises of creaking and
groaning, arose a deep thrumming note as of a mighty harp.  Knowing
Dede as he did, Daylight was confident that he would find her somewhere
in this grove where the storm effects were so pronounced.  And find her
he did, across the hollow and on the exposed crest of the opposing
slope where the gale smote its fiercest blows.

There was something monotonous, though not tiresome, about the way
Daylight proposed.  Guiltless of diplomacy subterfuge, he was as direct
and gusty as the gale itself.  He had time neither for greeting nor
apology.

"It's the same old thing," he said.  "I want you and I've come for you.
You've just got to have me, Dede, for the more I think about it the
more certain I am that you've got a Sneaking liking for me that's
something more than just Ordinary liking.  And you don't dast say that
it isn't; now dast you?"

He had shaken hands with her at the moment he began speaking, and he
had continued to hold her hand.  Now, when she did not answer, she felt
a light but firmly insistent pressure as of his drawing her to him.
Involuntarily, she half-yielded to him, her desire for the moment
stronger than her will.  Then suddenly she drew herself away, though
permitting her hand still to remain in his.

"You sure ain't afraid of me?" he asked, with quick compunction.

"No."  She smiled woefully.  "Not of you, but of myself."

"You haven't taken my dare," he urged under this encouragement.

"Please, please," she begged.  "We can never marry, so don't let us
discuss it."

"Then I copper your bet to lose."  He was almost gay, now, for success
was coming faster than his fondest imagining.  She liked him, without a
doubt; and without a doubt she liked him well enough to let him hold
her hand, well enough to be not repelled by the nearness of him.

She shook her head.  "No, it is impossible.  You would lose your bet."

For the first time a dark suspicion crossed Daylight's mind--a clew
that explained everything.

"Say, you ain't been let in for some one of these secret marriages have
you?"

The consternation in his voice and on his face was too much for her,
and her laugh rang out, merry and spontaneous as a burst of joy from
the throat of a bird.

Daylight knew his answer, and, vexed with himself decided that action
was more efficient than speech.  So he stepped between her and the wind
and drew her so that she stood close in the shelter of him.  An
unusually stiff squall blew about them and thrummed overhead in the
tree-tops and both paused to listen.  A shower of flying leaves
enveloped them, and hard on the heel of the wind came driving drops of
rain.  He looked down on her and on her hair wind-blown about her face;
and because of her closeness to him and of a fresher and more poignant
realization of what she meant to him, he trembled so that she was aware
of it in the hand that held hers.

She suddenly leaned against him, bowing her head until it rested
lightly upon his breast.  And so they stood while another squall, with
flying leaves and scattered drops of rain, rattled past. With equal
suddenness she lifted her head and looked at him.

"Do you know," she said, "I prayed last night about you.  I prayed that
you would fail, that you would lose everything everything."

Daylight stared his amazement at this cryptic utterance.  "That sure
beats me.  I always said I got out of my depth with women, and you've
got me out of my depth now.  Why you want me to lose everything, seeing
as you like me--"

"I never said so."

"You didn't dast say you didn't.  So, as I was saying: liking me, why
you'd want me to go broke is clean beyond my simple understanding.
It's right in line with that other puzzler of yours, the
more-you-like-me-the-less-you-want-to-marry-me one. Well, you've just
got to explain, that's all."

His arms went around her and held her closely, and this time she did
not resist.  Her head was bowed, and he had not see her face, yet he
had a premonition that she was crying.  He had learned the virtue of
silence, and he waited her will in the matter.  Things had come to such
a pass that she was bound to tell him something now.  Of that he was
confident.

"I am not romantic," she began, again looking at him as he spoke.

"It might be better for me if I were.  Then I could make a fool of
myself and be unhappy for the rest of my life.  But my abominable
common sense prevents.  And that doesn't make me a bit happier, either."

"I'm still out of my depth and swimming feeble," Daylight said, after
waiting vainly for her to go on.  "You've got to show me, and you ain't
shown me yet.  Your common sense and praying that I'd go broke is all
up in the air to me.  Little woman, I just love you mighty hard, and I
want you to marry me.  That's straight and simple and right off the
bat.  Will you marry me?"

She shook her head slowly, and then, as she talked, seemed to grow
angry, sadly angry; and Daylight knew that this anger was against him.

"Then let me explain, and just as straight and simply as you have
asked."  She paused, as if casting about for a beginning.  "You are
honest and straightforward.  Do you want me to be honest and
straightforward as a woman is not supposed to be?--to tell you things
that will hurt you?--to make confessions that ought to shame me?  to
behave in what many men would think was an unwomanly manner?"

The arm around her shoulder pressed encouragement, but he did not speak.

"I would dearly like to marry you, but I am afraid.  I am proud and
humble at the same time that a man like you should care for me.  But
you have too much money.  There's where my abominable common sense
steps in.  Even if we did marry, you could never be my man--my lover
and my husband.  You would be your money's man. I know I am a foolish
woman, but I want my man for myself.  You would not be free for me.
Your money possesses you, taking your time, your thoughts, your energy,
everything, bidding you go here and go there, do this and do that.
Don't you see?  Perhaps it's pure silliness, but I feel that I can love
much, give much--give all, and in return, though I don't want all, I
want much--and I want much more than your money would permit you to
give me.

"And your money destroys you; it makes you less and less nice. I am not
ashamed to say that I love you, because I shall never marry you.  And I
loved you much when I did not know you at all, when you first came down
from Alaska and I first went into the office.  You were my hero.  You
were the Burning Daylight of the gold-diggings, the daring traveler and
miner.  And you looked it. I don't see how any woman could have looked
at you without loving you--then.  But you don't look it now.

"Please, please, forgive me for hurting you.  You wanted straight talk,
and I am giving it to you.  All these last years you have been living
unnaturally.  You, a man of the open, have been cooping yourself up in
the cities with all that that means.  You are not the same man at all,
and your money is destroying you. You are becoming something different,
something not so healthy, not so clean, not so nice.  Your money and
your way of life are doing it.  You know it.  You haven't the same body
now that you had then.  You are putting on flesh, and it is not healthy
flesh. You are kind and genial with me, I know, but you are not kind
and genial to all the world as you were then.  You have become harsh
and cruel.  And I know.  Remember, I have studied you six days a week,
month after month, year after year; and I know more about the most
insignificant parts of you than you know of all of me. The cruelty is
not only in your heart and thoughts, but it is there in face.  It has
put its lines there.  I have watched them come and grow.  Your money,
and the life it compels you to lead have done all this.  You are being
brutalized and degraded.  And this process can only go on and on until
you are hopelessly destroyed--"

He attempted to interrupt, but she stopped him, herself breathless and
her voice trembling.

"No, no; let me finish utterly.  I have done nothing but think, think,
think, all these months, ever since you came riding with me, and now
that I have begun to speak I am going to speak all that I have in me.
I do love you, but I cannot marry you and destroy love.  You are
growing into a thing that I must in the end despise.  You can't help
it.  More than you can possibly love me, do you love this business
game.  This business--and it's all perfectly useless, so far as you are
concerned--claims all of you.  I sometimes think it would be easier to
share you equitably with another woman than to share you with this
business.  I might have half of you, at any rate.  But this business
would claim, not half of you, but nine-tenths of you, or ninety-nine
hundredths.

"Remember, the meaning of marriage to me is not to get a man's money to
spend.  I want the man.  You say you want ME.  And suppose I consented,
but gave you only one-hundredth part of me. Suppose there was something
else in my life that took the other ninety-nine parts, and,
furthermore, that ruined my figure, that put pouches under my eyes and
crows-feet in the corners, that made me unbeautiful to look upon and
that made my spirit unbeautiful.  Would you be satisfied with that
one-hundredth part of me?  Yet that is all you are offering me of
yourself.  Do you wonder that I won't marry you?--that I can't?"

Daylight waited to see if she were quite done, and she went on again.

"It isn't that I am selfish.  After all, love is giving, not receiving.
But I see so clearly that all my giving could not do you any good.  You
are like a sick man.  You don't play business like other men.  You play
it heart and and all of you.  No matter what you believed and intended
a wife would be only a brief diversion.  There is that magnificent Bob,
eating his head off in the stable.  You would buy me a beautiful
mansion and leave me in it to yawn my head off, or cry my eyes out
because of my helplessness and inability to save you.  This disease of
business would be corroding you and marring you all the time.  You play
it as you have played everything else, as in Alaska you played the life
of the trail.  Nobody could be permitted to travel as fast and as far
as you, to work as hard or endure as much.  You hold back nothing; you
put all you've got into whatever you are doing."

"Limit is the sky," he grunted grim affirmation.

"But if you would only play the lover-husband that way--"

Her voice faltered and stopped, and a blush showed in her wet cheeks as
her eyes fell before his.

"And now I won't say another word," she added. "I've delivered a whole
sermon."

She rested now, frankly and fairly, in the shelter of his arms, and
both were oblivious to the gale that rushed past them in quicker and
stronger blasts.  The big downpour of rain had not yet come, but the
mist-like squalls were more frequent.  Daylight was openly perplexed,
and he was still perplexed when he began to speak.

"I'm stumped.  I'm up a tree.  I'm clean flabbergasted, Miss Mason--or
Dede, because I love to call you that name.  I'm free to confess
there's a mighty big heap in what you say.  As I understand it, your
conclusion is that you'd marry me if I hadn't a cent and if I wasn't
getting fat.  No, no; I'm not joking.  I acknowledge the corn, and
that's just my way of boiling the matter down and summing it up.  If I
hadn't a cent, and if I was living a healthy life with all the time in
the world to love you and be your husband instead of being awash to my
back teeth in business and all the rest--why, you'd marry me.

"That's all as clear as print, and you're correcter than I ever guessed
before.  You've sure opened my eyes a few.  But I'm stuck.  What can I
do?  My business has sure roped, thrown, and branded me.  I'm tied hand
and foot, and I can't get up and meander over green pastures.  I'm like
the man that got the bear by the tail.  I can't let go; and I want you,
and I've got to let go to get you.

"I don't know what to do, but something's sure got to happen--I can't
lose you.  I just can't.  And I'm not going to.  Why, you're running
business a close second right now.  Business never kept me awake nights.

"You've left me no argument.  I know I'm not the same man that came
from Alaska.  I couldn't hit the trail with the dogs as I did in them
days.  I'm soft in my muscles, and my mind's gone hard.  I used to
respect men.  I despise them now.  You see, I spent all my life in the
open, and I reckon I'm an open-air man. Why, I've got the prettiest
little ranch you ever laid eyes on, up in Glen Ellen.  That's where I
got stuck for that brick-yard. You recollect handling the
correspondence.  I only laid eyes on the ranch that one time, and I so
fell in love with it that I bought it there and then.  I just rode
around the hills, and was happy as a kid out of school.  I'd be a
better man living in the country.  The city doesn't make me better.
You're plumb right there.  I know it.  But suppose your prayer should
be answered and I'd go clean broke and have to work for day's wages?"

She did not answer, though all the body of her seemed to urge consent.

"Suppose I had nothing left but that little ranch, and was satisfied to
grow a few chickens and scratch a living somehow--would you marry me
then, Dede?"

"Why, we'd be together all the time!" she cried.

"But I'd have to be out ploughing once in a while," he warned, "or
driving to town to get the grub."

"But there wouldn't be the office, at any rate, and no man to see, and
men to see without end.  But it is all foolish and impossible, and
we'll have to be starting back now if we're to escape the rain."

Then was the moment, among the trees, where they began the descent of
the hill, that Daylight might have drawn her closely to him and kissed
her once.  But he was too perplexed with the new thoughts she had put
into his head to take advantage of the situation.  He merely caught her
by the arm and helped her over the rougher footing.

"It's darn pretty country up there at Glen Ellen," he said
meditatively.  "I wish you could see it."

At the edge of the grove he suggested that it might be better for them
to part there.

"It's your neighborhood, and folks is liable to talk."

But she insisted that he accompany her as far as the house.

"I can't ask you in," she said, extending her hand at the foot of the
steps.

The wind was humming wildly in sharply recurrent gusts, but still the
rain held off.

"Do you know," he said, "taking it by and large, it's the happiest day
of my life."  He took off his hat, and the wind rippled and twisted his
black hair as he went on solemnly, "And I'm sure grateful to God, or
whoever or whatever is responsible for your being on this earth.  For
you do like me heaps.  It's been my joy to hear you say so to-day.
It's--" He left the thought arrested, and his face assumed the familiar
whimsical expression as he murmured: "Dede, Dede, we've just got to get
married.  It's the only way, and trust to luck for it's coming out all
right--".

But the tears were threatening to rise in her eyes again, as she shook
her head and turned and went up the steps.



CHAPTER XX

When the ferry system began to run, and the time between Oakland and
San Francisco was demonstrated to be cut in half, the tide of
Daylight's terrific expenditure started to turn.  Not that it really
did turn, for he promptly went into further investments. Thousands of
lots in his residence tracts were sold, and thousands of homes were
being built.  Factory sites also were selling, and business properties
in the heart of Oakland.  All this tended to a steady appreciation in
value of Daylight's huge holdings.  But, as of old, he had his hunch
and was riding it. Already he had begun borrowing from the banks.  The
magnificent profits he made on the land he sold were turned into more
land, into more development; and instead of paying off old loans, he
contracted new ones.  As he had pyramided in Dawson City, he now
pyramided in Oakland; but he did it with the knowledge that it was a
stable enterprise rather than a risky placer-mining boom.

In a small way, other men were following his lead, buying and selling
land and profiting by the improvement work he was doing. But this was
to be expected, and the small fortunes they were making at his expense
did not irritate him.  There was an exception, however.  One Simon
Dolliver, with money to go in with, and with cunning and courage to
back it up, bade fair to become a several times millionaire at
Daylight's expense. Dolliver, too, pyramided, playing quickly and
accurately, and keeping his money turning over and over.  More than
once Daylight found him in the way, as he himself had got in the way of
the Guggenhammers when they first set their eyes on Ophir Creek.

Work on Daylight's dock system went on apace, yet was one of those
enterprises that consumed money dreadfully and that could not be
accomplished as quickly as a ferry system.  The engineering
difficulties were great, the dredging and filling a cyclopean task.
The mere item of piling was anything but small. A good average pile, by
the time it was delivered on the ground, cost a twenty-dollar gold
piece, and these piles were used in unending thousands.  All accessible
groves of mature eucalyptus were used, and as well, great rafts of pine
piles were towed down the coast from Peugeot Sound.

Not content with manufacturing the electricity for his street railways
in the old-fashioned way, in power-houses, Daylight organized the
Sierra and Salvador Power Company.  This immediately assumed large
proportions.  Crossing the San Joaquin Valley on the way from the
mountains, and plunging through the Contra Costa hills, there were many
towns, and even a robust city, that could be supplied with power, also
with light; and it became a street- and house-lighting project as well.
As soon as the purchase of power sites in the Sierras was rushed
through, the survey parties were out and building operations begun.

And so it went.  There were a thousand maws into which he poured
unceasing streams of money.  But it was all so sound and legitimate,
that Daylight, born gambler that he was, and with his clear, wide
vision, could not play softly and safely.  It was a big opportunity,
and to him there was only one way to play it, and that was the big way.
Nor did his one confidential adviser, Larry Hegan, aid him to caution.
On the contrary, it was Daylight who was compelled to veto the wilder
visions of that able hasheesh dreamer.  Not only did Daylight borrow
heavily from the banks and trust companies, but on several of his
corporations he was compelled to issue stock.  He did this grudgingly
however, and retained most of his big enterprises of his own.  Among
the companies in which he reluctantly allowed the investing public to
join were the Golden Gate Dock Company, and Recreation Parks Company,
the United Water Company, the Uncial Shipbuilding Company, and the
Sierra and Salvador Power Company. Nevertheless, between himself and
Hegan, he retained the controlling share in each of these enterprises.

His affair with Dede Mason only seemed to languish.  While delaying to
grapple with the strange problem it presented, his desire for her
continued to grow.  In his gambling simile, his conclusion was that
Luck had dealt him the most remarkable card in the deck, and that for
years he had overlooked it.  Love was the card, and it beat them all.
Love was the king card of trumps, the fifth ace, the joker in a game of
tenderfoot poker. It was the card of cards, and play it he would, to
the limit, when the opening came.  He could not see that opening yet.
The present game would have to play to some sort of a conclusion first.

Yet he could not shake from his brain and vision the warm recollection
of those bronze slippers, that clinging gown, and all the feminine
softness and pliancy of Dede in her pretty Berkeley rooms.  Once again,
on a rainy Sunday, he telephoned that he was coming.  And, as has
happened ever since man first looked upon woman and called her good,
again he played the blind force of male compulsion against the woman's
secret weakness to yield.  Not that it was Daylight's way abjectly to
beg and entreat.  On the contrary, he was masterful in whatever he did,
but he had a trick of whimsical wheedling that Dede found harder to
resist than the pleas of a suppliant lover.  It was not a happy scene
in its outcome, for Dede, in the throes of her own desire, desperate
with weakness and at the same time with her better judgment hating her
weakness cried out:--

"You urge me to try a chance, to marry you now and trust to luck for it
to come out right.  And life is a gamble say.  Very well, let us
gamble.  Take a coin and toss it in the air.  If it comes heads, I'll
marry you.  If it doesn't, you are forever to leave me alone and never
mention marriage again."

A fire of mingled love and the passion of gambling came into Daylight's
eyes.  Involuntarily his hand started for his pocket for the coin.
Then it stopped, and the light in his eyes was troubled.

"Go on," she ordered sharply.  "Don't delay, or I may change my mind,
and you will lose the chance."

"Little woman."  His similes were humorous, but there was no humor in
their meaning.  His thought was as solemn as his voice. "Little woman,
I'd gamble all the way from Creation to the Day of Judgment; I'd gamble
a golden harp against another man's halo; I'd toss for pennies on the
front steps of the New Jerusalem or set up a faro layout just outside
the Pearly Gates; but I'll be everlastingly damned if I'll gamble on
love.  Love's too big to me to take a chance on.  Love's got to be a
sure thing, and between you and me it is a sure thing.  If the odds was
a hundred to one on my winning this flip, just the same, nary a flip."

In the spring of the year the Great Panic came on.  The first warning
was when the banks began calling in their unprotected loans.  Daylight
promptly paid the first several of his personal notes that were
presented; then he divined that these demands but indicated the way the
wind was going to blow, and that one of those terrific financial storms
he had heard about was soon to sweep over the United States.  How
terrific this particular storm was to be he did not anticipate.
Nevertheless, he took every precaution in his power, and had no anxiety
about his weathering it out.

Money grew tighter.  Beginning with the crash of several of the
greatest Eastern banking houses, the tightness spread, until every bank
in the country was calling in its credits.  Daylight was caught, and
caught because of the fact that for the first time he had been playing
the legitimate business game.  In the old days, such a panic, with the
accompanying extreme shrinkage of values, would have been a golden
harvest time for him.  As it was, he watched the gamblers, who had
ridden the wave of prosperity and made preparation for the slump,
getting out from under and safely scurrying to cover or proceeding to
reap a double harvest.  Nothing remained for him but to stand fast and
hold up.

He saw the situation clearly.  When the banks demanded that he pay his
loans, he knew that the banks were in sore need of the money.  But he
was in sorer need.  And he knew that the banks did not want his
collateral which they held.  It would do them no good.  In such a
tumbling of values was no time to sell.  His collateral was good, all
of it, eminently sound and worth while; yet it was worthless at such a
moment, when the one unceasing cry was money, money, money.  Finding
him obdurate, the banks demanded more collateral, and as the money
pinch tightened they asked for two and even three times as much as had
been originally accepted.  Sometimes Daylight yielded to these demands,
but more often not, and always battling fiercely.

He fought as with clay behind a crumbling wall.  All portions of the
wall were menaced, and he went around constantly strengthening the
weakest parts with clay.  This clay was money, and was applied, a sop
here and a sop there, as fast as it was needed, but only when it was
directly needed.  The strength of his position lay in the Yerba Buena
Ferry Company, the Consolidated Street Railways, and the United Water
Company. Though people were no longer buying residence lots and factory
and business sites, they were compelled to ride on his cars and
ferry-boats and to consume his water.  When all the financial world was
clamoring for money and perishing through lack of it, the first of each
month many thousands of dollars poured into his coffers from the
water-rates, and each day ten thousand dollars, in dime and nickels,
came in from his street railways and ferries.

Cash was what was wanted, and had he had the use of all this steady
river of cash, all would have been well with him.  As it was, he had to
fight continually for a portion of it. Improvement work ceased, and
only absolutely essential repairs were made.  His fiercest fight was
with the operating expenses, and this was a fight that never ended.
There was never any let-up in his turning the thumb-screws of extended
credit and economy.  From the big wholesale suppliers down through the
salary list to office stationery and postage stamps, he kept the
thumb-screws turning.  When his superintendents and heads of
departments performed prodigies of cutting down, he patted them on the
back and demanded more.  When they threw down their hands in despair,
he showed them how more could be accomplished.

"You are getting eight thousand dollars a year," he told Matthewson.
"It's better pay than you ever got in your life before.  Your fortune
is in the same sack with mine.  You've got to stand for some of the
strain and risk.  You've got personal credit in this town.  Use it.
Stand off butcher and baker and all the rest.  Savvee?  You're drawing
down something like six hundred and sixty dollars a month.  I want that
cash.  From now on, stand everybody off and draw down a hundred.  I'll
pay you interest on the rest till this blows over."

Two weeks later, with the pay-roll before them, it was:--

"Matthewson, who's this bookkeeper, Rogers?  Your nephew?  I thought
so.  He's pulling down eighty-five a month.  After--this let him draw
thirty-five.  The forty can ride with me at interest."

"Impossible!" Matthewson cried.  "He can't make ends meet on his salary
as it is, and he has a wife and two kids--"

Daylight was upon him with a mighty oath.

"Can't! Impossible!  What in hell do you think I'm running?  A home for
feeble-minded?  Feeding and dressing and wiping the little noses of a
lot of idiots that can't take care of themselves?  Not on your life.
I'm hustling, and now's the time that everybody that works for me has
got to hustle.  I want no fair-weather birds holding down my office
chairs or anything else.  This is nasty weather, damn nasty weather,
and they've got to buck into it just like me.  There are ten thousand
men out of work in Oakland right now, and sixty thousand more in San
Francisco.  Your nephew, and everybody else on your pay-roll, can do as
I say right now or quit.  Savvee?  If any of them get stuck, you go
around yourself and guarantee their credit with the butchers and
grocers.  And you trim down that pay-roll accordingly.  I've been
carrying a few thousand folks that'll have to carry themselves for a
while now, that's all."

"You say this filter's got to be replaced," he told his chief of the
water-works.  "We'll see about it.  Let the people of Oakland drink mud
for a change.  It'll teach them to appreciate good water.  Stop work at
once.  Get those men off the pay-roll. Cancel all orders for material.
The contractors will sue?  Let 'em sue and be damned.  We'll be busted
higher'n a kite or on easy street before they can get judgment."

And to Wilkinson:

"Take off that owl boat.  Let the public roar and come home early to
its wife.  And there's that last car that connects with the 12:45 boat
at Twenty-second and Hastings.  Cut it out.  I can't run it for two or
three passengers.  Let them take an earlier boat home or walk.  This is
no time for philanthropy.  And you might as well take off a few more
cars in the rush hours.  Let the strap-hangers pay.  It's the
strap-hangers that'll keep us from going under."

And to another chief, who broke down under the excessive strain of
retrenchment:--

"You say I can't do that and can't do this.  I'll just show you a few
of the latest patterns in the can-and-can't line.  You'll be compelled
to resign?  All right, if you think so I never saw the man yet that I
was hard up for.  And when any man thinks I can't get along without
him, I just show him the latest pattern in that line of goods and give
him his walking-papers."

And so he fought and drove and bullied and even wheedled his way along.
It was fight, fight, fight, and no let-up, from the first thing in the
morning till nightfall.  His private office saw throngs every day.  All
men came to see him, or were ordered to come.  Now it was an optimistic
opinion on the panic, a funny story, a serious business talk, or a
straight take-it-or-leave-it blow from the shoulder.  And there was
nobody to relieve him.  It was a case of drive, drive, drive, and he
alone could do the driving.  And this went on day after day, while the
whole business world rocked around him and house after house crashed to
the ground.

"It's all right, old man," he told Hegan every morning; and it was the
same cheerful word that he passed out all day long, except at such
times when he was in the thick of fighting to have his will with
persons and things.

Eight o'clock saw him at his desk each morning.  By ten o'clock, it was
into the machine and away for a round of the banks.  And usually in the
machine with him was the ten thousand and more dollars that had been
earned by his ferries and railways the day before.  This was for the
weakest spot in the financial dike. And with one bank president after
another similar scenes were enacted.  They were paralyzed with fear,
and first of all he played his role of the big vital optimist.  Times
were improving.

Of course they were.  The signs were already in the air.  All that
anybody had to do was to sit tight a little longer and hold on.  That
was all.  Money was already more active in the East. Look at the
trading on Wall Street of the last twenty-four hours.

That was the straw that showed the wind.  Hadn't Ryan said so and so?
and wasn't it reported that Morgan was preparing to do this and that?

As for himself, weren't the street-railway earnings increasing
steadily?  In spite of the panic, more and more people were coming to
Oakland right along.  Movements were already beginning in real estate.
He was dickering even then to sell over a thousand of his suburban
acres.  Of course it was at a sacrifice, but it would ease the strain
on all of them and bolster up the faint-hearted.  That was the
trouble--the faint-hearts.  Had there been no faint-hearts there would
have been no panic.  There was that Eastern syndicate, negotiating with
him now to take the majority of the stock in the Sierra and Salvador
Power Company off his hands.  That showed confidence that better times
were at hand.

And if it was not cheery discourse, but prayer and entreaty or show
down and fight on the part of the banks, Daylight had to counter in
kind.  If they could bully, he could bully.  If the favor he asked were
refused, it became the thing he demanded. And when it came down to raw
and naked fighting, with the last veil of sentiment or illusion torn
off, he could take their breaths away.

But he knew, also, how and when to give in.  When he saw the wall
shaking and crumbling irretrievably at a particular place, he patched
it up with sops of cash from his three cash-earning companies.  If the
banks went, he went too.  It was a case of their having to hold out.
If they smashed and all the collateral they held of his was thrown on
the chaotic market, it would be the end.  And so it was, as the time
passed, that on occasion his red motor-car carried, in addition to the
daily cash, the most gilt-edged securities he possessed; namely, the
Ferry Company, United Water and Consolidated Railways.  But he did this
reluctantly, fighting inch by inch.

As he told the president of the Merchants San Antonio who made the plea
of carrying so many others:--

"They're small fry.  Let them smash.  I'm the king pin here. You've got
more money to make out of me than them.  Of course, you're carrying too
much, and you've got to choose, that's all. It's root hog or die for
you or them.  I'm too strong to smash. You could only embarrass me and
get yourself tangled up.  Your way out is to let the small fry go, and
I'll lend you a hand to do it."

And it was Daylight, also, in this time of financial anarchy, who sized
up Simon Dolliver's affairs and lent the hand that sent that rival down
in utter failure.  The Golden Gate National was the keystone of
Dolliver's strength, and to the president of that institution Daylight
said:--

"Here I've been lending you a hand, and you now in the last ditch, with
Dolliver riding on you and me all the time.  It don't go.  You hear me,
it don't go.  Dolliver couldn't cough up eleven dollars to save you.
Let him get off and walk, and I'll tell you what I'll do.  I'll give
you the railway nickels for four days--that's forty thousand cash.  And
on the sixth of the month you can count on twenty thousand more from
the Water Company." He shrugged his shoulders.  "Take it or leave it.
Them's my terms."

"It's dog eat dog, and I ain't overlooking any meat that's floating
around," Daylight proclaimed that afternoon to Hegan; and Simon
Dolliver went the way of the unfortunate in the Great Panic who were
caught with plenty of paper and no money.

Daylight's shifts and devices were amazing.  Nothing however large or
small, passed his keen sight unobserved. The strain he was under was
terrific.  He no longer ate lunch.  The days were too short, and his
noon hours and his office were as crowded as at any other time.  By the
end of the day he was exhausted, and, as never before, he sought relief
behind his wall of alcoholic inhibition.  Straight to his hotel he was
driven, and straight to his rooms he went, where immediately was mixed
for him the first of a series of double Martinis.  By dinner, his brain
was well clouded and the panic forgotten.  By bedtime, with the
assistance of Scotch whiskey, he was full--not violently nor
uproariously full, nor stupefied, but merely well under the influence
of a pleasant and mild anesthetic.

Next morning he awoke with parched lips and mouth, and with sensations
of heaviness in his head which quickly passed away. By eight o'clock he
was at his desk, buckled down to the fight, by ten o'clock on his
personal round of the banks, and after that, without a moment's
cessation, till nightfall, he was handling the knotty tangles of
industry, finance, and human nature that crowded upon him.  And with
nightfall it was back to the hotel, the double Martinis and the Scotch;
and this was his program day after day until the days ran into weeks.



CHAPTER XXI

Though Daylight appeared among his fellows hearty voiced,
inexhaustible, spilling over with energy and vitality, deep down he was
a very weary man.  And sometime under the liquor drug, snatches of
wisdom came to him far more lucidity than in his sober moments, as, for
instance, one night, when he sat on the edge of the bed with one shoe
in his hand and meditated on Dede's aphorism to the effect that he
could not sleep in more than one bed at a time.  Still holding the
shoe, he looked at the array of horsehair bridles on the walls.  Then,
carrying the shoe, he got up and solemnly counted them, journeying into
the two adjoining rooms to complete the tale.  Then he came back to the
bed and gravely addressed his shoe:--

"The little woman's right.  Only one bed at a time.  One hundred and
forty hair bridles, and nothing doing with ary one of them. One bridle
at a time!  I can't ride one horse at a time.  Poor old Bob.  I'd
better be sending you out to pasture.  Thirty million dollars, and a
hundred million or nothing in sight, and what have I got to show for
it?  There's lots of things money can't buy.  It can't buy the little
woman.  It can't buy capacity.  What's the good of thirty millions when
I ain't got room for more than a quart of cocktails a day?  If I had a
hundred-quart-cocktail thirst, it'd be different.  But one quart--one
measly little quart!  Here I am, a thirty times over millionaire,
slaving harder every day than any dozen men that work for me, and all I
get is two meals that don't taste good, one bed, a quart of Martini,
and a hundred and forty hair bridles to look at on the wall."

He stared around at the array disconsolately.  "Mr. Shoe, I'm sizzled.
Good night."

Far worse than the controlled, steady drinker is the solitary drinker,
and it was this that Daylight was developing into.  He rarely drank
sociably any more, but in his own room, by himself. Returning weary
from each day's unremitting effort, he drugged himself to sleep,
knowing that on the morrow he would rise up with a dry and burning
mouth and repeat the program.

But the country did not recover with its wonted elasticity. Money did
not become freer, though the casual reader of Daylight's newspapers, as
well as of all the other owned and subsidised newspapers in the
country, could only have concluded that the money tightness was over
and that the panic was past history.  All public utterances were cheery
and optimistic, but privately many of the utterers were in desperate
straits.  The scenes enacted in the privacy of Daylight's office, and
of the meetings of his boards of directors, would have given the lie to
the editorials in his newspapers; as, for instance, when he addressed
the big stockholders in the Sierra and Salvador Power Company, the
United Water Company, and the several other stock companies:--

"You've got to dig.  You've got a good thing, but you'll have to
sacrifice in order to hold on.  There ain't no use spouting hard times
explanations.  Don't I know the hard times is on?  Ain't that what
you're here for?  As I said before, you've got to dig. I run the
majority stock, and it's come to a case of assess. It's that or smash.
If ever I start going you won't know what struck you, I'll smash that
hard.  The small fry can let go, but you big ones can't.  This ship
won't sink as long as you stay with her.  But if you start to leave
her, down you'll sure go before you can get to shore.  This assessment
has got to be met that's all."

The big wholesale supply houses, the caterers for his hotels, and all
the crowd that incessantly demanded to be paid, had their hot
half-hours with him.  He summoned them to his office and displayed his
latest patterns of can and can't and will and won't.

"By God, you've got to carry me!" he told them.  "If you think this is
a pleasant little game of parlor whist and that you can quit and go
home whenever you want, you're plumb wrong.  Look here, Watkins, you
remarked five minutes ago that you wouldn't stand for it.  Now let me
tell you a few.  You're going to stand for it and keep on standin's for
it.  You're going to continue supplying me and taking my paper until
the pinch is over.  How you're going to do it is your trouble, not
mine.  You remember what I did to Klinkner and the Altamont Trust
Company?  I know the inside of your business better than you do
yourself, and if you try to drop me I'll smash you.  Even if I'd be
going to smash myself, I'd find a minute to turn on you and bring you
down with me.  It's sink or swim for all of us, and I reckon you'll
find it to your interest to keep me on top the puddle."

Perhaps his bitterest fight was with the stockholders of the United
Water Company, for it was practically the whole of the gross earnings
of this company that he voted to lend to himself and used to bolster up
his wide battle front.  Yet he never pushed his arbitrary rule too far.
Compelling sacrifice from the men whose fortunes were tied up with his,
nevertheless when any one of them was driven to the wall and was in
dire need, Daylight was there to help him back into the line.  Only a
strong man could have saved so complicated a situation in such time of
stress, and Daylight was that man.  He turned and twisted, schemed and
devised, bludgeoned and bullied the weaker ones, kept the faint-hearted
in the fight, and had no mercy on the deserter.

And in the end, when early summer was on, everything began to mend.
Came a day when Daylight did the unprecedented.  He left the office an
hour earlier than usual, and for the reason that for the first time
since the panic there was not an item of work waiting to be done.  He
dropped into Hegan's private office, before leaving, for a chat, and as
he stood up to go, he said:--

"Hegan, we're all hunkadory.  We're pulling out of the financial
pawnshop in fine shape, and we'll get out without leaving one
unredeemed pledge behind.  The worst is over, and the end is in sight.
Just a tight rein for a couple more weeks, just a bit of a pinch or a
flurry or so now and then, and we can let go and spit on our hands."

For once he varied his program.  Instead of going directly to his
hotel, he started on a round of the bars and cafes, drinking a cocktail
here and a cocktail there, and two or three when he encountered men he
knew.  It was after an hour or so of this that he dropped into the bar
of the Parthenon for one last drink before going to dinner.  By this
time all his being was pleasantly warmed by the alcohol, and he was in
the most genial and best of spirits.  At the corner of the bar several
young men were up to the old trick of resting their elbows and
attempting to force each other's hands down.  One broad-shouldered
young giant never removed his elbow, but put down every hand that came
against him.  Daylight was interested.

"It's Slosson," the barkeeper told him, in answer to his query. "He's
the heavy-hammer thrower at the U.C.  Broke all records this year, and
the world's record on top of it.  He's a husky all right all right."

Daylight nodded and went over to him, placing his own arm in opposition.

"I'd like to go you a flutter, son, on that proposition," he said.

The young man laughed and locked hands with him; and to Daylight's
astonishment it was his own hand that was forced down on the bar.

"Hold on," he muttered.  "Just one more flutter.  I reckon I wasn't
just ready that time."

Again the hands locked.  It happened quickly.  The offensive attack of
Daylight's muscles slipped instantly into defense, and, resisting
vainly, his hand was forced over and down.  Daylight was dazed.  It had
been no trick.  The skill was equal, or, if anything, the superior
skill had been his.  Strength, sheer strength, had done it.  He called
for the drinks, and, still dazed and pondering, held up his own arm,
and looked at it as at some new strange thing.  He did not know this
arm.  It certainly was not the arm he had carried around with him all
the years. The old arm?  Why, it would have been play to turn down that
young husky's.  But this arm--he continued to look at it with such
dubious perplexity as to bring a roar of laughter from the young men.

This laughter aroused him.  He joined in it at first, and then his face
slowly grew grave.  He leaned toward the hammer-thrower.

"Son," he said, "let me whisper a secret.  Get out of here and quit
drinking before you begin."

The young fellow flushed angrily, but Daylight held steadily on.

"You listen to your dad, and let him say a few.  I'm a young man
myself, only I ain't.  Let me tell you, several years ago for me to
turn your hand down would have been like committing assault and battery
on a kindergarten."

Slosson looked his incredulity, while the others grinned and clustered
around Daylight encouragingly.

"Son, I ain't given to preaching.  This is the first time I ever come
to the penitent form, and you put me there yourself--hard. I've seen a
few in my time, and I ain't fastidious so as you can notice it.  But
let me tell you right now that I'm worth the devil alone knows how many
millions, and that I'd sure give it all, right here on the bar, to turn
down your hand.  Which means I'd give the whole shooting match just to
be back where I was before I quit sleeping under the stars and come
into the hen-coops of cities to drink cocktails and lift up my feet and
ride. Son, that's that's the matter with me, and that's the way I feel
about it.  The game ain't worth the candle.  You just take care of
yourself, and roll my advice over once in a while.  Good night."

He turned and lurched out of the place, the moral effect of his
utterance largely spoiled by the fact that he was so patently full
while he uttered it.

Still in a daze, Daylight made to his hotel, accomplished his dinner,
and prepared for bed.

"The damned young whippersnapper!" he muttered.  "Put my hand down easy
as you please.  My hand!"

He held up the offending member and regarded it with stupid wonder.
The hand that had never been beaten!  The hand that had made the Circle
City giants wince!  And a kid from college, with a laugh on his face,
had put it down--twice!  Dede was right.  He was not the same man.  The
situation would bear more serious looking into than he had ever given
it.  But this was not the time.  In the morning, after a good sleep, he
would give it consideration.



CHAPTER XXII

Daylight awoke with the familiar parched mouth and lips and throat,
took a long drink of water from the pitcher beside his bed, and
gathered up the train of thought where he had left it the night before.
He reviewed the easement of the financial strain.  Things were mending
at last.  While the going was still rough, the greatest dangers were
already past.  As he had told Hegan, a tight rein and careful playing
were all that was needed now.  Flurries and dangers were bound to come,
but not so grave as the ones they had already weathered.  He had been
hit hard, but he was coming through without broken bones, which was
more than Simon Dolliver and many another could say.  And not one of
his business friends had been ruined.  He had compelled them to stay in
line to save himself, and they had been saved as well.

His mind moved on to the incident at the corner of the bar of the
Parthenon, when the young athlete had turned his hand down.  He was no
longer stunned by the event, but he was shocked and grieved, as only a
strong man can be, at this passing of his strength.  And the issue was
too clear for him to dodge, even with himself.  He knew why his hand
had gone down.  Not because he was an old man.  He was just in the
first flush of his prime, and, by rights, it was the hand of the
hammer-thrower which should have gone down.  Daylight knew that he had
taken liberties with himself.  He had always looked upon this strength
of his as permanent, and here, for years, it had been steadily oozing
from him.  As he had diagnosed it, he had come in from under the stars
to roost in the coops of cities.  He had almost forgotten how to walk.
He had lifted up his feet and been ridden around in automobiles, cabs
and carriages, and electric cars.  He had not exercised, and he had
dry-rotted his muscles with alcohol.

And was it worth it?  What did all his money mean after all? Dede was
right.  It could buy him no more than one bed at a time, and at the
same time it made him the abjectest of slaves.  It tied him fast.  He
was tied by it right now.  Even if he so desired, he could not lie abed
this very day.  His money called him.  The office whistle would soon
blow, and he must answer it. The early sunshine was streaming through
his window--a fine day for a ride in the hills on Bob, with Dede beside
him on her Mab. Yet all his millions could not buy him this one day.
One of those flurries might come along, and he had to be on the spot to
meet it.  Thirty millions!  And they were powerless to persuade Dede to
ride on Mab--Mab, whom he had bought, and who was unused and growing
fat on pasture.  What were thirty millions when they could not buy a
man a ride with the girl he loved?  Thirty millions!--that made him
come here and go there, that rode upon him like so many millstones,
that destroyed him while they grew, that put their foot down and
prevented him from winning this girl who worked for ninety dollars a
month.

Which was better?  he asked himself.  All this was Dede's own thought.
It was what she had meant when she prayed he would go broke.  He held
up his offending right arm.  It wasn't the same old arm.  Of course she
could not love that arm and that body as she had loved the strong,
clean arm and body of years before.  He didn't like that arm and body
himself.  A young whippersnapper had been able to take liberties with
it.  It had gone back on him.  He sat up suddenly.  No, by God, he had
gone back on it! He had gone back on himself.  He had gone back on
Dede.  She was right, a thousand times right, and she had sense enough
to know it, sense enough to refuse to marry a money slave with a
whiskey-rotted carcass.

He got out of bed and looked at himself in the long mirror on the
wardrobe door.  He wasn't pretty.  The old-time lean cheeks were gone.
These were heavy, seeming to hang down by their own weight.  He looked
for the lines of cruelty Dede had spoken of, and he found them, and he
found the harshness in the eyes as well, the eyes that were muddy now
after all the cocktails of the night before, and of the months and
years before.  He looked at the clearly defined pouches that showed
under his eyes, and they've shocked him.  He rolled up the sleeve of
his pajamas.  No wonder the hammer-thrower had put his hand down.
Those weren't muscles.  A rising tide of fat had submerged them.  He
stripped off the pajama coat.  Again he was shocked, this time but the
bulk of his body.  It wasn't pretty.  The lean stomach had become a
paunch.  The ridged muscles of chest and shoulders and abdomen had
broken down into rolls of flesh.

He sat down on the bed, and through his mind drifted pictures of his
youthful excellence, of the hardships he had endured over other men, of
the Indians and dogs he had run off their legs in the heart-breaking
days and nights on the Alaskan trail, of the feats of strength that had
made him king over a husky race of frontiersmen.

And this was age.  Then there drifted across the field of vision of his
mind's eye the old man he had encountered at Glen Ellen, corning up the
hillside through the fires of sunset, white-headed and white-bearded,
eighty-four, in his hand the pail of foaming milk and in his face all
the warm glow and content of the passing summer day.  That had been
age.  "Yes siree, eighty-four, and spryer than most," he could hear the
old man say.  "And I ain't loafed none. I walked across the Plains with
an ox-team and fit Injuns in '51, and I was a family man then with
seven youngsters."

Next he remembered the old woman of the chaparral, pressing grapes in
her mountain clearing; and Ferguson, the little man who had scuttled
into the road like a rabbit, the one-time managing editor of a great
newspaper, who was content to live in the chaparral along with his
spring of mountain water and his hand-reared and manicured fruit trees.
Ferguson had solved a problem.  A weakling and an alcoholic, he had run
away from the doctors and the chicken-coop of a city, and soaked up
health like a thirsty sponge.  Well, Daylight pondered, if a sick man
whom the doctors had given up could develop into a healthy farm
laborer, what couldn't a merely stout man like himself do under similar
circumstances?  He caught a vision of his body with all its youthful
excellence returned, and thought of Dede, and sat down suddenly on the
bed, startled by the greatness of the idea that had come to him.

He did not sit long.  His mind, working in its customary way, like a
steel trap, canvassed the idea in all its bearings.  It was big--bigger
than anything he had faced before.  And he faced it squarely, picked it
up in his two hands and turned it over and around and looked at it.
The simplicity of it delighted him.  He chuckled over it, reached his
decision, and began to dress. Midway in the dressing he stopped in
order to use the telephone.

Dede was the first he called up.

"Don't come to the office this morning," he said.  "I'm coming out to
see you for a moment."  He called up others.  He ordered his motor-car.
To Jones he gave instructions for the forwarding of Bob and Wolf to
Glen Ellen.  Hegan he surprised by asking him to look up the deed of
the Glen Ellen ranch and make out a new one in Dede Mason's name.
"Who?" Hegan demanded.  "Dede Mason," Daylight replied imperturbably
the 'phone must be indistinct this morning.  "D-e-d-e M-a-s o-n.  Got
it?"

Half an hour later he was flying out to Berkeley.  And for the first
time the big red car halted directly before the house. Dede offered to
receive him in the parlor, but he shook his head and nodded toward her
rooms.

"In there," he said.  "No other place would suit."

As the door closed, his arms went out and around her.  Then he stood
with his hands on her shoulders and looking down into her face.

"Dede, if I tell you, flat and straight, that I'm going up to live on
that ranch at Glen Ellen, that I ain't taking a cent with me, that I'm
going to scratch for every bite I eat, and that I ain't going to play
ary a card at the business game again, will you come along with me?"

She gave a glad little cry, and he nestled her in closely.  But the
next moment she had thrust herself out from him to the old position at
arm's length.

"I--I don't understand," she said breathlessly.

"And you ain't answered my proposition, though I guess no answer is
necessary.  We're just going to get married right away and start.  I've
sent Bob and Wolf along already.  When will you be ready?"

Dede could not forbear to smile.  "My, what a hurricane of a man it is.
I'm quite blown away.  And you haven't explained a word to me."

Daylight smiled responsively.

"Look here, Dede, this is what card-sharps call a show-down.  No more
philandering and frills and long-distance sparring between you and me.
We're just going to talk straight out in meeting--the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth.  Now you answer some questions for
me, and then I'll answer yours."

He paused.  "Well, I've got only one question after all: Do you love me
enough to marry me?"

"But--" she began.

"No buts," he broke in sharply.  "This is a show-down.  When I say
marry, I mean what I told you at first, that we'd go up and live on the
ranch.  Do you love me enough for that?"

She looked at him for a moment, then her lids dropped, and all of her
seemed to advertise consent.

"Come on, then, let's start."  The muscles of his legs tensed
involuntarily as if he were about to lead her to the door.  "My auto's
waiting outside.  There's nothing to delay excepting getting on your
hat."

He bent over her. "I reckon it's allowable," he said, as he kissed her.

It was a long embrace, and she was the first to speak.

"You haven't answered my questions.  How is this possible?  How can you
leave your business?  Has anything happened?"

"No, nothing's happened yet, but it's going to, blame quick. I've taken
your preaching to heart, and I've come to the penitent form.  You are
my Lord God, and I'm sure going to serve you.  The rest can go to
thunder.  You were sure right.  I've been the slave to my money, and
since I can't serve two masters I'm letting the money slide.  I'd
sooner have you than all the money in the world, that's all."  Again he
held her closely in his arms.  "And I've sure got you, Dede.  I've sure
got you.

"And I want to tell you a few more.  I've taken my last drink. You're
marrying a whiskey-soak, but your husband won't be that. He's going to
grow into another man so quick you won't know him. A couple of months
from now, up there in Glen Ellen, you'll wake up some morning and find
you've got a perfect stranger in the house with you, and you'll have to
get introduced to him all over again.  You'll say, 'I'm Mrs. Harnish,
who are you?' And I'll say, 'I'm Elam Harnish's younger brother.  I've
just arrived from Alaska to attend the funeral.' 'What funeral?' you'll
say.  And I'll say, 'Why, the funeral of that good-for-nothing,
gambling, whiskey-drinking Burning Daylight--the man that died of fatty
degeneration of the heart from sitting in night and day at the business
game 'Yes ma'am,' I'll say, 'he's sure a gone 'coon, but I've come to
take his place and make you happy.  And now, ma'am, if you'll allow me,
I'll just meander down to the pasture and milk the cow while you're
getting breakfast.'"

Again he caught her hand and made as if to start with her for the door.
When she resisted, he bent and kissed her again and again.

"I'm sure hungry for you, little woman," he murmured "You make thirty
millions look like thirty cents."

"Do sit down and be sensible," she urged, her cheeks flushed, the
golden light in her eyes burning more golden than he had ever seen it
before.

But Daylight was bent on having his way, and when he sat down it was
with her beside him and his arm around her.

"'Yes, ma'am,' I'll say, 'Burning Daylight was a pretty good cuss, but
it's better that he's gone.  He quit rolling up in his rabbit-skins and
sleeping in the snow, and went to living in a chicken-coop.  He lifted
up his legs and quit walking and working, and took to existing on
Martini cocktails and Scotch whiskey.  He thought he loved you, ma'am,
and he did his best, but he loved his cocktails more, and he loved his
money more, and himself more, and 'most everything else more than he
did you.' And then I'll say, 'Ma'am, you just run your eyes over me and
see how different I am.  I ain't got a cocktail thirst, and all the
money I got is a dollar and forty cents and I've got to buy a new ax,
the last one being plumb wore out, and I can love you just about eleven
times as much as your first husband did.  You see, ma'am, he went all
to fat.  And there ain't ary ounce of fat on me.' And I'll roll up my
sleeve and show you, and say, 'Mrs. Harnish, after having experience
with being married to that old fat money-bags, do you-all mind marrying
a slim young fellow like me?' And you'll just wipe a tear away for poor
old Daylight, and kind of lean toward me with a willing expression in
your eye, and then I'll blush maybe some, being a young fellow, and put
my arm around you, like that, and then--why, then I'll up and marry my
brother's widow, and go out and do the chores while she's cooking a
bite to eat."

"But you haven't answered my questions," she reproached him, as she
emerged, rosy and radiant, from the embrace that had accompanied the
culmination of his narrative.

"Now just what do you want to know?" he asked.

"I want to know how all this is possible?  How you are able to leave
your business at a time like this?  What you meant by saying that
something was going to happen quickly?  I--" She hesitated and blushed.
"I answered your question, you know."

"Let's go and get married," he urged, all the whimsicality of his
utterance duplicated in his eyes.  "You know I've got to make way for
that husky young brother of mine, and I ain't got long to live."  She
made an impatient moue, and he continued seriously.

"You see, it's like this, Dede.  I've been working like forty horses
ever since this blamed panic set in, and all the time some of those
ideas you'd given me were getting ready to sprout. Well, they sprouted
this morning, that's all.  I started to get up, expecting to go to the
office as usual.  But I didn't go to the office.  All that sprouting
took place there and then.  The sun was shining in the window, and I
knew it was a fine day in the hills.  And I knew I wanted to ride in
the hills with you just about thirty million times more than I wanted
to go to the office.  And I knew all the time it was impossible.  And
why? Because of the office.  The office wouldn't let me.  All my money
reared right up on its hind legs and got in the way and wouldn't let
me.  It's a way that blamed money has of getting in the way. You know
that yourself.

"And then I made up my mind that I was to the dividing of the ways.
One way led to the office.  The other way led to Berkeley. And I took
the Berkeley road.  I'm never going to set foot in the office again.
That's all gone, finished, over and done with, and I'm letting it slide
clean to smash and then some.  My mind's set on this.  You see, I've
got religion, and it's sure the old-time religion; it's love and you,
and it's older than the oldest religion in the world.  It's IT, that's
what it is--IT, with a capital I-T."

She looked at him with a sudden, startled expression.

"You mean--?" she began.

"I mean just that.  I'm wiping the slate clean.  I'm letting it all go
to smash.  When them thirty million dollars stood up to my face and
said I couldn't go out with you in the hills to-day, I knew the time
had come for me to put my foot down.  And I'm putting it down.  I've
got you, and my strength to work for you, and that little ranch in
Sonoma.  That's all I want, and that's all I'm going to save out, along
with Bob and Wolf, a suit case and a hundred and forty hair bridles.
All the rest goes, and good riddance.  It's that much junk."

But Dede was insistent.

"Then this--this tremendous loss is all unnecessary?" she asked.

"Just what I haven't been telling you.  It IS necessary.  If that money
thinks it can stand up right to my face and say I can't go riding with
you--"

"No, no; be serious," Dede broke in.  "I don't mean that, and you know
it.  What I want to know is, from a standpoint of business, is this
failure necessary?"

He shook his head.

"You bet it isn't necessary.  That's the point of it.  I'm not letting
go of it because I'm licked to a standstill by the panic and have got
to let go.  I'm firing it out when I've licked the panic and am
winning, hands down.  That just shows how little I think of it.  It's
you that counts, little woman, and I make my play accordingly."

But she drew away from his sheltering arms.

"You are mad, Elam."

"Call me that again," he murmured ecstatically.  "It's sure sweeter
than the chink of millions."

All this she ignored.

"It's madness.  You don't know what you are doing--"

"Oh, yes, I do," he assured her.  "I'm winning the dearest wish of my
heart.  Why, your little finger is worth more--"

"Do be sensible for a moment."

"I was never more sensible in my life.  I know what I want, and I'm
going to get it.  I want you and the open air.  I want to get my foot
off the paving-stones and my ear away from the telephone. I want a
little ranch-house in one of the prettiest bits of country God ever
made, and I want to do the chores around that ranch-house--milk cows,
and chop wood, and curry horses, and plough the ground, and all the
rest of it; and I want you there in the ranch-house with me.  I'm plumb
tired of everything else, and clean wore out.  And I'm sure the
luckiest man alive, for I've got what money can't buy.  I've got you,
and thirty millions couldn't buy you, nor three thousand millions, nor
thirty cents--"

A knock at the door interrupted him, and he was left to stare
delightedly at the Crouched Venus and on around the room at Dede's
dainty possessions, while she answered the telephone.

"It is Mr. Hegan," she said, on returning.  "He is holding the line.
He says it is important."

Daylight shook his head and smiled.

"Please tell Mr. Hegan to hang up.  I'm done with the office and I
don't want to hear anything about anything."

A minute later she was back again.

"He refuses to hang up.  He told me to tell you that Unwin is in the
office now, waiting to see you, and Harrison, too.  Mr. Hegan said that
Grimshaw and Hodgkins are in trouble.  That it looks as if they are
going to break.  And he said something about protection."

It was startling information.  Both Unwin and Harrison represented big
banking corporations, and Daylight knew that if the house of Grimshaw
and Hodgkins went it would precipitate a number of failures and start a
flurry of serious dimensions.  But Daylight smiled, and shook his head,
and mimicked the stereotyped office tone of voice as he said:--

"Miss Mason, you will kindly tell Mr. Hegan that there is nothing doing
and to hang up."

"But you can't do this," she pleaded.

"Watch me," he grimly answered.

"Elam!"

"Say it again," he cried.  "Say it again, and a dozen Grimshaws and
Hodgkins can smash!"

He caught her by the hand and drew her to him.

"You let Hegan hang on to that line till he's tired.  We can't be
wasting a second on him on a day like this.  He's only in love with
books and things, but I've got a real live woman in my arms that's
loving me all the time she's kicking over the traces."



CHAPTER XXIII

"But I know something of the fight you have been making," Dede
contended.  "If you stop now, all the work you have done, everything,
will be destroyed.  You have no right to do it.  You can't do it."

Daylight was obdurate.  He shook his head and smiled tantalizingly.

"Nothing will be destroyed, Dede, nothing.  You don't understand this
business game.  It's done on paper.  Don't you see?  Where's the gold I
dug out of Klondike?  Why, it's in twenty-dollar gold pieces, in gold
watches, in wedding rings.  No matter what happens to me, the
twenty-dollar pieces, the watches, and the wedding rings remain.
Suppose I died right now.  It wouldn't affect the gold one iota.  It's
sure the same with this present situation.  All I stand for is paper.
I've got the paper for thousands of acres of land.  All right.  Burn up
the paper, and burn me along with it.  The land remains, don't it?  The
rain falls on it, the seeds sprout in it, the trees grow out of it, the
houses stand on it, the electric cars run over it.  It's paper that
business is run on.  I lose my paper, or I lose my life, it's all the
same; it won't alter one grain of sand in all that land, or twist one
blade of grass around sideways.

"Nothing is going to be lost--not one pile out of the docks, not one
railroad spike, not one ounce of steam out of the gauge of a
ferry-boat.  The cars will go on running, whether I hold the paper or
somebody else holds it.  The tide has set toward Oakland.  People are
beginning to pour in.  We're selling building lots again.  There is no
stopping that tide.  No matter what happens to me or the paper, them
three hundred thousand folks are coming in the same.  And there'll be
cars to carry them around, and houses to hold them, and good water for
them to drink and electricity to give them light, and all the rest."

By this time Hegan had arrived in an automobile.  The honk of it came
in through the open window, and they saw, it stop alongside the big red
machine.  In the car were Unwin and Harrison, while Jones sat with the
chauffeur.

"I'll see Hegan," Daylight told Dede.  "There's no need for the rest.
They can wait in the machine."

"Is he drunk?" Hegan whispered to Dede at the door.

She shook her head and showed him in.

"Good morning, Larry," was Daylight's greeting.  "Sit down and rest
your feet.  You sure seem to be in a flutter."

"I am," the little Irishman snapped back.  "Grimshaw and Hodgkins are
going to smash if something isn't done quick.  Why didn't you come to
the office?  What are you going to do about it?"

"Nothing," Daylight drawled lazily.  "Except let them smash, I guess--"

"But--"

"I've had no dealings with Grimshaw and Hodgkins.  I don't owe them
anything.  Besides, I'm going to smash myself.  Look here, Larry, you
know me.  You know when I make up my mind I mean it. Well, I've sure
made up my mind.  I'm tired of the whole game. I'm letting go of it as
fast as I can, and a smash is the quickest way to let go."

Hegan stared at his chief, then passed his horror-stricken gaze on to
Dede, who nodded in sympathy.

"So let her smash, Larry," Daylight went on.  "All you've got to do is
to protect yourself and all our friends.  Now you listen to me while I
tell you what to do.  Everything is in good shape to do it.  Nobody
must get hurt.  Everybody that stood by me must come through without
damage.  All the back wages and salaries must be paid pronto.  All the
money I've switched away from the water company, the street cars, and
the ferries must be switched back.  And you won't get hurt yourself
none.  Every company you got stock in will come through--"

"You are crazy, Daylight!" the little lawyer cried out.  "This is all
babbling lunacy.  What is the matter with you?  You haven't been eating
a drug or something?"

"I sure have!" Daylight smiled reply.  "And I'm now coughing it up.
I'm sick of living in a city and playing business--I'm going off to the
sunshine, and the country, and the green grass.  And Dede, here, is
going with me.  So you've got the chance to be the first to
congratulate me."

"Congratulate the--the devil!" Hegan spluttered.  "I'm not going to
stand for this sort of foolishness."

"Oh, yes, you are; because if you don't there'll be a bigger smash and
some folks will most likely get hurt.  You're worth a million or more
yourself, now, and if you listen to me you come through with a whole
skin.  I want to get hurt, and get hurt to the limit.  That's what I'm
looking for, and there's no man or bunch of men can get between me and
what I'm looking for. Savvee, Hegan?  Savvee?"

"What have you done to him?" Hegan snarled at Dede.

"Hold on there, Larry."  For the first time Daylight's voice was sharp,
while all the old lines of cruelty in his face stood forth.  "Miss
Mason is going to be my wife, and while I don't mind your talking to
her all you want, you've got to use a different tone of voice or you'll
be heading for a hospital, which will sure be an unexpected sort of
smash.  And let me tell you one other thing.  This-all is my doing.
She says I'm crazy, too."

Hegan shook his head in speechless sadness and continued to stare.

"There'll be temporary receiverships, of course," Daylight advised;
"but they won't bother none or last long.  What you must do immediately
is to save everybody--the men that have been letting their wages ride
with me, all the creditors, and all the concerns that have stood by.
There's the wad of land that New Jersey crowd has been dickering for.
They'll take all of a couple of thousand acres and will close now if
you give them half a chance.  That Fairmount section is the cream of
it, and they'll dig up as high as a thousand dollars an acre for a part
of it. That'll help out some.  That five-hundred acre tract beyond,
you'll be lucky if they pay two hundred an acre."

Dede, who had been scarcely listening, seemed abruptly to make up her
mind, and stepped forward where she confronted the two men. Her face
was pale, but set with determination, so that Daylight, looking at it,
was reminded of the day when she first rode Bob.

"Wait," she said.  "I want to say something.  Elam, if you do this
insane thing, I won't marry you.  I refuse to marry you."

Hegan, in spite of his misery, gave her a quick, grateful look.

"I'll take my chance on that," Daylight began.

"Wait!" she again interrupted.  "And if you don't do this thing, I will
marry you."

"Let me get this proposition clear."  Daylight spoke with exasperating
slowness and deliberation.  "As I understand it, if I keep right on at
the business game, you'll sure marry me? You'll marry me if I keep on
working my head off and drinking Martinis?"

After each question he paused, while she nodded an affirmation.

"And you'll marry me right away?"

"Yes."

"To-day?  Now?"

"Yes."

He pondered for a moment.

"No, little woman, I won't do it.  It won't work, and you know it
yourself.  I want you--all of you; and to get it I'll have to give you
all of myself, and there'll be darn little of myself left over to give
if I stay with the business game.  Why, Dede, with you on the ranch
with me, I'm sure of you--and of myself. I'm sure of you, anyway.  You
can talk will or won't all you want, but you're sure going to marry me
just the same.  And now, Larry, you'd better be going.  I'll be at the
hotel in a little while, and since I'm not going a step into the office
again, bring all papers to sign and the rest over to my rooms.  And you
can get me on the 'phone there any time.  This smash is going through.
Savvee?  I'm quit and done."

He stood up as a sign for Hegan to go.  The latter was plainly stunned.
He also rose to his feet, but stood looking helplessly around.

"Sheer, downright, absolute insanity," he muttered.

Daylight put his hand on the other's shoulder.

"Buck up, Larry.  You're always talking about the wonders of human
nature, and here I am giving you another sample of it and you ain't
appreciating it.  I'm a bigger dreamer than you are, that's all, and
I'm sure dreaming what's coming true.  It's the biggest, best dream I
ever had, and I'm going after it to get it--"

"By losing all you've got," Hegan exploded at him.

"Sure--by losing all I've got that I don't want.  But I'm hanging on to
them hundred and forty hair bridles just the same. Now you'd better
hustle out to Unwin and Harrison and get on down town.  I'll be at the
hotel, and you can call me up any time."

He turned to Dede as soon as Hegan was gone, and took her by the hand.

"And now, little woman, you needn't come to the office any more.
Consider yourself discharged.  And remember I was your employer, so
you've got to come to me for recommendation, and if you're not real
good, I won't give you one.  In the meantime, you just rest up and
think about what things you want to pack, because we'll just about have
to set up housekeeping on your stuff--leastways, the front part of the
house."

"But, Elam, I won't, I won't! If you do this mad thing I never will
marry you."

She attempted to take her hand away, but he closed on it with a
protecting, fatherly clasp.

"Will you be straight and honest?  All right, here goes.  Which would
you sooner have--me and the money, or me and the ranch?"

"But--" she began.

"No buts.  Me and the money?"

She did not answer.

"Me and the ranch?"

Still she did not answer, and still he was undisturbed.

"You see, I know your answer, Dede, and there's nothing more to say.
Here's where you and I quit and hit the high places for Sonoma.  You
make up your mind what you want to pack, and I'll have some men out
here in a couple of days to do it for you.  It will be about the last
work anybody else ever does for us.  You and I will do the unpacking
and the arranging ourselves."

She made a last attempt.

"Elam, won't you be reasonable?  There is time to reconsider.  I can
telephone down and catch Mr. Hegan as soon as he reaches the office--"

"Why, I'm the only reasonable man in the bunch right now," he rejoined.
"Look at me--as calm as you please, and as happy as a king, while
they're fluttering around like a lot of cranky hens whose heads are
liable to be cut off."

"I'd cry, if I thought it would do any good," she threatened.

"In which case I reckon I'd have to hold you in my arms some more and
sort of soothe you down," he threatened back.  "And now I'm going to
go.  It's too bad you got rid of Mab.  You could have sent her up to
the ranch.  But see you've got a mare to ride of some sort or other."

As he stood at the top of the steps, leaving, she said:--

"You needn't send those men.  There will be no packing, because I am
not going to marry you."

"I'm not a bit scared," he answered, and went down the steps.



CHAPTER XXIV

Three days later, Daylight rode to Berkeley in his red car.  It was for
the last time, for on the morrow the big machine passed into another's
possession.  It had been a strenuous three days, for his smash had been
the biggest the panic had precipitated in California.  The papers had
been filled with it, and a great cry of indignation had gone up from
the very men who later found that Daylight had fully protected their
interests.  It was these facts, coming slowly to light, that gave rise
to the widely repeated charge that Daylight had gone insane.  It was
the unanimous conviction among business men that no sane man could
possibly behave in such fashion.  On the other hand, neither his
prolonged steady drinking nor his affair with Dede became public, so
the only conclusion attainable was that the wild financier from Alaska
had gone lunatic.  And Daylight had grinned and confirmed the suspicion
by refusing to see the reporters.

He halted the automobile before Dede's door, and met her with his same
rushing tactics, enclosing her in his arms before a word could be
uttered.  Not until afterward, when she had recovered herself from him
and got him seated, did he begin to speak.

"I've done it," he announced.  "You've seen the newspapers, of course.
I'm plumb cleaned out, and I've just called around to find out what day
you feel like starting for Glen Ellen.  It'll have to be soon, for it's
real expensive living in Oakland these days.  My board at the hotel is
only paid to the end of the week, and I can't afford to stay after
that.  And beginning with to-morrow I've got to use the street cars,
and they sure eat up the nickels."

He paused, and waited, and looked at her.  Indecision and trouble
showed on her face.  Then the smile he knew so well began to grow on
her lips and in her eyes, until she threw back her head and laughed in
the old forthright boyish way.

"When are those men coming to pack for me?" she asked.

And again she laughed and simulated a vain attempt to escape his
bearlike arms.

"Dear Elam," she whispered; "dear Elam."  And of herself, for the first
time, she kissed him.

She ran her hand caressingly through his hair.

"Your eyes are all gold right now," he said.  "I can look in them and
tell just how much you love me."

"They have been all gold for you, Elam, for a long time.  I think, on
our little ranch, they will always be all gold."

"Your hair has gold in it, too, a sort of fiery gold."  He turned her
face suddenly and held it between his hands and looked long into her
eyes.  "And your eyes were full of gold only the other day, when you
said you wouldn't marry me."

She nodded and laughed.

"You would have your will," she confessed.  "But I couldn't be a party
to such madness.  All that money was yours, not mine.  But I was loving
you all the time, Elam, for the great big boy you are, breaking the
thirty-million toy with which you had grown tired of playing.  And when
I said no, I knew all the time it was yes.  And I am sure that my eyes
were golden all the time.  I had only one fear, and that was that you
would fail to lose everything.  Because, dear, I knew I should marry
you anyway, and I did so want just you and the ranch and Bob and Wolf
and those horse-hair bridles.  Shall I tell you a secret?  As soon as
you left, I telephoned the man to whom I sold Mab."

She hid her face against his breast for an instant, and then looked at
him again, gladly radiant.

"You see, Elam, in spite of what my lips said, my mind was made up
then.  I--I simply had to marry you.  But I was praying you would
succeed in losing everything.  And so I tried to find what had become
of Mab.  But the man had sold her and did not know what had become of
her.  You see, I wanted to ride with you over the Glen Ellen hills, on
Mab and you on Bob, just as I had ridden with you through the Piedmont
hills."

The disclosure of Mab's whereabouts trembled on Daylight's lips, but he
forbore.

"I'll promise you a mare that you'll like just as much as Mab," he said.

But Dede shook her head, and on that one point refused to be comforted.

"Now, I've got an idea," Daylight said, hastening to get the
conversation on less perilous ground.  "We're running away from cities,
and you have no kith nor kin, so it don't seem exactly right that we
should start off by getting married in a city.  So here's the idea:
I'll run up to the ranch and get things in shape around the house and
give the caretaker his walking-papers.  You follow me in a couple of
days, coming on the morning train.  I'll have the preacher fixed and
waiting.  And here's another idea. You bring your riding togs in a suit
case.  And as soon as the ceremony's over, you can go to the hotel and
change.  Then out you come, and you find me waiting with a couple of
horses, and we'll ride over the landscape so as you can see the
prettiest parts of the ranch the first thing.  And she's sure pretty,
that ranch.  And now that it's settled, I'll be waiting for you at the
morning train day after to-morrow."

Dede blushed as she spoke.

"You are such a hurricane."

"Well, ma'am," he drawled, "I sure hate to burn daylight. And you and I
have burned a heap of daylight.  We've been scandalously extravagant.
We might have been married years ago."

Two days later, Daylight stood waiting outside the little Glen Ellen
hotel.  The ceremony was over, and he had left Dede to go inside and
change into her riding-habit while he brought the horses.  He held them
now, Bob and Mab, and in the shadow of the watering-trough Wolf lay and
looked on.  Already two days of ardent California sun had touched with
new fires the ancient bronze in Daylight's face.  But warmer still was
the glow that came into his cheeks and burned in his eyes as he saw
Dede coming out the door, riding-whip in hand, clad in the familiar
corduroy skirt and leggings of the old Piedmont days.  There was warmth
and glow in her own face as she answered his gaze and glanced on past
him to the horses.  Then she saw Mab.  But her gaze leaped back to the
man.

"Oh, Elam!" she breathed.

It was almost a prayer, but a prayer that included a thousand meanings
Daylight strove to feign sheepishness, but his heart was singing too
wild a song for mere playfulness.  All things had been in the naming of
his name--reproach, refined away by gratitude, and all compounded of
joy and love.

She stepped forward and caressed the mare, and again turned and looked
at the man, and breathed:--

"Oh, Elam!"

And all that was in her voice was in her eyes, and in them Daylight
glimpsed a profundity deeper and wider than any speech or thought--the
whole vast inarticulate mystery and wonder of sex and love.

Again he strove for playfulness of speech, but it was too great a
moment for even love fractiousness to enter in.  Neither spoke. She
gathered the reins, and, bending, Daylight received her foot in his
hand.  She sprang, as he lifted and gained the saddle. The next moment
he was mounted and beside her, and, with Wolf sliding along ahead in
his typical wolf-trot, they went up the hill that led out of town--two
lovers on two chestnut sorrel steeds, riding out and away to honeymoon
through the warm summer day.  Daylight felt himself drunken as with
wine.  He was at the topmost pinnacle of life.  Higher than this no man
could climb nor had ever climbed.  It was his day of days, his
love-time and his mating-time, and all crowned by this virginal
possession of a mate who had said "Oh, Elam," as she had said it, and
looked at him out of her soul as she had looked.

They cleared the crest of the hill, and he watched the joy mount in her
face as she gazed on the sweet, fresh land.  He pointed out the group
of heavily wooded knolls across the rolling stretches of ripe grain.

"They're ours," he said.  "And they're only a sample of the ranch.
Wait till you see the big canon.  There are 'coons down there, and back
here on the Sonoma there are mink.  And deer!--why, that mountain's
sure thick with them, and I reckon we can scare up a mountain-lion if
we want to real hard.  And, say, there's a little meadow--well, I ain't
going to tell you another word.  You wait and see for yourself."

They turned in at the gate, where the road to the clay-pit crossed the
fields, and both sniffed with delight as the warm aroma of the ripe hay
rose in their nostrils.  As on his first visit, the larks were uttering
their rich notes and fluttering up before the horses until the woods
and the flower-scattered glades were reached, when the larks gave way
to blue jays and woodpeckers.

"We're on our land now," he said, as they left the hayfield behind.
"It runs right across country over the roughest parts. Just you wait
and see."

As on the first day, he turned aside from the clay-pit and worked
through the woods to the left, passing the first spring and jumping the
horses over the ruined remnants of the stake-and-rider fence.  From
here on, Dede was in an unending ecstasy.  By the spring that gurgled
among the redwoods grew another great wild lily, bearing on its slender
stalk the prodigious outburst of white waxen bells.  This time he did
not dismount, but led the way to the deep canon where the stream had
cut a passage among the knolls.  He had been at work here, and a steep
and slippery horse trail now crossed the creek, so they rode up beyond,
through the somber redwood twilight, and, farther on, through a tangled
wood of oak and madrono.  They came to a small clearing of several
acres, where the grain stood waist high.

"Ours," Daylight said.

She bent in her saddle, plucked a stalk of the ripe grain, and nibbled
it between her teeth.

"Sweet mountain hay," she cried.  "The kind Mab likes."

And throughout the ride she continued to utter cries and ejaculations
of surprise and delight.

"And you never told me all this!" she reproached him, as they looked
across the little clearing and over the descending slopes of woods to
the great curving sweep of Sonoma Valley.

"Come," he said; and they turned and went back through the forest
shade, crossed the stream and came to the lily by the spring.

Here, also, where the way led up the tangle of the steep hill, he had
cut a rough horse trail.  As they forced their way up the zigzags, they
caught glimpses out and down through the sea of foliage.  Yet always
were their farthest glimpses stopped by the closing vistas of green,
and, yet always, as they climbed, did the forest roof arch overhead,
with only here and there rifts that permitted shattered shafts of
sunlight to penetrate.  And all about them were ferns, a score of
varieties, from the tiny gold-backs and maidenhair to huge brakes six
and eight feet tall.

Below them, as they mounted, they glimpsed great gnarled trunks and
branches of ancient trees, and above them were similar great gnarled
branches.

Dede stopped her horse and sighed with the beauty of it all.

"It is as if we are swimmers," she said, "rising out of a deep pool of
green tranquillity.  Up above is the sky and the sun, but this is a
pool, and we are fathoms deep."

They started their horses, but a dog-tooth violet, shouldering amongst
the maidenhair, caught her eye and made her rein in again.

They cleared the crest and emerged from the pool as if into another
world, for now they were in the thicket of velvet-trunked young
madronos and looking down the open, sun-washed hillside, across the
nodding grasses, to the drifts of blue and white nemophilae that
carpeted the tiny meadow on either side the tiny stream.  Dede clapped
her hands.

"It's sure prettier than office furniture," Daylight remarked.

"It sure is," she answered.

And Daylight, who knew his weakness in the use of the particular word
sure, knew that she had repeated it deliberately and with love.

They crossed the stream and took the cattle track over the low rocky
hill and through the scrub forest of manzanita, till they emerged on
the next tiny valley with its meadow-bordered streamlet.

"If we don't run into some quail pretty soon, I'll be surprised some,"
Daylight said.

And as the words left his lips there was a wild series of explosive
thrumming as the old quail arose from all about Wolf, while the young
ones scuttled for safety and disappeared miraculously before the
spectators' very eyes.

He showed her the hawk's nest he had found in the lightning-shattered
top of the redwood, and she discovered a wood-rat's nest which he had
not seen before.  Next they took the old wood-road and came out on the
dozen acres of clearing where the wine grapes grew in the wine-colored
volcanic soil.  Then they followed the cow-path through more woods and
thickets and scattered glades, and dropped down the hillside to where
the farm-house, poised on the lip of the big canon, came into view only
when they were right upon it.

Dede stood on the wide porch that ran the length of the house while
Daylight tied the horses.  To Dede it was very quiet.  It was the dry,
warm, breathless calm of California midday.  All the world seemed
dozing.  From somewhere pigeons were cooing lazily. With a deep sigh of
satisfaction, Wolf, who had drunk his fill at all the streams along the
way, dropped down in the cool shadow of the porch.  She heard the
footsteps of Daylight returning, and caught her breath with a quick
intake.  He took her hand in his, and, as he turned the door-knob, felt
her hesitate.  Then he put his arm around her; the door swung open, and
together they passed in.



CHAPTER XXV

Many persons, themselves city-bred and city-reared, have fled to the
soil and succeeded in winning great happiness.  In such cases they have
succeeded only by going through a process of savage disillusionment.
But with Dede and Daylight it was different. They had both been born on
the soil, and they knew its naked simplicities and rawer ways.  They
were like two persons, after far wandering, who had merely come home
again.  There was less of the unexpected in their dealings with nature,
while theirs was all the delight of reminiscence.  What might appear
sordid and squalid to the fastidiously reared, was to them eminently
wholesome and natural.  The commerce of nature was to them no unknown
and untried trade.  They made fewer mistakes.  They already knew, and
it was a joy to remember what they had forgotten.

And another thing they learned was that it was easier for one who has
gorged at the flesh-pots to content himself with the meagerness of a
crust, than for one who has known only the crust.

Not that their life was meagre.  It was that they found keener delights
and deeper satisfactions in little things.  Daylight, who had played
the game in its biggest and most fantastic aspects, found that here, on
the slopes of Sonoma Mountain, it was still the same old game.  Man had
still work to perform, forces to combat, obstacles to overcome.  When
he experimented in a small way at raising a few pigeons for market, he
found no less zest in calculating in squabs than formerly when he had
calculated in millions.  Achievement was no less achievement, while the
process of it seemed more rational and received the sanction of his
reason.

The domestic cat that had gone wild and that preyed on his pigeons, he
found, by the comparative standard, to be of no less paramount menace
than a Charles Klinkner in the field of finance, trying to raid him for
several millions.  The hawks and weasels and 'coons were so many
Dowsetts, Lettons, and Guggenhammers that struck at him secretly.  The
sea of wild vegetation that tossed its surf against the boundaries of
all his clearings and that sometimes crept in and flooded in a single
week was no mean enemy to contend with and subdue.  His fat-soiled
vegetable-garden in the nook of hills that failed of its best was a
problem of engrossing importance, and when he had solved it by putting
in drain-tile, the joy of the achievement was ever with him.  He never
worked in it and found the soil unpacked and tractable without
experiencing the thrill of accomplishment.

There was the matter of the plumbing.  He was enabled to purchase the
materials through a lucky sale of a number of his hair bridles.  The
work he did himself, though more than once he was forced to call in
Dede to hold tight with a pipe-wrench.  And in the end, when the
bath-tub and the stationary tubs were installed and in working order,
he could scarcely tear himself away from the contemplation of what his
hands had wrought.  The first evening, missing him, Dede sought and
found him, lamp in hand, staring with silent glee at the tubs.  He
rubbed his hand over their smooth wooden lips and laughed aloud, and
was as shamefaced as any boy when she caught him thus secretly exulting
in his own prowess.

It was this adventure in wood-working and plumbing that brought about
the building of the little workshop, where he slowly gathered a
collection of loved tools.  And he, who in the old days, out of his
millions, could purchase immediately whatever he might desire, learned
the new joy of the possession that follows upon rigid economy and
desire long delayed.  He waited three months before daring the
extravagance of a Yankee screw-driver, and his glee in the marvelous
little mechanism was so keen that Dede conceived forthright a great
idea.  For six months she saved her egg-money, which was hers by right
of allotment, and on his birthday presented him with a turning-lathe of
wonderful simplicity and multifarious efficiencies.  And their mutual
delight in the tool, which was his, was only equalled by their delight
in Mab's first foal, which was Dede's special private property.

It was not until the second summer that Daylight built the huge
fireplace that outrivalled Ferguson's across the valley.  For all these
things took time, and Dede and Daylight were not in a hurry.  Theirs
was not the mistake of the average city-dweller who flees in
ultra-modern innocence to the soil.  They did not essay too much.
Neither did they have a mortgage to clear, nor did they desire wealth.
They wanted little in the way of food, and they had no rent to pay.  So
they planned unambiguously, reserving their lives for each other and
for the compensations of country-dwelling from which the average
country-dweller is barred.  From Ferguson's example, too, they profited
much.  Here was a man who asked for but the plainest fare; who
ministered to his own simple needs with his own hands; who worked out
as a laborer only when he needed money to buy books and magazines; and
who saw to it that the major portion of his waking time was for
enjoyment.  He loved to loaf long afternoons in the shade with his
books or to be up with the dawn and away over the hills.

On occasion he accompanied Dede and Daylight on deer hunts through the
wild canons and over the rugged steeps of Hood Mountain, though more
often Dede and Daylight were out alone. This riding was one of their
chief joys.  Every wrinkle and crease in the hills they explored, and
they came to know every secret spring and hidden dell in the whole
surrounding wall of the valley.  They learned all the trails and
cow-paths; but nothing delighted them more than to essay the roughest
and most impossible rides, where they were glad to crouch and crawl
along the narrowest deer-runs, Bob and Mab struggling and forcing their
way along behind.  Back from their rides they brought the seeds and
bulbs of wild flowers to plant in favoring nooks on the ranch.  Along
the foot trail which led down the side of the big canon to the intake
of the water-pipe, they established their fernery.  It was not a formal
affair, and the ferns were left to themselves.  Dede and Daylight
merely introduced new ones from time to time, changing them from one
wild habitat to another.  It was the same with the wild lilac, which
Daylight had sent to him from Mendocino County.  It became part of the
wildness of the ranch, and, after being helped for a season, was left
to its own devices they used to gather the seeds of the California
poppy and scatter them over their own acres, so that the orange-colored
blossoms spangled the fields of mountain hay and prospered in flaming
drifts in the fence corners and along the edges of the clearings.

Dede, who had a fondness for cattails, established a fringe of them
along the meadow stream, where they were left to fight it out with the
water-cress.  And when the latter was threatened with extinction,
Daylight developed one of the shaded springs into his water-cress
garden and declared war upon any invading cattail.  On her wedding day
Dede had discovered a long dog-tooth violet by the zigzag trail above
the redwood spring, and here she continued to plant more and more.  The
open hillside above the tiny meadow became a colony of Mariposa lilies.
This was due mainly to her efforts, while Daylight, who rode with a
short-handled ax on his saddle-bow, cleared the little manzanita wood
on the rocky hill of all its dead and dying and overcrowded weaklings.

They did not labor at these tasks.  Nor were they tasks.  Merely in
passing, they paused, from time to time, and lent a hand to nature.
These flowers and shrubs grew of themselves, and their presence was no
violation of the natural environment.  The man and the woman made no
effort to introduce a flower or shrub that did not of its own right
belong.  Nor did they protect them from their enemies.  The horses and
the colts and the cows and the calves ran at pasture among them or over
them, and flower or shrub had to take its chance.  But the beasts were
not noticeably destructive, for they were few in number and the ranch
was large.

On the other hand, Daylight could have taken in fully a dozen horses to
pasture, which would have earned him a dollar and a half per head per
month.  But this he refused to do, because of the devastation such
close pasturing would produce.

Ferguson came over to celebrate the housewarming that followed the
achievement of the great stone fireplace.  Daylight had ridden across
the valley more than once to confer with him about the undertaking, and
he was the only other present at the sacred function of lighting the
first fire.  By removing a partition, Daylight had thrown two rooms
into one, and this was the big living-room where Dede's treasures were
placed--her books, and paintings and photographs, her piano, the
Crouched Venus, the chafing-dish and all its glittering accessories.
Already, in addition to her own wild-animal skins, were those of deer
and coyote and one mountain-lion which Daylight had killed.  The
tanning he had done himself, slowly and laboriously, in frontier
fashion.

He handed the match to Dede, who struck it and lighted the fire. The
crisp manzanita wood crackled as the flames leaped up and assailed the
dry bark of the larger logs.  Then she leaned in the shelter of her
husband's arm, and the three stood and looked in breathless suspense.
When Ferguson gave judgment, it was with beaming face and extended hand.

"She draws!  By crickey, she draws!" he cried.

He shook Daylight's hand ecstatically, and Daylight shook his with
equal fervor, and, bending, kissed Dede on the lips.  They were as
exultant over the success of their simple handiwork as any great
captain at astonishing victory.  In Ferguson's eyes was actually a
suspicious moisture while the woman pressed even more closely against
the man whose achievement it was.  He caught her up suddenly in his
arms and whirled her away to the piano, crying out: "Come on, Dede! The
Gloria! The Gloria!"

And while the flames in the fireplace that worked, the triumphant
strains of the Twelfth Mass rolled forth.



CHAPTER XXVI

Daylight had made no assertion of total abstinence though he had not
taken a drink for months after the day he resolved to let his business
go to smash.  Soon he proved himself strong enough to dare to take a
drink without taking a second.  On the other hand, with his coming to
live in the country, had passed all desire and need for drink.  He felt
no yearning for it, and even forgot that it existed.  Yet he refused to
be afraid of it, and in town, on occasion, when invited by the
storekeeper, would reply: "All right, son.  If my taking a drink will
make you happy here goes. Whiskey for mine."

But such a drink began no desire for a second.  It made no impression.
He was too profoundly strong to be affected by a thimbleful.  As he had
prophesied to Dede, Burning Daylight, the city financier, had died a
quick death on the ranch, and his younger brother, the Daylight from
Alaska, had taken his place. The threatened inundation of fat had
subsided, and all his old-time Indian leanness and of muscle had
returned.  So, likewise, did the old slight hollows in his cheeks come
back. For him they indicated the pink of physical condition.  He became
the acknowledged strong man of Sonoma Valley, the heaviest lifter and
hardest winded among a husky race of farmer folk.  And once a year he
celebrated his birthday in the old-fashioned frontier way, challenging
all the valley to come up the hill to the ranch and be put on its back.
And a fair portion of the valley responded, brought the women-folk and
children along, and picnicked for the day.

At first, when in need of ready cash, he had followed Ferguson's
example of working at day's labor; but he was not long in gravitating
to a form of work that was more stimulating and more satisfying, and
that allowed him even more time for Dede and the ranch and the
perpetual riding through the hills.  Having been challenged by the
blacksmith, in a spirit of banter, to attempt the breaking of a certain
incorrigible colt, he succeeded so signally as to earn quite a
reputation as a horse-breaker.  And soon he was able to earn whatever
money he desired at this, to him, agreeable work.

A sugar king, whose breeding farm and training stables were at
Caliente, three miles away, sent for him in time of need, and, before
the year was out, offered him the management of the stables.  But
Daylight smiled and shook his head.  Furthermore, he refused to
undertake the breaking of as many animals as were offered.  "I'm sure
not going to die from overwork," he assured Dede; and he accepted such
work only when he had to have money. Later, he fenced off a small run
in the pasture, where, from time to time, he took in a limited number
of incorrigibles.

"We've got the ranch and each other," he told his wife, "and I'd sooner
ride with you to Hood Mountain any day than earn forty dollars.  You
can't buy sunsets, and loving wives, and cool spring water, and such
folderols, with forty dollars; and forty million dollars can't buy back
for me one day that I didn't ride with you to Hood Mountain."

His life was eminently wholesome and natural.  Early to bed, he slept
like an infant and was up with the dawn.  Always with something to do,
and with a thousand little things that enticed but did not clamor, he
was himself never overdone.  Nevertheless, there were times when both
he and Dede were not above confessing tiredness at bedtime after
seventy or eighty miles in the saddle.

Sometimes, when he had accumulated a little money, and when the season
favored, they would mount their horses, with saddle-bags behind, and
ride away over the wall of the valley and down into the other valleys.
When night fell, they put up at the first convenient farm or village,
and on the morrow they would ride on, without definite plan, merely
continuing to ride on, day after day, until their money gave out and
they were compelled to return.  On such trips they would be gone
anywhere from a week to ten days or two weeks, and once they managed a
three weeks' trip.

They even planned ambitiously some day when they were disgracefully
prosperous, to ride all the way up to Daylight's boyhood home in
Eastern Oregon, stopping on the way at Dede's girlhood home in
Siskiyou.  And all the joys of anticipation were theirs a thousand
times as they contemplated the detailed delights of this grand
adventure.

One day, stopping to mail a letter at the Glen Ellen post office, they
were hailed by the blacksmith.

"Say, Daylight," he said, "a young fellow named Slosson sends you his
regards.  He came through in an auto, on the way to Santa Rosa.  He
wanted to know if you didn't live hereabouts, but the crowd with him
was in a hurry.  So he sent you his regards and said to tell you he'd
taken your advice and was still going on breaking his own record."

Daylight had long since told Dede of the incident.

"Slosson?" he meditated, "Slosson?  That must be the hammer-thrower.
He put my hand down twice, the young scamp." He turned suddenly to
Dede.  "Say, it's only twelve miles to Santa Rosa, and the horses are
fresh."

She divined what was in his mind, of which his twinkling eyes and
sheepish, boyish grin gave sufficient advertisement, and she smiled and
nodded acquiescence.

"We'll cut across by Bennett Valley," he said.  "It's nearer that way."

There was little difficulty, once in Santa Rosa, of finding Slosson.
He and his party had registered at the Oberlin Hotel, and Daylight
encountered the young hammer-thrower himself in the office.

"Look here, son," Daylight announced, as soon as he had introduced
Dede, "I've come to go you another flutter at that hand game.  Here's a
likely place."

Slosson smiled and accepted.  The two men faced each other, the elbows
of their right arms on the counter, the hands clasped. Slosson's hand
quickly forced backward and down.

"You're the first man that ever succeeded in doing it," he said. "Let's
try it again."

"Sure," Daylight answered.  "And don't forget, son, that you're the
first man that put mine down.  That's why I lit out after you to-day."

Again they clasped hands, and again Slosson's hand went down.  He was a
broad-shouldered, heavy-muscled young giant, at least half a head
taller than Daylight, and he frankly expressed his chagrin and asked
for a third trial.  This time he steeled himself to the effort, and for
a moment the issue was in doubt.  With flushed face and set teeth he
met the other's strength till his crackling muscles failed him.  The
air exploded sharply from his tensed lungs, as he relaxed in surrender,
and the hand dropped limply down.

"You're too many for me," he confessed.  "I only hope you'll keep out
of the hammer-throwing game."

Daylight laughed and shook his head.

"We might compromise, and each stay in his own class.  You stick to
hammer-throwing, and I'll go on turning down hands."

But Slosson refused to accept defeat.

"Say," he called out, as Daylight and Dede, astride their horses, were
preparing to depart.  "Say--do you mind if I look you up next year?
I'd like to tackle you again."

"Sure, son.  You're welcome to a flutter any time.  Though I give you
fair warning that you'll have to go some.  You'll have to train up, for
I'm ploughing and chopping wood and breaking colts these days."

Now and again, on the way home, Dede could hear her big boy-husband
chuckling gleefully.  As they halted their horses on the top of the
divide out of Bennett Valley, in order to watch the sunset, he ranged
alongside and slipped his arm around her waist.

"Little woman," he said, "you're sure responsible for it all. And I
leave it to you, if all the money in creation is worth as much as one
arm like that when it's got a sweet little woman like this to go
around."

For of all his delights in the new life, Dede was his greatest. As he
explained to her more than once, he had been afraid of love all his
life only in the end to come to find it the greatest thing in the
world.  Not alone were the two well mated, but in coming to live on the
ranch they had selected the best soil in which their love would
prosper.  In spite of her books and music, there was in her a wholesome
simplicity and love of the open and natural, while Daylight, in every
fiber of him, was essentially an open-air man.

Of one thing in Dede, Daylight never got over marveling about, and that
was her efficient hands--the hands that he had first seen taking down
flying shorthand notes and ticking away at the typewriter; the hands
that were firm to hold a magnificent brute like Bob, that wonderfully
flashed over the keys of the piano, that were unhesitant in household
tasks, and that were twin miracles to caress and to run rippling
fingers through his hair. But Daylight was not unduly uxorious.  He
lived his man's life just as she lived her woman's life.  There was
proper division of labor in the work they individually performed.  But
the whole was entwined and woven into a fabric of mutual interest and
consideration.  He was as deeply interested in her cooking and her
music as she was in his agricultural adventures in the vegetable
garden.  And he, who resolutely declined to die of overwork, saw to it
that she should likewise escape so dire a risk.

In this connection, using his man's judgment and putting his man's foot
down, he refused to allow her to be burdened with the entertaining of
guests.  For guests they had, especially in the warm, long summers, and
usually they were her friends from the city, who were put to camp in
tents which they cared for themselves, and where, like true campers,
they had also to cook for themselves.  Perhaps only in California,
where everybody knows camp life, would such a program have been
possible.  But Daylight's steadfast contention was that his wife should
not become cook, waitress, and chambermaid because she did not happen
to possess a household of servants.  On the other hand, chafing-dish
suppers in the big living-room for their camping guests were a common
happening, at which times Daylight allotted them their chores and saw
that they were performed.  For one who stopped only for the night it
was different.  Likewise it was different with her brother, back from
Germany, and again able to sit a horse.  On his vacations he became the
third in the family, and to him was given the building of the fires,
the sweeping, and the washing of the dishes.

Daylight devoted himself to the lightening of Dede's labors, and it was
her brother who incited him to utilize the splendid water-power of the
ranch that was running to waste.  It required Daylight's breaking of
extra horses to pay for the materials, and the brother devoted a three
weeks' vacation to assisting, and together they installed a Pelting
wheel.  Besides sawing wood and turning his lathe and grindstone,
Daylight connected the power with the churn; but his great triumph was
when he put his arm around Dede's waist and led her out to inspect a
washing-machine, run by the Pelton wheel, which really worked and
really washed clothes.

Dede and Ferguson, between them, after a patient struggle, taught
Daylight poetry, so that in the end he might have been often seen,
sitting slack in the saddle and dropping down the mountain trails
through the sun-flecked woods, chanting aloud Kipling's "Tomlinson,"
or, when sharpening his ax, singing into the whirling grindstone
Henley's "Song of the Sword."  Not that he ever became consummately
literary in the way his two teachers were.  Beyond "Fra Lippo Lippi"
and "Caliban and Setebos," he found nothing in Browning, while George
Meredith was ever his despair.  It was of his own initiative, however,
that he invested in a violin, and practised so assiduously that in time
he and Dede beguiled many a happy hour playing together after night had
fallen.

So all went well with this well-mated pair.  Time never dragged. There
were always new wonderful mornings and still cool twilights at the end
of day; and ever a thousand interests claimed him, and his interests
were shared by her.  More thoroughly than he knew, had he come to a
comprehension of the relativity of things.  In this new game he played
he found in little things all the intensities of gratification and
desire that he had found in the frenzied big things when he was a power
and rocked half a continent with the fury of the blows he struck.  With
head and hand, at risk of life and limb, to bit and break a wild colt
and win it to the service of man, was to him no less great an
achievement.  And this new table on which he played the game was clean.
Neither lying, nor cheating, nor hypocrisy was here.  The other game
had made for decay and death, while this new one made for clean
strength and life.  And so he was content, with Dede at his side, to
watch the procession of the days and seasons from the farm-house
perched on the canon-lip; to ride through crisp frosty mornings or
under burning summer suns; and to shelter in the big room where blazed
the logs in the fireplace he had built, while outside the world
shuddered and struggled in the storm-clasp of a southeaster.

Once only Dede asked him if he ever regretted, and his answer was to
crush her in his arms and smother her lips with his.  His answer, a
minute later, took speech.

"Little woman, even if you did cost thirty millions, you are sure the
cheapest necessity of life I ever indulged in."  And then he added,
"Yes, I do have one regret, and a monstrous big one, too.  I'd sure
like to have the winning of you all over again. I'd like to go sneaking
around the Piedmont hills looking for you.  I'd like to meander into
those rooms of yours at Berkeley for the first time.  And there's no
use talking, I'm plumb soaking with regret that I can't put my arms
around you again that time you leaned your head on my breast and cried
in the wind and rain."



CHAPTER XXVII

But there came the day, one year, in early April, when Dede sat in an
easy chair on the porch, sewing on certain small garments, while
Daylight read aloud to her.  It was in the afternoon, and a bright sun
was shining down on a world of new green.  Along the irrigation
channels of the vegetable garden streams of water were flowing, and now
and again Daylight broke off from his reading to run out and change the
flow of water.  Also, he was teasingly interested in the certain small
garments on which Dede worked, while she was radiantly happy over them,
though at times, when his tender fun was too insistent, she was rosily
confused or affectionately resentful.

From where they sat they could look out over the world.  Like the curve
of a skirting blade, the Valley of the Moon stretched before them,
dotted with farm-houses and varied by pasture-lands, hay-fields, and
vineyards.  Beyond rose the wall of the valley, every crease and
wrinkle of which Dede and Daylight knew, and at one place, where the
sun struck squarely, the white dump of the abandoned mine burned like a
jewel.  In the foreground, in the paddock by the barn, was Mab, full of
pretty anxieties for the early spring foal that staggered about her on
tottery legs.  The air shimmered with heat, and altogether it was a
lazy, basking day.  Quail whistled to their young from the thicketed
hillside behind the house.  There was a gentle cooing of pigeons, and
from the green depths of the big canon arose the sobbing wood note of a
mourning dove.  Once, there was a warning chorus from the foraging hens
and a wild rush for cover, as a hawk, high in the blue, cast its
drifting shadow along the ground.

It was this, perhaps, that aroused old hunting memories in Wolf. At any
rate, Dede and Daylight became aware of excitement in the paddock, and
saw harmlessly reenacted a grim old tragedy of the Younger World.
Curiously eager, velvet-footed and silent as a ghost, sliding and
gliding and crouching, the dog that was mere domesticated wolf stalked
the enticing bit of young life that Mab had brought so recently into
the world.  And the mare, her own ancient instincts aroused and
quivering, circled ever between the foal and this menace of the wild
young days when all her ancestry had known fear of him and his hunting
brethren.  Once, she whirled and tried to kick him, but usually she
strove to strike him with her fore-hoofs, or rushed upon him with open
mouth and ears laid back in an effort to crunch his backbone between
her teeth.  And the wolf-dog, with ears flattened down and crouching,
would slide silkily away, only to circle up to the foal from the other
side and give cause to the mare for new alarm.  Then Daylight, urged on
by Dede's solicitude, uttered a low threatening cry; and Wolf, drooping
and sagging in all the body of him in token of his instant return to
man's allegiance, slunk off behind the barn.

It was a few minutes later that Daylight, breaking off from his reading
to change the streams of irrigation, found that the water had ceased
flowing.  He shouldered a pick and shovel, took a hammer and a
pipe-wrench from the tool-house, and returned to Dede on the porch.

"I reckon I'll have to go down and dig the pipe out," he told her.
"It's that slide that's threatened all winter.  I guess she's come down
at last."

"Don't you read ahead, now," he warned, as he passed around the house
and took the trail that led down the wall of the canon.

Halfway down the trail, he came upon the slide.  It was a small affair,
only a few tons of earth and crumbling rock; but, starting from fifty
feet above, it had struck the water pipe with force sufficient to break
it at a connection.  Before proceeding to work, he glanced up the path
of the slide, and he glanced with the eye of the earth-trained miner.
And he saw what made his eyes startle and cease for the moment from
questing farther.

"Hello," he communed aloud, "look who's here."

His glance moved on up the steep broken surface, and across it from
side to side.  Here and there, in places, small twisted manzanitas were
rooted precariously, but in the main, save for weeds and grass, that
portion of the canon was bare.  There were signs of a surface that had
shifted often as the rains poured a flow of rich eroded soil from above
over the lip of the canon.

"A true fissure vein, or I never saw one," he proclaimed softly.

And as the old hunting instincts had aroused that day in the wolf-dog,
so in him recrudesced all the old hot desire of gold-hunting.  Dropping
the hammer and pipe-wrench, but retaining pick and shovel, he climbed
up the slide to where a vague line of outputting but mostly
soil-covered rock could be seen.  It was all but indiscernible, but his
practised eye had sketched the hidden formation which it signified.
Here and there, along this wall of the vein, he attacked the crumbling
rock with the pick and shoveled the encumbering soil away.  Several
times he examined this rock.  So soft was some of it that he could
break it in his fingers.  Shifting a dozen feet higher up, he again
attacked with pick and shovel.  And this time, when he rubbed the soil
from a chunk of rock and looked, he straightened up suddenly, gasping
with delight.  And then, like a deer at a drinking pool in fear of its
enemies, he flung a quick glance around to see if any eye were gazing
upon him.  He grinned at his own foolishness and returned to his
examination of the chunk.  A slant of sunlight fell on it, and it was
all aglitter with tiny specks of unmistakable free gold.

"From the grass roots down," he muttered in an awestricken voice, as he
swung his pick into the yielding surface.

He seemed to undergo a transformation.  No quart of cocktails had ever
put such a flame in his cheeks nor such a fire in his eyes. As he
worked, he was caught up in the old passion that had ruled most of his
life.  A frenzy seized him that markedly increased from moment to
moment.  He worked like a madman, till he panted from his exertions and
the sweat dripped from his face to the ground.  He quested across the
face of the slide to the opposite wall of the vein and back again.
And, midway, he dug down through the red volcanic earth that had washed
from the disintegrating hill above, until he uncovered quartz, rotten
quartz, that broke and crumbled in his hands and showed to be alive
with free gold.

Sometimes he started small slides of earth that covered up his work and
compelled him to dig again.  Once, he was swept fifty feet down the
canon-side; but he floundered and scrambled up again without pausing
for breath.  He hit upon quartz that was so rotten that it was almost
like clay, and here the gold was richer than ever.  It was a veritable
treasure chamber.  For a hundred feet up and down he traced the walls
of the vein.  He even climbed over the canon-lip to look along the brow
of the hill for signs of the outcrop.  But that could wait, and he
hurried back to his find.

He toiled on in the same mad haste, until exhaustion and an intolerable
ache in his back compelled him to pause.  He straightened up with even
a richer piece of gold-laden quartz. Stooping, the sweat from his
forehead had fallen to the ground. It now ran into his eyes, blinding
him.  He wiped it from him with the back of his hand and returned to a
scrutiny of the gold.

It would run thirty thousand to the ton, fifty thousand, anything--he
knew that.  And as he gazed upon the yellow lure, and panted for air,
and wiped the sweat away, his quick vision leaped and set to work.  He
saw the spur-track that must run up from the valley and across the
upland pastures, and he ran the grades and built the bridge that would
span the canon, until it was real before his eyes.  Across the canon
was the place for the mill, and there he erected it; and he erected,
also, the endless chain of buckets, suspended from a cable and operated
by gravity, that would carry the ore across the canon to the
quartz-crusher. Likewise, the whole mine grew before him and beneath
him-tunnels, shafts, and galleries, and hoisting plants.  The blasts of
the miners were in his ears, and from across the canon he could hear
the roar of the stamps.  The hand that held the lump of quartz was
trembling, and there was a tired, nervous palpitation apparently in the
pit of his stomach.  It came to him abruptly that what he wanted was a
drink--whiskey, cocktails, anything, a drink.  And even then, with this
new hot yearning for the alcohol upon him, he heard, faint and far,
drifting down the green abyss of the canon, Dede's voice, crying:--

"Here, chick, chick, chick, chick, chick!  Here, chick, chick, chick!"

He was astounded at the lapse of time.  She had left her sewing on the
porch and was feeding the chickens preparatory to getting supper.  The
afternoon was gone.  He could not conceive that he had been away that
long.

Again came the call: "Here, chick, chick, chick, chick, chick! Here,
chick, chick, chick!"

It was the way she always called--first five, and then three.  He had
long since noticed it.  And from these thoughts of her arose other
thoughts that caused a great fear slowly to grow in his face.  For it
seemed to him that he had almost lost her.  Not once had he thought of
her in those frenzied hours, and for that much, at least, had she truly
been lost to him.

He dropped the piece of quartz, slid down the slide, and started up the
trail, running heavily.  At the edge of the clearing he eased down and
almost crept to a point of vantage whence he could peer out, himself
unseen.  She was feeding the chickens, tossing to them handfuls of
grain and laughing at their antics.

The sight of her seemed to relieve the panic fear into which he had
been flung, and he turned and ran back down the trail.  Again he
climbed the slide, but this time he climbed higher, carrying the pick
and shovel with him.  And again he toiled frenziedly, but this time
with a different purpose.  He worked artfully, loosing slide after
slide of the red soil and sending it streaming down and covering up all
he had uncovered, hiding from the light of day the treasure he had
discovered.  He even went into the woods and scooped armfuls of last
year's fallen leaves which he scattered over the slide.  But this he
gave up as a vain task; and he sent more slides of soil down upon the
scene of his labor, until no sign remained of the out-jutting walls of
the vein.

Next he repaired the broken pipe, gathered his tools together, and
started up the trail.  He walked slowly, feeling a great weariness, as
of a man who had passed through a frightful crisis.

He put the tools away, took a great drink of the water that again
flowed through the pipes, and sat down on the bench by the open kitchen
door.  Dede was inside, preparing supper, and the sound of her
footsteps gave him a vast content.

He breathed the balmy mountain air in great gulps, like a diver
fresh-risen from the sea.  And, as he drank in the air, he gazed with
all his eyes at the clouds and sky and valley, as if he were drinking
in that, too, along with the air.

Dede did not know he had come back, and at times he turned his head and
stole glances in at her--at her efficient hands, at the bronze of her
brown hair that smouldered with fire when she crossed the path of
sunshine that streamed through the window, at the promise of her figure
that shot through him a pang most strangely sweet and sweetly dear.  He
heard her approaching the door, and kept his head turned resolutely
toward the valley.  And next, he thrilled, as he had always thrilled,
when he felt the caressing gentleness of her fingers through his hair.

"I didn't know you were back," she said.  "Was it serious?"

"Pretty bad, that slide," he answered, still gazing away and thrilling
to her touch.  "More serious than I reckoned.  But I've got the plan.
Do you know what I'm going to do?--I'm going to plant eucalyptus all
over it.  They'll hold it.  I'll plant them thick as grass, so that
even a hungry rabbit can't squeeze between them; and when they get
their roots agoing, nothing in creation will ever move that dirt again."

"Why, is it as bad as that?"

He shook his head.

"Nothing exciting.  But I'd sure like to see any blamed old slide get
the best of me, that's all.  I'm going to seal that slide down so that
it'll stay there for a million years.  And when the last trump sounds,
and Sonoma Mountain and all the other mountains pass into nothingness,
that old slide will be still a-standing there, held up by the roots."

He passed his arm around her and pulled her down on his knees.

"Say, little woman, you sure miss a lot by living here on the
ranch--music, and theatres, and such things.  Don't you ever have a
hankering to drop it all and go back?"

So great was his anxiety that he dared not look at her, and when she
laughed and shook her head he was aware of a great relief. Also, he
noted the undiminished youth that rang through that same old-time
boyish laugh of hers.

"Say," he said, with sudden fierceness, "don't you go fooling around
that slide until after I get the trees in and rooted. It's mighty
dangerous, and I sure can't afford to lose you now."

He drew her lips to his and kissed her hungrily and passionately.

"What a lover!" she said; and pride in him and in her own womanhood was
in her voice.

"Look at that, Dede."  He removed one encircling arm and swept it in a
wide gesture over the valley and the mountains beyond. "The Valley of
the Moon--a good name, a good name.  Do you know, when I look out over
it all, and think of you and of all it means, it kind of makes me ache
in the throat, and I have things in my heart I can't find the words to
say, and I have a feeling that I can almost understand Browning and
those other high-flying poet-fellows.  Look at Hood Mountain there,
just where the sun's striking.  It was down in that crease that we
found the spring."

"And that was the night you didn't milk the cows till ten o'clock," she
laughed.  "And if you keep me here much longer, supper won't be any
earlier than it was that night."

Both arose from the bench, and Daylight caught up the milk-pail from
the nail by the door.  He paused a moment longer to look out over the
valley.

"It's sure grand," he said.

"It's sure grand," she echoed, laughing joyously at him and with him
and herself and all the world, as she passed in through the door.

And Daylight, like the old man he once had met, himself went down the
hill through the fires of sunset with a milk pail on his arm.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BURNING DAYLIGHT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of Before Adam
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Before Adam

Author: Jack London

Release date: June 29, 2008 [eBook #310]
                Most recently updated: March 31, 2021

Language: English

Credits: John Hamm and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEFORE ADAM ***

[Illustration]




Before Adam

by Jack London

1906

These are our ancestors, and their history is our history. Remember
that as surely as we one day swung down out of the trees and walked
upright, just as surely, on a far earlier day, did we crawl up out of
the sea and achieve our first adventure on land.


Contents

 CHAPTER I.
 CHAPTER II.
 CHAPTER III.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER V.
 CHAPTER VI.
 CHAPTER VII.
 CHAPTER VIII.
 CHAPTER IX.
 CHAPTER X.
 CHAPTER XI.
 CHAPTER XII.
 CHAPTER XIII.
 CHAPTER XIV.
 CHAPTER XV.
 CHAPTER XVI.
 CHAPTER XVII.
 CHAPTER XVIII.




CHAPTER I


Pictures! Pictures! Pictures! Often, before I learned, did I wonder
whence came the multitudes of pictures that thronged my dreams; for
they were pictures the like of which I had never seen in real
wake-a-day life. They tormented my childhood, making of my dreams a
procession of nightmares and a little later convincing me that I was
different from my kind, a creature unnatural and accursed.

In my days only did I attain any measure of happiness. My nights marked
the reign of fearand such fear! I make bold to state that no man of
all the men who walk the earth with me ever suffer fear of like kind
and degree. For my fear is the fear of long ago, the fear that was
rampant in the Younger World, and in the youth of the Younger World. In
short, the fear that reigned supreme in that period known as the
Mid-Pleistocene.

What do I mean? I see explanation is necessary before I can tell you of
the substance of my dreams. Otherwise, little could you know of the
meaning of the things I know so well. As I write this, all the beings
and happenings of that other world rise up before me in vast
phantasmagoria, and I know that to you they would be rhymeless and
reasonless.

What to you the friendship of Lop-Ear, the warm lure of the Swift One,
the lust and the atavism of Red-Eye? A screaming incoherence and no
more. And a screaming incoherence, likewise, the doings of the Fire
People and the Tree People, and the gibbering councils of the horde.
For you know not the peace of the cool caves in the cliffs, the circus
of the drinking-places at the end of the day. You have never felt the
bite of the morning wind in the tree-tops, nor is the taste of young
bark sweet in your mouth.

It would be better, I dare say, for you to make your approach, as I
made mine, through my childhood. As a boy I was very like other boysin
my waking hours. It was in my sleep that I was different. From my
earliest recollection my sleep was a period of terror. Rarely were my
dreams tinctured with happiness. As a rule, they were stuffed with
fearand with a fear so strange and alien that it had no ponderable
quality. No fear that I experienced in my waking life resembled the
fear that possessed me in my sleep. It was of a quality and kind that
transcended all my experiences.

For instance, I was a city boy, a city child, rather, to whom the
country was an unexplored domain. Yet I never dreamed of cities; nor
did a house ever occur in any of my dreams. Nor, for that matter, did
any of my human kind ever break through the wall of my sleep. I, who
had seen trees only in parks and illustrated books, wandered in my
sleep through interminable forests. And further, these dream trees were
not a mere blur on my vision. They were sharp and distinct. I was on
terms of practised intimacy with them. I saw every branch and twig; I
saw and knew every different leaf.

Well do I remember the first time in my waking life that I saw an oak
tree. As I looked at the leaves and branches and gnarls, it came to me
with distressing vividness that I had seen that same kind of tree many
and countless times in my sleep. So I was not surprised, still later on
in my life, to recognize instantly, the first time I saw them, trees
such as the spruce, the yew, the birch, and the laurel. I had seen them
all before, and was seeing them even then, every night, in my sleep.

This, as you have already discerned, violates the first law of
dreaming, namely, that in ones dreams one sees only what he has seen
in his waking life, or combinations of the things he has seen in his
waking life. But all my dreams violated this law. In my dreams I never
saw _anything_ of which I had knowledge in my waking life. My dream
life and my waking life were lives apart, with not one thing in common
save myself. I was the connecting link that somehow lived both lives.

Early in my childhood I learned that nuts came from the grocer, berries
from the fruit man; but before ever that knowledge was mine, in my
dreams I picked nuts from trees, or gathered them and ate them from the
ground underneath trees, and in the same way I ate berries from vines
and bushes. This was beyond any experience of mine.

I shall never forget the first time I saw blueberries served on the
table. I had never seen blueberries before, and yet, at the sight of
them, there leaped up in my mind memories of dreams wherein I had
wandered through swampy land eating my fill of them. My mother set
before me a dish of the berries. I filled my spoon, but before I raised
it to my mouth I knew just how they would taste. Nor was I
disappointed. It was the same tang that I had tasted a thousand times
in my sleep.

Snakes? Long before I had heard of the existence of snakes, I was
tormented by them in my sleep. They lurked for me in the forest glades;
leaped up, striking, under my feet; squirmed off through the dry grass
or across naked patches of rock; or pursued me into the tree-tops,
encircling the trunks with their great shining bodies, driving me
higher and higher or farther and farther out on swaying and crackling
branches, the ground a dizzy distance beneath me. Snakes!with their
forked tongues, their beady eyes and glittering scales, their hissing
and their rattlingdid I not already know them far too well on that day
of my first circus when I saw the snake-charmer lift them up?

They were old friends of mine, enemies rather, that peopled my nights
with fear.

Ah, those endless forests, and their horror-haunted gloom! For what
eternities have I wandered through them, a timid, hunted creature,
starting at the least sound, frightened of my own shadow, keyed-up,
ever alert and vigilant, ready on the instant to dash away in mad
flight for my life. For I was the prey of all manner of fierce life
that dwelt in the forest, and it was in ecstasies of fear that I fled
before the hunting monsters.

When I was five years old I went to my first circus. I came home from
it sickbut not from peanuts and pink lemonade. Let me tell you. As we
entered the animal tent, a hoarse roaring shook the air. I tore my hand
loose from my fathers and dashed wildly back through the entrance. I
collided with people, fell down; and all the time I was screaming with
terror. My father caught me and soothed me. He pointed to the crowd of
people, all careless of the roaring, and cheered me with assurances of
safety.

Nevertheless, it was in fear and trembling, and with much encouragement
on his part, that I at last approached the lions cage. Ah, I knew him
on the instant. The beast! The terrible one! And on my inner vision
flashed the memories of my dreams,the midday sun shining on tall
grass, the wild bull grazing quietly, the sudden parting of the grass
before the swift rush of the tawny one, his leap to the bulls back,
the crashing and the bellowing, and the crunch crunch of bones; or
again, the cool quiet of the water-hole, the wild horse up to his knees
and drinking softly, and then the tawny onealways the tawny one!the
leap, the screaming and the splashing of the horse, and the crunch
crunch of bones; and yet again, the sombre twilight and the sad silence
of the end of day, and then the great full-throated roar, sudden, like
a trump of doom, and swift upon it the insane shrieking and chattering
among the trees, and I, too, am trembling with fear and am one of the
many shrieking and chattering among the trees.

At the sight of him, helpless, within the bars of his cage, I became
enraged. I gritted my teeth at him, danced up and down, screaming an
incoherent mockery and making antic faces. He responded, rushing
against the bars and roaring back at me his impotent wrath. Ah, he knew
me, too, and the sounds I made were the sounds of old time and
intelligible to him.

My parents were frightened. The child is ill, said my mother. He is
hysterical, said my father. I never told them, and they never knew.
Already had I developed reticence concerning this quality of mine, this
semi-disassociation of personality as I think I am justified in calling
it.

I saw the snake-charmer, and no more of the circus did I see that
night. I was taken home, nervous and overwrought, sick with the
invasion of my real life by that other life of my dreams.

I have mentioned my reticence. Only once did I confide the strangeness
of it all to another. He was a boymy chum; and we were eight years
old. From my dreams I reconstructed for him pictures of that vanished
world in which I do believe I once lived. I told him of the terrors of
that early time, of Lop-Ear and the pranks we played, of the gibbering
councils, and of the Fire People and their squatting places.

He laughed at me, and jeered, and told me tales of ghosts and of the
dead that walk at night. But mostly did he laugh at my feeble fancy. I
told him more, and he laughed the harder. I swore in all earnestness
that these things were so, and he began to look upon me queerly. Also,
he gave amazing garblings of my tales to our playmates, until all began
to look upon me queerly.

It was a bitter experience, but I learned my lesson. I was different
from my kind. I was abnormal with something they could not understand,
and the telling of which would cause only misunderstanding. When the
stories of ghosts and goblins went around, I kept quiet. I smiled
grimly to myself. I thought of my nights of fear, and knew that mine
were the real thingsreal as life itself, not attenuated vapors and
surmised shadows.

For me no terrors resided in the thought of bugaboos and wicked ogres.
The fall through leafy branches and the dizzy heights; the snakes that
struck at me as I dodged and leaped away in chattering flight; the wild
dogs that hunted me across the open spaces to the timberthese were
terrors concrete and actual, happenings and not imaginings, things of
the living flesh and of sweat and blood. Ogres and bugaboos and I had
been happy bed-fellows, compared with these terrors that made their bed
with me throughout my childhood, and that still bed with me, now, as I
write this, full of years.




CHAPTER II


I have said that in my dreams I never saw a human being. Of this fact I
became aware very early, and felt poignantly the lack of my own kind.
As a very little child, even, I had a feeling, in the midst of the
horror of my dreaming, that if I could find but one man, only one
human, I should be saved from my dreaming, that I should be surrounded
no more by haunting terrors. This thought obsessed me every night of my
life for yearsif only I could find that one human and be saved!

I must iterate that I had this thought in the midst of my dreaming, and
I take it as an evidence of the merging of my two personalities, as
evidence of a point of contact between the two disassociated parts of
me. My dream personality lived in the long ago, before ever man, as we
know him, came to be; and my other and wake-a-day personality projected
itself, to the extent of the knowledge of mans existence, into the
substance of my dreams.

Perhaps the psychologists of the book will find fault with my way of
using the phrase, disassociation of personality. I know their use of
it, yet am compelled to use it in my own way in default of a better
phrase. I take shelter behind the inadequacy of the English language.
And now to the explanation of my use, or misuse, of the phrase.

It was not till I was a young man, at college, that I got any clew to
the significance of my dreams, and to the cause of them. Up to that
time they had been meaningless and without apparent causation. But at
college I discovered evolution and psychology, and learned the
explanation of various strange mental states and experiences. For
instance, there was the falling-through-space dreamthe commonest dream
experience, one practically known, by first-hand experience, to all
men.

This, my professor told me, was a racial memory. It dated back to our
remote ancestors who lived in trees. With them, being tree-dwellers,
the liability of falling was an ever-present menace. Many lost their
lives that way; all of them experienced terrible falls, saving
themselves by clutching branches as they fell toward the ground.

Now a terrible fall, averted in such fashion, was productive of shock.
Such shock was productive of molecular changes in the cerebral cells.
These molecular changes were transmitted to the cerebral cells of
progeny, became, in short, racial memories. Thus, when you and I,
asleep or dozing off to sleep, fall through space and awake to
sickening consciousness just before we strike, we are merely
remembering what happened to our arboreal ancestors, and which has been
stamped by cerebral changes into the heredity of the race.

There is nothing strange in this, any more than there is anything
strange in an instinct. An instinct is merely a habit that is stamped
into the stuff of our heredity, that is all. It will be noted, in
passing, that in this falling dream which is so familiar to you and me
and all of us, we never strike bottom. To strike bottom would be
destruction. Those of our arboreal ancestors who struck bottom died
forthwith. True, the shock of their fall was communicated to the
cerebral cells, but they died immediately, before they could have
progeny. You and I are descended from those that did not strike bottom;
that is why you and I, in our dreams, never strike bottom.

And now we come to disassociation of personality. We never have this
sense of falling when we are wide awake. Our wake-a-day personality has
no experience of it. Thenand here the argument is irresistibleit must
be another and distinct personality that falls when we are asleep, and
that has had experience of such fallingthat has, in short, a memory of
past-day race experiences, just as our wake-a-day personality has a
memory of our wake-a-day experiences.

It was at this stage in my reasoning that I began to see the light. And
quickly the light burst upon me with dazzling brightness, illuminating
and explaining all that had been weird and uncanny and unnaturally
impossible in my dream experiences. In my sleep it was not my
wake-a-day personality that took charge of me; it was another and
distinct personality, possessing a new and totally different fund of
experiences, and, to the point of my dreaming, possessing memories of
those totally different experiences.

What was this personality? When had it itself lived a wake-a-day life
on this planet in order to collect this fund of strange experiences?
These were questions that my dreams themselves answered. He lived in
the long ago, when the world was young, in that period that we call the
Mid-Pleistocene. He fell from the trees but did not strike bottom. He
gibbered with fear at the roaring of the lions. He was pursued by
beasts of prey, struck at by deadly snakes. He chattered with his kind
in council, and he received rough usage at the hands of the Fire People
in the day that he fled before them.

But, I hear you objecting, why is it that these racial memories are not
ours as well, seeing that we have a vague other-personality that falls
through space while we sleep?

And I may answer with another question. Why is a two-headed calf? And
my own answer to this is that it is a freak. And so I answer your
question. I have this other-personality and these complete racial
memories because I am a freak.

But let me be more explicit.

The commonest race memory we have is the falling-through-space dream.
This other-personality is very vague. About the only memory it has is
that of falling. But many of us have sharper, more distinct
other-personalities. Many of us have the flying dream, the
pursuing-monster dream, color dreams, suffocation dreams, and the
reptile and vermin dreams. In short, while this other-personality is
vestigial in all of us, in some of us it is almost obliterated, while
in others of us it is more pronounced. Some of us have stronger and
completer race memories than others.

It is all a question of varying degree of possession of the
other-personality. In myself, the degree of possession is enormous. My
other-personality is almost equal in power with my own personality. And
in this matter I am, as I said, a freaka freak of heredity.

I do believe that it is the possession of this other-personalitybut
not so strong a one as minethat has in some few others given rise to
belief in personal reincarnation experiences. It is very plausible to
such people, a most convincing hypothesis. When they have visions of
scenes they have never seen in the flesh, memories of acts and events
dating back in time, the simplest explanation is that they have lived
before.

But they make the mistake of ignoring their own duality. They do not
recognize their other-personality. They think it is their own
personality, that they have only one personality; and from such a
premise they can conclude only that they have lived previous lives.

But they are wrong. It is not reincarnation. I have visions of myself
roaming through the forests of the Younger World; and yet it is not
myself that I see but one that is only remotely a part of me, as my
father and my grandfather are parts of me less remote. This other-self
of mine is an ancestor, a progenitor of my progenitors in the early
line of my race, himself the progeny of a line that long before his
time developed fingers and toes and climbed up into the trees.

I must again, at the risk of boring, repeat that I am, in this one
thing, to be considered a freak. Not alone do I possess racial memory
to an enormous extent, but I possess the memories of one particular and
far-removed progenitor. And yet, while this is most unusual, there is
nothing over-remarkable about it.

Follow my reasoning. An instinct is a racial memory. Very good. Then
you and I and all of us receive these memories from our fathers and
mothers, as they received them from their fathers and mothers.
Therefore there must be a medium whereby these memories are transmitted
from generation to generation. This medium is what Weismann terms the
germplasm. It carries the memories of the whole evolution of the
race. These memories are dim and confused, and many of them are lost.
But some strains of germplasm carry an excessive freightage of
memoriesare, to be scientific, more atavistic than other strains; and
such a strain is mine. I am a freak of heredity, an atavistic
nightmarecall me what you will; but here I am, real and alive, eating
three hearty meals a day, and what are you going to do about it?

And now, before I take up my tale, I want to anticipate the doubting
Thomases of psychology, who are prone to scoff, and who would otherwise
surely say that the coherence of my dreams is due to overstudy and the
subconscious projection of my knowledge of evolution into my dreams. In
the first place, I have never been a zealous student. I graduated last
of my class. I cared more for athletics, andthere is no reason I
should not confess itmore for billiards.

Further, I had no knowledge of evolution until I was at college,
whereas in my childhood and youth I had already lived in my dreams all
the details of that other, long-ago life. I will say, however, that
these details were mixed and incoherent until I came to know the
science of evolution. Evolution was the key. It gave the explanation,
gave sanity to the pranks of this atavistic brain of mine that, modern
and normal, harked back to a past so remote as to be contemporaneous
with the raw beginnings of mankind.

For in this past I know of, man, as we to-day know him, did not exist.
It was in the period of his becoming that I must have lived and had my
being.




CHAPTER III


The commonest dream of my early childhood was something like this: It
seemed that I was very small and that I lay curled up in a sort of nest
of twigs and boughs. Sometimes I was lying on my back. In this position
it seemed that I spent many hours, watching the play of sunlight on the
foliage and the stirring of the leaves by the wind. Often the nest
itself moved back and forth when the wind was strong.

But always, while so lying in the nest, I was mastered as of tremendous
space beneath me. I never saw it, I never peered over the edge of the
nest to see; but I _knew_ and feared that space that lurked just
beneath me and that ever threatened me like a maw of some all-devouring
monster.

This dream, in which I was quiescent and which was more like a
condition than an experience of action, I dreamed very often in my
early childhood. But suddenly, there would rush into the very midst of
it strange forms and ferocious happenings, the thunder and crashing of
storm, or unfamiliar landscapes such as in my wake-a-day life I had
never seen. The result was confusion and nightmare. I could comprehend
nothing of it. There was no logic of sequence.

You see, I did not dream consecutively. One moment I was a wee babe of
the Younger World lying in my tree nest; the next moment I was a grown
man of the Younger World locked in combat with the hideous Red-Eye; and
the next moment I was creeping carefully down to the water-hole in the
heat of the day. Events, years apart in their occurrence in the Younger
World, occurred with me within the space of several minutes, or
seconds.

It was all a jumble, but this jumble I shall not inflict upon you. It
was not until I was a young man and had dreamed many thousand times,
that everything straightened out and became clear and plain. Then it
was that I got the clew of time, and was able to piece together events
and actions in their proper order. Thus was I able to reconstruct the
vanished Younger World as it was at the time I lived in itor at the
time my other-self lived in it. The distinction does not matter; for I,
too, the modern man, have gone back and lived that early life in the
company of my other-self.

For your convenience, since this is to be no sociological screed, I
shall frame together the different events into a comprehensive story.
For there is a certain thread of continuity and happening that runs
through all the dreams. There is my friendship with Lop-Ear, for
instance. Also, there is the enmity of Red-Eye, and the love of the
Swift One. Taking it all in all, a fairly coherent and interesting
story I am sure you will agree.

I do not remember much of my mother. Possibly the earliest recollection
I have of herand certainly the sharpestis the following: It seemed I
was lying on the ground. I was somewhat older than during the nest
days, but still helpless. I rolled about in the dry leaves, playing
with them and making crooning, rasping noises in my throat. The sun
shone warmly and I was happy, and comfortable. I was in a little open
space. Around me, on all sides, were bushes and fern-like growths, and
overhead and all about were the trunks and branches of forest trees.

Suddenly I heard a sound. I sat upright and listened. I made no
movement. The little noises died down in my throat, and I sat as one
petrified. The sound drew closer. It was like the grunt of a pig. Then
I began to hear the sounds caused by the moving of a body through the
brush. Next I saw the ferns agitated by the passage of the body. Then
the ferns parted, and I saw gleaming eyes, a long snout, and white
tusks.

It was a wild boar. He peered at me curiously. He grunted once or twice
and shifted his weight from one foreleg to the other, at the same time
moving his head from side to side and swaying the ferns. Still I sat as
one petrified, my eyes unblinking as I stared at him, fear eating at my
heart.

It seemed that this movelessness and silence on my part was what was
expected of me. I was not to cry out in the face of fear. It was a
dictate of instinct. And so I sat there and waited for I knew not what.
The boar thrust the ferns aside and stepped into the open. The
curiosity went out of his eyes, and they gleamed cruelly. He tossed his
head at me threateningly and advanced a step. This he did again, and
yet again.

Then I screamed...or shriekedI cannot describe it, but it was a shrill
and terrible cry. And it seems that it, too, at this stage of the
proceedings, was the thing expected of me. From not far away came an
answering cry. My sounds seemed momentarily to disconcert the boar, and
while he halted and shifted his weight with indecision, an apparition
burst upon us.

She was like a large orangutan, my mother, or like a chimpanzee, and
yet, in sharp and definite ways, quite different. She was heavier of
build than they, and had less hair. Her arms were not so long, and her
legs were stouter. She wore no clothesonly her natural hair. And I can
tell you she was a fury when she was excited.

And like a fury she dashed upon the scene. She was gritting her teeth,
making frightful grimaces, snarling, uttering sharp and continuous
cries that sounded like kh-ah! kh-ah! So sudden and formidable was
her appearance that the boar involuntarily bunched himself together on
the defensive and bristled as she swerved toward him. Then she swerved
toward me. She had quite taken the breath out of him. I knew just what
to do in that moment of time she had gained. I leaped to meet her,
catching her about the waist and holding on hand and footyes, by my
feet; I could hold on by them as readily as by my hands. I could feel
in my tense grip the pull of the hair as her skin and her muscles moved
beneath with her efforts.

As I say, I leaped to meet her, and on the instant she leaped straight
up into the air, catching an overhanging branch with her hands. The
next instant, with clashing tusks, the boar drove past underneath. He
had recovered from his surprise and sprung forward, emitting a squeal
that was almost a trumpeting. At any rate it was a call, for it was
followed by the rushing of bodies through the ferns and brush from all
directions.

From every side wild hogs dashed into the open spacea score of them.
But my mother swung over the top of a thick limb, a dozen feet from the
ground, and, still holding on to her, we perched there in safety. She
was very excited. She chattered and screamed, and scolded down at the
bristling, tooth-gnashing circle that had gathered beneath. I, too,
trembling, peered down at the angry beasts and did my best to imitate
my mothers cries.

From the distance came similar cries, only pitched deeper, into a sort
of roaring bass. These grew momentarily louder, and soon I saw him
approaching, my fatherat least, by all the evidence of the times, I am
driven to conclude that he was my father.

He was not an extremely prepossessing father, as fathers go. He seemed
half man, and half ape, and yet not ape, and not yet man. I fail to
describe him. There is nothing like him to-day on the earth, under the
earth, nor in the earth. He was a large man in his day, and he must
have weighed all of a hundred and thirty pounds. His face was broad and
flat, and the eyebrows over-hung the eyes. The eyes themselves were
small, deep-set, and close together. He had practically no nose at all.
It was squat and broad, apparently without any bridge, while the
nostrils were like two holes in the face, opening outward instead of
down.

The forehead slanted back from the eyes, and the hair began right at
the eyes and ran up over the head. The head itself was preposterously
small and was supported on an equally preposterous, thick, short neck.

There was an elemental economy about his bodyas was there about all
our bodies. The chest was deep, it is true, cavernously deep; but there
were no full-swelling muscles, no wide-spreading shoulders, no
clean-limbed straightness, no generous symmetry of outline. It
represented strength, that body of my fathers, strength without
beauty; ferocious, primordial strength, made to clutch and gripe and
rend and destroy.

His hips were thin; and the legs, lean and hairy, were crooked and
stringy-muscled. In fact, my fathers legs were more like arms. They
were twisted and gnarly, and with scarcely the semblance of the full
meaty calf such as graces your leg and mine. I remember he could not
walk on the flat of his foot. This was because it was a prehensile
foot, more like a hand than a foot. The great toe, instead of being in
line with the other toes, opposed them, like a thumb, and its
opposition to the other toes was what enabled him to get a grip with
his foot. This was why he could not walk on the flat of his foot.

But his appearance was no more unusual than the manner of his coming,
there to my mother and me as we perched above the angry wild pigs. He
came through the trees, leaping from limb to limb and from tree to
tree; and he came swiftly. I can see him now, in my wake-a-day life, as
I write this, swinging along through the trees, a four-handed, hairy
creature, howling with rage, pausing now and again to beat his chest
with his clenched fist, leaping ten-and-fifteen-foot gaps, catching a
branch with one hand and swinging on across another gap to catch with
his other hand and go on, never hesitating, never at a loss as to how
to proceed on his arboreal way.

And as I watched him I felt in my own being, in my very muscles
themselves, the surge and thrill of desire to go leaping from bough to
bough; and I felt also the guarantee of the latent power in that being
and in those muscles of mine. And why not? Little boys watch their
fathers swing axes and fell trees, and feel in themselves that some day
they, too, will swing axes and fell trees. And so with me. The life
that was in me was constituted to do what my father did, and it
whispered to me secretly and ambitiously of aerial paths and forest
flights.

At last my father joined us. He was extremely angry. I remember the
out-thrust of his protruding underlip as he glared down at the wild
pigs. He snarled something like a dog, and I remember that his
eye-teeth were large, like fangs, and that they impressed me
tremendously.

His conduct served only the more to infuriate the pigs. He broke off
twigs and small branches and flung them down upon our enemies. He even
hung by one hand, tantalizingly just beyond reach, and mocked them as
they gnashed their tusks with impotent rage. Not content with this, he
broke off a stout branch, and, holding on with one hand and foot,
jabbed the infuriated beasts in the sides and whacked them across their
noses. Needless to state, my mother and I enjoyed the sport.

But one tires of all good things, and in the end, my father, chuckling
maliciously the while, led the way across the trees. Now it was that my
ambitions ebbed away, and I became timid, holding tightly to my mother
as she climbed and swung through space. I remember when the branch
broke with her weight. She had made a wide leap, and with the snap of
the wood I was overwhelmed with the sickening consciousness of falling
through space, the pair of us. The forest and the sunshine on the
rustling leaves vanished from my eyes. I had a fading glimpse of my
father abruptly arresting his progress to look, and then all was
blackness.

The next moment I was awake, in my sheeted bed, sweating, trembling,
nauseated. The window was up, and a cool air was blowing through the
room. The night-lamp was burning calmly. And because of this I take it
that the wild pigs did not get us, that we never fetched bottom; else I
should not be here now, a thousand centuries after, to remember the
event.

And now put yourself in my place for a moment. Walk with me a bit in my
tender childhood, bed with me a night and imagine yourself dreaming
such incomprehensible horrors. Remember I was an inexperienced child. I
had never seen a wild boar in my life. For that matter I had never seen
a domesticated pig. The nearest approach to one that I had seen was
breakfast bacon sizzling in its fat. And yet here, real as life, wild
boars dashed through my dreams, and I, with fantastic parents, swung
through the lofty tree-spaces.

Do you wonder that I was frightened and oppressed by my
nightmare-ridden nights? I was accursed. And, worst of all, I was
afraid to tell. I do not know why, except that I had a feeling of
guilt, though I knew no better of what I was guilty. So it was, through
long years, that I suffered in silence, until I came to mans estate
and learned the why and wherefore of my dreams.




CHAPTER IV


There is one puzzling thing about these prehistoric memories of mine.
It is the vagueness of the time element. I do not always know the order
of events;or can I tell, between some events, whether one, two, or
four or five years have elapsed. I can only roughly tell the passage of
time by judging the changes in the appearance and pursuits of my
fellows.

Also, I can apply the logic of events to the various happenings. For
instance, there is no doubt whatever that my mother and I were treed by
the wild pigs and fled and fell in the days before I made the
acquaintance of Lop-Ear, who became what I may call my boyhood chum.
And it is just as conclusive that between these two periods I must have
left my mother.

I have no memory of my father than the one I have given. Never, in the
years that followed, did he reappear. And from my knowledge of the
times, the only explanation possible lies in that he perished shortly
after the adventure with the wild pigs. That it must have been an
untimely end, there is no discussion. He was in full vigor, and only
sudden and violent death could have taken him off. But I know not the
manner of his goingwhether he was drowned in the river, or was
swallowed by a snake, or went into the stomach of old Saber-Tooth, the
tiger, is beyond my knowledge.

For know that I remember only the things I saw myself, with my own
eyes, in those prehistoric days. If my mother knew my fathers end, she
never told me. For that matter I doubt if she had a vocabulary adequate
to convey such information. Perhaps, all told, the Folk in that day had
a vocabulary of thirty or forty sounds.

I call them _sounds_, rather than _words_, because sounds they were
primarily. They had no fixed values, to be altered by adjectives and
adverbs. These latter were tools of speech not yet invented. Instead of
qualifying nouns or verbs by the use of adjectives and adverbs, we
qualified sounds by intonation, by changes in quantity and pitch, by
retarding and by accelerating. The length of time employed in the
utterance of a particular sound shaded its meaning.

We had no conjugation. One judged the tense by the context. We talked
only concrete things because we thought only concrete things. Also, we
depended largely on pantomime. The simplest abstraction was practically
beyond our thinking; and when one did happen to think one, he was hard
put to communicate it to his fellows. There were no sounds for it. He
was pressing beyond the limits of his vocabulary. If he invented sounds
for it, his fellows did not understand the sounds. Then it was that he
fell back on pantomime, illustrating the thought wherever possible and
at the same time repeating the new sound over and over again.

Thus language grew. By the few sounds we possessed we were enabled to
think a short distance beyond those sounds; then came the need for new
sounds wherewith to express the new thought. Sometimes, however, we
thought too long a distance in advance of our sounds, managed to
achieve abstractions (dim ones I grant), which we failed utterly to
make known to other folk. After all, language did not grow fast in that
day.

Oh, believe me, we were amazingly simple. But we did know a lot that is
not known to-day. We could twitch our ears, prick them up and flatten
them down at will. And we could scratch between our shoulders with
ease. We could throw stones with our feet. I have done it many a time.
And for that matter, I could keep my knees straight, bend forward from
the hips, and touch, not the tips of my fingers, but the points of my
elbows, to the ground. And as for bird-nestingwell, I only wish the
twentieth-century boy could see us. But we made no collections of eggs.
We ate them.

I rememberbut I out-run my story. First let me tell of Lop-Ear and our
friendship. Very early in my life, I separated from my mother. Possibly
this was because, after the death of my father, she took to herself a
second husband. I have few recollections of him, and they are not of
the best. He was a light fellow. There was no solidity to him. He was
too voluble. His infernal chattering worries me even now as I think of
it. His mind was too inconsequential to permit him to possess purpose.
Monkeys in their cages always remind me of him. He was monkeyish. That
is the best description I can give of him.

He hated me from the first. And I quickly learned to be afraid of him
and his malicious pranks. Whenever he came in sight I crept close to my
mother and clung to her. But I was growing older all the time, and it
was inevitable that I should from time to time stray from her, and
stray farther and farther. And these were the opportunities that the
Chatterer waited for. (I may as well explain that we bore no names in
those days; were not known by any name. For the sake of convenience I
have myself given names to the various Folk I was more closely in
contact with, and the Chatterer is the most fitting description I can
find for that precious stepfather of mine. As for me, I have named
myself Big-Tooth. My eye-teeth were pronouncedly large.)

But to return to the Chatterer. He persistently terrorized me. He was
always pinching me and cuffing me, and on occasion he was not above
biting me. Often my mother interfered, and the way she made his fur fly
was a joy to see. But the result of all this was a beautiful and
unending family quarrel, in which I was the bone of contention.

No, my home-life was not happy. I smile to myself as I write the
phrase. Home-life! Home! I had no home in the modern sense of the term.
My home was an association, not a habitation. I lived in my mothers
care, not in a house. And my mother lived anywhere, so long as when
night came she was above the ground.

My mother was old-fashioned. She still clung to her trees. It is true,
the more progressive members of our horde lived in the caves above the
river. But my mother was suspicious and unprogressive. The trees were
good enough for her. Of course, we had one particular tree in which we
usually roosted, though we often roosted in other trees when nightfall
caught us. In a convenient fork was a sort of rude platform of twigs
and branches and creeping things. It was more like a huge bird-nest
than anything else, though it was a thousand times cruder in the
weaving than any bird-nest. But it had one feature that I have never
seen attached to any bird-nest, namely, a roof.

Oh, not a roof such as modern man makes! Nor a roof such as is made by
the lowest aborigines of to-day. It was infinitely more clumsy than the
clumsiest handiwork of manof man as we know him. It was put together
in a casual, helter-skelter sort of way. Above the fork of the tree
whereon we rested was a pile of dead branches and brush. Four or five
adjacent forks held what I may term the various ridge-poles. These were
merely stout sticks an inch or so in diameter. On them rested the brush
and branches. These seemed to have been tossed on almost aimlessly.
There was no attempt at thatching. And I must confess that the roof
leaked miserably in a heavy rain.

But the Chatterer. He made home-life a burden for both my mother and
meand by home-life I mean, not the leaky nest in the tree, but the
group-life of the three of us. He was most malicious in his persecution
of me. That was the one purpose to which he held steadfastly for longer
than five minutes. Also, as time went by, my mother was less eager in
her defence of me. I think, what of the continuous rows raised by the
Chatterer, that I must have become a nuisance to her. At any rate, the
situation went from bad to worse so rapidly that I should soon, of my
own volition, have left home. But the satisfaction of performing so
independent an act was denied me. Before I was ready to go, I was
thrown out. And I mean this literally.

The opportunity came to the Chatterer one day when I was alone in the
nest. My mother and the Chatterer had gone away together toward the
blueberry swamp. He must have planned the whole thing, for I heard him
returning alone through the forest, roaring with self-induced rage as
he came. Like all the men of our horde, when they were angry or were
trying to make themselves angry, he stopped now and again to hammer on
his chest with his fist.

I realized the helplessness of my situation, and crouched trembling in
the nest. The Chatterer came directly to the treeI remember it was an
oak treeand began to climb up. And he never ceased for a moment from
his infernal row. As I have said, our language was extremely meagre,
and he must have strained it by the variety of ways in which he
informed me of his undying hatred of me and of his intention there and
then to have it out with me.

As he climbed to the fork, I fled out the great horizontal limb. He
followed me, and out I went, farther and farther. At last I was out
amongst the small twigs and leaves. The Chatterer was ever a coward,
and greater always than any anger he ever worked up was his caution. He
was afraid to follow me out amongst the leaves and twigs. For that
matter, his greater weight would have crashed him through the foliage
before he could have got to me.

But it was not necessary for him to reach me, and well he knew it, the
scoundrel! With a malevolent expression on his face, his beady eyes
gleaming with cruel intelligence, he began teetering. Teetering!and
with me out on the very edge of the bough, clutching at the twigs that
broke continually with my weight. Twenty feet beneath me was the earth.

Wildly and more wildly he teetered, grinning at me his gloating hatred.
Then came the end. All four holds broke at the same time, and I fell,
back-downward, looking up at him, my hands and feet still clutching the
broken twigs. Luckily, there were no wild pigs under me, and my fall
was broken by the tough and springy bushes.

Usually, my falls destroy my dreams, the nervous shock being sufficient
to bridge the thousand centuries in an instant and hurl me wide awake
into my little bed, where, perchance, I lie sweating and trembling and
hear the cuckoo clock calling the hour in the hall. But this dream of
my leaving home I have had many times, and never yet have I been
awakened by it. Always do I crash, shrieking, down through the brush
and fetch up with a bump on the ground.

Scratched and bruised and whimpering, I lay where I had fallen. Peering
up through the bushes, I could see the Chatterer. He had set up a
demoniacal chant of joy and was keeping time to it with his teetering.
I quickly hushed my whimpering. I was no longer in the safety of the
trees, and I knew the danger I ran of bringing upon myself the hunting
animals by too audible an expression of my grief.

I remember, as my sobs died down, that I became interested in watching
the strange light-effects produced by partially opening and closing my
tear-wet eyelids. Then I began to investigate, and found that I was not
so very badly damaged by my fall. I had lost some hair and hide, here
and there; the sharp and jagged end of a broken branch had thrust fully
an inch into my forearm; and my right hip, which had borne the brunt of
my contact with the ground, was aching intolerably. But these, after
all, were only petty hurts. No bones were broken, and in those days the
flesh of man had finer healing qualities than it has to-day. Yet it was
a severe fall, for I limped with my injured hip for fully a week
afterward.

Next, as I lay in the bushes, there came upon me a feeling of
desolation, a consciousness that I was homeless. I made up my mind
never to return to my mother and the Chatterer. I would go far away
through the terrible forest, and find some tree for myself in which to
roost. As for food, I knew where to find it. For the last year at least
I had not been beholden to my mother for food. All she had furnished me
was protection and guidance.

I crawled softly out through the bushes. Once I looked back and saw the
Chatterer still chanting and teetering. It was not a pleasant sight. I
knew pretty well how to be cautious, and I was exceedingly careful on
this my first journey in the world.

I gave no thought as to where I was going. I had but one purpose, and
that was to go away beyond the reach of the Chatterer. I climbed into
the trees and wandered on amongst them for hours, passing from tree to
tree and never touching the ground. But I did not go in any particular
direction, nor did I travel steadily. It was my nature, as it was the
nature of all my folk, to be inconsequential. Besides, I was a mere
child, and I stopped a great deal to play by the way.

The events that befell me on my leaving home are very vague in my mind.
My dreams do not cover them. Much has my other-self forgotten, and
particularly at this very period. Nor have I been able to frame up the
various dreams so as to bridge the gap between my leaving the home-tree
and my arrival at the caves.

I remember that several times I came to open spaces. These I crossed in
great trepidation, descending to the ground and running at the top of
my speed. I remember that there were days of rain and days of sunshine,
so that I must have wandered alone for quite a time. I especially dream
of my misery in the rain, and of my sufferings from hunger and how I
appeased it. One very strong impression is of hunting little lizards on
the rocky top of an open knoll. They ran under the rocks, and most of
them escaped; but occasionally I turned over a stone and caught one. I
was frightened away from this knoll by snakes. They did not pursue me.
They were merely basking on flat rocks in the sun. But such was my
inherited fear of them that I fled as fast as if they had been after
me.

Then I gnawed bitter bark from young trees. I remember vaguely the
eating of many green nuts, with soft shells and milky kernels. And I
remember most distinctly suffering from a stomach-ache. It may have
been caused by the green nuts, and maybe by the lizards. I do not know.
But I do know that I was fortunate in not being devoured during the
several hours I was knotted up on the ground with the colic.




CHAPTER V


My vision of the scene came abruptly, as I emerged from the forest. I
found myself on the edge of a large clear space. On one side of this
space rose up high bluffs. On the other side was the river. The earth
bank ran steeply down to the water, but here and there, in several
places, where at some time slides of earth had occurred, there were
run-ways. These were the drinking-places of the Folk that lived in the
caves.

And this was the main abiding-place of the Folk that I had chanced
upon. This was, I may say, by stretching the word, the village. My
mother and the Chatterer and I, and a few other simple bodies, were
what might be termed suburban residents. We were part of the horde,
though we lived a distance away from it. It was only a short distance,
though it had taken me, what of my wandering, all of a week to arrive.
Had I come directly, I could have covered the trip in an hour.

But to return. From the edge of the forest I saw the caves in the
bluff, the open space, and the run-ways to the drinking-places. And in
the open space I saw many of the Folk. I had been straying, alone and a
child, for a week. During that time I had seen not one of my kind. I
had lived in terror and desolation. And now, at the sight of my kind, I
was overcome with gladness, and I ran wildly toward them.

Then it was that a strange thing happened. Some one of the Folk saw me
and uttered a warning cry. On the instant, crying out with fear and
panic, the Folk fled away. Leaping and scrambling over the rocks, they
plunged into the mouths of the caves and disappeared...all but one, a
little baby, that had been dropped in the excitement close to the base
of the bluff. He was wailing dolefully. His mother dashed out; he
sprang to meet her and held on tightly as she scrambled back into the
cave.

I was all alone. The populous open space had of a sudden become
deserted. I sat down forlornly and whimpered. I could not understand.
Why had the Folk run away from me? In later time, when I came to know
their ways, I was to learn. When they saw me dashing out of the forest
at top speed they concluded that I was being pursued by some hunting
animal. By my unceremonious approach I had stampeded them.

As I sat and watched the cave-mouths I became aware that the Folk were
watching me. Soon they were thrusting their heads out. A little later
they were calling back and forth to one another. In the hurry and
confusion it had happened that all had not gained their own caves. Some
of the young ones had sought refuge in other caves. The mothers did not
call for them by name, because that was an invention we had not yet
made. All were nameless. The mothers uttered querulous, anxious cries,
which were recognized by the young ones. Thus, had my mother been there
calling to me, I should have recognized her voice amongst the voices of
a thousand mothers, and in the same way would she have recognized mine
amongst a thousand.

This calling back and forth continued for some time, but they were too
cautious to come out of their caves and descend to the ground. Finally
one did come. He was destined to play a large part in my life, and for
that matter he already played a large part in the lives of all the
members of the horde. He it was whom I shall call Red-Eye in the pages
of this historyso called because of his inflamed eyes, the lids being
always red, and, by the peculiar effect they produced, seeming to
advertise the terrible savagery of him. The color of his soul was red.

He was a monster in all ways. Physically he was a giant. He must have
weighed one hundred and seventy pounds. He was the largest one of our
kind I ever saw. Nor did I ever see one of the Fire People so large as
he, nor one of the Tree People. Sometimes, when in the newspapers I
happen upon descriptions of our modern bruisers and prizefighters, I
wonder what chance the best of them would have had against him.

I am afraid not much of a chance. With one grip of his iron fingers and
a pull, he could have plucked a muscle, say a biceps, by the roots,
clear out of their bodies. A back-handed, loose blow of his fist could
have smashed their skulls like egg-shells. With a sweep of his wicked
feet (or hind-hands) he could have disembowelled them. A twist could
have broken their necks, and I know that with a single crunch of his
jaws he could have pierced, at the same moment, the great vein of the
throat in front and the spinal marrow at the back.

He could spring twenty feet horizontally from a sitting position. He
was abominably hairy. It was a matter of pride with us to be not very
hairy. But he was covered with hair all over, on the inside of the arms
as well as the outside, and even the ears themselves. The only places
on him where the hair did not grow were the soles of his hands and feet
and beneath his eyes. He was frightfully ugly, his ferocious grinning
mouth and huge down-hanging under-lip being but in harmony with his
terrible eyes.

This was Red-Eye. And right gingerly he crept out of his cave and
descended to the ground. Ignoring me, he proceeded to reconnoitre. He
bent forward from the hips as he walked; and so far forward did he
bend, and so long were his arms, that with every step he touched the
knuckles of his hands to the ground on either side of him. He was
awkward in the semi-erect position of walking that he assumed, and he
really touched his knuckles to the ground in order to balance himself.
But oh, I tell you he could run on all-fours! Now this was something at
which we were particularly awkward. Furthermore, it was a rare
individual among us who balanced himself with his knuckles when
walking. Such an individual was an atavism, and Red-Eye was an even
greater atavism.

That is what he wasan atavism. We were in the process of changing our
tree-life to life on the ground. For many generations we had been going
through this change, and our bodies and carriage had likewise changed.
But Red-Eye had reverted to the more primitive tree-dwelling type.
Perforce, because he was born in our horde he stayed with us; but in
actuality he was an atavism and his place was elsewhere.

Very circumspect and very alert, he moved here and there about the open
space, peering through the vistas among the trees and trying to catch a
glimpse of the hunting animal that all suspected had pursued me. And
while he did this, taking no notice of me, the Folk crowded at the
cave-mouths and watched.

At last he evidently decided that there was no danger lurking about. He
was returning from the head of the run-way, from where he had taken a
peep down at the drinking-place. His course brought him near, but still
he did not notice me. He proceeded casually on his way until abreast of
me, and then, without warning and with incredible swiftness, he smote
me a buffet on the head. I was knocked backward fully a dozen feet
before I fetched up against the ground, and I remember, half-stunned,
even as the blow was struck, hearing the wild uproar of clucking and
shrieking laughter that arose from the caves. It was a great jokeat
least in that day; and right heartily the Folk appreciated it.

Thus was I received into the horde. Red-Eye paid no further attention
to me, and I was at liberty to whimper and sob to my hearts content.
Several of the women gathered curiously about me, and I recognized
them. I had encountered them the preceding year when my mother had
taken me to the hazelnut canyons.

But they quickly left me alone, being replaced by a dozen curious and
teasing youngsters. They formed a circle around me, pointing their
fingers, making faces, and poking and pinching me. I was frightened,
and for a time I endured them, then anger got the best of me and I
sprang tooth and nail upon the most audacious one of themnone other
than Lop-Ear himself. I have so named him because he could prick up
only one of his ears. The other ear always hung limp and without
movement. Some accident had injured the muscles and deprived him of the
use of it.

He closed with me, and we went at it for all the world like a couple of
small boys fighting. We scratched and bit, pulled hair, clinched, and
threw each other down. I remember I succeeded in getting on him what in
my college days I learned was called a half-Nelson. This hold gave me
the decided advantage. But I did not enjoy it long. He twisted up one
leg, and with the foot (or hind-hand) made so savage an onslaught upon
my abdomen as to threaten to disembowel me. I had to release him in
order to save myself, and then we went at it again.

Lop-Ear was a year older than I, but I was several times angrier than
he, and in the end he took to his heels. I chased him across the open
and down a run-way to the river. But he was better acquainted with the
locality and ran along the edge of the water and up another run-way. He
cut diagonally across the open space and dashed into a wide-mouthed
cave.

Before I knew it, I had plunged after him into the darkness. The next
moment I was badly frightened. I had never been in a cave before. I
began to whimper and cry out. Lop-Ear chattered mockingly at me, and,
springing upon me unseen, tumbled me over. He did not risk a second
encounter, however, and took himself off. I was between him and the
entrance, and he did not pass me; yet he seemed to have gone away. I
listened, but could get no clew as to where he was. This puzzled me,
and when I regained the outside I sat down to watch.

He never came out of the entrance, of that I was certain; yet at the
end of several minutes he chuckled at my elbow. Again I ran after him,
and again he ran into the cave; but this time I stopped at the mouth. I
dropped back a short distance and watched. He did not come out, yet, as
before, he chuckled at my elbow and was chased by me a third time into
the cave.

This performance was repeated several times. Then I followed him into
the cave, where I searched vainly for him. I was curious. I could not
understand how he eluded me. Always he went into the cave, never did he
come out of it, yet always did he arrive there at my elbow and mock me.
Thus did our fight transform itself into a game of hide and seek.

All afternoon, with occasional intervals, we kept it up, and a playful,
friendly spirit arose between us. In the end, he did not run away from
me, and we sat together with our arms around each other. A little later
he disclosed the mystery of the wide-mouthed cave. Holding me by the
hand he led me inside. It connected by a narrow crevice with another
cave, and it was through this that we regained the open air.

We were now good friends. When the other young ones gathered around to
tease, he joined with me in attacking them; and so viciously did we
behave that before long I was let alone. Lop-Ear made me acquainted
with the village. There was little that he could tell me of conditions
and customshe had not the necessary vocabulary; but by observing his
actions I learned much, and also he showed me places and things.

He took me up the open space, between the caves and the river, and into
the forest beyond, where, in a grassy place among the trees, we made a
meal of stringy-rooted carrots. After that we had a good drink at the
river and started up the run-way to the caves.

It was in the run-way that we came upon Red-Eye again. The first I
knew, Lop-Ear had shrunk away to one side and was crouching low against
the bank. Naturally and involuntarily, I imitated him. Then it was that
I looked to see the cause of his fear. It was Red-Eye, swaggering down
the centre of the run-way and scowling fiercely with his inflamed eyes.
I noticed that all the youngsters shrank away from him as we had done,
while the grown-ups regarded him with wary eyes when he drew near, and
stepped aside to give him the centre of the path.

As twilight came on, the open space was deserted. The Folk were seeking
the safety of the caves. Lop-Ear led the way to bed. High up the bluff
we climbed, higher than all the other caves, to a tiny crevice that
could not be seen from the ground. Into this Lop-Ear squeezed. I
followed with difficulty, so narrow was the entrance, and found myself
in a small rock-chamber. It was very lownot more than a couple of feet
in height, and possibly three feet by four in width and length. Here,
cuddled together in each others arms, we slept out the night.




CHAPTER VI


While the more courageous of the youngsters played in and out of the
large-mouthed caves, I early learned that such caves were unoccupied.
No one slept in them at night. Only the crevice-mouthed caves were
used, the narrower the mouth the better. This was from fear of the
preying animals that made life a burden to us in those days and nights.

The first morning, after my nights sleep with Lop-Ear, I learned the
advantage of the narrow-mouthed caves. It was just daylight when old
Saber-Tooth, the tiger, walked into the open space. Two of the Folk
were already up. They made a rush for it. Whether they were
panic-stricken, or whether he was too close on their heels for them to
attempt to scramble up the bluff to the crevices, I do not know; but at
any rate they dashed into the wide-mouthed cave wherein Lop-Ear and I
had played the afternoon before.

What happened inside there was no way of telling, but it is fair to
conclude that the two Folk slipped through the connecting crevice into
the other cave. This crevice was too small to allow for the passage of
Saber-Tooth, and he came out the way he had gone in, unsatisfied and
angry. It was evident that his nights hunting had been unsuccessful
and that he had expected to make a meal off of us. He caught sight of
the two Folk at the other cave-mouth and sprang for them. Of course,
they darted through the passageway into the first cave. He emerged
angrier than ever and snarling.

Pandemonium broke loose amongst the rest of us. All up and down the
great bluff, we crowded the crevices and outside ledges, and we were
all chattering and shrieking in a thousand keys. And we were all making
facessnarling faces; this was an instinct with us. We were as angry as
Saber-Tooth, though our anger was allied with fear. I remember that I
shrieked and made faces with the best of them. Not only did they set
the example, but I felt the urge from within me to do the same things
they were doing. My hair was bristling, and I was convulsed with a
fierce, unreasoning rage.

For some time old Saber-Tooth continued dashing in and out of first the
one cave and then the other. But the two Folk merely slipped back and
forth through the connecting crevice and eluded him. In the meantime
the rest of us up the bluff had proceeded to action. Every time he
appeared outside we pelted him with rocks. At first we merely dropped
them on him, but we soon began to whiz them down with the added force
of our muscles.

This bombardment drew Saber-Tooths attention to us and made him
angrier than ever. He abandoned his pursuit of the two Folk and sprang
up the bluff toward the rest of us, clawing at the crumbling rock and
snarling as he clawed his upward way. At this awful sight, the last one
of us sought refuge inside our caves. I know this, because I peeped out
and saw the whole bluff-side deserted, save for Saber-Tooth, who had
lost his footing and was sliding and falling down.

I called out the cry of encouragement, and again the bluff was covered
by the screaming horde and the stones were falling faster than ever.
Saber-Tooth was frantic with rage. Time and again he assaulted the
bluff. Once he even gained the first crevice-entrances before he fell
back, but was unable to force his way inside. With each upward rush he
made, waves of fear surged over us. At first, at such times, most of us
dashed inside; but some remained outside to hammer him with stones, and
soon all of us remained outside and kept up the fusillade.

Never was so masterly a creature so completely baffled. It hurt his
pride terribly, thus to be outwitted by the small and tender Folk. He
stood on the ground and looked up at us, snarling, lashing his tail,
snapping at the stones that fell near to him. Once I whizzed down a
stone, and just at the right moment he looked up. It caught him full on
the end of his nose, and he went straight up in the air, all four feet
of him, roaring and caterwauling, what of the hurt and surprise.

He was beaten and he knew it. Recovering his dignity, he stalked out
solemnly from under the rain of stones. He stopped in the middle of the
open space and looked wistfully and hungrily back at us. He hated to
forego the meal, and we were just so much meat, cornered but
inaccessible. This sight of him started us to laughing. We laughed
derisively and uproariously, all of us. Now animals do not like
mockery. To be laughed at makes them angry. And in such fashion our
laughter affected Saber-Tooth. He turned with a roar and charged the
bluff again. This was what we wanted. The fight had become a game, and
we took huge delight in pelting him.

But this attack did not last long. He quickly recovered his common
sense, and besides, our missiles were shrewd to hurt. Vividly do I
recollect the vision of one bulging eye of his, swollen almost shut by
one of the stones we had thrown. And vividly do I retain the picture of
him as he stood on the edge of the forest whither he had finally
retreated. He was looking back at us, his writhing lips lifted clear of
the very roots of his huge fangs, his hair bristling and his tail
lashing. He gave one last snarl and slid from view among the trees.

And then such a chattering as went up. We swarmed out of our holes,
examining the marks his claws had made on the crumbling rock of the
bluff, all of us talking at once. One of the two Folk who had been
caught in the double cave was part-grown, half child and half youth.
They had come out proudly from their refuge, and we surrounded them in
an admiring crowd. Then the young fellows mother broke through and
fell upon him in a tremendous rage, boxing his ears, pulling his hair,
and shrieking like a demon. She was a strapping big woman, very hairy,
and the thrashing she gave him was a delight to the horde. We roared
with laughter, holding on to one another or rolling on the ground in
our glee.

In spite of the reign of fear under which we lived, the Folk were
always great laughers. We had the sense of humor. Our merriment was
Gargantuan. It was never restrained. There was nothing half way about
it. When a thing was funny we were convulsed with appreciation of it,
and the simplest, crudest things were funny to us. Oh, we were great
laughers, I can tell you.

The way we had treated Saber-Tooth was the way we treated all animals
that invaded the village. We kept our run-ways and drinking-places to
ourselves by making life miserable for the animals that trespassed or
strayed upon our immediate territory. Even the fiercest hunting animals
we so bedevilled that they learned to leave our places alone. We were
not fighters like them; we were cunning and cowardly, and it was
because of our cunning and cowardice, and our inordinate capacity for
fear, that we survived in that frightfully hostile environment of the
Younger World.

Lop-Ear, I figure, was a year older than I. What his past history was
he had no way of telling me, but as I never saw anything of his mother
I believed him to be an orphan. After all, fathers did not count in our
horde. Marriage was as yet in a rude state, and couples had a way of
quarrelling and separating. Modern man, what of his divorce
institution, does the same thing legally. But we had no laws. Custom
was all we went by, and our custom in this particular matter was rather
promiscuous.

Nevertheless, as this narrative will show later on, we betrayed
glimmering adumbrations of the monogamy that was later to give power
to, and make mighty, such tribes as embraced it. Furthermore, even at
the time I was born, there were several faithful couples that lived in
the trees in the neighborhood of my mother. Living in the thick of the
horde did not conduce to monogamy. It was for this reason, undoubtedly,
that the faithful couples went away and lived by themselves. Through
many years these couples stayed together, though when the man or woman
died or was eaten the survivor invariably found a new mate.

There was one thing that greatly puzzled me during the first days of my
residence in the horde. There was a nameless and incommunicable fear
that rested upon all. At first it appeared to be connected wholly with
direction. The horde feared the northeast. It lived in perpetual
apprehension of that quarter of the compass. And every individual gazed
more frequently and with greater alarm in that direction than in any
other.

When Lop-Ear and I went toward the north-east to eat the stringy-rooted
carrots that at that season were at their best, he became unusually
timid. He was content to eat the leavings, the big tough carrots and
the little ropy ones, rather than to venture a short distance farther
on to where the carrots were as yet untouched. When I so ventured, he
scolded me and quarrelled with me. He gave me to understand that in
that direction was some horrible danger, but just what the horrible
danger was his paucity of language would not permit him to say.

Many a good meal I got in this fashion, while he scolded and chattered
vainly at me. I could not understand. I kept very alert, but I could
see no danger. I calculated always the distance between myself and the
nearest tree, and knew that to that haven of refuge I could out-foot
the Tawny One, or old Saber-Tooth, did one or the other suddenly
appear.

One late afternoon, in the village, a great uproar arose. The horde was
animated with a single emotion, that of fear. The bluff-side swarmed
with the Folk, all gazing and pointing into the northeast. I did not
know what it was, but I scrambled all the way up to the safety of my
own high little cave before ever I turned around to see.

And then, across the river, away into the northeast, I saw for the
first time the mystery of smoke. It was the biggest animal I had ever
seen. I thought it was a monster snake, up-ended, rearing its head high
above the trees and swaying back and forth. And yet, somehow, I seemed
to gather from the conduct of the Folk that the smoke itself was not
the danger. They appeared to fear it as the token of something else.
What this something else was I was unable to guess. Nor could they tell
me. Yet I was soon to know, and I was to know it as a thing more
terrible than the Tawny One, than old Saber-Tooth, than the snakes
themselves, than which it seemed there could be no things more
terrible.




CHAPTER VII


Broken-Tooth was another youngster who lived by himself. His mother
lived in the caves, but two more children had come after him and he had
been thrust out to shift for himself. We had witnessed the performance
during the several preceding days, and it had given us no little glee.
Broken-Tooth did not want to go, and every time his mother left the
cave he sneaked back into it. When she returned and found him there her
rages were delightful. Half the horde made a practice of watching for
these moments. First, from within the cave, would come her scolding and
shrieking. Then we could hear sounds of the thrashing and the yelling
of Broken-Tooth. About this time the two younger children joined in.
And finally, like the eruption of a miniature volcano, Broken-Tooth
would come flying out.

At the end of several days his leaving home was accomplished. He wailed
his grief, unheeded, from the centre of the open space, for at least
half an hour, and then came to live with Lop-Ear and me. Our cave was
small, but with squeezing there was room for three. I have no
recollection of Broken-Tooth spending more than one night with us, so
the accident must have happened right away.

It came in the middle of the day. In the morning we had eaten our fill
of the carrots, and then, made heedless by play, we had ventured on to
the big trees just beyond. I cannot understand how Lop-Ear got over his
habitual caution, but it must have been the play. We were having a
great time playing tree tag. And such tag! We leaped ten or
fifteen-foot gaps as a matter of course. And a twenty or twenty-five
foot deliberate drop clear down to the ground was nothing to us. In
fact, I am almost afraid to say the great distances we dropped. As we
grew older and heavier we found we had to be more cautious in dropping,
but at that age our bodies were all strings and springs and we could do
anything.

Broken-Tooth displayed remarkable agility in the game. He was It less
frequently than any of us, and in the course of the game he discovered
one difficult slip that neither Lop-Ear nor I was able to accomplish.
To be truthful, we were afraid to attempt it.

When we were It, Broken-Tooth always ran out to the end of a lofty
branch in a certain tree. From the end of the branch to the ground it
must have been seventy feet, and nothing intervened to break a fall.
But about twenty feet lower down, and fully fifteen feet out from the
perpendicular, was the thick branch of another tree.

As we ran out the limb, Broken-Tooth, facing us, would begin teetering.
This naturally impeded our progress; but there was more in the
teetering than that. He teetered with his back to the jump he was to
make. Just as we nearly reached him he would let go. The teetering
branch was like a spring-board. It threw him far out, backward, as he
fell. And as he fell he turned around sidewise in the air so as to face
the other branch into which he was falling. This branch bent far down
under the impact, and sometimes there was an ominous crackling; but it
never broke, and out of the leaves was always to be seen the face of
Broken-Tooth grinning triumphantly up at us.

I was It the last time Broken-Tooth tried this. He had gained the end
of the branch and begun his teetering, and I was creeping out after
him, when suddenly there came a low warning cry from Lop-Ear. I looked
down and saw him in the main fork of the tree crouching close against
the trunk. Instinctively I crouched down upon the thick limb.
Broken-Tooth stopped teetering, but the branch would not stop, and his
body continued bobbing up and down with the rustling leaves.

I heard the crackle of a dry twig, and looking down saw my first
Fire-Man. He was creeping stealthily along on the ground and peering up
into the tree. At first I thought he was a wild animal, because he wore
around his waist and over his shoulders a ragged piece of bearskin. And
then I saw his hands and feet, and more clearly his features. He was
very much like my kind, except that he was less hairy and that his feet
were less like hands than ours. In fact, he and his people, as I was
later to know, were far less hairy than we, though we, in turn, were
equally less hairy than the Tree People.

It came to me instantly, as I looked at him. This was the terror of the
northeast, of which the mystery of smoke was a token. Yet I was
puzzled. Certainly he was nothing of which to be afraid. Red-Eye or
any of our strong men would have been more than a match for him. He was
old, too, wizened with age, and the hair on his face was gray. Also, he
limped badly with one leg. There was no doubt at all that we could
out-run him and out-climb him. He could never catch us, that was
certain.

But he carried something in his hand that I had never seen before. It
was a bow and arrow. But at that time a bow and arrow had no meaning
for me. How was I to know that death lurked in that bent piece of wood?
But Lop-Ear knew. He had evidently seen the Fire People before and knew
something of their ways. The Fire-Man peered up at him and circled
around the tree. And around the main trunk above the fork Lop-Ear
circled too, keeping always the trunk between himself and the Fire-Man.

The latter abruptly reversed his circling. Lop-Ear, caught unawares,
also hastily reversed, but did not win the protection of the trunk
until after the Fire-Man had twanged the bow.

I saw the arrow leap up, miss Lop-Ear, glance against a limb, and fall
back to the ground. I danced up and down on my lofty perch with
delight. It was a game! The Fire-Man was throwing things at Lop-Ear as
we sometimes threw things at one another.

The game continued a little longer, but Lop-Ear did not expose himself
a second time. Then the Fire-Man gave it up. I leaned far out over my
horizontal limb and chattered down at him. I wanted to play. I wanted
to have him try to hit me with the thing. He saw me, but ignored me,
turning his attention to Broken-Tooth, who was still teetering slightly
and involuntarily on the end of the branch.

The first arrow leaped upward. Broken-Tooth yelled with fright and
pain. It had reached its mark. This put a new complexion on the matter.
I no longer cared to play, but crouched trembling close to my limb. A
second arrow and a third soared up, missing Broken-Tooth, rustling the
leaves as they passed through, arching in their flight and returning to
earth.

The Fire-Man stretched his bow again. He shifted his position, walking
away several steps, then shifted it a second time. The bow-string
twanged, the arrow leaped upward, and Broken-Tooth, uttering a terrible
scream, fell off the branch. I saw him as he went down, turning over
and over, all arms and legs it seemed, the shaft of the arrow
projecting from his chest and appearing and disappearing with each
revolution of his body.

Sheer down, screaming, seventy feet he fell, smashing to the earth with
an audible thud and crunch, his body rebounding slightly and settling
down again. Still he lived, for he moved and squirmed, clawing with his
hands and feet. I remember the Fire-Man running forward with a stone
and hammering him on the head...and then I remember no more.

Always, during my childhood, at this stage of the dream, did I wake up
screaming with frightto find, often, my mother or nurse, anxious and
startled, by my bedside, passing soothing hands through my hair and
telling me that they were there and that there was nothing to fear.

My next dream, in the order of succession, begins always with the
flight of Lop-Ear and myself through the forest. The Fire-Man and
Broken-Tooth and the tree of the tragedy are gone. Lop-Ear and I, in a
cautious panic, are fleeing through the trees. In my right leg is a
burning pain; and from the flesh, protruding head and shaft from either
side, is an arrow of the Fire-Man. Not only did the pull and strain of
it pain me severely, but it bothered my movements and made it
impossible for me to keep up with Lop-Ear.

At last I gave up, crouching in the secure fork of a tree. Lop-Ear went
right on. I called to himmost plaintively, I remember; and he stopped
and looked back. Then he returned to me, climbing into the fork and
examining the arrow. He tried to pull it out, but one way the flesh
resisted the barbed head, and the other way it resisted the feathered
shaft. Also, it hurt grievously, and I stopped him.

For some time we crouched there, Lop-Ear nervous and anxious to be
gone, perpetually and apprehensively peering this way and that, and
myself whimpering softly and sobbing. Lop-Ear was plainly in a funk,
and yet his conduct in remaining by me, in spite of his fear, I take as
a foreshadowing of the altruism and comradeship that have helped make
man the mightiest of the animals.

Once again Lop-Ear tried to drag the arrow through the flesh, and I
angrily stopped him. Then he bent down and began gnawing the shaft of
the arrow with his teeth. As he did so he held the arrow firmly in both
hands so that it would not play about in the wound, and at the same
time I held on to him. I often meditate upon this scenethe two of us,
half-grown cubs, in the childhood of the race, and the one mastering
his fear, beating down his selfish impulse of flight, in order to stand
by and succor the other. And there rises up before me all that was
there foreshadowed, and I see visions of Damon and Pythias, of
life-saving crews and Red Cross nurses, of martyrs and leaders of
forlorn hopes, of Father Damien, and of the Christ himself, and of all
the men of earth, mighty of stature, whose strength may trace back to
the elemental loins of Lop-Ear and Big-Tooth and other dim denizens of
the Younger World.

When Lop-Ear had chewed off the head of the arrow, the shaft was
withdrawn easily enough. I started to go on, but this time it was he
that stopped me. My leg was bleeding profusely. Some of the smaller
veins had doubtless been ruptured. Running out to the end of a branch,
Lop-Ear gathered a handful of green leaves. These he stuffed into the
wound. They accomplished the purpose, for the bleeding soon stopped.
Then we went on together, back to the safety of the caves.




CHAPTER VIII


Well do I remember that first winter after I left home. I have long
dreams of sitting shivering in the cold. Lop-Ear and I sit close
together, with our arms and legs about each other, blue-faced and with
chattering teeth. It got particularly crisp along toward morning. In
those chill early hours we slept little, huddling together in numb
misery and waiting for the sunrise in order to get warm.

When we went outside there was a crackle of frost under foot. One
morning we discovered ice on the surface of the quiet water in the eddy
where was the drinking-place, and there was a great How-do-you-do about
it. Old Marrow-Bone was the oldest member of the horde, and he had
never seen anything like it before. I remember the worried, plaintive
look that came into his eyes as he examined the ice. (This plaintive
look always came into our eyes when we did not understand a thing, or
when we felt the prod of some vague and inexpressible desire.) Red-Eye,
too, when he investigated the ice, looked bleak and plaintive, and
stared across the river into the northeast, as though in some way he
connected the Fire People with this latest happening.

But we found ice only on that one morning, and that was the coldest
winter we experienced. I have no memory of other winters when it was so
cold. I have often thought that that cold winter was a fore-runner of
the countless cold winters to come, as the ice-sheet from farther north
crept down over the face of the land. But we never saw that ice-sheet.
Many generations must have passed away before the descendants of the
horde migrated south, or remained and adapted themselves to the changed
conditions.

Life was hit or miss and happy-go-lucky with us. Little was ever
planned, and less was executed. We ate when we were hungry, drank when
we were thirsty, avoided our carnivorous enemies, took shelter in the
caves at night, and for the rest just sort of played along through
life.

We were very curious, easily amused, and full of tricks and pranks.
There was no seriousness about us, except when we were in danger or
were angry, in which cases the one was quickly forgotten and the other
as quickly got over.

We were inconsecutive, illogical, and inconsequential. We had no
steadfastness of purpose, and it was here that the Fire People were
ahead of us. They possessed all these things of which we possessed so
little. Occasionally, however, especially in the realm of the emotions,
we were capable of long-cherished purpose. The faithfulness of the
monogamic couples I have referred to may be explained as a matter of
habit; but my long desire for the Swift One cannot be so explained, any
more than can be explained the undying enmity between me and Red-Eye.

But it was our inconsequentiality and stupidity that especially
distresses me when I look back upon that life in the long ago. Once I
found a broken gourd which happened to lie right side up and which had
been filled with the rain. The water was sweet, and I drank it. I even
took the gourd down to the stream and filled it with more water, some
of which I drank and some of which I poured over Lop-Ear. And then I
threw the gourd away. It never entered my head to fill the gourd with
water and carry it into my cave. Yet often I was thirsty at night,
especially after eating wild onions and watercress, and no one ever
dared leave the caves at night for a drink.

Another time I found a dry gourd, inside of which the seeds rattled. I
had fun with it for a while. But it was a plaything, nothing more. And
yet, it was not long after this that the using of gourds for storing
water became the general practice of the horde. But I was not the
inventor. The honor was due to old Marrow-Bone, and it is fair to
assume that it was the necessity of his great age that brought about
the innovation.

At any rate, the first member of the horde to use gourds was
Marrow-Bone. He kept a supply of drinking-water in his cave, which cave
belonged to his son, the Hairless One, who permitted him to occupy a
corner of it. We used to see Marrow-Bone filling his gourd at the
drinking-place and carrying it carefully up to his cave. Imitation was
strong in the Folk, and first one, and then another and another,
procured a gourd and used it in similar fashion, until it was a general
practice with all of us so to store water.

Sometimes old Marrow-Bone had sick spells and was unable to leave the
cave. Then it was that the Hairless One filled the gourd for him. A
little later, the Hairless One deputed the task to Long-Lip, his son.
And after that, even when Marrow-Bone was well again, Long-Lip
continued carrying water for him. By and by, except on unusual
occasions, the men never carried any water at all, leaving the task to
the women and larger children. Lop-Ear and I were independent. We
carried water only for ourselves, and we often mocked the young
water-carriers when they were called away from play to fill the gourds.

Progress was slow with us. We played through life, even the adults,
much in the same way that children play, and we played as none of the
other animals played. What little we learned, was usually in the course
of play, and was due to our curiosity and keenness of appreciation. For
that matter, the one big invention of the horde, during the time I
lived with it, was the use of gourds. At first we stored only water in
the gourdsin imitation of old Marrow-Bone.

But one day some one of the womenI do not know which onefilled a
gourd with black-berries and carried it to her cave. In no time all the
women were carrying berries and nuts and roots in the gourds. The idea,
once started, had to go on. Another evolution of the
carrying-receptacle was due to the women. Without doubt, some womans
gourd was too small, or else she had forgotten her gourd; but be that
as it may, she bent two great leaves together, pinning the seams with
twigs, and carried home a bigger quantity of berries than could have
been contained in the largest gourd.

So far we got, and no farther, in the transportation of supplies during
the years I lived with the Folk. It never entered anybodys head to
weave a basket out of willow-withes. Sometimes the men and women tied
tough vines about the bundles of ferns and branches that they carried
to the caves to sleep upon. Possibly in ten or twenty generations we
might have worked up to the weaving of baskets. And of this, one thing
is sure: if once we wove withes into baskets, the next and inevitable
step would have been the weaving of cloth. Clothes would have followed,
and with covering our nakedness would have come modesty.

Thus was momentum gained in the Younger World. But we were without this
momentum. We were just getting started, and we could not go far in a
single generation. We were without weapons, without fire, and in the
raw beginnings of speech. The device of writing lay so far in the
future that I am appalled when I think of it.

Even I was once on the verge of a great discovery. To show you how
fortuitous was development in those days let me state that had it not
been for the gluttony of Lop-Ear I might have brought about the
domestication of the dog. And this was something that the Fire People
who lived to the northeast had not yet achieved. They were without
dogs; this I knew from observation. But let me tell you how Lop-Ears
gluttony possibly set back our social development many generations.

Well to the west of our caves was a great swamp, but to the south lay a
stretch of low, rocky hills. These were little frequented for two
reasons. First of all, there was no food there of the kind we ate; and
next, those rocky hills were filled with the lairs of carnivorous
beasts.

But Lop-Ear and I strayed over to the hills one day. We would not have
strayed had we not been teasing a tiger. Please do not laugh. It was
old Saber-Tooth himself. We were perfectly safe. We chanced upon him in
the forest, early in the morning, and from the safety of the branches
overhead we chattered down at him our dislike and hatred. And from
branch to branch, and from tree to tree, we followed overhead, making
an infernal row and warning all the forest-dwellers that old
Saber-Tooth was coming.

We spoiled his hunting for him, anyway. And we made him good and angry.
He snarled at us and lashed his tail, and sometimes he paused and
stared up at us quietly for a long time, as if debating in his mind
some way by which he could get hold of us. But we only laughed and
pelted him with twigs and the ends of branches.

This tiger-baiting was common sport among the folk. Sometimes half the
horde would follow from overhead a tiger or lion that had ventured out
in the daytime. It was our revenge; for more than one member of the
horde, caught unexpectedly, had gone the way of the tigers belly or
the lions. Also, by such ordeals of helplessness and shame, we taught
the hunting animals to some extent to keep out of our territory. And
then it was funny. It was a great game.

And so Lop-Ear and I had chased Saber-Tooth across three miles of
forest. Toward the last he put his tail between his legs and fled from
our gibing like a beaten cur. We did our best to keep up with him; but
when we reached the edge of the forest he was no more than a streak in
the distance.

I dont know what prompted us, unless it was curiosity; but after
playing around awhile, Lop-Ear and I ventured across the open ground to
the edge of the rocky hills. We did not go far. Possibly at no time
were we more than a hundred yards from the trees. Coming around a sharp
corner of rock (we went very carefully, because we did not know what we
might encounter), we came upon three puppies playing in the sun.

They did not see us, and we watched them for some time. They were wild
dogs. In the rock-wall was a horizontal fissureevidently the lair
where their mother had left them, and where they should have remained
had they been obedient. But the growing life, that in Lop-Ear and me
had impelled us to venture away from the forest, had driven the puppies
out of the cave to frolic. I know how their mother would have punished
them had she caught them.

But it was Lop-Ear and I who caught them. He looked at me, and then we
made a dash for it. The puppies knew no place to run except into the
lair, and we headed them off. One rushed between my legs. I squatted
and grabbed him. He sank his sharp little teeth into my arm, and I
dropped him in the suddenness of the hurt and surprise. The next moment
he had scurried inside.

Lop-Ear, struggling with the second puppy, scowled at me and intimated
by a variety of sounds the different kinds of a fool and a bungler that
I was. This made me ashamed and spurred me to valor. I grabbed the
remaining puppy by the tail. He got his teeth into me once, and then I
got him by the nape of the neck. Lop-Ear and I sat down, and held the
puppies up, and looked at them, and laughed.

They were snarling and yelping and crying. Lop-Ear started suddenly. He
thought he had heard something. We looked at each other in fear,
realizing the danger of our position. The one thing that made animals
raging demons was tampering with their young. And these puppies that
made such a racket belonged to the wild dogs. Well we knew them,
running in packs, the terror of the grass-eating animals. We had
watched them following the herds of cattle and bison and dragging down
the calves, the aged, and the sick. We had been chased by them
ourselves, more than once. I had seen one of the Folk, a woman, run
down by them and caught just as she reached the shelter of the woods.
Had she not been tired out by the run, she might have made it into a
tree. She tried, and slipped, and fell back. They made short work of
her.

We did not stare at each other longer than a moment. Keeping tight hold
of our prizes, we ran for the woods. Once in the security of a tall
tree, we held up the puppies and laughed again. You see, we had to have
our laugh out, no matter what happened.

And then began one of the hardest tasks I ever attempted. We started to
carry the puppies to our cave. Instead of using our hands for climbing,
most of the time they were occupied with holding our squirming
captives. Once we tried to walk on the ground, but were treed by a
miserable hyena, who followed along underneath. He was a wise hyena.

Lop-Ear got an idea. He remembered how we tied up bundles of leaves to
carry home for beds. Breaking off some tough vines, he tied his puppys
legs together, and then, with another piece of vine passed around his
neck, slung the puppy on his back. This left him with hands and feet
free to climb. He was jubilant, and did not wait for me to finish tying
my puppys legs, but started on. There was one difficulty, however. The
puppy wouldnt stay slung on Lop-Ears back. It swung around to the
side and then on in front. Its teeth were not tied, and the next thing
it did was to sink its teeth into Lop-Ears soft and unprotected
stomach. He let out a scream, nearly fell, and clutched a branch
violently with both hands to save himself. The vine around his neck
broke, and the puppy, its four legs still tied, dropped to the ground.
The hyena proceeded to dine.

Lop-Ear was disgusted and angry. He abused the hyena, and then went off
alone through the trees. I had no reason that I knew for wanting to
carry the puppy to the cave, except that I _wanted_ to; and I stayed by
my task. I made the work a great deal easier by elaborating on
Lop-Ears idea. Not only did I tie the puppys legs, but I thrust a
stick through his jaws and tied them together securely.

At last I got the puppy home. I imagine I had more pertinacity than the
average Folk, or else I should not have succeeded. They laughed at me
when they saw me lugging the puppy up to my high little cave, but I did
not mind. Success crowned my efforts, and there was the puppy. He was a
plaything such as none of the Folk possessed. He learned rapidly. When
I played with him and he bit me, I boxed his ears, and then he did not
try again to bite for a long time.

I was quite taken up with him. He was something new, and it was a
characteristic of the Folk to like new things. When I saw that he
refused fruits and vegetables, I caught birds for him and squirrels and
young rabbits. (We Folk were meat-eaters, as well as vegetarians, and
we were adept at catching small game.) The puppy ate the meat and
thrived. As well as I can estimate, I must have had him over a week.
And then, coming back to the cave one day with a nestful of
young-hatched pheasants, I found Lop-Ear had killed the puppy and was
just beginning to eat him. I sprang for Lop-Ear,the cave was
small,and we went at it tooth and nail.

And thus, in a fight, ended one of the earliest attempts to domesticate
the dog. We pulled hair out in handfuls, and scratched and bit and
gouged. Then we sulked and made up. After that we ate the puppy. Raw?
Yes. We had not yet discovered fire. Our evolution into cooking animals
lay in the tight-rolled scroll of the future.




CHAPTER IX


Red-Eye was an atavism. He was the great discordant element in our
horde. He was more primitive than any of us. He did not belong with us,
yet we were still so primitive ourselves that we were incapable of a
cooperative effort strong enough to kill him or cast him out. Rude as
was our social organization, he was, nevertheless, too rude to live in
it. He tended always to destroy the horde by his unsocial acts. He was
really a reversion to an earlier type, and his place was with the Tree
People rather than with us who were in the process of becoming men.

He was a monster of cruelty, which is saying a great deal in that day.
He beat his wivesnot that he ever had more than one wife at a time,
but that he was married many times. It was impossible for any woman to
live with him, and yet they did live with him, out of compulsion. There
was no gainsaying him.

No man was strong enough to stand against him.

Often do I have visions of the quiet hour before the twilight. From
drinking-place and carrot patch and berry swamp the Folk are trooping
into the open space before the caves. They dare linger no later than
this, for the dreadful darkness is approaching, in which the world is
given over to the carnage of the hunting animals, while the
fore-runners of man hide tremblingly in their holes.

There yet remain to us a few minutes before we climb to our caves. We
are tired from the play of the day, and the sounds we make are subdued.
Even the cubs, still greedy for fun and antics, play with restraint.
The wind from the sea has died down, and the shadows are lengthening
with the last of the suns descent. And then, suddenly, from Red-Eyes
cave, breaks a wild screaming and the sound of blows. He is beating his
wife.

At first an awed silence comes upon us. But as the blows and screams
continue we break out into an insane gibbering of helpless rage. It is
plain that the men resent Red-Eyes actions, but they are too afraid of
him. The blows cease, and a low groaning dies away, while we chatter
among ourselves and the sad twilight creeps upon us.

We, to whom most happenings were jokes, never laughed during Red-Eyes
wife-beatings. We knew too well the tragedy of them. On more than one
morning, at the base of the cliff, did we find the body of his latest
wife. He had tossed her there, after she had died, from his cave-mouth.
He never buried his dead. The task of carrying away the bodies, that
else would have polluted our abiding-place, he left to the horde. We
usually flung them into the river below the last drinking-place.

Not alone did Red-Eye murder his wives, but he also murdered for his
wives, in order to get them. When he wanted a new wife and selected the
wife of another man, he promptly killed that man. Two of these murders
I saw myself. The whole horde knew, but could do nothing. We had not
yet developed any government, to speak of, inside the horde. We had
certain customs and visited our wrath upon the unlucky ones who
violated those customs. Thus, for example, the individual who defiled a
drinking-place would be attacked by every onlooker, while one who
deliberately gave a false alarm was the recipient of much rough usage
at our hands. But Red-Eye walked rough-shod over all our customs, and
we so feared him that we were incapable of the collective action
necessary to punish him.

It was during the sixth winter in our cave that Lop-Ear and I
discovered that we were really growing up. From the first it had been a
squeeze to get in through the entrance-crevice. This had had its
advantages, however. It had prevented the larger Folk from taking our
cave away from us. And it was a most desirable cave, the highest on the
bluff, the safest, and in winter the smallest and warmest.

To show the stage of the mental development of the Folk, I may state
that it would have been a simple thing for some of them to have driven
us out and enlarged the crevice-opening. But they never thought of it.
Lop-Ear and I did not think of it either until our increasing size
compelled us to make an enlargement. This occurred when summer was well
along and we were fat with better forage. We worked at the crevice in
spells, when the fancy struck us.

At first we dug the crumbling rocks away with our fingers, until our
nails got sore, when I accidentally stumbled upon the idea of using a
piece of wood on the rock. This worked well. Also it worked woe. One
morning early, we had scratched out of the wall quite a heap of
fragments. I gave the heap a shove over the lip of the entrance. The
next moment there came up from below a howl of rage. There was no need
to look. We knew the voice only too well. The rubbish had descended
upon Red-Eye.

We crouched down in the cave in consternation. A minute later he was at
the entrance, peering in at us with his inflamed eyes and raging like a
demon. But he was too large. He could not get in to us. Suddenly he
went away. This was suspicious. By all we knew of Folk nature he should
have remained and had out his rage. I crept to the entrance and peeped
down. I could see him just beginning to mount the bluff again. In one
hand he carried a long stick. Before I could divine his plan, he was
back at the entrance and savagely jabbing the stick in at us.

His thrusts were prodigious. They could have disembowelled us. We
shrank back against the side-walls, where we were almost out of range.
But by industrious poking he got us now and againcruel, scraping jabs
with the end of the stick that raked off the hide and hair. When we
screamed with the hurt, he roared his satisfaction and jabbed the
harder.

I began to grow angry. I had a temper of my own in those days, and
pretty considerable courage, too, albeit it was largely the courage of
the cornered rat. I caught hold of the stick with my hands, but such
was his strength that he jerked me into the crevice. He reached for me
with his long arm, and his nails tore my flesh as I leaped back from
the clutch and gained the comparative safety of the side-wall.

He began poking again, and caught me a painful blow on the shoulder.
Beyond shivering with fright and yelling when he was hit, Lop-Ear did
nothing. I looked for a stick with which to jab back, but found only
the end of a branch, an inch through and a foot long. I threw this at
Red-Eye. It did no damage, though he howled with a sudden increase of
rage at my daring to strike back. He began jabbing furiously. I found a
fragment of rock and threw it at him, striking him on the chest.

This emboldened me, and, besides, I was now as angry as he, and had
lost all fear. I ripped a fragment of rock from the wall. The piece
must have weighed two or three pounds. With my strength I slammed it
full into Red-Eyes face. It nearly finished him. He staggered
backward, dropping his stick, and almost fell off the cliff.

He was a ferocious sight. His face was covered with blood, and he was
snarling and gnashing his fangs like a wild boar. He wiped the blood
from his eyes, caught sight of me, and roared with fury. His stick was
gone, so he began ripping out chunks of crumbling rock and throwing
them in at me. This supplied me with ammunition. I gave him as good as
he sent, and better; for he presented a good target, while he caught
only glimpses of me as I snuggled against the side-wall.

Suddenly he disappeared again. From the lip of the cave I saw him
descending. All the horde had gathered outside and in awed silence was
looking on. As he descended, the more timid ones scurried for their
caves. I could see old Marrow-Bone tottering along as fast as he could.
Red-Eye sprang out from the wall and finished the last twenty feet
through the air. He landed alongside a mother who was just beginning
the ascent. She screamed with fear, and the two-year-old child that was
clinging to her released its grip and rolled at Red-Eyes feet. Both he
and the mother reached for it, and he got it. The next moment the frail
little body had whirled through the air and shattered against the wall.
The mother ran to it, caught it up in her arms, and crouched over it
crying.

Red-Eye started over to pick up the stick. Old Marrow-Bone had tottered
into his way. Red-Eyes great hand shot out and clutched the old man by
the back of the neck. I looked to see his neck broken. His body went
limp as he surrendered himself to his fate. Red-Eye hesitated a moment,
and Marrow-Bone, shivering terribly, bowed his head and covered his
face with his crossed arms. Then Red-Eye slammed him face-downward to
the ground. Old Marrow-Bone did not struggle. He lay there crying with
the fear of death. I saw the Hairless One, out in the open space,
beating his chest and bristling, but afraid to come forward. And then,
in obedience to some whim of his erratic spirit, Red-Eye let the old
man alone and passed on and recovered the stick.

He returned to the wall and began to climb up. Lop-Ear, who was
shivering and peeping alongside of me, scrambled back into the cave. It
was plain that Red-Eye was bent upon murder. I was desperate and angry
and fairly cool. Running back and forth along the neighboring ledges, I
gathered a heap of rocks at the cave-entrance. Red-Eye was now several
yards beneath me, concealed for the moment by an out-jut of the cliff.
As he climbed, his head came into view, and I banged a rock down. It
missed, striking the wall and shattering; but the flying dust and grit
filled his eyes and he drew back out of view.

A chuckling and chattering arose from the horde, that played the part
of audience. At last there was one of the Folk who dared to face
Red-Eye. As their approval and acclamation arose on the air, Red-Eye
snarled down at them, and on the instant they were subdued to silence.
Encouraged by this evidence of his power, he thrust his head into view,
and by scowling and snarling and gnashing his fangs tried to intimidate
me. He scowled horribly, contracting the scalp strongly over the brows
and bringing the hair down from the top of the head until each hair
stood apart and pointed straight forward.

The sight chilled me, but I mastered my fear, and, with a stone poised
in my hand, threatened him back. He still tried to advance. I drove the
stone down at him and made a sheer miss. The next shot was a success.
The stone struck him on the neck. He slipped back out of sight, but as
he disappeared I could see him clutching for a grip on the wall with
one hand, and with the other clutching at his throat. The stick fell
clattering to the ground.

I could not see him any more, though I could hear him choking and
strangling and coughing. The audience kept a death-like silence. I
crouched on the lip of the entrance and waited. The strangling and
coughing died down, and I could hear him now and again clearing his
throat. A little later he began to climb down. He went very quietly,
pausing every moment or so to stretch his neck or to feel it with his
hand.

At the sight of him descending, the whole horde, with wild screams and
yells, stampeded for the woods. Old Marrow-Bone, hobbling and
tottering, followed behind. Red-Eye took no notice of the flight. When
he reached the ground he skirted the base of the bluff and climbed up
and into his own cave. He did not look around once.

I stared at Lop-Ear, and he stared back. We understood each other.
Immediately, and with great caution and quietness, we began climbing up
the cliff. When we reached the top we looked back. The abiding-place
was deserted, Red-Eye remained in his cave, and the horde had
disappeared in the depths of the forest.

We turned and ran. We dashed across the open spaces and down the slopes
unmindful of possible snakes in the grass, until we reached the woods.
Up into the trees we went, and on and on, swinging our arboreal flight
until we had put miles between us and the caves. And then, and not till
then, in the security of a great fork, we paused, looked at each other,
and began to laugh. We held on to each other, arms and legs, our eyes
streaming tears, our sides aching, and laughed and laughed and laughed.




CHAPTER X


After we had had out our laugh, Lop-Ear and I curved back in our flight
and got breakfast in the blueberry swamp. It was the same swamp to
which I had made my first journeys in the world, years before,
accompanied by my mother. I had seen little of her in the intervening
time. Usually, when she visited the horde at the caves, I was away in
the forest. I had once or twice caught glimpses of the Chatterer in the
open space, and had had the pleasure of making faces at him and
angering him from the mouth of my cave. Beyond such amenities I had
left my family severely alone. I was not much interested in it, and
anyway I was doing very well by myself.

After eating our fill of berries, with two nestfuls of partly hatched
quail-eggs for dessert, Lop-Ear and I wandered circumspectly into the
woods toward the river. Here was where stood my old home-tree, out of
which I had been thrown by the Chatterer. It was still occupied. There
had been increase in the family. Clinging tight to my mother was a
little baby. Also, there was a girl, partly grown, who cautiously
regarded us from one of the lower branches. She was evidently my
sister, or half-sister, rather.

My mother recognized me, but she warned me away when I started to climb
into the tree. Lop-Ear, who was more cautious by far than I, beat a
retreat, nor could I persuade him to return. Later in the day, however,
my sister came down to the ground, and there and in neighboring trees
we romped and played all afternoon. And then came trouble. She was my
sister, but that did not prevent her from treating me abominably, for
she had inherited all the viciousness of the Chatterer. She turned upon
me suddenly, in a petty rage, and scratched me, tore my hair, and sank
her sharp little teeth deep into my forearm. I lost my temper. I did
not injure her, but it was undoubtedly the soundest spanking she had
received up to that time.

How she yelled and squalled. The Chatterer, who had been away all day
and who was only then returning, heard the noise and rushed for the
spot. My mother also rushed, but he got there first. Lop-Ear and I did
not wait his coming. We were off and away, and the Chatterer gave us
the chase of our lives through the trees.

After the chase was over, and Lop-Ear and I had had out our laugh, we
discovered that twilight was falling. Here was night with all its
terrors upon us, and to return to the caves was out of the question.
Red-Eye made that impossible. We took refuge in a tree that stood apart
from other trees, and high up in a fork we passed the night. It was a
miserable night. For the first few hours it rained heavily, then it
turned cold and a chill wind blew upon us. Soaked through, with
shivering bodies and chattering teeth, we huddled in each others arms.
We missed the snug, dry cave that so quickly warmed with the heat of
our bodies.

Morning found us wretched and resolved. We would not spend another such
night. Remembering the tree-shelters of our elders, we set to work to
make one for ourselves. We built the framework of a rough nest, and on
higher forks overhead even got in several ridge-poles for the roof.
Then the sun came out, and under its benign influence we forgot the
hardships of the night and went off in search of breakfast. After that,
to show the inconsequentiality of life in those days, we fell to
playing. It must have taken us all of a month, working intermittently,
to make our tree-house; and then, when it was completed, we never used
it again.

But I run ahead of my story. When we fell to playing, after breakfast,
on the second day away from the caves, Lop-Ear led me a chase through
the trees and down to the river. We came out upon it where a large
slough entered from the blueberry swamp. The mouth of this slough was
wide, while the slough itself was practically without a current. In the
dead water, just inside its mouth, lay a tangled mass of tree trunks.
Some of these, what of the wear and tear of freshets and of being
stranded long summers on sand-bars, were seasoned and dry and without
branches. They floated high in the water, and bobbed up and down or
rolled over when we put our weight upon them.

Here and there between the trunks were water-cracks, and through them
we could see schools of small fish, like minnows, darting back and
forth. Lop-Ear and I became fishermen at once. Lying flat on the logs,
keeping perfectly quiet, waiting till the minnows came close, we would
make swift passes with our hands. Our prizes we ate on the spot,
wriggling and moist. We did not notice the lack of salt.

The mouth of the slough became our favorite playground. Here we spent
many hours each day, catching fish and playing on the logs, and here,
one day, we learned our first lessons in navigation. The log on which
Lop-Ear was lying got adrift. He was curled up on his side, asleep. A
light fan of air slowly drifted the log away from the shore, and when I
noticed his predicament the distance was already too great for him to
leap.

At first the episode seemed merely funny to me. But when one of the
vagrant impulses of fear, common in that age of perpetual insecurity,
moved within me, I was struck with my own loneliness. I was made
suddenly aware of Lop-Ears remoteness out there on that alien element
a few feet away. I called loudly to him a warning cry. He awoke
frightened, and shifted his weight rashly on the log. It turned over,
sousing him under. Three times again it soused him under as he tried to
climb out upon it. Then he succeeded, crouching upon it and chattering
with fear.

I could do nothing. Nor could he. Swimming was something of which we
knew nothing. We were already too far removed from the lower life-forms
to have the instinct for swimming, and we had not yet become
sufficiently man-like to undertake it as the working out of a problem.
I roamed disconsolately up and down the bank, keeping as close to him
in his involuntary travels as I could, while he wailed and cried till
it was a wonder that he did not bring down upon us every hunting animal
within a mile.

The hours passed. The sun climbed overhead and began its descent to the
west. The light wind died down and left Lop-Ear on his log floating
around a hundred feet away. And then, somehow, I know not how, Lop-Ear
made the great discovery. He began paddling with his hands. At first
his progress was slow and erratic. Then he straightened out and began
laboriously to paddle nearer and nearer. I could not understand. I sat
down and watched and waited until he gained the shore.

But he had learned something, which was more than I had done. Later in
the afternoon, he deliberately launched out from shore on the log.
Still later he persuaded me to join him, and I, too, learned the trick
of paddling. For the next several days we could not tear ourselves away
from the slough. So absorbed were we in our new game that we almost
neglected to eat. We even roosted in a nearby tree at night. And we
forgot that Red-Eye existed.

We were always trying new logs, and we learned that the smaller the log
the faster we could make it go. Also, we learned that the smaller the
log the more liable it was to roll over and give us a ducking. Still
another thing about small logs we learned. One day we paddled our
individual logs alongside each other. And then, quite by accident, in
the course of play, we discovered that when each, with one hand and
foot, held on to the others log, the logs were steadied and did not
turn over. Lying side by side in this position, our outside hands and
feet were left free for paddling. Our final discovery was that this
arrangement enabled us to use still smaller logs and thereby gain
greater speed. And there our discoveries ended. We had invented the
most primitive catamaran, and we did not have sense enough to know it.
It never entered our heads to lash the logs together with tough vines
or stringy roots. We were content to hold the logs together with our
hands and feet.

It was not until we got over our first enthusiasm for navigation and
had begun to return to our tree-shelter to sleep at night, that we
found the Swift One. I saw her first, gathering young acorns from the
branches of a large oak near our tree. She was very timid. At first,
she kept very still; but when she saw that she was discovered she
dropped to the ground and dashed wildly away. We caught occasional
glimpses of her from day to day, and came to look for her when we
travelled back and forth between our tree and the mouth of the slough.

And then, one day, she did not run away. She waited our coming, and
made soft peace-sounds. We could not get very near, however. When we
seemed to approach too close, she darted suddenly away and from a safe
distance uttered the soft sounds again. This continued for some days.
It took a long while to get acquainted with her, but finally it was
accomplished and she joined us sometimes in our play.

I liked her from the first. She was of most pleasing appearance. She
was very mild. Her eyes were the mildest I had ever seen. In this she
was quite unlike the rest of the girls and women of the Folk, who were
born viragos. She never made harsh, angry cries, and it seemed to be
her nature to flee away from trouble rather than to remain and fight.

The mildness I have mentioned seemed to emanate from her whole being.
Her bodily as well as facial appearance was the cause of this. Her eyes
were larger than most of her kind, and they were not so deep-set, while
the lashes were longer and more regular. Nor was her nose so thick and
squat. It had quite a bridge, and the nostrils opened downward. Her
incisors were not large, nor was her upper lip long and down-hanging,
nor her lower lip protruding. She was not very hairy, except on the
outsides of arms and legs and across the shoulders; and while she was
thin-hipped, her calves were not twisted and gnarly.

I have often wondered, looking back upon her from the twentieth century
through the medium of my dreams, and it has always occurred to me that
possibly she may have been related to the Fire People. Her father, or
mother, might well have come from that higher stock. While such things
were not common, still they did occur, and I have seen the proof of
them with my own eyes, even to the extent of members of the horde
turning renegade and going to live with the Tree People.

All of which is neither here nor there. The Swift One was radically
different from any of the females of the horde, and I had a liking for
her from the first. Her mildness and gentleness attracted me. She was
never rough, and she never fought. She always ran away, and right here
may be noted the significance of the naming of her. She was a better
climber than Lop-Ear or I. When we played tag we could never catch her
except by accident, while she could catch us at will. She was
remarkably swift in all her movements, and she had a genius for judging
distances that was equalled only by her daring. Excessively timid in
all other matters, she was without fear when it came to climbing or
running through the trees, and Lop-Ear and I were awkward and lumbering
and cowardly in comparison.

She was an orphan. We never saw her with any one, and there was no
telling how long she had lived alone in the world. She must have
learned early in her helpless childhood that safety lay only in flight.
She was very wise and very discreet. It became a sort of game with
Lop-Ear and me to try to find where she lived. It was certain that she
had a tree-shelter somewhere, and not very far away; but trail her as
we would, we could never find it. She was willing enough to join with
us at play in the day-time, but the secret of her abiding-place she
guarded jealously.




CHAPTER XI


It must be remembered that the description I have just given of the
Swift One is not the description that would have been given by
Big-Tooth, my other self of my dreams, my prehistoric ancestor. It is
by the medium of my dreams that I, the modern man, look through the
eyes of Big-Tooth and see.

And so it is with much that I narrate of the events of that far-off
time. There is a duality about my impressions that is too confusing to
inflict upon my readers. I shall merely pause here in my narrative to
indicate this duality, this perplexing mixing of personality. It is I,
the modern, who look back across the centuries and weigh and analyze
the emotions and motives of Big-Tooth, my other self. He did not bother
to weigh and analyze. He was simplicity itself. He just lived events,
without ever pondering why he lived them in his particular and often
erratic way.

As I, my real self, grew older, I entered more and more into the
substance of my dreams. One may dream, and even in the midst of the
dream be aware that he is dreaming, and if the dream be bad, comfort
himself with the thought that it is only a dream. This is a common
experience with all of us. And so it was that I, the modern, often
entered into my dreaming, and in the consequent strange dual
personality was both actor and spectator. And right often have I, the
modern, been perturbed and vexed by the foolishness, illogic,
obtuseness, and general all-round stupendous stupidity of myself, the
primitive.

And one thing more, before I end this digression. Have you ever dreamed
that you dreamed? Dogs dream, horses dream, all animals dream. In
Big-Tooths day the half-men dreamed, and when the dreams were bad they
howled in their sleep. Now I, the modern, have lain down with Big-Tooth
and dreamed his dreams.

This is getting almost beyond the grip of the intellect, I know; but I
do know that I have done this thing. And let me tell you that the
flying and crawling dreams of Big-Tooth were as vivid to him as the
falling-through-space dream is to you.

For Big-Tooth also had an other-self, and when he slept that other-self
dreamed back into the past, back to the winged reptiles and the clash
and the onset of dragons, and beyond that to the scurrying, rodent-like
life of the tiny mammals, and far remoter still, to the shore-slime of
the primeval sea. I cannot, I dare not, say more. It is all too vague
and complicated and awful. I can only hint of those vast and terrific
vistas through which I have peered hazily at the progression of life,
not upward from the ape to man, but upward from the worm.

And now to return to my tale. I, Big-Tooth, knew not the Swift One as a
creature of finer facial and bodily symmetry, with long-lashed eyes and
a bridge to her nose and down-opening nostrils that made toward beauty.
I knew her only as the mild-eyed young female who made soft sounds and
did not fight. I liked to play with her, I knew not why, to seek food
in her company, and to go bird-nesting with her. And I must confess she
taught me things about tree-climbing. She was very wise, very strong,
and no clinging skirts impeded her movements.

It was about this time that a slight defection arose on the part of
Lop-Ear. He got into the habit of wandering off in the direction of the
tree where my mother lived. He had taken a liking to my vicious sister,
and the Chatterer had come to tolerate him. Also, there were several
other young people, progeny of the monogamic couples that lived in the
neighborhood, and Lop-Ear played with these young people.

I could never get the Swift One to join with them. Whenever I visited
them she dropped behind and disappeared. I remember once making a
strong effort to persuade her. But she cast backward, anxious glances,
then retreated, calling to me from a tree. So it was that I did not
make a practice of accompanying Lop-Ear when he went to visit his new
friends. The Swift One and I were good comrades, but, try as I would, I
could never find her tree-shelter. Undoubtedly, had nothing happened,
we would have soon mated, for our liking was mutual; but the something
did happen.

One morning, the Swift One not having put in an appearance, Lop-Ear and
I were down at the mouth of the slough playing on the logs. We had
scarcely got out on the water, when we were startled by a roar of rage.
It was Red-Eye. He was crouching on the edge of the timber jam and
glowering his hatred at us. We were badly frightened, for here was no
narrow-mouthed cave for refuge. But the twenty feet of water that
intervened gave us temporary safety, and we plucked up courage.

Red-Eye stood up erect and began beating his hairy chest with his fist.
Our two logs were side by side, and we sat on them and laughed at him.
At first our laughter was half-hearted, tinged with fear, but as we
became convinced of his impotence we waxed uproarious. He raged and
raged at us, and ground his teeth in helpless fury. And in our fancied
security we mocked and mocked him. We were ever short-sighted, we Folk.

Red-Eye abruptly ceased his breast-beating and tooth-grinding, and ran
across the timber-jam to the shore. And just as abruptly our merriment
gave way to consternation. It was not Red-Eyes way to forego revenge
so easily. We waited in fear and trembling for whatever was to happen.
It never struck us to paddle away. He came back with great leaps across
the jam, one huge hand filled with round, water-washed pebbles. I am
glad that he was unable to find larger missiles, say stones weighing
two or three pounds, for we were no more than a score of feet away, and
he surely would have killed us.

As it was, we were in no small danger. Zip! A tiny pebble whirred past
with the force almost of a bullet. Lop-Ear and I began paddling
frantically. Whiz-zip-bang! Lop-Ear screamed with sudden anguish. The
pebble had struck him between the shoulders. Then I got one and yelled.
The only thing that saved us was the exhausting of Red-Eyes
ammunition. He dashed back to the gravel-bed for more, while Lop-Ear
and I paddled away.

Gradually we drew out of range, though Red-Eye continued making trips
for more ammunition and the pebbles continued to whiz about us. Out in
the centre of the slough there was a slight current, and in our
excitement we failed to notice that it was drifting us into the river.
We paddled, and Red-Eye kept as close as he could to us by following
along the shore. Then he discovered larger rocks. Such ammunition
increased his range. One fragment, fully five pounds in weight, crashed
on the log alongside of me, and such was its impact that it drove a
score of splinters, like fiery needles, into my leg. Had it struck me
it would have killed me.

And then the river current caught us. So wildly were we paddling that
Red-Eye was the first to notice it, and our first warning was his yell
of triumph. Where the edge of the current struck the slough-water was a
series of eddies or small whirlpools. These caught our clumsy logs and
whirled them end for end, back and forth and around. We quit paddling
and devoted our whole energy to holding the logs together alongside
each other. In the meanwhile Red-Eye continued to bombard us, the rock
fragments falling about us, splashing water on us, and menacing our
lives. At the same time he gloated over us, wildly and vociferously.

It happened that there was a sharp turn in the river at the point where
the slough entered, and the whole main current of the river was
deflected to the other bank. And toward that bank, which was the north
bank, we drifted rapidly, at the same time going down-stream. This
quickly took us out of range of Red-Eye, and the last we saw of him was
far out on a point of land, where he was jumping up and down and
chanting a paean of victory.

Beyond holding the two logs together, Lop-Ear and I did nothing. We
were resigned to our fate, and we remained resigned until we aroused to
the fact that we were drifting along the north shore not a hundred feet
away. We began to paddle for it. Here the main force of the current was
flung back toward the south shore, and the result of our paddling was
that we crossed the current where it was swiftest and narrowest. Before
we were aware, we were out of it and in a quiet eddy.

Our logs drifted slowly and at last grounded gently on the bank.
Lop-Ear and I crept ashore. The logs drifted on out of the eddy and
swept away down the stream. We looked at each other, but we did not
laugh. We were in a strange land, and it did not enter our minds that
we could return to our own land in the same manner that we had come.

We had learned how to cross a river, though we did not know it. And
this was something that no one else of the Folk had ever done. We were
the first of the Folk to set foot on the north bank of the river, and,
for that matter, I believe the last. That they would have done so in
the time to come is undoubted; but the migration of the Fire People,
and the consequent migration of the survivors of the Folk, set back our
evolution for centuries.

Indeed, there is no telling how disastrous was to be the outcome of the
Fire Peoples migration. Personally, I am prone to believe that it
brought about the destruction of the Folk; that we, a branch of lower
life budding toward the human, were nipped short off and perished down
by the roaring surf where the river entered the sea. Of course, in such
an eventuality, I remain to be accounted for; but I outrun my story,
and such accounting will be made before I am done.




CHAPTER XII


I have no idea how long Lop-Ear and I wandered in the land north of the
river. We were like mariners wrecked on a desert isle, so far as
concerned the likelihood of our getting home again. We turned our backs
upon the river, and for weeks and months adventured in that wilderness
where there were no Folk. It is very difficult for me to reconstruct
our journeying, and impossible to do it from day to day. Most of it is
hazy and indistinct, though here and there I have vivid recollections
of things that happened.

Especially do I remember the hunger we endured on the mountains between
Long Lake and Far Lake, and the calf we caught sleeping in the thicket.
Also, there are the Tree People who dwelt in the forest between Long
Lake and the mountains. It was they who chased us into the mountains
and compelled us to travel on to Far Lake.

First, after we left the river, we worked toward the west till we came
to a small stream that flowed through marshlands. Here we turned away
toward the north, skirting the marshes and after several days arriving
at what I have called Long Lake. We spent some time around its upper
end, where we found food in plenty; and then, one day, in the forest,
we ran foul of the Tree People. These creatures were ferocious apes,
nothing more. And yet they were not so different from us. They were
more hairy, it is true; their legs were a trifle more twisted and
gnarly, their eyes a bit smaller, their necks a bit thicker and
shorter, and their nostrils slightly more like orifices in a sunken
surface; but they had no hair on their faces and on the palms of their
hands and the soles of their feet, and they made sounds similar to ours
with somewhat similar meanings. After all, the Tree People and the Folk
were not so unlike.

I found him first, a little withered, dried-up old fellow,
wrinkled-faced and bleary-eyed and tottery. He was legitimate prey. In
our world there was no sympathy between the kinds, and he was not our
kind. He was a Tree-Man, and he was very old. He was sitting at the
foot of a treeevidently his tree, for we could see the tattered nest
in the branches, in which he slept at night.

I pointed him out to Lop-Ear, and we made a rush for him. He started to
climb, but was too slow. I caught him by the leg and dragged him back.
Then we had fun. We pinched him, pulled his hair, tweaked his ears, and
poked twigs into him, and all the while we laughed with streaming eyes.
His futile anger was most absurd. He was a comical sight, striving to
fan into flame the cold ashes of his youth, to resurrect his strength
dead and gone through the oozing of the yearsmaking woeful faces in
place of the ferocious ones he intended, grinding his worn teeth
together, beating his meagre chest with feeble fists.

Also, he had a cough, and he gasped and hacked and spluttered
prodigiously. Every time he tried to climb the tree we pulled him back,
until at last he surrendered to his weakness and did no more than sit
and weep. And Lop-Ear and I sat with him, our arms around each other,
and laughed at his wretchedness.

From weeping he went to whining, and from whining to wailing, until at
last he achieved a scream. This alarmed us, but the more we tried to
make him cease, the louder he screamed. And then, from not far away in
the forest, came a Gok! Gok! to our ears. To this there were
answering cries, several of them, and from very far off we could hear a
big, bass Gok! Gok! Gok! Also, the Whoo-whoo! call was rising in
the forest all around us.

Then came the chase. It seemed it never would end. They raced us
through the trees, the whole tribe of them, and nearly caught us. We
were forced to take to the ground, and here we had the advantage, for
they were truly the Tree People, and while they out-climbed us we
out-footed them on the ground. We broke away toward the north, the
tribe howling on our track. Across the open spaces we gained, and in
the brush they caught up with us, and more than once it was nip and
tuck. And as the chase continued, we realized that we were not their
kind, either, and that the bonds between us were anything but
sympathetic.

They ran us for hours. The forest seemed interminable. We kept to the
glades as much as possible, but they always ended in more thick forest.
Sometimes we thought we had escaped, and sat down to rest; but always,
before we could recover our breath, we would hear the hateful
Whoo-whoo! cries and the terrible Gok! Gok! Gok! This latter
sometimes terminated in a savage Ha ha ha ha haaaaa!!!

And in this fashion were we hunted through the forest by the
exasperated Tree People. At last, by mid-afternoon, the slopes began
rising higher and higher and the trees were becoming smaller. Then we
came out on the grassy flanks of the mountains. Here was where we could
make time, and here the Tree People gave up and returned to their
forest.

The mountains were bleak and inhospitable, and three times that
afternoon we tried to regain the woods. But the Tree People were lying
in wait, and they drove us back. Lop-Ear and I slept that night in a
dwarf tree, no larger than a bush. Here was no security, and we would
have been easy prey for any hunting animal that chanced along.

In the morning, what of our new-gained respect for the Tree People, we
faced into the mountains. That we had no definite plan, or even idea, I
am confident. We were merely driven on by the danger we had escaped. Of
our wanderings through the mountains I have only misty memories. We
were in that bleak region many days, and we suffered much, especially
from fear, it was all so new and strange. Also, we suffered from the
cold, and later from hunger.

It was a desolate land of rocks and foaming streams and clattering
cataracts. We climbed and descended mighty canyons and gorges; and
ever, from every view point, there spread out before us, in all
directions, range upon range, the unceasing mountains. We slept at
night in holes and crevices, and on one cold night we perched on top a
slender pinnacle of rock that was almost like a tree.

And then, at last, one hot midday, dizzy with hunger, we gained the
divide. From this high backbone of earth, to the north, across the
diminishing, down-falling ranges, we caught a glimpse of a far lake.
The sun shone upon it, and about it were open, level grass-lands, while
to the eastward we saw the dark line of a wide-stretching forest.

We were two days in gaining the lake, and we were weak with hunger; but
on its shore, sleeping snugly in a thicket, we found a part-grown calf.
It gave us much trouble, for we knew no other way to kill than with our
hands. When we had gorged our fill, we carried the remainder of the
meat to the eastward forest and hid it in a tree. We never returned to
that tree, for the shore of the stream that drained Far Lake was packed
thick with salmon that had come up from the sea to spawn.

Westward from the lake stretched the grass-lands, and here were
multitudes of bison and wild cattle. Also were there many packs of wild
dogs, and as there were no trees it was not a safe place for us. We
followed north along the stream for days. Then, and for what reason I
do not know, we abruptly left the stream and swung to the east, and
then to the southeast, through a great forest. I shall not bore you
with our journey. I but indicate it to show how we finally arrived at
the Fire Peoples country.

We came out upon the river, but we did not know it for our river. We
had been lost so long that we had come to accept the condition of being
lost as habitual. As I look back I see clearly how our lives and
destinies are shaped by the merest chance. We did not know it was our
riverthere was no way of telling; and if we had never crossed it we
would most probably have never returned to the horde; and I, the
modern, the thousand centuries yet to be born, would never have been
born.

And yet Lop-Ear and I wanted greatly to return. We had experienced
homesickness on our journey, the yearning for our own kind and land;
and often had I had recollections of the Swift One, the young female
who made soft sounds, whom it was good to be with, and who lived by
herself nobody knew where. My recollections of her were accompanied by
sensations of hunger, and these I felt when I was not hungry and when I
had just eaten.

But to come back to the river. Food was plentiful, principally berries
and succulent roots, and on the river bank we played and lingered for
days. And then the idea came to Lop-Ear. It was a visible process, the
coming of the idea. I saw it. The expression in his eyes became
plaintive and querulous, and he was greatly perturbed. Then his eyes
went muddy, as if he had lost his grip on the inchoate thought. This
was followed by the plaintive, querulous expression as the idea
persisted and he clutched it anew. He looked at me, and at the river
and the far shore. He tried to speak, but had no sounds with which to
express the idea. The result was a gibberish that made me laugh. This
angered him, and he grabbed me suddenly and threw me on my back. Of
course we fought, and in the end I chased him up a tree, where he
secured a long branch and poked me every time I tried to get at him.

And the idea had gone glimmering. I did not know, and he had forgotten.
But the next morning it awoke in him again. Perhaps it was the homing
instinct in him asserting itself that made the idea persist. At any
rate it was there, and clearer than before. He led me down to the
water, where a log had grounded in an eddy. I thought he was minded to
play, as we had played in the mouth of the slough. Nor did I change my
mind as I watched him tow up a second log from farther down the shore.

It was not until we were on the logs, side by side and holding them
together, and had paddled out into the current, that I learned his
intention. He paused to point at the far shore, and resumed his
paddling, at the same time uttering loud and encouraging cries. I
understood, and we paddled energetically. The swift current caught us,
flung us toward the south shore, but before we could make a landing
flung us back toward the north shore.

Here arose dissension. Seeing the north shore so near, I began to
paddle for it. Lop-Ear tried to paddle for the south shore. The logs
swung around in circles, and we got nowhere, and all the time the
forest was flashing past as we drifted down the stream. We could not
fight. We knew better than to let go the grips of hands and feet that
held the logs together. But we chattered and abused each other with our
tongues until the current flung us toward the south bank again. That
was now the nearest goal, and together and amicably we paddled for it.
We landed in an eddy, and climbed directly into the trees to
reconnoitre.




CHAPTER XIII


It was not until the night of our first day on the south bank of the
river that we discovered the Fire People. What must have been a band of
wandering hunters went into camp not far from the tree in which Lop-Ear
and I had elected to roost for the night. The voices of the Fire People
at first alarmed us, but later, when darkness had come, we were
attracted by the fire. We crept cautiously and silently from tree to
tree till we got a good view of the scene.

In an open space among the trees, near to the river, the fire was
burning. About it were half a dozen Fire-Men. Lop-Ear clutched me
suddenly, and I could feel him tremble. I looked more closely, and saw
the wizened little old hunter who had shot Broken-Tooth out of the tree
years before. When he got up and walked about, throwing fresh wood upon
the fire, I saw that he limped with his crippled leg. Whatever it was,
it was a permanent injury. He seemed more dried up and wizened than
ever, and the hair on his face was quite gray.

The other hunters were young men. I noted, lying near them on the
ground, their bows and arrows, and I knew the weapons for what they
were. The Fire-Men wore animal skins around their waists and across
their shoulders. Their arms and legs, however, were bare, and they wore
no footgear. As I have said before, they were not quite so hairy as we
of the Folk. They did not have large heads, and between them and the
Folk there was very little difference in the degree of the slant of the
head back from the eyes.

They were less stooped than we, less springy in their movements. Their
backbones and hips and knee-joints seemed more rigid. Their arms were
not so long as ours either, and I did not notice that they ever
balanced themselves when they walked, by touching the ground on either
side with their hands. Also, their muscles were more rounded and
symmetrical than ours, and their faces were more pleasing. Their nose
orifices opened downward; likewise the bridges of their noses were more
developed, did not look so squat nor crushed as ours. Their lips were
less flabby and pendent, and their eye-teeth did not look so much like
fangs. However, they were quite as thin-hipped as we, and did not weigh
much more. Take it all in all, they were less different from us than
were we from the Tree People. Certainly, all three kinds were related,
and not so remotely related at that.

The fire around which they sat was especially attractive. Lop-Ear and I
sat for hours, watching the flames and smoke. It was most fascinating
when fresh fuel was thrown on and showers of sparks went flying upward.
I wanted to come closer and look at the fire, but there was no way. We
were crouching in the forks of a tree on the edge of the open space,
and we did not dare run the risk of being discovered.

The Fire-Men squatted around the fire and slept with their heads bowed
forward on their knees. They did not sleep soundly. Their ears twitched
in their sleep, and they were restless. Every little while one or
another got up and threw more wood upon the fire. About the circle of
light in the forest, in the darkness beyond, roamed hunting animals.
Lop-Ear and I could tell them by their sounds. There were wild dogs and
a hyena, and for a time there was a great yelping and snarling that
awakened on the instant the whole circle of sleeping Fire-Men.

Once a lion and a lioness stood beneath our tree and gazed out with
bristling hair and blinking eyes. The lion licked his chops and was
nervous with eagerness, as if he wanted to go forward and make a meal.
But the lioness was more cautious. It was she that discovered us, and
the pair stood and looked up at us, silently, with twitching, scenting
nostrils. Then they growled, looked once again at the fire, and turned
away into the forest.

For a much longer time Lop-Ear and I remained and watched. Now and
again we could hear the crashing of heavy bodies in the thickets and
underbrush, and from the darkness of the other side, across the circle,
we could see eyes gleaming in the firelight. In the distance we heard a
lion roar, and from far off came the scream of some stricken animal,
splashing and floundering in a drinking-place. Also, from the river,
came a great grunting of rhinoceroses.

In the morning, after having had our sleep, we crept back to the fire.
It was still smouldering, and the Fire-Men were gone. We made a circle
through the forest to make sure, and then we ran to the fire. I wanted
to see what it was like, and between thumb and finger I picked up a
glowing coal. My cry of pain and fear, as I dropped it, stampeded
Lop-Ear into the trees, and his flight frightened me after him.

The next time we came back more cautiously, and we avoided the glowing
coals. We fell to imitating the Fire-Men. We squatted down by the fire,
and with heads bent forward on our knees, made believe to sleep. Then
we mimicked their speech, talking to each other in their fashion and
making a great gibberish. I remembered seeing the wizened old hunter
poke the fire with a stick. I poked the fire with a stick, turning up
masses of live coals and clouds of white ashes. This was great sport,
and soon we were coated white with the ashes.

It was inevitable that we should imitate the Fire-Men in replenishing
the fire. We tried it first with small pieces of wood. It was a
success. The wood flamed up and crackled, and we danced and gibbered
with delight. Then we began to throw on larger pieces of wood. We put
on more and more, until we had a mighty fire. We dashed excitedly back
and forth, dragging dead limbs and branches from out the forest. The
flames soared higher and higher, and the smoke-column out-towered the
trees. There was a tremendous snapping and crackling and roaring. It
was the most monumental work we had ever effected with our hands, and
we were proud of it. We, too, were Fire-Men, we thought, as we danced
there, white gnomes in the conflagration.

The dried grass and underbrush caught fire, but we did not notice it.
Suddenly a great tree on the edge of the open space burst into flames.

We looked at it with startled eyes. The heat of it drove us back.
Another tree caught, and another, and then half a dozen. We were
frightened. The monster had broken loose. We crouched down in fear,
while the fire ate around the circle and hemmed us in. Into Lop-Ears
eyes came the plaintive look that always accompanied incomprehension,
and I know that in my eyes must have been the same look. We huddled,
with our arms around each other, until the heat began to reach us and
the odor of burning hair was in our nostrils. Then we made a dash of
it, and fled away westward through the forest, looking back and
laughing as we ran.

By the middle of the day we came to a neck of land, made, as we
afterward discovered, by a great curve of the river that almost
completed a circle. Right across the neck lay bunched several low and
partly wooded hills. Over these we climbed, looking backward at the
forest which had become a sea of flame that swept eastward before a
rising wind. We continued to the west, following the river bank, and
before we knew it we were in the midst of the abiding-place of the Fire
People.

This abiding-place was a splendid strategic selection. It was a
peninsula, protected on three sides by the curving river. On only one
side was it accessible by land. This was the narrow neck of the
peninsula, and here the several low hills were a natural obstacle.
Practically isolated from the rest of the world, the Fire People must
have here lived and prospered for a long time. In fact, I think it was
their prosperity that was responsible for the subsequent migration that
worked such calamity upon the Folk. The Fire People must have increased
in numbers until they pressed uncomfortably against the bounds of their
habitat. They were expanding, and in the course of their expanding they
drove the Folk before them, and settled down themselves in the caves
and occupied the territory that we had occupied.

But Lop-Ear and I little dreamed of all this when we found ourselves in
the Fire Peoples stronghold. We had but one idea, and that was to get
away, though we could not forbear humoring our curiosity by peeping out
upon the village. For the first time we saw the women and children of
the Fire People. The latter ran for the most part naked, though the
former wore skins of wild animals.

The Fire People, like ourselves, lived in caves. The open space in
front of the caves sloped down to the river, and in the open space
burned many small fires. But whether or not the Fire People cooked
their food, I do not know. Lop-Ear and I did not see them cook. Yet it
is my opinion that they surely must have performed some sort of rude
cookery. Like us, they carried water in gourds from the river. There
was much coming and going, and loud cries made by the women and
children. The latter played about and cut up antics quite in the same
way as did the children of the Folk, and they more nearly resembled the
children of the Folk than did the grown Fire People resemble the grown
Folk.

Lop-Ear and I did not linger long. We saw some of the part-grown boys
shooting with bow and arrow, and we sneaked back into the thicker
forest and made our way to the river. And there we found a catamaran, a
real catamaran, one evidently made by some Fire-Man. The two logs were
small and straight, and were lashed together by means of tough roots
and crosspieces of wood.

This time the idea occurred simultaneously to us. We were trying to
escape out of the Fire Peoples territory. What better way than by
crossing the river on these logs? We climbed on board and shoved off. A
sudden something gripped the catamaran and flung it downstream
violently against the bank. The abrupt stoppage almost whipped us off
into the water. The catamaran was tied to a tree by a rope of twisted
roots. This we untied before shoving off again.

By the time we had paddled well out into the current, we had drifted so
far downstream that we were in full view of the Fire Peoples
abiding-place. So occupied were we with our paddling, our eyes fixed
upon the other bank, that we knew nothing until aroused by a yell from
the shore. We looked around. There were the Fire People, many of them,
looking at us and pointing at us, and more were crawling out of the
caves. We sat up to watch, and forgot all about paddling. There was a
great hullabaloo on the shore. Some of the Fire-Men discharged their
bows at us, and a few of the arrows fell near us, but the range was too
great.

It was a great day for Lop-Ear and me. To the east the conflagration we
had started was filling half the sky with smoke. And here we were,
perfectly safe in the middle of the river, encircling the Fire Peoples
stronghold. We sat and laughed at them as we dashed by, swinging south,
and southeast to east, and even to northeast, and then east again,
southeast and south and on around to the west, a great double curve
where the river nearly tied a knot in itself.

As we swept on to the west, the Fire People far behind, a familiar
scene flashed upon our eyes.

It was the great drinking-place, where we had wandered once or twice to
watch the circus of the animals when they came down to drink. Beyond
it, we knew, was the carrot patch, and beyond that the caves and the
abiding-place of the horde. We began to paddle for the bank that slid
swiftly past, and before we knew it we were down upon the
drinking-places used by the horde. There were the women and children,
the water carriers, a number of them, filling their gourds. At sight of
us they stampeded madly up the run-ways, leaving behind them a trail of
gourds they had dropped.

We landed, and of course we neglected to tie up the catamaran, which
floated off down the river. Right cautiously we crept up a run-way. The
Folk had all disappeared into their holes, though here and there we
could see a face peering out at us. There was no sign of Red-Eye. We
were home again. And that night we slept in our own little cave high up
on the cliff, though first we had to evict a couple of pugnacious
youngsters who had taken possession.




CHAPTER XIV


The months came and went. The drama and tragedy of the future were yet
to come upon the stage, and in the meantime we pounded nuts and lived.
It was a good year, I remember, for nuts. We used to fill gourds with
nuts and carry them to the pounding-places. We placed them in
depressions in the rock, and, with a piece of rock in our hands, we
cracked them and ate them as we cracked.

It was the fall of the year when Lop-Ear and I returned from our long
adventure-journey, and the winter that followed was mild. I made
frequent trips to the neighborhood of my old home-tree, and frequently
I searched the whole territory that lay between the blueberry swamp and
the mouth of the slough where Lop-Ear and I had learned navigation, but
no clew could I get of the Swift One. She had disappeared. And I wanted
her. I was impelled by that hunger which I have mentioned, and which
was akin to physical hunger, albeit it came often upon me when my
stomach was full. But all my search was vain.

Life was not monotonous at the caves, however. There was Red-Eye to be
considered. Lop-Ear and I never knew a moments peace except when we
were in our own little cave. In spite of the enlargement of the
entrance we had made, it was still a tight squeeze for us to get in.
And though from time to time we continued to enlarge, it was still too
small for Red-Eyes monstrous body. But he never stormed our cave
again. He had learned the lesson well, and he carried on his neck a
bulging lump to show where I had hit him with the rock. This lump never
went away, and it was prominent enough to be seen at a distance. I
often took great delight in watching that evidence of my handiwork; and
sometimes, when I was myself assuredly safe, the sight of it caused me
to laugh.

While the other Folk would not have come to our rescue had Red-Eye
proceeded to tear Lop-Ear and me to pieces before their eyes,
nevertheless they sympathized with us. Possibly it was not sympathy but
the way they expressed their hatred for Red-Eye; at any rate they
always warned us of his approach. Whether in the forest, at the
drinking-places, or in the open space before the caves, they were
always quick to warn us. Thus we had the advantage of many eyes in our
feud with Red-Eye, the atavism.

Once he nearly got me. It was early in the morning, and the Folk were
not yet up. The surprise was complete. I was cut off from the way up
the cliff to my cave. Before I knew it I had dashed into the
double-cave,the cave where Lop-Ear had first eluded me long years
before, and where old Saber-Tooth had come to discomfiture when he
pursued the two Folk. By the time I had got through the connecting
passage between the two caves, I discovered that Red-Eye was not
following me. The next moment he charged into the cave from the
outside. I slipped back through the passage, and he charged out and
around and in upon me again. I merely repeated my performance of
slipping through the passage.

He kept me there half a day before he gave up. After that, when Lop-Ear
and I were reasonably sure of gaining the double-cave, we did not
retreat up the cliff to our own cave when Red-Eye came upon the scene.
All we did was to keep an eye on him and see that he did not cut across
our line of retreat.

It was during this winter that Red-Eye killed his latest wife with
abuse and repeated beatings. I have called him an atavism, but in this
he was worse than an atavism, for the males of the lower animals do not
maltreat and murder their mates. In this I take it that Red-Eye, in
spite of his tremendous atavistic tendencies, foreshadowed the coming
of man, for it is the males of the human species only that murder their
mates.

As was to be expected, with the doing away of one wife Red-Eye
proceeded to get another. He decided upon the Singing One. She was the
granddaughter of old Marrow-Bone, and the daughter of the Hairless One.
She was a young thing, greatly given to singing at the mouth of her
cave in the twilight, and she had but recently mated with Crooked-Leg.
He was a quiet individual, molesting no one and not given to bickering
with his fellows. He was no fighter anyway. He was small and lean, and
not so active on his legs as the rest of us.

Red-Eye never committed a more outrageous deed. It was in the quiet at
the end of the day, when we began to congregate in the open space
before climbing into our caves. Suddenly the Singing One dashed up a
run-way from a drinking-place, pursued by Red-Eye. She ran to her
husband. Poor little Crooked-Leg was terribly scared. But he was a
hero. He knew that death was upon him, yet he did not run away. He
stood up, and chattered, bristled, and showed his teeth.

Red-Eye roared with rage. It was an offence to him that any of the Folk
should dare to withstand him. His hand shot out and clutched
Crooked-Leg by the neck. The latter sank his teeth into Red-Eyes arm;
but the next moment, with a broken neck, Crooked-Leg was floundering
and squirming on the ground. The Singing One screeched and gibbered.
Red-Eye seized her by the hair of her head and dragged her toward his
cave. He handled her roughly when the climb began, and he dragged and
hauled her up into the cave.

We were very angry, insanely, vociferously angry. Beating our chests,
bristling, and gnashing our teeth, we gathered together in our rage. We
felt the prod of gregarious instinct, the drawing together as though
for united action, the impulse toward cooperation. In dim ways this
need for united action was impressed upon us. But there was no way to
achieve it because there was no way to express it. We did not turn to,
all of us, and destroy Red-Eye, because we lacked a vocabulary. We were
vaguely thinking thoughts for which there were no thought-symbols.
These thought-symbols were yet to be slowly and painfully invented.

We tried to freight sound with the vague thoughts that flitted like
shadows through our consciousness. The Hairless One began to chatter
loudly. By his noises he expressed anger against Red-Eye and desire to
hurt Red-Eye. Thus far he got, and thus far we understood. But when he
tried to express the cooperative impulse that stirred within him, his
noises became gibberish. Then Big-Face, with brow-bristling and
chest-pounding, began to chatter. One after another of us joined in the
orgy of rage, until even old Marrow-Bone was mumbling and spluttering
with his cracked voice and withered lips. Some one seized a stick and
began pounding a log. In a moment he had struck a rhythm.
Unconsciously, our yells and exclamations yielded to this rhythm. It
had a soothing effect upon us; and before we knew it, our rage
forgotten, we were in the full swing of a hee-hee council.

These hee-hee councils splendidly illustrate the inconsecutiveness and
inconsequentiality of the Folk. Here were we, drawn together by mutual
rage and the impulse toward cooperation, led off into forgetfulness by
the establishment of a rude rhythm. We were sociable and gregarious,
and these singing and laughing councils satisfied us. In ways the
hee-hee council was an adumbration of the councils of primitive man,
and of the great national assemblies and international conventions of
latter-day man. But we Folk of the Younger World lacked speech, and
whenever we were so drawn together we precipitated babel, out of which
arose a unanimity of rhythm that contained within itself the essentials
of art yet to come. It was art nascent.

There was nothing long-continued about these rhythms that we struck. A
rhythm was soon lost, and pandemonium reigned until we could find the
rhythm again or start a new one. Sometimes half a dozen rhythms would
be swinging simultaneously, each rhythm backed by a group that strove
ardently to drown out the other rhythms.

In the intervals of pandemonium, each chattered, cut up, hooted,
screeched, and danced, himself sufficient unto himself, filled with his
own ideas and volitions to the exclusion of all others, a veritable
centre of the universe, divorced for the time being from any unanimity
with the other universe-centres leaping and yelling around him. Then
would come the rhythma clapping of hands; the beating of a stick upon
a log; the example of one that leaped with repetitions; or the chanting
of one that uttered, explosively and regularly, with inflection that
rose and fell, A-bang, a-bang! A-bang, a-bang! One after another of
the self-centred Folk would yield to it, and soon all would be dancing
or chanting in chorus. Ha-ah, ha-ah, ha-ah-ha! was one of our
favorite choruses, and another was, Eh-wah, eh-wah, eh-wah-hah!

And so, with mad antics, leaping, reeling, and over-balancing, we
danced and sang in the sombre twilight of the primeval world, inducing
forgetfulness, achieving unanimity, and working ourselves up into
sensuous frenzy. And so it was that our rage against Red-Eye was
soothed away by art, and we screamed the wild choruses of the hee-hee
council until the night warned us of its terrors, and we crept away to
our holes in the rocks, calling softly to one another, while the stars
came out and darkness settled down.

We were afraid only of the dark. We had no germs of religion, no
conceptions of an unseen world. We knew only the real world, and the
things we feared were the real things, the concrete dangers, the
flesh-and-blood animals that preyed. It was they that made us afraid of
the dark, for darkness was the time of the hunting animals. It was then
that they came out of their lairs and pounced upon one from the dark
wherein they lurked invisible.

Possibly it was out of this fear of the real denizens of the dark that
the fear of the unreal denizens was later to develop and to culminate
in a whole and mighty unseen world. As imagination grew it is likely
that the fear of death increased until the Folk that were to come
projected this fear into the dark and peopled it with spirits. I think
the Fire People had already begun to be afraid of the dark in this
fashion; but the reasons we Folk had for breaking up our hee-hee
councils and fleeing to our holes were old Saber-Tooth, the lions and
the jackals, the wild dogs and the wolves, and all the hungry,
meat-eating breeds.




CHAPTER XV


Lop-Ear got married. It was the second winter after our
adventure-journey, and it was most unexpected. He gave me no warning.
The first I knew was one twilight when I climbed the cliff to our cave.
I squeezed into the entrance and there I stopped. There was no room for
me. Lop-Ear and his mate were in possession, and she was none other
than my sister, the daughter of my step-father, the Chatterer.

I tried to force my way in. There was space only for two, and that
space was already occupied. Also, they had me at a disadvantage, and,
what of the scratching and hair-pulling I received, I was glad to
retreat. I slept that night, and for many nights, in the connecting
passage of the double-cave. From my experience it seemed reasonably
safe. As the two Folk had dodged old Saber-Tooth, and as I had dodged
Red-Eye, so it seemed to me that I could dodge the hunting animals by
going back and forth between the two caves.

I had forgotten the wild dogs. They were small enough to go through any
passage that I could squeeze through. One night they nosed me out. Had
they entered both caves at the same time they would have got me. As it
was, followed by some of them through the passage, I dashed out the
mouth of the other cave. Outside were the rest of the wild dogs. They
sprang for me as I sprang for the cliff-wall and began to climb. One of
them, a lean and hungry brute, caught me in mid-leap. His teeth sank
into my thigh-muscles, and he nearly dragged me back. He held on, but I
made no effort to dislodge him, devoting my whole effort to climbing
out of reach of the rest of the brutes.

Not until I was safe from them did I turn my attention to that live
agony on my thigh. And then, a dozen feet above the snapping pack that
leaped and scrambled against the wall and fell back, I got the dog by
the throat and slowly throttled him. I was a long time doing it. He
clawed and ripped my hair and hide with his hind-paws, and ever he
jerked and lunged with his weight to drag me from the wall.

At last his teeth opened and released my torn flesh. I carried his body
up the cliff with me, and perched out the night in the entrance of my
old cave, wherein were Lop-Ear and my sister. But first I had to endure
a storm of abuse from the aroused horde for being the cause of the
disturbance. I had my revenge. From time to time, as the noise of the
pack below eased down, I dropped a rock and started it up again.
Whereupon, from all around, the abuse of the exasperated Folk began
afresh. In the morning I shared the dog with Lop-Ear and his wife, and
for several days the three of us were neither vegetarians nor
fruitarians.

Lop-Ears marriage was not a happy one, and the consolation about it is
that it did not last very long. Neither he nor I was happy during that
period. I was lonely. I suffered the inconvenience of being cast out of
my safe little cave, and somehow I did not make it up with any other of
the young males. I suppose my long-continued chumming with Lop-Ear had
become a habit.

I might have married, it is true; and most likely I should have married
had it not been for the dearth of females in the horde. This dearth, it
is fair to assume, was caused by the exorbitance of Red-Eye, and it
illustrates the menace he was to the existence of the horde. Then there
was the Swift One, whom I had not forgotten.

At any rate, during the period of Lop-Ears marriage I knocked about
from pillar to post, in danger every night that I slept, and never
comfortable. One of the Folk died, and his widow was taken into the
cave of another one of the Folk. I took possession of the abandoned
cave, but it was wide-mouthed, and after Red-Eye nearly trapped me in
it one day, I returned to sleeping in the passage of the double-cave.
During the summer, however, I used to stay away from the caves for
weeks, sleeping in a tree-shelter I made near the mouth of the slough.

I have said that Lop-Ear was not happy. My sister was the daughter of
the Chatterer, and she made Lop-Ears life miserable for him. In no
other cave was there so much squabbling and bickering. If Red-Eye was a
Bluebeard, Lop-Ear was hen-pecked; and I imagine that Red-Eye was too
shrewd ever to covet Lop-Ears wife.

Fortunately for Lop-Ear, she died. An unusual thing happened that
summer. Late, almost at the end of it, a second crop of the
stringy-rooted carrots sprang up. These unexpected second-crop roots
were young and juicy and tender, and for some time the carrot-patch was
the favorite feeding-place of the horde. One morning, early, several
score of us were there making our breakfast. On one side of me was the
Hairless One. Beyond him were his father and son, old Marrow-Bone and
Long-Lip. On the other side of me were my sister and Lop-Ear, she being
next to me.

There was no warning. On the sudden, both the Hairless One and my
sister sprang and screamed. At the same instant I heard the thud of the
arrows that transfixed them. The next instant they were down on the
ground, floundering and gasping, and the rest of us were stampeding for
the trees. An arrow drove past me and entered the ground, its feathered
shaft vibrating and oscillating from the impact of its arrested flight.
I remember clearly how I swerved as I ran, to go past it, and that I
gave it a needlessly wide berth. I must have shied at it as a horse
shies at an object it fears.

Lop-Ear took a smashing fall as he ran beside me. An arrow had driven
through the calf of his leg and tripped him. He tried to run, but was
tripped and thrown by it a second time. He sat up, crouching, trembling
with fear, and called to me pleadingly. I dashed back. He showed me the
arrow. I caught hold of it to pull it out, but the consequent hurt made
him seize my hand and stop me. A flying arrow passed between us.
Another struck a rock, splintered, and fell to the ground. This was too
much. I pulled, suddenly, with all my might. Lop-Ear screamed as the
arrow came out, and struck at me angrily. But the next moment we were
in full flight again.

I looked back. Old Marrow-Bone, deserted and far behind, was tottering
silently along in his handicapped race with death. Sometimes he almost
fell, and once he did fall; but no more arrows were coming. He
scrambled weakly to his feet. Age burdened him heavily, but he did not
want to die. The three Fire-Men, who were now running forward from
their forest ambush, could easily have got him, but they did not try.
Perhaps he was too old and tough. But they did want the Hairless One
and my sister, for as I looked back from the trees I could see the
Fire-Men beating in their heads with rocks. One of the Fire-Men was the
wizened old hunter who limped.

We went on through the trees toward the cavesan excited and disorderly
mob that drove before it to their holes all the small life of the
forest, and that set the blue-jays screaming impudently. Now that there
was no immediate danger, Long-Lip waited for his grand-father,
Marrow-Bone; and with the gap of a generation between them, the old
fellow and the youth brought up our rear.

And so it was that Lop-Ear became a bachelor once more. That night I
slept with him in the old cave, and our old life of chumming began
again. The loss of his mate seemed to cause him no grief. At least he
showed no signs of it, nor of need for her. It was the wound in his leg
that seemed to bother him, and it was all of a week before he got back
again to his old spryness.

Marrow-Bone was the only old member in the horde. Sometimes, on looking
back upon him, when the vision of him is most clear, I note a striking
resemblance between him and the father of my fathers gardener. The
gardeners father was very old, very wrinkled and withered; and for all
the world, when he peered through his tiny, bleary eyes and mumbled
with his toothless gums, he looked and acted like old Marrow-Bone. This
resemblance, as a child, used to frighten me. I always ran when I saw
the old man tottering along on his two canes. Old Marrow-Bone even had
a bit of sparse and straggly white beard that seemed identical with the
whiskers of the old man.

As I have said, Marrow-Bone was the only old member of the horde. He
was an exception. The Folk never lived to old age. Middle age was
fairly rare. Death by violence was the common way of death. They died
as my father had died, as Broken-Tooth had died, as my sister and the
Hairless One had just diedabruptly and brutally, in the full
possession of their faculties, in the full swing and rush of life.
Natural death? To die violently was the natural way of dying in those
days.

No one died of old age among the Folk. I never knew of a case. Even
Marrow-Bone did not die that way, and he was the only one in my
generation who had the chance. A bad crippling, any serious accidental
or temporary impairment of the faculties, meant swift death. As a rule,
these deaths were not witnessed.

Members of the horde simply dropped out of sight. They left the caves
in the morning, and they never came back. They disappearedinto the
ravenous maws of the hunting creatures.

This inroad of the Fire People on the carrot-patch was the beginning of
the end, though we did not know it. The hunters of the Fire People
began to appear more frequently as the time went by. They came in twos
and threes, creeping silently through the forest, with their flying
arrows able to annihilate distance and bring down prey from the top of
the loftiest tree without themselves climbing into it. The bow and
arrow was like an enormous extension of their leaping and striking
muscles, so that, virtually, they could leap and kill at a hundred feet
and more. This made them far more terrible than Saber-Tooth himself.
And then they were very wise. They had speech that enabled them more
effectively to reason, and in addition they understood cooperation.

We Folk came to be very circumspect when we were in the forest. We were
more alert and vigilant and timid. No longer were the trees a
protection to be relied upon. No longer could we perch on a branch and
laugh down at our carnivorous enemies on the ground. The Fire People
were carnivorous, with claws and fangs a hundred feet long, the most
terrible of all the hunting animals that ranged the primeval world.

One morning, before the Folk had dispersed to the forest, there was a
panic among the water-carriers and those who had gone down to the river
to drink. The whole horde fled to the caves. It was our habit, at such
times, to flee first and investigate afterward. We waited in the mouths
of our caves and watched. After some time a Fire-Man stepped cautiously
into the open space. It was the little wizened old hunter. He stood for
a long time and watched us, looking our caves and the cliff-wall up and
down. He descended one of the run-ways to a drinking-place, returning a
few minutes later by another run-way. Again he stood and watched us
carefully, for a long time. Then he turned on his heel and limped into
the forest, leaving us calling querulously and plaintively to one
another from the cave-mouths.




CHAPTER XVI


I found her down in the old neighborhood near the blueberry swamp,
where my mother lived and where Lop-Ear and I had built our first
tree-shelter. It was unexpected. As I came under the tree I heard the
familiar soft sound and looked up. There she was, the Swift One,
sitting on a limb and swinging her legs back and forth as she looked at
me.

I stood still for some time. The sight of her had made me very happy.
And then an unrest and a pain began to creep in on this happiness. I
started to climb the tree after her, and she retreated slowly out the
limb. Just as I reached for her, she sprang through the air and landed
in the branches of the next tree. From amid the rustling leaves she
peeped out at me and made soft sounds. I leaped straight for her, and
after an exciting chase the situation was duplicated, for there she
was, making soft sounds and peeping out from the leaves of a third
tree.

It was borne in upon me that somehow it was different now from the old
days before Lop-Ear and I had gone on our adventure-journey. I wanted
her, and I knew that I wanted her. And she knew it, too. That was why
she would not let me come near her. I forgot that she was truly the
Swift One, and that in the art of climbing she had been my teacher. I
pursued her from tree to tree, and ever she eluded me, peeping back at
me with kindly eyes, making soft sounds, and dancing and leaping and
teetering before me just out of reach. The more she eluded me, the more
I wanted to catch her, and the lengthening shadows of the afternoon
bore witness to the futility of my effort.

As I pursued her, or sometimes rested in an adjoining tree and watched
her, I noticed the change in her. She was larger, heavier, more
grown-up. Her lines were rounder, her muscles fuller, and there was
about her that indefinite something of maturity that was new to her and
that incited me on. Three years she had been gonethree years at the
very least, and the change in her was marked. I say three years; it is
as near as I can measure the time. A fourth year may have elapsed,
which I have confused with the happenings of the other three years. The
more I think of it, the more confident I am that it must be four years
that she was away.

Where she went, why she went, and what happened to her during that
time, I do not know. There was no way for her to tell me, any more than
there was a way for Lop-Ear and me to tell the Folk what we had seen
when we were away. Like us, the chance is she had gone off on an
adventure-journey, and by herself. On the other hand, it is possible
that Red-Eye may have been the cause of her going. It is quite certain
that he must have come upon her from time to time, wandering in the
woods; and if he had pursued her there is no question but that it would
have been sufficient to drive her away. From subsequent events, I am
led to believe that she must have travelled far to the south, across a
range of mountains and down to the banks of a strange river, away from
any of her kind. Many Tree People lived down there, and I think it must
have been they who finally drove her back to the horde and to me. My
reasons for this I shall explain later.

The shadows grew longer, and I pursued more ardently than ever, and
still I could not catch her. She made believe that she was trying
desperately to escape me, and all the time she managed to keep just
beyond reach. I forgot everythingtime, the oncoming of night, and my
meat-eating enemies. I was insane with love of her, and withanger,
too, because she would not let me come up with her. It was strange how
this anger against her seemed to be part of my desire for her.

As I have said, I forgot everything. In racing across an open space I
ran full tilt upon a colony of snakes. They did not deter me. I was
mad. They struck at me, but I ducked and dodged and ran on. Then there
was a python that ordinarily would have sent me screeching to a
tree-top. He did run me into a tree; but the Swift One was going out of
sight, and I sprang back to the ground and went on. It was a close
shave. Then there was my old enemy, the hyena. From my conduct he was
sure something was going to happen, and he followed me for an hour.
Once we exasperated a band of wild pigs, and they took after us. The
Swift One dared a wide leap between trees that was too much for me. I
had to take to the ground. There were the pigs. I didnt care. I struck
the earth within a yard of the nearest one. They flanked me as I ran,
and chased me into two different trees out of the line of my pursuit of
the Swift One. I ventured the ground again, doubled back, and crossed a
wide open space, with the whole band grunting, bristling, and
tusk-gnashing at my heels.

If I had tripped or stumbled in that open space, there would have been
no chance for me. But I didnt. And I didnt care whether I did or not.
I was in such mood that I would have faced old Saber-Tooth himself, or
a score of arrow-shooting Fire People. Such was the madness of
love...with me. With the Swift One it was different. She was very wise.
She did not take any real risks, and I remember, on looking back across
the centuries to that wild love-chase, that when the pigs delayed me
she did not run away very fast, but waited, rather, for me to take up
the pursuit again. Also, she directed her retreat before me, going
always in the direction she wanted to go.

At last came the dark. She led me around the mossy shoulder of a canyon
wall that out-jutted among the trees. After that we penetrated a dense
mass of underbrush that scraped and ripped me in passing. But she never
ruffled a hair. She knew the way. In the midst of the thicket was a
large oak. I was very close to her when she climbed it; and in the
forks, in the nest-shelter I had sought so long and vainly, I caught
her.

The hyena had taken our trail again, and he now sat down on the ground
and made hungry noises. But we did not mind, and we laughed at him when
he snarled and went away through the thicket. It was the spring-time,
and the night noises were many and varied. As was the custom at that
time of the year, there was much fighting among the animals. From the
nest we could hear the squealing and neighing of wild horses, the
trumpeting of elephants, and the roaring of lions. But the moon came
out, and the air was warm, and we laughed and were unafraid.

I remember, next morning, that we came upon two ruffled cock-birds that
fought so ardently that I went right up to them and caught them by
their necks. Thus did the Swift One and I get our wedding breakfast.
They were delicious. It was easy to catch birds in the spring of the
year. There was one night that year when two elk fought in the
moonlight, while the Swift One and I watched from the trees; and we saw
a lion and lioness crawl up to them unheeded, and kill them as they
fought.

There is no telling how long we might have lived in the Swift Ones
tree-shelter. But one day, while we were away, the tree was struck by
lightning. Great limbs were riven, and the nest was demolished. I
started to rebuild, but the Swift One would have nothing to do with it.
As I was to learn, she was greatly afraid of lightning, and I could not
persuade her back into the tree. So it came about, our honeymoon over,
that we went to the caves to live. As Lop-Ear had evicted me from the
cave when he got married, I now evicted him; and the Swift One and I
settled down in it, while he slept at night in the connecting passage
of the double cave.

And with our coming to live with the horde came trouble. Red-Eye had
had I dont know how many wives since the Singing One. She had gone the
way of the rest. At present he had a little, soft, spiritless thing
that whimpered and wept all the time, whether he beat her or not; and
her passing was a question of very little time. Before she passed,
even, Red-Eye set his eyes on the Swift One; and when she passed, the
persecution of the Swift One began.

Well for her that she was the Swift One, that she had that amazing
aptitude for swift flight through the trees. She needed all her wisdom
and daring in order to keep out of the clutches of Red-Eye. I could not
help her. He was so powerful a monster that he could have torn me limb
from limb. As it was, to my death I carried an injured shoulder that
ached and went lame in rainy weather and that was a mark of his
handiwork.

The Swift One was sick at the time I received this injury. It must have
been a touch of the malaria from which we sometimes suffered; but
whatever it was, it made her dull and heavy. She did not have the
accustomed spring to her muscles, and was indeed in poor shape for
flight when Red-Eye cornered her near the lair of the wild dogs,
several miles south from the caves. Usually, she would have circled
around him, beaten him in the straight-away, and gained the protection
of our small-mouthed cave. But she could not circle him. She was too
dull and slow. Each time he headed her off, until she gave over the
attempt and devoted her energies wholly to keeping out of his clutches.

Had she not been sick it would have been childs play for her to elude
him; but as it was, it required all her caution and cunning. It was to
her advantage that she could travel on thinner branches than he, and
make wider leaps. Also, she was an unerring judge of distance, and she
had an instinct for knowing the strength of twigs, branches, and rotten
limbs.

It was an interminable chase. Round and round and back and forth for
long stretches through the forest they dashed. There was great
excitement among the other Folk. They set up a wild chattering, that
was loudest when Red-Eye was at a distance, and that hushed when the
chase led him near. They were impotent onlookers. The females screeched
and gibbered, and the males beat their chests in helpless rage. Big
Face was especially angry, and though he hushed his racket when Red-Eye
drew near, he did not hush it to the extent the others did.

As for me, I played no brave part. I know I was anything but a hero.
Besides, of what use would it have been for me to encounter Red-Eye? He
was the mighty monster, the abysmal brute, and there was no hope for me
in a conflict of strength. He would have killed me, and the situation
would have remained unchanged. He would have caught the Swift One
before she could have gained the cave. As it was, I could only look on
in helpless fury, and dodge out of the way and cease my raging when he
came too near.

The hours passed. It was late afternoon. And still the chase went on.
Red-Eye was bent upon exhausting the Swift One. He deliberately ran her
down. After a long time she began to tire and could no longer maintain
her headlong flight. Then it was that she began going far out on the
thinnest branches, where he could not follow. Thus she might have got a
breathing spell, but Red-Eye was fiendish. Unable to follow her, he
dislodged her by shaking her off. With all his strength and weight, he
would shake the branch back and forth until he snapped her off as one
would snap a fly from a whip-lash. The first time, she saved herself by
falling into branches lower down. Another time, though they did not
save her from the ground, they broke her fall. Still another time, so
fiercely did he snap her from the branch, she was flung clear across a
gap into another tree. It was remarkable, the way she gripped and saved
herself. Only when driven to it did she seek the temporary safety of
the thin branches. But she was so tired that she could not otherwise
avoid him, and time after time she was compelled to take to the thin
branches.

Still the chase went on, and still the Folk screeched, beat their
chests, and gnashed their teeth. Then came the end. It was almost
twilight. Trembling, panting, struggling for breath, the Swift One
clung pitiably to a high thin branch. It was thirty feet to the ground,
and nothing intervened. Red-Eye swung back and forth on the branch
farther down. It became a pendulum, swinging wider and wider with every
lunge of his weight. Then he reversed suddenly, just before the
downward swing was completed. Her grips were torn loose, and,
screaming, she was hurled toward the ground.

But she righted herself in mid-air and descended feet first.
Ordinarily, from such a height, the spring in her legs would have eased
the shock of impact with the ground. But she was exhausted. She could
not exercise this spring. Her legs gave under her, having only partly
met the shock, and she crashed on over on her side. This, as it turned
out, did not injure her, but it did knock the breath from her lungs.
She lay helpless and struggling for air.

Red-Eye rushed upon her and seized her. With his gnarly fingers twisted
into the hair of her head, he stood up and roared in triumph and
defiance at the awed Folk that watched from the trees. Then it was that
I went mad. Caution was thrown to the winds; forgotten was the will to
live of my flesh. Even as Red-Eye roared, from behind I dashed upon
him. So unexpected was my charge that I knocked him off his feet. I
twined my arms and legs around him and strove to hold him down. This
would have been impossible to accomplish had he not held tightly with
one hand to the Swift Ones hair.

Encouraged by my conduct, Big-Face became a sudden ally. He charged in,
sank his teeth in Red-Eyes arm, and ripped and tore at his face. This
was the time for the rest of the Folk to have joined in. It was the
chance to do for Red-Eye for all time. But they remained afraid in the
trees.

It was inevitable that Red-Eye should win in the struggle against the
two of us. The reason he did not finish us off immediately was that the
Swift One clogged his movements. She had regained her breath and was
beginning to resist. He would not release his clutch on her hair, and
this handicapped him. He got a grip on my arm. It was the beginning of
the end for me. He began to draw me toward him into a position where he
could sink his teeth into my throat. His mouth was open, and he was
grinning. And yet, though he had just begun to exert his strength, in
that moment he wrenched my shoulder so that I suffered from it for the
remainder of my life.

And in that moment something happened. There was no warning. A great
body smashed down upon the four of us locked together. We were driven
violently apart and rolled over and over, and in the suddenness of
surprise we released our holds on one another. At the moment of the
shock, Big-Face screamed terribly. I did not know what had happened,
though I smelled tiger and caught a glimpse of striped fur as I sprang
for a tree.

It was old Saber-Tooth. Aroused in his lair by the noise we had made,
he had crept upon us unnoticed. The Swift One gained the next tree to
mine, and I immediately joined her. I put my arms around her and held
her close to me while she whimpered and cried softly. From the ground
came a snarling, and crunching of bones. It was Saber-Tooth making his
supper off of what had been Big-Face. From beyond, with inflamed rims
and eyes, Red-Eye peered down. Here was a monster mightier than he. The
Swift One and I turned and went away quietly through the trees toward
the cave, while the Folk gathered overhead and showered down abuse and
twigs and branches upon their ancient enemy. He lashed his tail and
snarled, but went on eating.

And in such fashion were we saved. It was a mere accidentthe sheerest
accident. Else would I have died, there in Red-Eyes clutch, and there
would have been no bridging of time to the tune of a thousand centuries
down to a progeny that reads newspapers and rides on electric carsay,
and that writes narratives of bygone happenings even as this is
written.




CHAPTER XVII


It was in the early fall of the following year that it happened. After
his failure to get the Swift One, Red-Eye had taken another wife; and,
strange to relate, she was still alive. Stranger still, they had a baby
several months oldRed-Eyes first child. His previous wives had never
lived long enough to bear him children. The year had gone well for all
of us. The weather had been exceptionally mild and food plentiful. I
remember especially the turnips of that year. The nut crop was also
very heavy, and the wild plums were larger and sweeter than usual.

In short, it was a golden year. And then it happened. It was in the
early morning, and we were surprised in our caves. In the chill gray
light we awoke from sleep, most of us, to encounter death. The Swift
One and I were aroused by a pandemonium of screeching and gibbering.
Our cave was the highest of all on the cliff, and we crept to the mouth
and peered down. The open space was filled with the Fire People. Their
cries and yells were added to the clamor, but they had order and plan,
while we Folk had none. Each one of us fought and acted for himself,
and no one of us knew the extent of the calamity that was befalling us.

By the time we got to stone-throwing, the Fire People had massed thick
at the base of the cliff. Our first volley must have mashed some heads,
for when they swerved back from the cliff three of their number were
left upon the ground. These were struggling and floundering, and one
was trying to crawl away. But we fixed them. By this time we males were
roaring with rage, and we rained rocks upon the three men that were
down. Several of the Fire-Men returned to drag them into safety, but
our rocks drove the rescuers back.

The Fire People became enraged. Also, they became cautious. In spite of
their angry yells, they kept at a distance and sent flights of arrows
against us. This put an end to the rock-throwing. By the time half a
dozen of us had been killed and a score injured, the rest of us
retreated inside our caves. I was not out of range in my lofty cave,
but the distance was great enough to spoil effective shooting, and the
Fire People did not waste many arrows on me. Furthermore, I was
curious. I wanted to see. While the Swift One remained well inside the
cave, trembling with fear and making low wailing sounds because I would
not come in, I crouched at the entrance and watched.

The fighting had now become intermittent. It was a sort of deadlock. We
were in the caves, and the question with the Fire People was how to get
us out. They did not dare come in after us, and in general we would not
expose ourselves to their arrows. Occasionally, when one of them drew
in close to the base of the cliff, one or another of the Folk would
smash a rock down. In return, he would be transfixed by half a dozen
arrows. This ruse worked well for some time, but finally the Folk no
longer were inveigled into showing themselves. The deadlock was
complete.

Behind the Fire People I could see the little wizened old hunter
directing it all. They obeyed him, and went here and there at his
commands. Some of them went into the forest and returned with loads of
dry wood, leaves, and grass. All the Fire People drew in closer. While
most of them stood by with bows and arrows, ready to shoot any of the
Folk that exposed themselves, several of the Fire-Men heaped the dry
grass and wood at the mouths of the lower tier of caves. Out of these
heaps they conjured the monster we feared_FIRE_. At first, wisps of
smoke arose and curled up the cliff. Then I could see the red-tongued
flames darting in and out through the wood like tiny snakes. The smoke
grew thicker and thicker, at times shrouding the whole face of the
cliff. But I was high up and it did not bother me much, though it stung
my eyes and I rubbed them with my knuckles.

Old Marrow-Bone was the first to be smoked out. A light fan of air
drifted the smoke away at the time so that I saw clearly. He broke out
through the smoke, stepping on a burning coal and screaming with the
sudden hurt of it, and essayed to climb up the cliff. The arrows
showered about him. He came to a pause on a ledge, clutching a knob of
rock for support, gasping and sneezing and shaking his head. He swayed
back and forth. The feathered ends of a dozen arrows were sticking out
of him. He was an old man, and he did not want to die. He swayed wider
and wider, his knees giving under him, and as he swayed he wailed most
plaintively. His hand released its grip and he lurched outward to the
fall. His old bones must have been sadly broken. He groaned and strove
feebly to rise, but a Fire-Man rushed in upon him and brained him with
a club.

And as it happened with Marrow-Bone, so it happened with many of the
Folk. Unable to endure the smoke-suffocation, they rushed out to fall
beneath the arrows. Some of the women and children remained in the
caves to strangle to death, but the majority met death outside.

When the Fire-Men had in this fashion cleared the first tier of caves,
they began making arrangements to duplicate the operation on the second
tier of caves. It was while they were climbing up with their grass and
wood, that Red-Eye, followed by his wife, with the baby holding to her
tightly, made a successful flight up the cliff. The Fire-Men must have
concluded that in the interval between the smoking-out operations we
would remain in our caves; so that they were unprepared, and their
arrows did not begin to fly till Red-Eye and his wife were well up the
wall. When he reached the top, he turned about and glared down at them,
roaring and beating his chest. They arched their arrows at him, and
though he was untouched he fled on.

I watched a third tier smoked out, and a fourth. A few of the Folk
escaped up the cliff, but most of them were shot off the face of it as
they strove to climb. I remember Long-Lip. He got as far as my ledge,
crying piteously, an arrow clear through his chest, the feathered shaft
sticking out behind, the bone head sticking out before, shot through
the back as he climbed. He sank down on my ledge bleeding profusely at
the mouth.

It was about this time that the upper tiers seemed to empty themselves
spontaneously. Nearly all the Folk not yet smoked out stampeded up the
cliff at the same time. This was the saving of many. The Fire People
could not shoot arrows fast enough. They filled the air with arrows,
and scores of the stricken Folk came tumbling down; but still there
were a few who reached the top and got away.

The impulse of flight was now stronger in me than curiosity. The arrows
had ceased flying. The last of the Folk seemed gone, though there may
have been a few still hiding in the upper caves. The Swift One and I
started to make a scramble for the cliff-top. At sight of us a great
cry went up from the Fire People. This was not caused by me, but by the
Swift One. They were chattering excitedly and pointing her out to one
another. They did not try to shoot her. Not an arrow was discharged.
They began calling softly and coaxingly. I stopped and looked down. She
was afraid, and whimpered and urged me on. So we went up over the top
and plunged into the trees.

This event has often caused me to wonder and speculate. If she were
really of their kind, she must have been lost from them at a time when
she was too young to remember, else would she not have been afraid of
them. On the other hand, it may well have been that while she was their
kind she had never been lost from them; that she had been born in the
wild forest far from their haunts, her father maybe a renegade
Fire-Man, her mother maybe one of my own kind, one of the Folk. But who
shall say? These things are beyond me, and the Swift One knew no more
about them than did I.

We lived through a day of terror. Most of the survivors fled toward the
blueberry swamp and took refuge in the forest in that neighborhood. And
all day hunting parties of the Fire People ranged the forest, killing
us wherever they found us. It must have been a deliberately executed
plan. Increasing beyond the limits of their own territory, they had
decided on making a conquest of ours. Sorry the conquest! We had no
chance against them. It was slaughter, indiscriminate slaughter, for
they spared none, killing old and young, effectively ridding the land
of our presence.

It was like the end of the world to us. We fled to the trees as a last
refuge, only to be surrounded and killed, family by family. We saw much
of this during that day, and besides, I wanted to see. The Swift One
and I never remained long in one tree, and so escaped being surrounded.
But there seemed no place to go. The Fire-Men were everywhere, bent on
their task of extermination. Every way we turned we encountered them,
and because of this we saw much of their handiwork.

I did not see what became of my mother, but I did see the Chatterer
shot down out of the old home-tree. And I am afraid that at the sight I
did a bit of joyous teetering. Before I leave this portion of my
narrative, I must tell of Red-Eye. He was caught with his wife in a
tree down by the blueberry swamp. The Swift One and I stopped long
enough in our flight to see. The Fire-Men were too intent upon their
work to notice us, and, furthermore, we were well screened by the
thicket in which we crouched.

Fully a score of the hunters were under the tree, discharging arrows
into it. They always picked up their arrows when they fell back to
earth. I could not see Red-Eye, but I could hear him howling from
somewhere in the tree.

After a short interval his howling grew muffled. He must have crawled
into a hollow in the trunk. But his wife did not win this shelter. An
arrow brought her to the ground. She was severely hurt, for she made no
effort to get away. She crouched in a sheltering way over her baby
(which clung tightly to her), and made pleading signs and sounds to the
Fire-Men. They gathered about her and laughed at hereven as Lop-Ear
and I had laughed at the old Tree-Man. And even as we had poked him
with twigs and sticks, so did the Fire-Men with Red-Eyes wife. They
poked her with the ends of their bows, and prodded her in the ribs. But
she was poor fun. She would not fight. Nor, for that matter, would she
get angry. She continued to crouch over her baby and to plead. One of
the Fire-Men stepped close to her. In his hand was a club. She saw and
understood, but she made only the pleading sounds until the blow fell.

Red-Eye, in the hollow of the trunk, was safe from their arrows. They
stood together and debated for a while, then one of them climbed into
the tree. What happened up there I could not tell, but I heard him yell
and saw the excitement of those that remained beneath. After several
minutes his body crashed down to the ground. He did not move. They
looked at him and raised his head, but it fell back limply when they
let go. Red-Eye had accounted for himself.

They were very angry. There was an opening into the trunk close to the
ground. They gathered wood and grass and built a fire. The Swift One
and I, our arms around each other, waited and watched in the thicket.
Sometimes they threw upon the fire green branches with many leaves,
whereupon the smoke became very thick.

We saw them suddenly swerve back from the tree. They were not quick
enough. Red-Eyes flying body landed in the midst of them.

He was in a frightful rage, smashing about with his long arms right and
left. He pulled the face off one of them, literally pulled it off with
those gnarly fingers of his and those tremendous muscles. He bit
another through the neck. The Fire-Men fell back with wild fierce
yells, then rushed upon him. He managed to get hold of a club and began
crushing heads like eggshells. He was too much for them, and they were
compelled to fall back again. This was his chance, and he turned his
back upon them and ran for it, still howling wrathfully. A few arrows
sped after him, but he plunged into a thicket and was gone.

The Swift One and I crept quietly away, only to run foul of another
party of Fire-Men. They chased us into the blueberry swamp, but we knew
the tree-paths across the farther morasses where they could not follow
on the ground, and so we escaped. We came out on the other side into a
narrow strip of forest that separated the blueberry swamp from the
great swamp that extended westward. Here we met Lop-Ear. How he had
escaped I cannot imagine, unless he had not slept the preceding night
at the caves.

Here, in the strip of forest, we might have built tree-shelters and
settled down; but the Fire People were performing their work of
extermination thoroughly. In the afternoon, Hair-Face and his wife fled
out from among the trees to the east, passed us, and were gone. They
fled silently and swiftly, with alarm in their faces. In the direction
from which they had come we heard the cries and yells of the hunters,
and the screeching of some one of the Folk. The Fire People had found
their way across the swamp.

The Swift One, Lop-Ear, and I followed on the heels of Hair-Face and
his wife. When we came to the edge of the great swamp, we stopped. We
did not know its paths. It was outside our territory, and it had been
always avoided by the Folk. None had ever gone into itat least, to
return. In our minds it represented mystery and fear, the terrible
unknown. As I say, we stopped at the edge of it. We were afraid. The
cries of the Fire-Men were drawing nearer. We looked at one another.
Hair-Face ran out on the quaking morass and gained the firmer footing
of a grass-hummock a dozen yards away. His wife did not follow. She
tried to, but shrank back from the treacherous surface and cowered
down.

The Swift One did not wait for me, nor did she pause till she had
passed beyond Hair-Face a hundred yards and gained a much larger
hummock. By the time Lop-Ear and I had caught up with her, the Fire-Men
appeared among the trees. Hair-Faces wife, driven by them into panic
terror, dashed after us. But she ran blindly, without caution, and
broke through the crust. We turned and watched, and saw them shoot her
with arrows as she sank down in the mud. The arrows began falling about
us. Hair-Face had now joined us, and the four of us plunged on, we knew
not whither, deeper and deeper into the swamp.




CHAPTER XVIII


Of our wanderings in the great swamp I have no clear knowledge. When I
strive to remember, I have a riot of unrelated impressions and a loss
of time-value. I have no idea of how long we were in that vast
everglade, but it must have been for weeks. My memories of what
occurred invariably take the form of nightmare. For untold ages,
oppressed by protean fear, I am aware of wandering, endlessly
wandering, through a dank and soggy wilderness, where poisonous snakes
struck at us, and animals roared around us, and the mud quaked under us
and sucked at our heels.

I know that we were turned from our course countless times by streams
and lakes and slimy seas. Then there were storms and risings of the
water over great areas of the low-lying lands; and there were periods
of hunger and misery when we were kept prisoners in the trees for days
and days by these transient floods.

Very strong upon me is one picture. Large trees are about us, and from
their branches hang gray filaments of moss, while great creepers, like
monstrous serpents, curl around the trunks and writhe in tangles
through the air. And all about is the mud, soft mud, that bubbles forth
gases, and that heaves and sighs with internal agitations. And in the
midst of all this are a dozen of us. We are lean and wretched, and our
bones show through our tight-stretched skins. We do not sing and
chatter and laugh. We play no pranks. For once our volatile and
exuberant spirits are hopelessly subdued. We make plaintive, querulous
noises, look at one another, and cluster close together. It is like the
meeting of the handful of survivors after the day of the end of the
world.

This event is without connection with the other events in the swamp.
How we ever managed to cross it, I do not know, but at last we came out
where a low range of hills ran down to the bank of the river. It was
our river emerging like ourselves from the great swamp. On the south
bank, where the river had broken its way through the hills, we found
many sand-stone caves. Beyond, toward the west, the ocean boomed on the
bar that lay across the rivers mouth. And here, in the caves, we
settled down in our abiding-place by the sea.

There were not many of us. From time to time, as the days went by, more
of the Folk appeared. They dragged themselves from the swamp singly,
and in twos and threes, more dead than alive, mere perambulating
skeletons, until at last there were thirty of us. Then no more came
from the swamp, and Red-Eye was not among us. It was noticeable that no
children had survived the frightful journey.

I shall not tell in detail of the years we lived by the sea. It was not
a happy abiding-place. The air was raw and chill, and we suffered
continually from coughing and colds. We could not survive in such an
environment. True, we had children; but they had little hold on life
and died early, while we died faster than new ones were born. Our
number steadily diminished.

Then the radical change in our diet was not good for us. We got few
vegetables and fruits, and became fish-eaters. There were mussels and
abalones and clams and rock-oysters, and great ocean-crabs that were
thrown upon the beaches in stormy weather. Also, we found several kinds
of seaweed that were good to eat. But the change in diet caused us
stomach troubles, and none of us ever waxed fat. We were all lean and
dyspeptic-looking. It was in getting the big abalones that Lop-Ear was
lost. One of them closed upon his fingers at low-tide, and then the
flood-tide came in and drowned him. We found his body the next day, and
it was a lesson to us. Not another one of us was ever caught in the
closing shell of an abalone.

The Swift One and I managed to bring up one child, a boyat least we
managed to bring him along for several years. But I am quite confident
he could never have survived that terrible climate. And then, one day,
the Fire People appeared again. They had come down the river, not on a
catamaran, but in a rude dug-out. There were three of them that paddled
in it, and one of them was the little wizened old hunter. They landed
on our beach, and he limped across the sand and examined our caves.

They went away in a few minutes, but the Swift One was badly scared. We
were all frightened, but none of us to the extent that she was. She
whimpered and cried and was restless all that night. In the morning she
took the child in her arms, and by sharp cries, gestures, and example,
started me on our second long flight. There were eight of the Folk (all
that was left of the horde) that remained behind in the caves. There
was no hope for them. Without doubt, even if the Fire People did not
return, they must soon have perished. It was a bad climate down there
by the sea. The Folk were not constituted for the coast-dwelling life.

We travelled south, for days skirting the great swamp but never
venturing into it. Once we broke back to the westward, crossing a range
of mountains and coming down to the coast. But it was no place for us.
There were no treesonly bleak headlands, a thundering surf, and strong
winds that seemed never to cease from blowing. We turned back across
the mountains, travelling east and south, until we came in touch with
the great swamp again.

Soon we gained the southern extremity of the swamp, and we continued
our course south and east. It was a pleasant land. The air was warm,
and we were again in the forest. Later on we crossed a low-lying range
of hills and found ourselves in an even better forest country. The
farther we penetrated from the coast the warmer we found it, and we
went on and on until we came to a large river that seemed familiar to
the Swift One. It was where she must have come during the four years
absence from the horde. This river we crossed on logs, landing on the
other side at the base of a large bluff. High up on the bluff we found
our new home most difficult of access and quite hidden from any eye
beneath.

There is little more of my tale to tell. Here the Swift One and I lived
and reared our family. And here my memories end. We never made another
migration. I never dream beyond our high, inaccessible cave. And here
must have been born the child that inherited the stuff of my dreams,
that had moulded into its being all the impressions of my lifeor of
the life of Big-Tooth, rather, who is my other-self, and not my real
self, but who is so real to me that often I am unable to tell what age
I am living in.

I often wonder about this line of descent. I, the modern, am
incontestably a man; yet I, Big-Tooth, the primitive, am not a man.
Somewhere, and by straight line of descent, these two parties to my
dual personality were connected. Were the Folk, before their
destruction, in the process of becoming men? And did I and mine carry
through this process? On the other hand, may not some descendant of
mine have gone in to the Fire People and become one of them? I do not
know. There is no way of learning. One thing only is certain, and that
is that Big-Tooth did stamp into the cerebral constitution of one of
his progeny all the impressions of his life, and stamped them in so
indelibly that the hosts of intervening generations have failed to
obliterate them.

There is one other thing of which I must speak before I close. It is a
dream that I dream often, and in point of time the real event must have
occurred during the period of my living in the high, inaccessible cave.
I remember that I wandered far in the forest toward the east. There I
came upon a tribe of Tree People. I crouched in a thicket and watched
them at play. They were holding a laughing council, jumping up and down
and screeching rude choruses.

Suddenly they hushed their noise and ceased their capering. They shrank
down in fear, and quested anxiously about with their eyes for a way of
retreat. Then Red-Eye walked in among them. They cowered away from him.
All were frightened. But he made no attempt to hurt them. He was one of
them. At his heels, on stringy bended legs, supporting herself with
knuckles to the ground on either side, walked an old female of the Tree
People, his latest wife. He sat down in the midst of the circle. I can
see him now, as I write this, scowling, his eyes inflamed, as he peers
about him at the circle of the Tree People. And as he peers he crooks
one monstrous leg and with his gnarly toes scratches himself on the
stomach. He is Red-Eye, the atavism.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEFORE ADAM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Children of the Frost
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Children of the Frost

Author: Jack London

Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10736]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Credits: E-text prepared by Wilelmina Mallire and Project Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILDREN OF THE FROST ***

CHILDREN OF THE FROST

BY JACK LONDON

1902






[Illustration: "And the girl, Kasaan, crept in, very timid and quiet,
and dropped a little bag upon the things for my journey."




CONTENTS


IN THE FORESTS OF THE NORTH

THE LAW OF LIFE

NAM-BOK THE UNVERACIOUS

THE MASTER OF MYSTERY

THE SUNLANDERS

THE SICKNESS OF LONE CHIEF

KEESH, THE SON OF KEESH

THE DEATH OF LIGOUN

LI WAN, THE FAIR

THE LEAGUE OF THE OLD MEN




IN THE FORESTS OF THE NORTH


A weary journey beyond the last scrub timber and straggling copses,
into the heart of the Barrens where the niggard North is supposed to
deny the Earth, are to be found great sweeps of forests and stretches
of smiling land. But this the world is just beginning to know. The
world's explorers have known it, from time to time, but hitherto they
have never returned to tell the world.

The Barrens--well, they are the Barrens, the bad lands of the Arctic,
the deserts of the Circle, the bleak and bitter home of the musk-ox
and the lean plains wolf. So Avery Van Brunt found them, treeless and
cheerless, sparsely clothed with moss and lichens, and altogether
uninviting. At least so he found them till he penetrated to the white
blank spaces on the map, and came upon undreamed-of rich spruce
forests and unrecorded Eskimo tribes. It had been his intention, (and
his bid for fame), to break up these white blank spaces and diversify
them with the black markings of mountain-chains, sinks and basins, and
sinuous river courses; and it was with added delight that he came to
speculate upon the possibilities of timber belts and native villages.

Avery Van Brunt, or, in full distinction, Professor A. Van Brunt of
the Geological Survey, was second in command of the expedition, and
first in command of the sub-expedition which he had led on a side tour
of some half a thousand miles up one of the branches of the Thelon and
which he was now leading into one of his unrecorded villages. At his
back plodded eight men, two of them French-Canadian _voyageurs_,
and the remainder strapping Crees from Manitoba-way. He, alone, was
full-blooded Saxon, and his blood was pounding fiercely through his
veins to the traditions of his race. Clive and Hastings, Drake and
Raleigh, Hengest and Horsa, walked with him. First of all men of his
breed was he to enter this lone Northland village, and at the thought
an exultancy came upon him, an exaltation, and his followers noted
that his leg-weariness fell from him and that he insensibly quickened
the pace.

The village emptied itself, and a motley crowd trooped out to meet
him, men in the forefront, with bows and spears clutched menacingly,
and women and children faltering timidly in the rear. Van Brunt lifted
his right arm and made the universal peace sign, a sign which all
peoples know, and the villagers answered in peace. But to his chagrin,
a skin-clad man ran forward and thrust out his hand with a familiar
"Hello." He was a bearded man, with cheeks and brow bronzed to
copper-brown, and in him Van Brunt knew his kind.

"Who are you?" he asked, gripping the extended hand. "Andre?"

"Who's Andre?" the man asked back.

Van Brunt looked at him more sharply. "By George, you've been here
some time."

"Five years," the man answered, a dim flicker of pride in his eyes.
"But come on, let's talk."

"Let them camp alongside of me," he answered Van Brunt's glance at his
party. "Old Tantlatch will take care of them. Come on."

He swung off in a long stride, Van Brunt following at his heels
through the village. In irregular fashion, wherever the ground
favored, the lodges of moose hide were pitched. Van Brunt ran his
practised eye over them and calculated.

"Two hundred, not counting the young ones," he summed up.

The man nodded. "Pretty close to it. But here's where I live, out of
the thick of it, you know--more privacy and all that. Sit down. I'll
eat with you when your men get something cooked up. I've forgotten
what tea tastes like.... Five years and never a taste or smell.... Any
tobacco?... Ah, thanks, and a pipe? Good. Now for a fire-stick and
we'll see if the weed has lost its cunning."

He scratched the match with the painstaking care of the woodsman,
cherished its young flame as though there were never another in all
the world, and drew in the first mouthful of smoke. This he retained
meditatively for a time, and blew out through his pursed lips slowly
and caressingly. Then his face seemed to soften as he leaned back,
and a soft blur to film his eyes. He sighed heavily, happily, with
immeasurable content, and then said suddenly:

"God! But that tastes good!"

Van Brunt nodded sympathetically. "Five years, you say?"

"Five years." The man sighed again. "And you, I presume, wish to know
about it, being naturally curious, and this a sufficiently strange
situation, and all that. But it's not much. I came in from Edmonton
after musk-ox, and like Pike and the rest of them, had my mischances,
only I lost my party and outfit. Starvation, hardship, the regular
tale, you know, sole survivor and all that, till I crawled into
Tantlatch's, here, on hand and knee."

"Five years," Van Brunt murmured retrospectively, as though turning
things over in his mind.

"Five years on February last. I crossed the Great Slave early in
May--"

"And you are ... Fairfax?" Van Brunt interjected.

The man nodded.

"Let me see ... John, I think it is, John Fairfax."

"How did you know?" Fairfax queried lazily, half-absorbed in curling
smoke-spirals upward in the quiet air.

"The papers were full of it at the time. Prevanche--"

"Prevanche!" Fairfax sat up, suddenly alert. "He was lost in the Smoke
Mountains."

"Yes, but he pulled through and came out."

Fairfax settled back again and resumed his smoke-spirals. "I am glad
to hear it," he remarked reflectively. "Prevanche was a bully fellow
if he _did_ have ideas about head-straps, the beggar. And he pulled
through? Well, I'm glad."

Five years ... the phrase drifted recurrently through Van Brunt's
thought, and somehow the face of Emily Southwaithe seemed to rise up
and take form before him. Five years ... A wedge of wild-fowl honked
low overhead and at sight of the encampment veered swiftly to the
north into the smouldering sun. Van Brunt could not follow them. He
pulled out his watch. It was an hour past midnight. The northward
clouds flushed bloodily, and rays of sombre-red shot southward, firing
the gloomy woods with a lurid radiance. The air was in breathless
calm, not a needle quivered, and the least sounds of the camp were
distinct and clear as trumpet calls. The Crees and _voyageurs_ felt
the spirit of it and mumbled in dreamy undertones, and the cook
unconsciously subdued the clatter of pot and pan. Somewhere a child
was crying, and from the depths of the forest, like a silver
thread, rose a woman's voice in mournful chant:

"O-o-o-o-o-o-a-haa-ha-a-ha-aa-a-a, O-o-o-o-o-o-a-ha-a-ha-a."

Van Brunt shivered and rubbed the backs of his hands briskly.

"And they gave me up for dead?" his companion asked slowly.

"Well, you never came back, so your friends--"

"Promptly forgot." Fairfax laughed harshly, defiantly.

"Why didn't you come out?"

"Partly disinclination, I suppose, and partly because of circumstances
over which I had no control. You see, Tantlatch, here, was down with a
broken leg when I made his acquaintance,--a nasty fracture,--and I
set it for him and got him into shape. I stayed some time, getting my
strength back. I was the first white man he had seen, and of course I
seemed very wise and showed his people no end of things. Coached them
up in military tactics, among other things, so that they conquered the
four other tribal villages, (which you have not yet seen), and came to
rule the land. And they naturally grew to think a good deal of me, so
much so that when I was ready to go they wouldn't hear of it. Were
most hospitable, in fact. Put a couple of guards over me and watched
me day and night. And then Tantlatch offered me inducements,--in a
sense, inducements,--so to say, and as it didn't matter much one way
or the other, I reconciled myself to remaining."

"I knew your brother at Freiburg. I am Van Brunt."

Fairfax reached forward impulsively and shook his hand. "You were
Billy's friend, eh? Poor Billy! He spoke of you often."

"Rum meeting place, though," he added, casting an embracing glance
over the primordial landscape and listening for a moment to the
woman's mournful notes. "Her man was clawed by a bear, and she's
taking it hard."

"Beastly life!" Van Brunt grimaced his disgust. "I suppose, after five
years of it, civilization will be sweet? What do you say?"

Fairfax's face took on a stolid expression. "Oh, I don't know. At
least they're honest folk and live according to their lights. And then
they are amazingly simple. No complexity about them, no thousand and
one subtle ramifications to every single emotion they experience. They
love, fear, hate, are angered, or made happy, in common, ordinary, and
unmistakable terms. It may be a beastly life, but at least it is easy
to live. No philandering, no dallying. If a woman likes you, she'll
not be backward in telling you so. If she hates you, she'll tell you
so, and then, if you feel inclined, you can beat her, but the thing
is, she knows precisely what you mean, and you know precisely what
she means. No mistakes, no misunderstandings. It has its charm, after
civilization's fitful fever. Comprehend?"

"No, it's a pretty good life," he continued, after a pause; "good
enough for me, and I intend to stay with it."

Van Brunt lowered his head in a musing manner, and an imperceptible
smile played on his mouth. No philandering, no dallying, no
misunderstanding. Fairfax also was taking it hard, he thought, just
because Emily Southwaithe had been mistakenly clawed by a bear. And
not a bad sort of a bear, either, was Carlton Southwaithe.

"But you are coming along with me," Van Brunt said deliberately.

"No, I'm not."

"Yes, you are."

"Life's too easy here, I tell you." Fairfax spoke with decision.
"I understand everything, and I am understood. Summer and winter
alternate like the sun flashing through the palings of a fence, the
seasons are a blur of light and shade, and time slips by, and life
slips by, and then ... a wailing in the forest, and the dark. Listen!"

He held up his hand, and the silver thread of the woman's sorrow rose
through the silence and the calm. Fairfax joined in softly.

"O-o-o-o-o-o-a-haa-ha-a-ha-aa-a-a, O-o-o-o-o-o-a-ha-a-ha-a," he sang.
"Can't you hear it? Can't you see it? The women mourning? the funeral
chant? my hair white-locked and patriarchal? my skins wrapped in rude
splendor about me? my hunting-spear by my side? And who shall say it
is not well?"

Van Brunt looked at him coolly. "Fairfax, you are a damned fool. Five
years of this is enough to knock any man, and you are in an unhealthy,
morbid condition. Further, Carlton Southwaithe is dead."

Van Brunt filled his pipe and lighted it, the while watching slyly
and with almost professional interest. Fairfax's eyes flashed on the
instant, his fists clenched, he half rose up, then his muscles relaxed
and he seemed to brood. Michael, the cook, signalled that the meal was
ready, but Van Brunt motioned back to delay. The silence hung heavy,
and he fell to analyzing the forest scents, the odors of mould and
rotting vegetation, the resiny smells of pine cones and needles, the
aromatic savors of many camp-smokes. Twice Fairfax looked up, but said
nothing, and then:

"And ... Emily ...?"

"Three years a widow; still a widow."

Another long silence settled down, to be broken by Fairfax finally
with a nave smile. "I guess you're right, Van Brunt. I'll go along."

"I knew you would." Van Brunt laid his hand on Fairfax's shoulder. "Of
course, one cannot know, but I imagine--for one in her position--she
has had offers--"

"When do you start?" Fairfax interrupted.

"After the men have had some sleep. Which reminds me, Michael is
getting angry, so come and eat."

After supper, when the Crees and _voyageurs_ had rolled into their
blankets, snoring, the two men lingered by the dying fire. There was
much to talk about,--wars and politics and explorations, the doings
of men and the happening of things, mutual friends, marriages,
deaths,--five years of history for which Fairfax clamored.

"So the Spanish fleet was bottled up in Santiago," Van Brunt was
saying, when a young woman stepped lightly before him and stood by
Fairfax's side. She looked swiftly into his face, then turned a
troubled gaze upon Van Brunt.

"Chief Tantlatch's daughter, sort of princess," Fairfax explained,
with an honest flush. "One of the inducements, in short, to make me
stay. Thom, this is Van Brunt, friend of mine."

Van Brunt held out his hand, but the woman maintained a rigid repose
quite in keeping with her general appearance. Not a line of her face
softened, not a feature unbent. She looked him straight in the eyes,
her own piercing, questioning, searching.

"Precious lot she understands," Fairfax laughed. "Her first
introduction, you know. But as you were saying, with the Spanish fleet
bottled up in Santiago?"

Thom crouched down by her husband's side, motionless as a bronze
statue, only her eyes flashing from face to face in ceaseless search.
And Avery Van Brunt, as he talked on and on, felt a nervousness under
the dumb gaze. In the midst of his most graphic battle descriptions,
he would become suddenly conscious of the black eyes burning into him,
and would stumble and flounder till he could catch the gait and go
again. Fairfax, hands clasped round knees, pipe out, absorbed, spurred
him on when he lagged, and repictured the world he thought he had
forgotten.

One hour passed, and two, and Fairfax rose reluctantly to his feet.
"And Cronje was cornered, eh? Well, just wait a moment till I run over
to Tantlatch. He'll be expecting you, and I'll arrange for you to see
him after breakfast. That will be all right, won't it?"

He went off between the pines, and Van Brunt found himself staring
into Thom's warm eyes. Five years, he mused, and she can't be more
than twenty now. A most remarkable creature. Being Eskimo, she should
have a little flat excuse for a nose, and lo, it is neither broad nor
flat, but aquiline, with nostrils delicately and sensitively formed
as any fine lady's of a whiter breed--the Indian strain somewhere, be
assured, Avery Van Brunt. And, Avery Van Brunt, don't be nervous, she
won't eat you; she's only a woman, and not a bad-looking one at that.
Oriental rather than aborigine. Eyes large and fairly wide apart, with
just the faintest hint of Mongol obliquity. Thom, you're an anomaly.
You're out of place here among these Eskimos, even if your father is
one. Where did your mother come from? or your grandmother? And Thom,
my dear, you're a beauty, a frigid, frozen little beauty with Alaskan
lava in your blood, and please don't look at me that way.

He laughed and stood up. Her insistent stare disconcerted him. A dog
was prowling among the grub-sacks. He would drive it away and place
them into safety against Fairfax's return. But Thom stretched out a
detaining hand and stood up, facing him.

"You?" she said, in the Arctic tongue which differs little from
Greenland to Point Barrow. "You?"

And the swift expression of her face demanded all for which "you"
stood, his reason for existence, his presence there, his relation to
her husband--everything.

"Brother," he answered in the same tongue, with a sweeping gesture to
the south. "Brothers we be, your man and I."

She shook her head. "It is not good that you be here."

"After one sleep I go."

"And my man?" she demanded, with tremulous eagerness.

Van Brunt shrugged his shoulders. He was aware of a certain secret
shame, of an impersonal sort of shame, and an anger against Fairfax.
And he felt the warm blood in his face as he regarded the young
savage. She was just a woman. That was all--a woman. The whole sordid
story over again, over and over again, as old as Eve and young as the
last new love-light.

"My man! My man! My man!" she was reiterating vehemently, her face
passionately dark, and the ruthless tenderness of the Eternal Woman,
the Mate-Woman, looking out at him from her eyes.

"Thom," he said gravely, in English, "you were born in the Northland
forest, and you have eaten fish and meat, and fought with frost and
famine, and lived simply all the days of your life. And there are many
things, indeed not simple, which you do not know and cannot come to
understand. You do not know what it is to long for the fleshpots afar,
you cannot understand what it is to yearn for a fair woman's face. And
the woman is fair, Thom, the woman is nobly fair. You have been woman
to this man, and you have been your all, but your all is very little,
very simple. Too little and too simple, and he is an alien man. Him
you have never known, you can never know. It is so ordained. You held
him in your arms, but you never held his heart, this man with his
blurring seasons and his dreams of a barbaric end. Dreams and
dream-dust, that is what he has been to you. You clutched at form and
gripped shadow, gave yourself to a man and bedded with the wraith of
a man. In such manner, of old, did the daughters of men whom the gods
found fair. And, Thom, Thom, I should not like to be John Fairfax in
the night-watches of the years to come, in the night-watches, when his
eyes shall see, not the sun-gloried hair of the woman by his side, but
the dark tresses of a mate forsaken in the forests of the North."

Though she did not understand, she had listened with intense
attention, as though life hung on his speech. But she caught at her
husband's name and cried out in Eskimo:--

"Yes! Yes! Fairfax! My man!"

"Poor little fool, how could he be your man?"

But she could not understand his English tongue, and deemed that she
was being trifled with. The dumb, insensate anger of the Mate-Woman
flamed in her face, and it almost seemed to the man as though she
crouched panther-like for the spring.

He cursed softly to himself and watched the fire fade from her face
and the soft luminous glow of the appealing woman spring up, of the
appealing woman who foregoes strength and panoplies herself wisely in
her weakness.

"He is my man," she said gently. "Never have I known other. It cannot
be that I should ever know other. Nor can it be that he should go from
me."

"Who has said he shall go from thee?" he demanded sharply, half in
exasperation, half in impotence.

"It is for thee to say he shall not go from me," she answered softly,
a half-sob in her throat.

Van Brunt kicked the embers of the fire savagely and sat down.

"It is for thee to say. He is my man. Before all women he is my man.
Thou art big, thou art strong, and behold, I am very weak. See, I am
at thy feet. It is for thee to deal with me. It is for thee."

"Get up!" He jerked her roughly erect and stood up himself. "Thou art
a woman. Wherefore the dirt is no place for thee, nor the feet of any
man."

"He is my man."

"Then Jesus forgive all men!" Van Brunt cried out passionately.

"He is my man," she repeated monotonously, beseechingly.

"He is my brother," he answered.

"My father is Chief Tantlatch. He is a power over five villages. I
will see that the five villages be searched for thy choice of all
maidens, that thou mayest stay here by thy brother, and dwell in
comfort."

"After one sleep I go."

"And my man?"

"Thy man comes now. Behold!"

From among the gloomy spruces came the light carolling of Fairfax's
voice.

As the day is quenched by a sea of fog, so his song smote the light
out of her face. "It is the tongue of his own people," she said; "the
tongue of his own people."

She turned, with the free movement of a lithe young animal, and made
off into the forest.

"It's all fixed," Fairfax called as he came up. "His regal highness
will receive you after breakfast."

"Have you told him?" Van Brunt asked.

"No. Nor shall I tell him till we're ready to pull out."

Van Brunt looked with moody affection over the sleeping forms of his
men.

"I shall be glad when we are a hundred leagues upon our way," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thom raised the skin-flap of her father's lodge. Two men sat with
him, and the three looked at her with swift interest. But her face
betokened nothing as she entered and took seat quietly, without
speech. Tantlatch drummed with his knuckles on a spear-heft across
his knees, and gazed idly along the path of a sun-ray which pierced a
lacing-hole and flung a glittering track across the murky atmosphere
of the lodge. To his right, at his shoulder, crouched Chugungatte, the
shaman. Both were old men, and the weariness of many years brooded in
their eyes. But opposite them sat Keen, a young man and chief favorite
in the tribe. He was quick and alert of movement, and his black eyes
flashed from face to face in ceaseless scrutiny and challenge.

Silence reigned in the place. Now and again camp noises penetrated,
and from the distance, faint and far, like the shadows of voices, came
the wrangling of boys in thin shrill tones. A dog thrust his head into
the entrance and blinked wolfishly at them for a space, the slaver
dripping from his ivory-white fangs. After a time he growled
tentatively, and then, awed by the immobility of the human figures,
lowered his head and grovelled away backward. Tantlatch glanced
apathetically at his daughter.

"And thy man, how is it with him and thee?"

"He sings strange songs," Thom made answer, "and there is a new look
on his face."

"So? He hath spoken?"

"Nay, but there is a new look on his face, a new light in his eyes,
and with the New-Comer he sits by the fire, and they talk and talk,
and the talk is without end."

Chugungatte whispered in his master's ear, and Keen leaned forward
from his hips.

"There be something calling him from afar," she went on, "and he
seems to sit and listen, and to answer, singing, in his own people's
tongue."

Again Chugungatte whispered and Keen leaned forward, and Thom held her
speech till her father nodded his head that she might proceed.

"It be known to thee, O Tantlatch, that the wild goose and the swan
and the little ringed duck be born here in the low-lying lands. It
be known that they go away before the face of the frost to unknown
places. And it be known, likewise, that always do they return when the
sun is in the land and the waterways are free. Always do they return
to where they were born, that new life may go forth. The land calls to
them and they come. And now there is another land that calls, and it
is calling to my man,--the land where he was born,--and he hath it in
mind to answer the call. Yet is he my man. Before all women is he my
man."

"Is it well, Tantlatch? Is it well?" Chugungatte demanded, with the
hint of menace in his voice.

"Ay, it is well!" Keen cried boldly. "The land calls to its children,
and all lands call their children home again. As the wild goose and
the swan and the little ringed duck are called, so is called this
Stranger Man who has lingered with us and who now must go. Also there
be the call of kind. The goose mates with the goose, nor does the swan
mate with the little ringed duck. It is not well that the swan should
mate with the little ringed duck. Nor is it well that stranger men
should mate with the women of our villages. Wherefore I say the man
should go, to his own kind, in his own land."

"He is my own man," Thom answered, "and he is a great man."

"Ay, he is a great man." Chugungatte lifted his head with a faint
recrudescence of youthful vigor. "He is a great man, and he put
strength in thy arm, O Tantlatch, and gave thee power, and made thy
name to be feared in the land, to be feared and to be respected. He
is very wise, and there be much profit in his wisdom. To him are we
beholden for many things,--for the cunning in war and the secrets of
the defence of a village and a rush in the forest, for the discussion
in council and the undoing of enemies by word of mouth and the
hard-sworn promise, for the gathering of game and the making of traps
and the preserving of food, for the curing of sickness and mending of
hurts of trail and fight. Thou, Tantlatch, wert a lame old man this
day, were it not that the Stranger Man came into our midst and
attended on thee. And ever, when in doubt on strange questions, have
we gone to him, that out of his wisdom he might make things clear, and
ever has he made things clear. And there be questions yet to arise,
and needs upon his wisdom yet to come, and we cannot bear to let him
go. It is not well that we should let him go."

Tantlatch continued to drum on the spear-haft, and gave no sign that
he had heard. Thom studied his face in vain, and Chugungatte seemed to
shrink together and droop down as the weight of years descended upon
him again.

"No man makes my kill." Keen smote his breast a valorous blow. "I make
my own kill. I am glad to live when I make my own kill. When I creep
through the snow upon the great moose, I am glad. And when I draw the
bow, so, with my full strength, and drive the arrow fierce and swift
and to the heart, I am glad. And the meat of no man's kill tastes
as sweet as the meat of my kill. I am glad to live, glad in my own
cunning and strength, glad that I am a doer of things, a doer of
things for myself. Of what other reason to live than that? Why should
I live if I delight not in myself and the things I do? And it is
because I delight and am glad that I go forth to hunt and fish, and it
is because I go forth to hunt and fish that I grow cunning and strong.
The man who stays in the lodge by the fire grows not cunning and
strong. He is not made happy in the eating of my kill, nor is living
to him a delight. He does not live. And so I say it is well this
Stranger Man should go. His wisdom does not make us wise. If he be
cunning, there is no need that we be cunning. If need arise, we go
to him for his cunning. We eat the meat of his kill, and it tastes
unsweet. We merit by his strength, and in it there is no delight.
We do not live when he does our living for us. We grow fat and like
women, and we are afraid to work, and we forget how to do things for
ourselves. Let the man go, O Tantlatch, that we may be men! I am Keen,
a man, and I make my own kill!"

Tantlatch turned a gaze upon him in which seemed the vacancy of
eternity. Keen waited the decision expectantly; but the lips did not
move, and the old chief turned toward his daughter.

"That which be given cannot be taken away," she burst forth. "I was
but a girl when this Stranger Man, who is my man, came among us. And
I knew not men, or the ways of men, and my heart was in the play of
girls, when thou, Tantlatch, thou and none other, didst call me to
thee and press me into the arms of the Stranger Man. Thou and none
other, Tantlatch; and as thou didst give me to the man, so didst thou
give the man to me. He is my man. In my arms has he slept, and from my
arms he cannot be taken."

"It were well, O Tantlatch," Keen followed quickly, with a significant
glance at Thom, "it were well to remember that that which be given
cannot be taken away."

Chugungatte straightened up. "Out of thy youth, Keen, come the words
of thy mouth. As for ourselves, O Tantlatch, we be old men and we
understand. We, too, have looked into the eyes of women and felt our
blood go hot with strange desires. But the years have chilled us, and
we have learned the wisdom of the council, the shrewdness of the cool
head and hand, and we know that the warm heart be over-warm and prone
to rashness. We know that Keen found favor in thy eyes. We know that
Thom was promised him in the old days when she was yet a child. And we
know that the new days came, and the Stranger Man, and that out of our
wisdom and desire for welfare was Thom lost to Keen and the promise
broken."

The old shaman paused, and looked directly at the young man.

"And be it known that I, Chugungatte, did advise that the promise be
broken."

"Nor have I taken other woman to my bed," Keen broke in. "And I have
builded my own fire, and cooked my own food, and ground my teeth in my
loneliness."

Chugungatte waved his hand that he had not finished. "I am an old man
and I speak from understanding. It be good to be strong and grasp for
power. It be better to forego power that good come out of it. In the
old days I sat at thy shoulder, Tantlatch, and my voice was heard over
all in the council, and my advice taken in affairs of moment. And I
was strong and held power. Under Tantlatch I was the greatest man.
Then came the Stranger Man, and I saw that he was cunning and wise and
great. And in that he was wiser and greater than I, it was plain that
greater profit should arise from him than from me. And I had thy ear,
Tantlatch, and thou didst listen to my words, and the Stranger Man was
given power and place and thy daughter, Thom. And the tribe prospered
under the new laws in the new days, and so shall it continue to
prosper with the Stranger Man in our midst. We be old men, we two, O
Tantlatch, thou and I, and this be an affair of head, not heart. Hear
my words, Tantlatch! Hear my words! The man remains!"

There was a long silence. The old chief pondered with the massive
certitude of God, and Chugungatte seemed to wrap himself in the mists
of a great antiquity. Keen looked with yearning upon the woman, and
she, unnoting, held her eyes steadfastly upon her father's face. The
wolf-dog shoved the flap aside again, and plucking courage at the
quiet, wormed forward on his belly. He sniffed curiously at Thom's
listless hand, cocked ears challengingly at Chugungatte, and hunched
down upon his haunches before Tantlatch. The spear rattled to the
ground, and the dog, with a frightened yell, sprang sideways, snapping
in mid-air, and on the second leap cleared the entrance.

Tantlatch looked from face to face, pondering each one long and
carefully. Then he raised his head, with rude royalty, and gave
judgment in cold and even tones: "The man remains. Let the hunters be
called together. Send a runner to the next village with word to
bring on the fighting men. I shall not see the New-Comer. Do thou,
Chugungatte, have talk with him. Tell him he may go at once, if he
would go in peace. And if fight there be, kill, kill, kill, to the
last man; but let my word go forth that no harm befall our man,--the
man whom my daughter hath wedded. It is well."

Chugungatte rose and tottered out; Thom followed; but as Keen stooped
to the entrance the voice of Tantlatch stopped him.

"Keen, it were well to hearken to my word. The man remains. Let no
harm befall him."

Because of Fairfax's instructions in the art of war, the tribesmen did
not hurl themselves forward boldly and with clamor. Instead, there was
great restraint and self-control, and they were content to advance
silently, creeping and crawling from shelter to shelter. By the river
bank, and partly protected by a narrow open space, crouched the Crees
and _voyageurs_. Their eyes could see nothing, and only in vague
ways did their ears hear, but they felt the thrill of life which
ran through the forest, the indistinct, indefinable movement of an
advancing host.

"Damn them," Fairfax muttered. "They've never faced powder, but I
taught them the trick."

Avery Van Brunt laughed, knocked the ashes out of his pipe, and put it
carefully away with the pouch, and loosened the hunting-knife in its
sheath at his hip.

"Wait," he said. "We'll wither the face of the charge and break their
hearts."

"They'll rush scattered if they remember my teaching."

"Let them. Magazine rifles were made to pump. We'll--good! First
blood! Extra tobacco, Loon!"

Loon, a Cree, had spotted an exposed shoulder and with a stinging
bullet apprised its owner of his discovery.

"If we can tease them into breaking forward," Fairfax muttered,--"if
we can only tease them into breaking forward."

Van Brunt saw a head peer from behind a distant tree, and with a quick
shot sent the man sprawling to the ground in a death struggle. Michael
potted a third, and Fairfax and the rest took a hand, firing at every
exposure and into each clump of agitated brush. In crossing one little
swale out of cover, five of the tribesmen remained on their faces, and
to the left, where the covering was sparse, a dozen men were struck.
But they took the punishment with sullen steadiness, coming on
cautiously, deliberately, without haste and without lagging.

Ten minutes later, when they were quite close, all movement was
suspended, the advance ceased abruptly, and the quietness that
followed was portentous, threatening. Only could be seen the green and
gold of the woods, and undergrowth, shivering and trembling to the
first faint puffs of the day-wind. The wan white morning sun mottled
the earth with long shadows and streaks of light. A wounded man lifted
his head and crawled painfully out of the swale, Michael following
him with his rifle but forbearing to shoot. A whistle ran along the
invisible line from left to right, and a flight of arrows arched
through the air.

"Get ready," Van Brunt commanded, a new metallic note in his voice.
"Now!"

They broke cover simultaneously. The forest heaved into sudden life.
A great yell went up, and the rifles barked back sharp defiance.
Tribesmen knew their deaths in mid-leap, and as they fell, their
brothers surged over them in a roaring, irresistible wave. In the
forefront of the rush, hair flying and arms swinging free, flashing
past the tree-trunks, and leaping the obstructing logs, came Thom.
Fairfax sighted on her and almost pulled trigger ere he knew her.

"The woman! Don't shoot!" he cried. "See! She is unarmed!"

The Crees never heard, nor Michael and his brother _voyageur_, nor Van
Brunt, who was keeping one shell continuously in the air. But Thom
bore straight on, unharmed, at the heels of a skin-clad hunter who had
veered in before her from the side. Fairfax emptied his magazine into
the men to right and left of her, and swung his rifle to meet the big
hunter. But the man, seeming to recognize him, swerved suddenly aside
and plunged his spear into the body of Michael. On the moment Thom had
one arm passed around her husband's neck, and twisting half about,
with voice and gesture was splitting the mass of charging warriors.
A score of men hurled past on either side, and Fairfax, for a brief
instant's space, stood looking upon her and her bronze beauty,
thrilling, exulting, stirred to unknown deeps, visioning strange
things, dreaming, immortally dreaming. Snatches and scraps of
old-world philosophies and new-world ethics floated through his mind,
and things wonderfully concrete and woefully incongruous--hunting
scenes, stretches of sombre forest, vastnesses of silent snow, the
glittering of ballroom lights, great galleries and lecture halls, a
fleeting shimmer of glistening test-tubes, long rows of book-lined
shelves, the throb of machinery and the roar of traffic, a fragment
of forgotten song, faces of dear women and old chums, a lonely
watercourse amid upstanding peaks, a shattered boat on a pebbly
strand, quiet moonlit fields, fat vales, the smell of hay....

A hunter, struck between the eyes with a rifle-ball, pitched forward
lifeless, and with the momentum of his charge slid along the ground.
Fairfax came back to himself. His comrades, those that lived, had been
swept far back among the trees beyond. He could hear the fierce "Hia!
Hia!" of the hunters as they closed in and cut and thrust with their
weapons of bone and ivory. The cries of the stricken men smote him
like blows. He knew the fight was over, the cause was lost, but all
his race traditions and race loyalty impelled him into the welter that
he might die at least with his kind.

"My man! My man!" Thom cried. "Thou art safe!"

He tried to struggle on, but her dead weight clogged his steps.

"There is no need! They are dead, and life be good!"

She held him close around the neck and twined her limbs about his till
he tripped and stumbled, reeled violently to recover footing, tripped
again, and fell backward to the ground. His head struck a jutting
root, and he was half-stunned and could struggle but feebly. In the
fall she had heard the feathered swish of an arrow darting past, and
she covered his body with hers, as with a shield, her arms holding him
tightly, her face and lips pressed upon his neck.

Then it was that Keen rose up from a tangled thicket a score of feet
away. He looked about him with care. The fight had swept on and the
cry of the last man was dying away. There was no one to see. He fitted
an arrow to the string and glanced at the man and woman. Between her
breast and arm the flesh of the man's side showed white. Keen bent the
bow and drew back the arrow to its head. Twice he did so, calmly and
for certainty, and then drove the bone-barbed missile straight home
to the white flesh, gleaming yet more white in the dark-armed,
dark-breasted embrace.




THE LAW OF LIFE


Old Koskoosh listened greedily. Though his sight had long since faded,
his hearing was still acute, and the slightest sound penetrated to the
glimmering intelligence which yet abode behind the withered forehead,
but which no longer gazed forth upon the things of the world. Ah! that
was Sit-cum-to-ha, shrilly anathematizing the dogs as she cuffed
and beat them into the harnesses. Sit-cum-to-ha was his daughter's
daughter, but she was too busy to waste a thought upon her broken
grandfather, sitting alone there in the snow, forlorn and helpless.
Camp must be broken. The long trail waited while the short day refused
to linger. Life called her, and the duties of life, not death. And he
was very close to death now.

The thought made the old man panicky for the moment, and he stretched
forth a palsied hand which wandered tremblingly over the small heap
of dry wood beside him. Reassured that it was indeed there, his hand
returned to the shelter of his mangy furs, and he again fell to
listening. The sulky crackling of half-frozen hides told him that the
chief's moose-skin lodge had been struck, and even then was being
rammed and jammed into portable compass. The chief was his son,
stalwart and strong, head man of the tribesmen, and a mighty hunter.
As the women toiled with the camp luggage, his voice rose, chiding
them for their slowness. Old Koskoosh strained his ears. It was the
last time he would hear that voice. There went Geehow's lodge! And
Tusken's! Seven, eight, nine; only the shaman's could be still
standing. There! They were at work upon it now. He could hear the
shaman grunt as he piled it on the sled. A child whimpered, and a
woman soothed it with soft, crooning gutturals. Little Koo-tee, the
old man thought, a fretful child, and not overstrong. It would die
soon, perhaps, and they would burn a hole through the frozen tundra
and pile rocks above to keep the wolverines away. Well, what did it
matter? A few years at best, and as many an empty belly as a full one.
And in the end, Death waited, ever-hungry and hungriest of them all.

What was that? Oh, the men lashing the sleds and drawing tight the
thongs. He listened, who would listen no more. The whip-lashes snarled
and bit among the dogs. Hear them whine! How they hated the work and
the trail! They were off! Sled after sled churned slowly away into the
silence. They were gone. They had passed out of his life, and he faced
the last bitter hour alone. No. The snow crunched beneath a moccasin;
a man stood beside him; upon his head a hand rested gently. His son
was good to do this thing. He remembered other old men whose sons had
not waited after the tribe. But his son had. He wandered away into the
past, till the young man's voice brought him back.

"Is it well with you?" he asked.

And the old man answered, "It is well."

"There be wood beside you," the younger man continued, "and the fire
burns bright. The morning is gray, and the cold has broken. It will
snow presently. Even now is it snowing."

"Ay, even now is it snowing."

"The tribesmen hurry. Their bales are heavy, and their bellies flat
with lack of feasting. The trail is long and they travel fast. I go
now. It is well?"

"It is well. I am as a last year's leaf, clinging lightly to the stem.
The first breath that blows, and I fall. My voice is become like an
old woman's. My eyes no longer show me the way of my feet, and my feet
are heavy, and I am tired. It is well."

He bowed his head in content till the last noise of the complaining
snow had died away, and he knew his son was beyond recall. Then his
hand crept out in haste to the wood. It alone stood between him and
the eternity that yawned in upon him. At last the measure of his life
was a handful of fagots. One by one they would go to feed the fire,
and just so, step by step, death would creep upon him. When the last
stick had surrendered up its heat, the frost would begin to gather
strength. First his feet would yield, then his hands; and the numbness
would travel, slowly, from the extremities to the body. His head would
fall forward upon his knees, and he would rest. It was easy. All men
must die.

He did not complain. It was the way of life, and it was just. He had
been born close to the earth, close to the earth had he lived, and the
law thereof was not new to him. It was the law of all flesh. Nature
was not kindly to the flesh. She had no concern for that concrete
thing called the individual. Her interest lay in the species, the
race. This was the deepest abstraction old Koskoosh's barbaric mind
was capable of, but he grasped it firmly. He saw it exemplified in all
life. The rise of the sap, the bursting greenness of the willow bud,
the fall of the yellow leaf--in this alone was told the whole history.
But one task did Nature set the individual. Did he not perform it, he
died. Did he perform it, it was all the same, he died. Nature did
not care; there were plenty who were obedient, and it was only the
obedience in this matter, not the obedient, which lived and lived
always. The tribe of Koskoosh was very old. The old men he had known
when a boy, had known old men before them. Therefore it was true that
the tribe lived, that it stood for the obedience of all its members,
way down into the forgotten past, whose very resting-places were
unremembered. They did not count; they were episodes. They had passed
away like clouds from a summer sky. He also was an episode, and would
pass away. Nature did not care. To life she set one task, gave one
law. To perpetuate was the task of life, its law was death. A maiden
was a good creature to look upon, full-breasted and strong, with
spring to her step and light in her eyes. But her task was yet before
her. The light in her eyes brightened, her step quickened, she was
now bold with the young men, now timid, and she gave them of her own
unrest. And ever she grew fairer and yet fairer to look upon, till
some hunter, able no longer to withhold himself, took her to his lodge
to cook and toil for him and to become the mother of his children. And
with the coming of her offspring her looks left her. Her limbs dragged
and shuffled, her eyes dimmed and bleared, and only the little
children found joy against the withered cheek of the old squaw by the
fire. Her task was done. But a little while, on the first pinch of
famine or the first long trail, and she would be left, even as he had
been left, in the snow, with a little pile of wood. Such was the law.

He placed a stick carefully upon the fire and resumed his meditations.
It was the same everywhere, with all things. The mosquitoes vanished
with the first frost. The little tree-squirrel crawled away to die.
When age settled upon the rabbit it became slow and heavy, and could
no longer outfoot its enemies. Even the big bald-face grew clumsy and
blind and quarrelsome, in the end to be dragged down by a handful of
yelping huskies. He remembered how he had abandoned his own father
on an upper reach of the Klondike one winter, the winter before the
missionary came with his talk-books and his box of medicines. Many a
time had Koskoosh smacked his lips over the recollection of that box,
though now his mouth refused to moisten. The "painkiller" had been
especially good. But the missionary was a bother after all, for he
brought no meat into the camp, and he ate heartily, and the hunters
grumbled. But he chilled his lungs on the divide by the Mayo, and the
dogs afterwards nosed the stones away and fought over his bones.

Koskoosh placed another stick on the fire and harked back deeper into
the past. There was the time of the Great Famine, when the old men
crouched empty-bellied to the fire, and let fall from their lips dim
traditions of the ancient day when the Yukon ran wide open for three
winters, and then lay frozen for three summers. He had lost his mother
in that famine. In the summer the salmon run had failed, and the tribe
looked forward to the winter and the coming of the caribou. Then the
winter came, but with it there were no caribou. Never had the like
been known, not even in the lives of the old men. But the caribou
did not come, and it was the seventh year, and the rabbits had not
replenished, and the dogs were naught but bundles of bones. And
through the long darkness the children wailed and died, and the women,
and the old men; and not one in ten of the tribe lived to meet the sun
when it came back in the spring. That _was_ a famine!

But he had seen times of plenty, too, when the meat spoiled on their
hands, and the dogs were fat and worthless with overeating--times when
they let the game go unkilled, and the women were fertile, and the
lodges were cluttered with sprawling men-children and women-children.
Then it was the men became high-stomached, and revived ancient
quarrels, and crossed the divides to the south to kill the Pellys, and
to the west that they might sit by the dead fires of the Tananas. He
remembered, when a boy, during a time of plenty, when he saw a moose
pulled down by the wolves. Zing-ha lay with him in the snow and
watched--Zing-ha, who later became the craftiest of hunters, and who,
in the end, fell through an air-hole on the Yukon. They found him, a
month afterward, just as he had crawled halfway out and frozen stiff
to the ice.

But the moose. Zing-ha and he had gone out that day to play at hunting
after the manner of their fathers. On the bed of the creek they struck
the fresh track of a moose, and with it the tracks of many wolves. "An
old one," Zing-ha, who was quicker at reading the sign, said--"an old
one who cannot keep up with the herd. The wolves have cut him out from
his brothers, and they will never leave him." And it was so. It was
their way. By day and by night, never resting, snarling on his heels,
snapping at his nose, they would stay by him to the end. How Zing-ha
and he felt the blood-lust quicken! The finish would be a sight to
see!

Eager-footed, they took the trail, and even he, Koskoosh, slow of
sight and an unversed tracker, could have followed it blind, it was
so wide. Hot were they on the heels of the chase, reading the grim
tragedy, fresh-written, at every step. Now they came to where the
moose had made a stand. Thrice the length of a grown man's body, in
every direction, had the snow been stamped about and uptossed. In the
midst were the deep impressions of the splay-hoofed game, and all
about, everywhere, were the lighter footmarks of the wolves. Some,
while their brothers harried the kill, had lain to one side and
rested. The full-stretched impress of their bodies in the snow was as
perfect as though made the moment before. One wolf had been caught
in a wild lunge of the maddened victim and trampled to death. A few
bones, well picked, bore witness.

Again, they ceased the uplift of their snowshoes at a second stand.
Here the great animal had fought desperately. Twice had he been
dragged down, as the snow attested, and twice had he shaken his
assailants clear and gained footing once more. He had done his task
long since, but none the less was life dear to him. Zing-ha said it
was a strange thing, a moose once down to get free again; but this one
certainly had. The shaman would see signs and wonders in this when
they told him.

And yet again, they come to where the moose had made to mount the bank
and gain the timber. But his foes had laid on from behind, till he
reared and fell back upon them, crushing two deep into the snow. It
was plain the kill was at hand, for their brothers had left them
untouched. Two more stands were hurried past, brief in time-length and
very close together. The trail was red now, and the clean stride of
the great beast had grown short and slovenly. Then they heard the
first sounds of the battle--not the full-throated chorus of the chase,
but the short, snappy bark which spoke of close quarters and teeth to
flesh. Crawling up the wind, Zing-ha bellied it through the snow, and
with him crept he, Koskoosh, who was to be chief of the tribesmen in
the years to come. Together they shoved aside the under branches of a
young spruce and peered forth. It was the end they saw.

The picture, like all of youth's impressions, was still strong with
him, and his dim eyes watched the end played out as vividly as in
that far-off time. Koskoosh marvelled at this, for in the days which
followed, when he was a leader of men and a head of councillors, he
had done great deeds and made his name a curse in the mouths of the
Pellys, to say naught of the strange white man he had killed, knife to
knife, in open fight.

For long he pondered on the days of his youth, till the fire died down
and the frost bit deeper. He replenished it with two sticks this time,
and gauged his grip on life by what remained. If Sit-cum-to-ha had
only remembered her grandfather, and gathered a larger armful, his
hours would have been longer. It would have been easy. But she was
ever a careless child, and honored not her ancestors from the time the
Beaver, son of the son of Zing-ha, first cast eyes upon her. Well,
what mattered it? Had he not done likewise in his own quick youth? For
a while he listened to the silence. Perhaps the heart of his son might
soften, and he would come back with the dogs to take his old father on
with the tribe to where the caribou ran thick and the fat hung heavy
upon them.

He strained his ears, his restless brain for the moment stilled. Not a
stir, nothing. He alone took breath in the midst of the great silence.
It was very lonely. Hark! What was that? A chill passed over his body.
The familiar, long-drawn howl broke the void, and it was close at
hand. Then on his darkened eyes was projected the vision of the
moose--the old bull moose--the torn flanks and bloody sides, the
riddled mane, and the great branching horns, down low and tossing to
the last. He saw the flashing forms of gray, the gleaming eyes, the
lolling tongues, the slavered fangs. And he saw the inexorable circle
close in till it became a dark point in the midst of the stamped snow.

A cold muzzle thrust against his cheek, and at its touch his soul
leaped back to the present. His hand shot into the fire and dragged
out a burning faggot. Overcome for the nonce by his hereditary fear of
man, the brute retreated, raising a prolonged call to his brothers;
and greedily they answered, till a ring of crouching, jaw-slobbered
gray was stretched round about. The old man listened to the drawing
in of this circle. He waved his brand wildly, and sniffs turned to
snarls; but the panting brutes refused to scatter. Now one wormed his
chest forward, dragging his haunches after, now a second, now a third;
but never a one drew back. Why should he cling to life? he asked, and
dropped the blazing stick into the snow. It sizzled and went out. The
circle grunted uneasily, but held its own. Again he saw the last stand
of the old bull moose, and Koskoosh dropped his head wearily upon his
knees. What did it matter after all? Was it not the law of life?




NAM-BOK THE UNVERACIOUS


"A bidarka, is it not so? Look! a bidarka, and one man who drives
clumsily with a paddle!"

Old Bask-Wah-Wan rose to her knees, trembling with weakness and
eagerness, and gazed out over the sea.

"Nam-Bok was ever clumsy at the paddle," she maundered reminiscently,
shading the sun from her eyes and staring across the silver-spilled
water. "Nam-Bok was ever clumsy. I remember...."

But the women and children laughed loudly, and there was a gentle
mockery in their laughter, and her voice dwindled till her lips moved
without sound.

Koogah lifted his grizzled head from his bone-carving and followed
the path of her eyes. Except when wide yaws took it off its course, a
bidarka was heading in for the beach. Its occupant was paddling with
more strength than dexterity, and made his approach along the zigzag
line of most resistance. Koogah's head dropped to his work again, and
on the ivory tusk between his knees he scratched the dorsal fin of a
fish the like of which never swam in the sea.

"It is doubtless the man from the next village," he said finally,
"come to consult with me about the marking of things on bone. And the
man is a clumsy man. He will never know how."

"It is Nam-Bok," old Bask-Wah-Wan repeated. "Should I not know my
son?" she demanded shrilly. "I say, and I say again, it is Nam-Bok."

"And so thou hast said these many summers," one of the women chided
softly. "Ever when the ice passed out of the sea hast thou sat and
watched through the long day, saying at each chance canoe, 'This is
Nam-Bok.' Nam-Bok is dead, O Bask-Wah-Wan, and the dead do not come
back. It cannot be that the dead come back."

"Nam-Bok!" the old woman cried, so loud and clear that the whole
village was startled and looked at her.

She struggled to her feet and tottered down the sand. She stumbled
over a baby lying in the sun, and the mother hushed its crying and
hurled harsh words after the old woman, who took no notice. The
children ran down the beach in advance of her, and as the man in the
bidarka drew closer, nearly capsizing with one of his ill-directed
strokes, the women followed. Koogah dropped his walrus tusk and went
also, leaning heavily upon his staff, and after him loitered the men
in twos and threes.

The bidarka turned broadside and the ripple of surf threatened to
swamp it, only a naked boy ran into the water and pulled the bow high
up on the sand. The man stood up and sent a questing glance along the
line of villagers. A rainbow sweater, dirty and the worse for wear,
clung loosely to his broad shoulders, and a red cotton handkerchief
was knotted in sailor fashion about his throat. A fisherman's
tam-o'-shanter on his close-clipped head, and dungaree trousers and
heavy brogans, completed his outfit.

But he was none the less a striking personage to these simple
fisherfolk of the great Yukon Delta, who, all their lives, had stared
out on Bering Sea and in that time seen but two white men,--the census
enumerator and a lost Jesuit priest. They were a poor people, with
neither gold in the ground nor valuable furs in hand, so the whites
had passed them afar. Also, the Yukon, through the thousands of years,
had shoaled that portion of the sea with the detritus of Alaska till
vessels grounded out of sight of land. So the sodden coast, with its
long inside reaches and huge mud-land archipelagoes, was avoided by
the ships of men, and the fisherfolk knew not that such things were.

Koogah, the Bone-Scratcher, retreated backward in sudden haste,
tripping over his staff and falling to the ground. "Nam-Bok!" he
cried, as he scrambled wildly for footing. "Nam-Bok, who was blown off
to sea, come back!"

The men and women shrank away, and the children scuttled off between
their legs. Only Opee-Kwan was brave, as befitted the head man of
the village. He strode forward and gazed long and earnestly at the
new-comer.

"It _is_ Nam-Bok," he said at last, and at the conviction in his voice
the women wailed apprehensively and drew farther away.

The lips of the stranger moved indecisively, and his brown throat
writhed and wrestled with unspoken words.

"La la, it is Nam-Bok," Bask-Wah-Wan croaked, peering up into his
face. "Ever did I say Nam-Bok would come back."

"Ay, it is Nam-Bok come back." This time it was Nam-Bok himself who
spoke, putting a leg over the side of the bidarka and standing with
one foot afloat and one ashore. Again his throat writhed and wrestled
as he grappled after forgotten words. And when the words came forth
they were strange of sound and a spluttering of the lips accompanied
the gutturals. "Greeting, O brothers," he said, "brothers of old time
before I went away with the off-shore wind."

He stepped out with both feet on the sand, and Opee-Kwan waved him
back.

"Thou art dead, Nam-Bok," he said.

Nam-Bok laughed. "I am fat."

"Dead men are not fat," Opee-Kwan confessed. "Thou hast fared well,
but it is strange. No man may mate with the off-shore wind and come
back on the heels of the years."

"I have come back," Nam-Bok answered simply.

"Mayhap thou art a shadow, then, a passing shadow of the Nam-Bok that
was. Shadows come back."

"I am hungry. Shadows do not eat."

But Opee-Kwan doubted, and brushed his hand across his brow in sore
puzzlement. Nam-Bok was likewise puzzled, and as he looked up and down
the line found no welcome in the eyes of the fisherfolk. The men and
women whispered together. The children stole timidly back among their
elders, and bristling dogs fawned up to him and sniffed suspiciously.

"I bore thee, Nam-Bok, and I gave thee suck when thou wast little,"
Bask-Wah-Wan whimpered, drawing closer; "and shadow though thou be, or
no shadow, I will give thee to eat now."

Nam-Bok made to come to her, but a growl of fear and menace warned
him back. He said something in a strange tongue which sounded like
"Goddam," and added, "No shadow am I, but a man."

"Who may know concerning the things of mystery?" Opee-Kwan demanded,
half of himself and half of his tribespeople. "We are, and in a breath
we are not. If the man may become shadow, may not the shadow become
man? Nam-Bok was, but is not. This we know, but we do not know if this
be Nam-Bok or the shadow of Nam-Bok."

Nam-Bok cleared his throat and made answer. "In the old time long ago,
thy father's father, Opee-Kwan, went away and came back on the heels
of the years. Nor was a place by the fire denied him. It is said ..."
He paused significantly, and they hung on his utterance. "It is said,"
he repeated, driving his point home with deliberation, "that Sipsip,
his _klooch_, bore him two sons after he came back."

"But he had no doings with the off-shore wind," Opee-Kwan retorted.
"He went away into the heart of the land, and it is in the nature of
things that a man may go on and on into the land."

"And likewise the sea. But that is neither here nor there. It is said
... that thy father's father told strange tales of the things he saw."

"Ay, strange tales he told."

"I, too, have strange tales to tell," Nam-Bok stated insidiously. And,
as they wavered, "And presents likewise."

He pulled from the bidarka a shawl, marvellous of texture and color,
and flung it about his mother's shoulders. The women voiced a
collective sigh of admiration, and old Bask-Wah-Wan ruffled the gay
material and patted it and crooned in childish joy.

"He has tales to tell," Koogah muttered. "And presents," a woman
seconded.

And Opee-Kwan knew that his people were eager, and further, he was
aware himself of an itching curiosity concerning those untold tales.
"The fishing has been good," he said judiciously, "and we have oil in
plenty. So come, Nam-Bok, let us feast."

Two of the men hoisted the bidarka on their shoulders and carried
it up to the fire. Nam-Bok walked by the side of Opee-Kwan, and the
villagers followed after, save those of the women who lingered a
moment to lay caressing fingers on the shawl.

There was little talk while the feast went on, though many and curious
were the glances stolen at the son of Bask-Wah-Wan. This embarrassed
him--not because he was modest of spirit, however, but for the fact
that the stench of the seal-oil had robbed him of his appetite, and
that he keenly desired to conceal his feelings on the subject.

"Eat; thou art hungry," Opee-Kwan commanded, and Nam-Bok shut both his
eyes and shoved his fist into the big pot of putrid fish.

"La la, be not ashamed. The seal were many this year, and strong men
are ever hungry." And Bask-Wah-Wan sopped a particularly offensive
chunk of salmon into the oil and passed it fondly and dripping to her
son.

In despair, when premonitory symptoms warned him that his stomach was
not so strong as of old, he filled his pipe and struck up a smoke. The
people fed on noisily and watched. Few of them could boast of intimate
acquaintance with the precious weed, though now and again small
quantities and abominable qualities were obtained in trade from the
Eskimos to the northward. Koogah, sitting next to him, indicated that
he was not averse to taking a draw, and between two mouthfuls,
with the oil thick on his lips, sucked away at the amber stem. And
thereupon Nam-Bok held his stomach with a shaky hand and declined the
proffered return. Koogah could keep the pipe, he said, for he had
intended so to honor him from the first. And the people licked their
fingers and approved of his liberality.

Opee-Kwan rose to his feet "And now, O Nam-Bok, the feast is ended,
and we would listen concerning the strange things you have seen."

The fisherfolk applauded with their hands, and gathering about them
their work, prepared to listen. The men were busy fashioning spears
and carving on ivory, while the women scraped the fat from the hides
of the hair seal and made them pliable or sewed muclucs with threads
of sinew. Nam-Bok's eyes roved over the scene, but there was not the
charm about it that his recollection had warranted him to expect.
During the years of his wandering he had looked forward to just this
scene, and now that it had come he was disappointed. It was a bare and
meagre life, he deemed, and not to be compared to the one to which he
had become used. Still, he would open their eyes a bit, and his own
eyes sparkled at the thought.

"Brothers," he began, with the smug complacency of a man about to
relate the big things he has done, "it was late summer of many summers
back, with much such weather as this promises to be, when I went away.
You all remember the day, when the gulls flew low, and the wind blew
strong from the land, and I could not hold my bidarka against it. I
tied the covering of the bidarka about me so that no water could get
in, and all of the night I fought with the storm. And in the morning
there was no land,--only the sea,--and the off-shore wind held me
close in its arms and bore me along. Three such nights whitened into
dawn and showed me no land, and the off-shore wind would not let me
go.

"And when the fourth day came, I was as a madman. I could not dip my
paddle for want of food; and my head went round and round, what of the
thirst that was upon me. But the sea was no longer angry, and the soft
south wind was blowing, and as I looked about me I saw a sight that
made me think I was indeed mad."

Nam-Bok paused to pick away a sliver of salmon lodged between his
teeth, and the men and women, with idle hands and heads craned
forward, waited.

"It was a canoe, a big canoe. If all the canoes I have ever seen were
made into one canoe, it would not be so large."

There were exclamations of doubt, and Koogah, whose years were many,
shook his head.

"If each bidarka were as a grain of sand," Nam-Bok defiantly
continued, "and if there were as many bidarkas as there be grains of
sand in this beach, still would they not make so big a canoe as this I
saw on the morning of the fourth day. It was a very big canoe, and
it was called a _schooner_. I saw this thing of wonder, this great
schooner, coming after me, and on it I saw men--"

"Hold, O Nam-Bok!" Opee-Kwan broke in. "What manner of men were
they?--big men?"

"Nay, mere men like you and me."

"Did the big canoe come fast?"

"Ay."

"The sides were tall, the men short." Opee-Kwan stated the premises
with conviction. "And did these men dip with long paddles?"

Nam-Bok grinned. "There were no paddles," he said.

Mouths remained open, and a long silence dropped down. Opee-Kwan
borrowed Koogah's pipe for a couple of contemplative sucks. One of the
younger women giggled nervously and drew upon herself angry eyes.

"There were no paddles?" Opee-Kwan asked softly, returning the pipe.

"The south wind was behind," Nam-Bok explained.

"But the wind-drift is slow."

"The schooner had wings--thus." He sketched a diagram of masts and
sails in the sand, and the men crowded around and studied it. The wind
was blowing briskly, and for more graphic elucidation he seized the
corners of his mother's shawl and spread them out till it bellied like
a sail. Bask-Wah-Wan scolded and struggled, but was blown down the
beach for a score of feet and left breathless and stranded in a heap
of driftwood. The men uttered sage grunts of comprehension, but Koogah
suddenly tossed back his hoary head.

"Ho! Ho!" he laughed. "A foolish thing, this big canoe! A most foolish
thing! The plaything of the wind! Wheresoever the wind goes, it goes
too. No man who journeys therein may name the landing beach, for
always he goes with the wind, and the wind goes everywhere, but no man
knows where."

"It is so," Opee-Kwan supplemented gravely. "With the wind the going
is easy, but against the wind a man striveth hard; and for that they
had no paddles these men on the big canoe did not strive at all."

"Small need to strive," Nam-Bok cried angrily. "The schooner went
likewise against the wind."

"And what said you made the sch--sch--schooner go?" Koogah asked,
tripping craftily over the strange word.

"The wind," was the impatient response.

"Then the wind made the sch--sch--schooner go against the wind." Old
Koogah dropped an open leer to Opee-Kwan, and, the laughter growing
around him, continued: "The wind blows from the south and blows the
schooner south. The wind blows against the wind. The wind blows one
way and the other at the same time. It is very simple. We understand,
Nam-Bok. We clearly understand."

"Thou art a fool!"

"Truth falls from thy lips," Koogah answered meekly. "I was over-long
in understanding, and the thing was simple."

But Nam-Bok's face was dark, and he said rapid words which they had
never heard before. Bone-scratching and skin-scraping were resumed,
but he shut his lips tightly on the tongue that could not be believed.

"This sch--sch--schooner," Koogah imperturbably asked; "it was made of
a big tree?"

"It was made of many trees," Nam-Bok snapped shortly. "It was very
big."

He lapsed into sullen silence again, and Opee-Kwan nudged Koogah, who
shook his head with slow amazement and murmured, "It is very strange."

Nam-bok took the bait. "That is nothing," he said airily; "you should
see the _steamer_. As the grain of sand is to the bidarka, as the
bidarka is to the schooner, so the schooner is to the steamer.
Further, the steamer is made of iron. It is all iron."

"Nay, nay, Nam-Bok," cried the head man; "how can that be? Always iron
goes to the bottom. For behold, I received an iron knife in trade from
the head man of the next village, and yesterday the iron knife slipped
from my fingers and went down, down, into the sea. To all things there
be law. Never was there one thing outside the law. This we know. And,
moreover, we know that things of a kind have the one law, and that all
iron has the one law. So unsay thy words, Nam-Bok, that we may yet
honor thee."

"It is so," Nam-Bok persisted. "The steamer is all iron and does not
sink."

"Nay, nay; this cannot be."

"With my own eyes I saw it."

"It is not in the nature of things."

"But tell me, Nam-Bok," Koogah interrupted, for fear the tale would
go no farther, "tell me the manner of these men in finding their way
across the sea when there is no land by which to steer."

"The sun points out the path."

"But how?"

"At midday the head man of the schooner takes a thing through which
his eye looks at the sun, and then he makes the sun climb down out of
the sky to the edge of the earth."

"Now this be evil medicine!" cried Opee-Kwan, aghast at the sacrilege.
The men held up their hands in horror, and the women moaned. "This be
evil medicine. It is not good to misdirect the great sun which drives
away the night and gives us the seal, the salmon, and warm weather."

"What if it be evil medicine?" Nam-Bok demanded truculently. "I, too,
have looked through the thing at the sun and made the sun climb down
out of the sky."

Those who were nearest drew away from him hurriedly, and a woman
covered the face of a child at her breast so that his eye might not
fall upon it.

"But on the morning of the fourth day, O Nam-Bok," Koogah suggested;
"on the morning of the fourth day when the sch--sch--schooner came
after thee?"

"I had little strength left in me and could not run away. So I was
taken on board and water was poured down my throat and good food given
me. Twice, my brothers, you have seen a white man. These men were all
white and as many as have I fingers and toes. And when I saw they were
full of kindness, I took heart, and I resolved to bring away with me
report of all that I saw. And they taught me the work they did, and
gave me good food and a place to sleep.

"And day after day we went over the sea, and each day the head man
drew the sun down out of the sky and made it tell where we were. And
when the waves were kind, we hunted the fur seal and I marvelled much,
for always did they fling the meat and the fat away and save only the
skin."

Opee-Kwan's mouth was twitching violently, and he was about to make
denunciation of such waste when Koogah kicked him to be still.

"After a weary time, when the sun was gone and the bite of the frost
come into the air, the head man pointed the nose of the schooner
south. South and east we travelled for days upon days, with never the
land in sight, and we were near to the village from which hailed the
men--"

"How did they know they were near?" Opee-Kwan, unable to contain
himself longer, demanded. "There was no land to see."

Nam-Bok glowered on him wrathfully. "Did I not say the head man
brought the sun down out of the sky?"

Koogah interposed, and Nam-Bok went on.

"As I say, when we were near to that village a great storm blew up,
and in the night we were helpless and knew not where we were--"

"Thou hast just said the head man knew--"

"Oh, peace, Opee-Kwan! Thou art a fool and cannot understand. As I
say, we were helpless in the night, when I heard, above the roar of
the storm, the sound of the sea on the beach. And next we struck with
a mighty crash and I was in the water, swimming. It was a rock-bound
coast, with one patch of beach in many miles, and the law was that I
should dig my hands into the sand and draw myself clear of the surf.
The other men must have pounded against the rocks, for none of them
came ashore but the head man, and him I knew only by the ring on his
finger.

"When day came, there being nothing of the schooner, I turned my face
to the land and journeyed into it that I might get food and look upon
the faces of the people. And when I came to a house I was taken in and
given to eat, for I had learned their speech, and the white men are
ever kindly. And it was a house bigger than all the houses built by us
and our fathers before us."

"It was a mighty house," Koogah said, masking his unbelief with
wonder.

"And many trees went into the making of such a house," Opee-Kwan
added, taking the cue.

"That is nothing." Nam-Bok shrugged his shoulders in belittling
fashion. "As our houses are to that house, so that house was to the
houses I was yet to see."

"And they are not big men?"

"Nay; mere men like you and me," Nam-Bok answered. "I had cut a stick
that I might walk in comfort, and remembering that I was to bring
report to you, my brothers, I cut a notch in the stick for each person
who lived in that house. And I stayed there many days, and worked, for
which they gave me _money_--a thing of which you know nothing, but
which is very good.

"And one day I departed from that place to go farther into the land.
And as I walked I met many people, and I cut smaller notches in the
stick, that there might be room for all. Then I came upon a strange
thing. On the ground before me was a bar of iron, as big in thickness
as my arm, and a long step away was another bar of iron--"

"Then wert thou a rich man," Opee-Kwan asserted; "for iron be worth
more than anything else in the world. It would have made many knives."

"Nay, it was not mine."

"It was a find, and a find be lawful."

"Not so; the white men had placed it there And further, these bars
were so long that no man could carry them away--so long that as far as
I could see there was no end to them."

"Nam-Bok, that is very much iron," Opee-Kwan cautioned.

"Ay, it was hard to believe with my own eyes upon it; but I could not
gainsay my eyes. And as I looked I heard...." He turned abruptly upon
the head man. "Opee-Kwan, thou hast heard the sea-lion bellow in his
anger. Make it plain in thy mind of as many sea-lions as there be
waves to the sea, and make it plain that all these sea-lions be made
into one sea-lion, and as that one sea-lion would bellow so bellowed
the thing I heard."

The fisherfolk cried aloud in astonishment, and Opee-Kwan's jaw
lowered and remained lowered.

"And in the distance I saw a monster like unto a thousand whales.
It was one-eyed, and vomited smoke, and it snorted with exceeding
loudness. I was afraid and ran with shaking legs along the path
between the bars. But it came with the speed of the wind, this
monster, and I leaped the iron bars with its breath hot on my
face...."

Opee-Kwan gained control of his jaw again. "And--and then, O Nam-Bok?"

"Then it came by on the bars, and harmed me not; and when my legs
could hold me up again it was gone from sight. And it is a very common
thing in that country. Even the women and children are not afraid. Men
make them to do work, these monsters."

"As we make our dogs do work?" Koogah asked, with sceptic twinkle in
his eye.

"Ay, as we make our dogs do work."

"And how do they breed these--these things?" Opee-Kwan questioned.

"They breed not at all. Men fashion them cunningly of iron, and feed
them with stone, and give them water to drink. The stone becomes fire,
and the water becomes steam, and the steam of the water is the breath
of their nostrils, and--"

"There, there, O Nam-Bok," Opee-Kwan interrupted. "Tell us of other
wonders. We grow tired of this which we may not understand."

"You do not understand?" Nam-Bok asked despairingly.

"Nay, we do not understand," the men and women wailed back. "We cannot
understand."

Nam-Bok thought of a combined harvester, and of the machines wherein
visions of living men were to be seen, and of the machines from which
came the voices of men, and he knew his people could never understand.

"Dare I say I rode this iron monster through the land?" he asked
bitterly.

Opee-Kwan threw up his hands, palms outward, in open incredulity. "Say
on; say anything. We listen."

"Then did I ride the iron monster, for which I gave money--"

"Thou saidst it was fed with stone."

"And likewise, thou fool, I said money was a thing of which you know
nothing. As I say, I rode the monster through the land, and through
many villages, until I came to a big village on a salt arm of the sea.
And the houses shoved their roofs among the stars in the sky, and the
clouds drifted by them, and everywhere was much smoke. And the roar
of that village was like the roar of the sea in storm, and the people
were so many that I flung away my stick and no longer remembered the
notches upon it."

"Hadst thou made small notches," Koogah reproved, "thou mightst have
brought report."

Nam-Bok whirled upon him in anger. "Had I made small notches! Listen,
Koogah, thou scratcher of bone! If I had made small notches, neither
the stick, nor twenty sticks, could have borne them--nay, not all the
driftwood of all the beaches between this village and the next. And if
all of you, the women and children as well, were twenty times as many,
and if you had twenty hands each, and in each hand a stick and a
knife, still the notches could not be cut for the people I saw, so
many were they and so fast did they come and go."

"There cannot be so many people in all the world," Opee-Kwan objected,
for he was stunned and his mind could not grasp such magnitude of
numbers.

"What dost thou know of all the world and how large it is?" Nam-Bok
demanded.

"But there cannot be so many people in one place."

"Who art thou to say what can be and what cannot be?"

"It stands to reason there cannot be so many people in one place.
Their canoes would clutter the sea till there was no room. And they
could empty the sea each day of its fish, and they would not all be
fed."

"So it would seem," Nam-Bok made final answer; "yet it was so. With my
own eyes I saw, and flung my stick away." He yawned heavily and rose
to his feet. "I have paddled far. The day has been long, and I am
tired. Now I will sleep, and to-morrow we will have further talk upon
the things I have seen."

Bask-Wah-Wan, hobbling fearfully in advance, proud indeed, yet awed by
her wonderful son, led him to her igloo and stowed him away among the
greasy, ill-smelling furs. But the men lingered by the fire, and a
council was held wherein was there much whispering and low-voiced
discussion.

An hour passed, and a second, and Nam-Bok slept, and the talk went on.
The evening sun dipped toward the northwest, and at eleven at
night was nearly due north. Then it was that the head man and the
bone-scratcher separated themselves from the council and aroused
Nam-Bok. He blinked up into their faces and turned on his side to
sleep again. Opee-Kwan gripped him by the arm and kindly but firmly
shook his senses back into him.

"Come, Nam-Bok, arise!" he commanded. "It be time."

"Another feast?" Nam-Bok cried. "Nay, I am not hungry. Go on with the
eating and let me sleep."

"Time to be gone!" Koogah thundered.

But Opee-Kwan spoke more softly. "Thou wast bidarka-mate with me when
we were boys," he said. "Together we first chased the seal and drew
the salmon from the traps. And thou didst drag me back to life,
Nam-Bok, when the sea closed over me and I was sucked down to the
black rocks. Together we hungered and bore the chill of the frost, and
together we crawled beneath the one fur and lay close to each other.
And because of these things, and the kindness in which I stood to
thee, it grieves me sore that thou shouldst return such a remarkable
liar. We cannot understand, and our heads be dizzy with the things
thou hast spoken. It is not good, and there has been much talk in the
council. Wherefore we send thee away, that our heads may remain clear
and strong and be not troubled by the unaccountable things."

"These things thou speakest of be shadows," Koogah took up the strain.
"From the shadow-world thou hast brought them, and to the shadow-world
thou must return them. Thy bidarka be ready, and the tribespeople
wait. They may not sleep until thou art gone."

Nam-Bok was perplexed, but hearkened to the voice of the head man.

"If thou art Nam-Bok," Opee-Kwan was saying, "thou art a fearful and
most wonderful liar; if thou art the shadow of Nam-Bok, then thou
speakest of shadows, concerning which it is not good that living men
have knowledge. This great village thou hast spoken of we deem the
village of shadows. Therein flutter the souls of the dead; for the
dead be many and the living few. The dead do not come back. Never have
the dead come back--save thou with thy wonder-tales. It is not meet
that the dead come back, and should we permit it, great trouble may be
our portion."

Nam-Bok knew his people well and was aware that the voice of the
council was supreme. So he allowed himself to be led down to the
water's edge, where he was put aboard his bidarka and a paddle thrust
into his hand. A stray wild-fowl honked somewhere to seaward, and the
surf broke limply and hollowly on the sand. A dim twilight brooded
over land and water, and in the north the sun smouldered, vague and
troubled, and draped about with blood-red mists. The gulls were flying
low. The off-shore wind blew keen and chill, and the black-massed
clouds behind it gave promise of bitter weather.

"Out of the sea thou earnest," Opee-Kwan chanted oracularly, "and
back into the sea thou goest. Thus is balance achieved and all things
brought to law."

Bask-Wah-Wan limped to the froth-mark and cried, "I bless thee,
Nam-Bok, for that thou remembered me."

But Koogah, shoving Nam-Bok clear of the beach, tore the shawl from
her shoulders and flung it into the bidarka.

"It is cold in the long nights," she wailed; "and the frost is prone
to nip old bones."

"The thing is a shadow," the bone-scratcher answered, "and shadows
cannot keep thee warm."

Nam-Bok stood up that his voice might carry. "O Bask-Wah-Wan, mother
that bore me!" he called. "Listen to the words of Nam-Bok, thy son.
There be room in his bidarka for two, and he would that thou camest
with him. For his journey is to where there are fish and oil in
plenty. There the frost comes not, and life is easy, and the things of
iron do the work of men. Wilt thou come, O Bask-Wah-Wan?"

She debated a moment, while the bidarka drifted swiftly from her, then
raised her voice to a quavering treble. "I am old, Nam-Bok, and soon I
shall pass down among the shadows. But I have no wish to go before my
time. I am old, Nam-Bok, and I am afraid."

A shaft of light shot across the dim-lit sea and wrapped boat and man
in a splendor of red and gold. Then a hush fell upon the fisherfolk,
and only was heard the moan of the off-shore wind and the cries of the
gulls flying low in the air.




THE MASTER OF MYSTERY


There was complaint in the village. The women chattered together with
shrill, high-pitched voices. The men were glum and doubtful of aspect,
and the very dogs wandered dubiously about, alarmed in vague ways by
the unrest of the camp, and ready to take to the woods on the first
outbreak of trouble. The air was filled with suspicion. No man was
sure of his neighbor, and each was conscious that he stood in like
unsureness with his fellows. Even the children were oppressed and
solemn, and little Di Ya, the cause of it all, had been soundly
thrashed, first by Hooniah, his mother, and then by his father, Bawn,
and was now whimpering and looking pessimistically out upon the world
from the shelter of the big overturned canoe on the beach.

And to make the matter worse, Scundoo, the shaman, was in disgrace,
and his known magic could not be called upon to seek out the
evil-doer. Forsooth, a month gone, he had promised a fair south wind
so that the tribe might journey to the _potlatch_ at Tonkin, where
Taku Jim was giving away the savings of twenty years; and when the day
came, lo, a grievous north wind blew, and of the first three canoes to
venture forth, one was swamped in the big seas, and two were pounded
to pieces on the rocks, and a child was drowned. He had pulled the
string of the wrong bag, he explained,--a mistake. But the people
refused to listen; the offerings of meat and fish and fur ceased to
come to his door; and he sulked within--so they thought, fasting in
bitter penance; in reality, eating generously from his well-stored
cache and meditating upon the fickleness of the mob.

The blankets of Hooniah were missing. They were good blankets, of most
marvellous thickness and warmth, and her pride in them was greatened
in that they had been come by so cheaply. Ty-Kwan, of the next village
but one, was a fool to have so easily parted with them. But then,
she did not know they were the blankets of the murdered Englishman,
because of whose take-off the United States cutter nosed along the
coast for a time, while its launches puffed and snorted among the
secret inlets. And not knowing that Ty-Kwan had disposed of them in
haste so that his own people might not have to render account to the
Government, Hooniah's pride was unshaken. And because the women envied
her, her pride was without end and boundless, till it filled the
village and spilled over along the Alaskan shore from Dutch Harbor to
St. Mary's. Her totem had become justly celebrated, and her name
known on the lips of men wherever men fished and feasted, what of the
blankets and their marvellous thickness and warmth. It was a most
mysterious happening, the manner of their going.

"I but stretched them up in the sun by the side-wall of the house,"
Hooniah disclaimed for the thousandth time to her Thlinget sisters. "I
but stretched them up and turned my back; for Di Ya, dough-thief
and eater of raw flour that he is, with head into the big iron pot,
overturned and stuck there, his legs waving like the branches of a
forest tree in the wind. And I did but drag him out and twice knock
his head against the door for riper understanding, and behold, the
blankets were not!"

"The blankets were not!" the women repeated in awed whispers.

"A great loss," one added. A second, "Never were there such blankets."
And a third, "We be sorry, Hooniah, for thy loss." Yet each woman
of them was glad in her heart that the odious, dissension-breeding
blankets were gone. "I but stretched them up in the sun," Hooniah
began for the thousand and first time.

"Yea, yea," Bawn spoke up, wearied. "But there were no gossips in the
village from other places. Wherefore it be plain that some of our own
tribespeople have laid unlawful hand upon the blankets."

"How can that be, O Bawn?" the women chorussed indignantly. "Who
should there be?"

"Then has there been witchcraft," Bawn continued stolidly enough,
though he stole a sly glance at their faces.

"_Witchcraft!_" And at the dread word their voices hushed and each
looked fearfully at each.

"Ay," Hooniah affirmed, the latent malignancy of her nature flashing
into a moment's exultation. "And word has been sent to Klok-No-Ton,
and strong paddles. Truly shall he be here with the afternoon tide."

The little groups broke up, and fear descended upon the village. Of
all misfortune, witchcraft was the most appalling. With the intangible
and unseen things only the shamans could cope, and neither man, woman,
nor child could know, until the moment of ordeal, whether devils
possessed their souls or not. And of all shamans, Klok-No-Ton, who
dwelt in the next village, was the most terrible. None found more
evil spirits than he, none visited his victims with more frightful
tortures. Even had he found, once, a devil residing within the body of
a three-months babe--a most obstinate devil which could only be driven
out when the babe had lain for a week on thorns and briers. The body
was thrown into the sea after that, but the waves tossed it back again
and again as a curse upon the village, nor did it finally go away till
two strong men were staked out at low tide and drowned.

And Hooniah had sent for this Klok-No-Ton. Better had it been if
Scundoo, their own shaman, were undisgraced. For he had ever a gentler
way, and he had been known to drive forth two devils from a man
who afterward begat seven healthy children. But Klok-No-Ton! They
shuddered with dire foreboding at thought of him, and each one felt
himself the centre of accusing eyes, and looked accusingly upon his
fellows--each one and all, save Sime, and Sime was a scoffer whose
evil end was destined with a certitude his successes could not shake.

"Hoh! Hoh!" he laughed. "Devils and Klok-No-Ton!--than whom no greater
devil can be found in Thlinket Land."

"Thou fool! Even now he cometh with witcheries and sorceries; so
beware thy tongue, lest evil befall thee and thy days be short in the
land!"

So spoke La-lah, otherwise the Cheater, and Sime laughed scornfully.

"I am Sime, unused to fear, unafraid of the dark. I am a strong man,
as my father before me, and my head is clear. Nor you nor I have seen
with our eyes the unseen evil things--"

"But Scundoo hath," La-lah made answer. "And likewise Klok-No-Ton.
This we know."

"How dost thou know, son of a fool?" Sime thundered, the choleric
blood darkening his thick bull neck.

"By the word of their mouths--even so."

Sime snorted. "A shaman is only a man. May not his words be crooked,
even as thine and mine? Bah! Bah! And once more, bah! And this for thy
shamans and thy shamans' devils! and this! and this!"

And snapping his fingers to right and left, Sime strode through the
on-lookers, who made over-zealous and fearsome way for him.

"A good fisher and strong hunter, but an evil man," said one.

"Yet does he flourish," speculated another.

"Wherefore be thou evil and flourish," Sime retorted over his
shoulder. "And were all evil, there would be no need for shamans. Bah!
You children-afraid-of-the-dark!"

And when Klok-No-Ton arrived on the afternoon tide, Sime's defiant
laugh was unabated; nor did he forbear to make a joke when the shaman
tripped on the sand in the landing. Klok-No-Ton looked at him sourly,
and without greeting stalked straight through their midst to the house
of Scundoo.

Of the meeting with Scundoo none of the tribespeople might know, for
they clustered reverently in the distance and spoke in whispers while
the masters of mystery were together.

"Greeting, O Scundoo!" Klok-No-Ton rumbled, wavering perceptibly from
doubt of his reception.

He was a giant in stature, and towered massively above little Scundoo,
whose thin voice floated upward like the faint far rasping of a
cricket.

"Greeting, Klok-No-Ton," he returned. "The day is fair with thy
coming."

"Yet it would seem ..." Klok-No-Ton hesitated.

"Yea, yea," the little shaman put in impatiently, "that I have fallen
on ill days, else would I not stand in gratitude to you in that you do
my work."

"It grieves me, friend Scundoo ..."

"Nay, I am made glad, Klok-No-Ton."

"But will I give thee half of that which be given me."

"Not so, good Klok-No-Ton," murmured Scundoo, with a deprecatory wave
of the hand. "It is I who am thy slave, and my days shall be filled
with desire to befriend thee."

"As I--"

"As thou now befriendest me."

"That being so, it is then a bad business, these blankets of the woman
Hooniah?"

The big shaman blundered tentatively in his quest, and Scundoo smiled
a wan, gray smile, for he was used to reading men, and all men seemed
very small to him.

"Ever hast thou dealt in strong medicine," he said. "Doubtless the
evil-doer will be briefly known to thee."

"Ay, briefly known when I set eyes upon him." Again Klok-No-Ton
hesitated. "Have there been gossips from other places?" he asked.

Scundoo shook his head. "Behold! Is this not a most excellent mucluc?"

He held up the foot-covering of sealskin and walrus hide, and his
visitor examined it with secret interest.

"It did come to me by a close-driven bargain."

Klok-No-Ton nodded attentively.

"I got it from the man La-lah. He is a remarkable man, and often have
I thought ..."

"So?" Klok-No-Ton ventured impatiently.

"Often have I thought," Scundoo concluded, his voice falling as he
came to a full pause. "It is a fair day, and thy medicine be strong,
Klok-No-Ton."

Klok-No-Ton's face brightened. "Thou art a great man, Scundoo, a
shaman of shamans. I go now. I shall remember thee always. And the man
La-lah, as you say, is a remarkable man."

Scundoo smiled yet more wan and gray, closed the door on the heels of
his departing visitor, and barred and double-barred it.

Sime was mending his canoe when Klok-No-Ton came down the beach, and
he broke off from his work only long enough to ostentatiously load his
rifle and place it near him.

The shaman noted the action and called out: "Let all the people come
together on this spot! It is the word of Klok-No-Ton, devil-seeker and
driver of devils!"

He had been minded to assemble them at Hooniah's house, but it was
necessary that all should be present, and he was doubtful of Sime's
obedience and did not wish trouble. Sime was a good man to let alone,
his judgment ran, and withal, a bad one for the health of any shaman.

"Let the woman Hooniah be brought," Klok-No-Ton commanded, glaring
ferociously about the circle and sending chills up and down the spines
of those he looked upon.

Hooniah waddled forward, head bent and gaze averted.

"Where be thy blankets?"

"I but stretched them up in the sun, and behold, they were not!" she
whined.

"So?"

"It was because of Di Ya."

"So?"

"Him have I beaten sore, and he shall yet be beaten, for that he
brought trouble upon us who be poor people."

"The blankets!" Klok-No-Ton bellowed hoarsely, foreseeing her desire
to lower the price to be paid. "The blankets, woman! Thy wealth is
known."

"I but stretched them up in the sun," she sniffled, "and we be poor
people and have nothing."

He stiffened suddenly, with a hideous distortion of the face, and
Hooniah shrank back. But so swiftly did he spring forward, with
in-turned eyeballs and loosened jaw, that she stumbled and fell down
grovelling at his feet. He waved his arms about, wildly flagellating
the air, his body writhing and twisting in torment. An epilepsy seemed
to come upon him. A white froth flecked his lips, and his body was
convulsed with shiverings and tremblings.

The women broke into a wailing chant, swaying backward and forward in
abandonment, while one by one the men succumbed to the excitement till
only Sime remained. He, perched upon his canoe, looked on in mockery;
yet the ancestors whose seed he bore pressed heavily upon him, and
he swore his strongest oaths that his courage might be cheered.
Klok-No-Ton was horrible to behold. He had cast off his blanket and
torn his clothes from him, so that he was quite naked, save for a
girdle of eagle-claws about his thighs. Shrieking and yelling, his
long black hair flying like a blot of night, he leaped frantically
about the circle. A certain rude rhythm characterized his frenzy, and
when all were under its sway, swinging their bodies in accord with
his and venting their cries in unison, he sat bolt upright, with arm
outstretched and long, talon-like finger extended. A low moaning, as
of the dead, greeted this, and the people cowered with shaking knees
as the dread finger passed them slowly by. For death went with it, and
life remained with those who watched it go; and being rejected, they
watched with eager intentness.

Finally, with a tremendous cry, the fateful finger rested upon La-lah.
He shook like an aspen, seeing himself already dead, his household
goods divided, and his widow married to his brother. He strove to
speak, to deny, but his tongue clove to his mouth and his throat was
sanded with an intolerable thirst. Klok-No-Ton seemed to half swoon
away, now that his work was done; but he waited, with closed eyes,
listening for the great blood-cry to go up--the great blood-cry,
familiar to his ear from a thousand conjurations, when the
tribespeople flung themselves like wolves upon the trembling victim.
But only was there silence, then a low tittering, from nowhere in
particular, which spread and spread until a vast laughter welled up to
the sky.

"Wherefore?" he cried.

"Na! Na!" the people laughed. "Thy medicine be ill, O Klok-No-Ton!"

"It be known to all," La-lah stuttered. "For eight weary months have
I been gone afar with the Siwash sealers, and but this day am I come
back to find the blankets of Hooniah gone ere I came!"

"It be true!" they cried with one accord. "The blankets of Hooniah
were gone ere he came!"

"And thou shalt be paid nothing for thy medicine which is of no
avail," announced Hooniah, on her feet once more and smarting from a
sense of ridiculousness.

But Klok-No-Ton saw only the face of Scundoo and its wan, gray smile,
heard only the faint far cricket's rasping. "I got it from the man
La-lah, and often have I thought," and, "It is a fair day and thy
medicine be strong."

He brushed by Hooniah, and the circle instinctively gave way for
him to pass. Sime flung a jeer from the top of the canoe, the women
snickered in his face, cries of derision rose in his wake, but he took
no notice, pressing onward to the house of Scundoo. He hammered on the
door, beat it with his fists, and howled vile imprecations. Yet there
was no response, save that in the lulls Scundoo's voice rose eerily
in incantation. Klok-No-Ton raged about like a madman, but when he
attempted to break in the door with a huge stone, murmurs arose from
the men and women. And he, Klok-No-Ton, knew that he stood shorn of
his strength and authority before an alien people. He saw a man stoop
for a stone, and a second, and a bodily fear ran through him.

"Harm not Scundoo, who is a master!" a woman cried out.

"Better you return to your own village," a man advised menacingly.

Klok-No-Ton turned on his heel and went down among them to the beach,
a bitter rage at his heart, and in his head a just apprehension for
his defenceless back. But no stones were cast. The children swarmed
mockingly about his feet, and the air was wild with laughter and
derision, but that was all. Yet he did not breathe freely until the
canoe was well out upon the water, when he rose up and laid a futile
curse upon the village and its people, not forgetting to particularly
specify Scundoo who had made a mock of him.

Ashore there was a clamor for Scundoo, and the whole population
crowded his door, entreating and imploring in confused babel till he
came forth and raised his hand.

"In that ye are my children I pardon freely," he said. "But never
again. For the last time thy foolishness goes unpunished. That which
ye wish shall be granted, and it be already known to me. This night,
when the moon has gone behind the world to look upon the mighty
dead, let all the people gather in the blackness before the house of
Hooniah. Then shall the evil-doer stand forth and take his merited
reward. I have spoken."

"It shall be death!" Bawn vociferated, "for that it hath brought worry
upon us, and shame."

"So be it," Scundoo replied, and shut his door.

"Now shall all be made clear and plain, and content rest upon us once
again," La-lah declaimed oracularly.

"Because of Scundoo, the little man," Sime sneered.

"Because of the medicine of Scundoo, the little man," La-lah
corrected.

"Children of foolishness, these Thlinket people!" Sime smote his thigh
a resounding blow. "It passeth understanding that grown women and
strong men should get down in the dirt to dream-things and wonder
tales."

"I am a travelled man," La-lah answered. "I have journeyed on the deep
seas and seen signs and wonders, and I know that these things be so.
I am La-lah--"

"The Cheater--"

"So called, but the Far-Journeyer right-named."

"I am not so great a traveller--" Sime began.

"Then hold thy tongue," Bawn cut in, and they separated in anger.

When the last silver moonlight had vanished beyond the world, Scundoo
came among the people huddled about the house of Hooniah. He walked
with a quick, alert step, and those who saw him in the light of
Hooniah's slush-lamp noticed that he came empty-handed, without
rattles, masks, or shaman's paraphernalia, save for a great sleepy
raven carried under one arm.

"Is there wood gathered for a fire, so that all may see when the work
be done?" he demanded.

"Yea," Bawn answered. "There be wood in plenty."

"Then let all listen, for my words be few. With me have I brought
Jelchs, the Raven, diviner of mystery and seer of things. Him, in his
blackness, shall I place under the big black pot of Hooniah, in the
blackest corner of her house. The slush-lamp shall cease to burn, and
all remain in outer darkness. It is very simple. One by one shall ye
go into the house, lay hand upon the pot for the space of one long
intake of the breath, and withdraw again. Doubtless Jelchs will make
outcry when the hand of the evil-doer is nigh him. Or who knows but
otherwise he may manifest his wisdom. Are ye ready?"

"We be ready," came the multi-voiced response.

"Then will I call the name aloud, each in his turn and hers, till all
are called."

Thereat La-lah was first chosen, and he passed in at once. Every
ear strained, and through the silence they could hear his footsteps
creaking across the rickety floor. But that was all. Jelchs made no
outcry, gave no sign. Bawn was next chosen, for it well might be that
a man should steal his own blankets with intent to cast shame upon his
neighbors. Hooniah followed, and other women and children, but without
result.

"Sime!" Scundoo called out.

"Sime!" he repeated.

But Sime did not stir.

"Art thou afraid of the dark?" La-lah, his own integrity being proved,
demanded fiercely.

Sime chuckled. "I laugh at it all, for it is a great foolishness.
Yet will I go in, not in belief in wonders, but in token that I am
unafraid."

And he passed in boldly, and came out still mocking.

"Some day shalt thou die with great suddenness," La-lah whispered,
righteously indignant.

"I doubt not," the scoffer answered airily. "Few men of us die in our
beds, what of the shamans and the deep sea."

When half the villagers had safely undergone the ordeal, the
excitement, because of its repression, was painfully intense. When
two-thirds had gone through, a young woman, close on her first
child-bed, broke down and in nervous shrieks and laughter gave form to
her terror.

Finally the turn came for the last of all to go in, and nothing had
happened. And Di Ya was the last of all. It must surely be he. Hooniah
let out a lament to the stars, while the rest drew back from the
luckless lad. He was half-dead from fright, and his legs gave under
him so that he staggered on the threshold and nearly fell. Scundoo
shoved him inside and closed the door. A long time went by, during
which could be heard only the boy's weeping. Then, very slowly, came
the creak of his steps to the far corner, a pause, and the creaking of
his return. The door opened and he came forth. Nothing had happened,
and he was the last.

"Let the fire be lighted," Scundoo commanded.

The bright flames rushed upward, revealing faces yet marked with
vanishing fear, but also clouded with doubt.

"Surely the thing has failed," Hooniah whispered hoarsely.

"Yea," Bawn answered complacently. "Scundoo groweth old, and we stand
in need of a new shaman."

"Where now is the wisdom of Jelchs?" Sime snickered in La-lah's ear.

La-lah brushed his brow in a puzzled manner and said nothing.

Sime threw his chest out arrogantly and strutted up to the little
shaman. "Hoh! Hoh! As I said, nothing has come of it!"

"So it would seem, so it would seem," Scundoo answered meekly. "And it
would seem strange to those unskilled in the affairs of mystery."

"As thou?" Sime queried audaciously.

"Mayhap even as I." Scundoo spoke quite softly, his eyelids drooping,
slowly drooping, down, down, till his eyes were all but hidden. "So I
am minded of another test. Let every man, woman, and child, now and at
once, hold their hands well up above their heads!"

So unexpected was the order, and so imperatively was it given, that it
was obeyed without question. Every hand was in the air.

"Let each look on the other's hands, and let all look," Scundoo
commanded, "so that--"

But a noise of laughter, which was more of wrath, drowned his voice.
All eyes had come to rest upon Sime. Every hand but his was black with
soot, and his was guiltless of the smirch of Hooniah's pot.

A stone hurtled through the air and struck him on the cheek.

"It is a lie!" he yelled. "A lie! I know naught of Hooniah's
blankets!"

A second stone gashed his brow, a third whistled past his head, the
great blood-cry went up, and everywhere were people groping on the
ground for missiles. He staggered and half sank down.

"It was a joke! Only a joke!" he shrieked. "I but took them for a
joke!"

"Where hast thou hidden them?" Scundoo's shrill, sharp voice cut
through the tumult like a knife.

"In the large skin-bale in my house, the one slung by the ridge-pole,"
came the answer. "But it was a joke, I say, only--"

Scundoo nodded his head, and the air went thick with flying stones.
Sime's wife was crying silently, her head upon her knees; but his
little boy, with shrieks and laughter, was flinging stones with the
rest.

Hooniah came waddling back with the precious blankets. Scundoo stopped
her.

"We be poor people and have little," she whimpered. "So be not hard
upon us, O Scundoo."

The people ceased from the quivering stone-pile they had builded, and
looked on.

"Nay, it was never my way, good Hooniah," Scundoo made answer,
reaching for the blankets. "In token that I am not hard, these only
shall I take."

"Am I not wise, my children?" he demanded.

"Thou art indeed wise, O Scundoo!" they cried in one voice.

And he went away into the darkness, the blankets around him, and
Jelchs nodding sleepily under his arm.




THE SUNLANDERS


Mandell is an obscure village on the rim of the polar sea. It is not
large, and the people are peaceable, more peaceable even than those
of the adjacent tribes. There are few men in Mandell, and many women;
wherefore a wholesome and necessary polygamy is in practice; the women
bear children with ardor, and the birth of a man-child is hailed with
acclamation. Then there is Aab-Waak, whose head rests always on one
shoulder, as though at some time the neck had become very tired and
refused forevermore its wonted duty.

The cause of all these things,--the peaceableness, and the polygamy,
and the tired neck of Aab-Waak,--goes back among the years to the time
when the schooner _Search_ dropped anchor in Mandell Bay, and when
Tyee, chief man of the tribe, conceived a scheme of sudden wealth. To
this day the story of things that happened is remembered and spoken
of with bated breath by the people of Mandell, who are cousins to the
Hungry Folk who live in the west. Children draw closer when the tale
is told, and marvel sagely to themselves at the madness of those who
might have been their forebears had they not provoked the Sunlanders
and come to bitter ends.

It began to happen when six men came ashore from the _Search_,
with heavy outfits, as though they had come to stay, and quartered
themselves in Neegah's igloo. Not but that they paid well in flour and
sugar for the lodging, but Neegah was aggrieved because Mesahchie, his
daughter, elected to cast her fortunes and seek food and blanket with
Bill-Man, who was leader of the party of white men.

"She is worth a price," Neegah complained to the gathering by the
council-fire, when the six white men were asleep. "She is worth a
price, for we have more men than women, and the men be bidding high.
The hunter Ounenk offered me a kayak, new-made, and a gun which he got
in trade from the Hungry Folk. This was I offered, and behold, now she
is gone and I have nothing!"

"I, too, did bid for Mesahchie," grumbled a voice, in tones not
altogether joyless, and Peelo shoved his broad-cheeked, jovial face
for a moment into the light.

"Thou, too," Neegah affirmed. "And there were others. Why is there
such a restlessness upon the Sunlanders?" he demanded petulantly. "Why
do they not stay at home? The Snow People do not wander to the lands
of the Sunlanders."

"Better were it to ask why they come," cried a voice from the
darkness, and Aab-Waak pushed his way to the front.

"Ay! Why they come!" clamored many voices, and Aab-Waak waved his hand
for silence.

"Men do not dig in the ground for nothing," he began. "And I have it
in mind of the Whale People, who are likewise Sunlanders, and who lost
their ship in the ice. You all remember the Whale People, who came to
us in their broken boats, and who went away into the south with dogs
and sleds when the frost arrived and snow covered the land. And you
remember, while they waited for the frost, that one man of them dug in
the ground, and then two men and three, and then all men of them, with
great excitement and much disturbance. What they dug out of the ground
we do not know, for they drove us away so we could not see. But
afterward, when they were gone, we looked and found nothing. Yet there
be much ground and they did not dig it all."

"Ay, Aab-Waak! Ay!" cried the people in admiration.

"Wherefore I have it in mind," he concluded, "that one Sunlander tells
another, and that these Sunlanders have been so told and are come to
dig in the ground."

"But how can it be that Bill-Man speaks our tongue?" demanded a little
weazened old hunter,--"Bill-Man, upon whom never before our eyes have
rested?"

"Bill-Man has been other times in the Snow Lands," Aab-Waak answered,
"else would he not speak the speech of the Bear People, which is like
the speech of the Hungry Folk, which is very like the speech of the
Mandells. For there have been many Sunlanders among the Bear People,
few among the Hungry Folk, and none at all among the Mandells, save
the Whale People and those who sleep now in the igloo of Neegah."

"Their sugar is very good," Neegah commented, "and their flour."

"They have great wealth," Ounenk added. "Yesterday I was to their
ship, and beheld most cunning tools of iron, and knives, and guns, and
flour, and sugar, and strange foods without end."

"It is so, brothers!" Tyee stood up and exulted inwardly at the
respect and silence his people accorded him. "They be very rich,
these Sunlanders. Also, they be fools. For behold! They come among us
boldly, blindly, and without thought for all of their great wealth.
Even now they snore, and we are many and unafraid."

"Mayhap they, too, are unafraid, being great fighters," the weazened
little old hunter objected.

But Tyee scowled upon him. "Nay, it would not seem so. They live to
the south, under the path of the sun, and are soft as their dogs are
soft. You remember the dog of the Whale People? Our dogs ate him the
second day, for he was soft and could not fight. The sun is warm and
life easy in the Sun Lands, and the men are as women, and the women as
children."

Heads nodded in approval, and the women craned their necks to listen.

"It is said they are good to their women, who do little work,"
tittered Likeeta, a broad-hipped, healthy young woman, daughter to
Tyee himself.

"Thou wouldst follow the feet of Mesahchie, eh?" he cried angrily.
Then he turned swiftly to the tribesmen. "Look you, brothers, this is
the way of the Sunlanders! They have eyes for our women, and take them
one by one. As Mesahchie has gone, cheating Neegah of her price, so
will Likeeta go, so will they all go, and we be cheated. I have talked
with a hunter from the Bear People, and I know. There be Hungry Folk
among us; let them speak if my words be true."

The six hunters of the Hungry Folk attested the truth and fell each
to telling his neighbor of the Sunlanders and their ways. There were
mutterings from the younger men, who had wives to seek, and from the
older men, who had daughters to fetch prices, and a low hum of rage
rose higher and clearer.

"They are very rich, and have cunning tools of iron, and knives, and
guns without end," Tyee suggested craftily, his dream of sudden wealth
beginning to take shape.

"I shall take the gun of Bill-Man for myself," Aab-Waak suddenly
proclaimed.

"Nay, it shall be mine!" shouted Neegah; "for there is the price of
Mesahchie to be reckoned."

"Peace! O brothers!" Tyee swept the assembly with his hands. "Let the
women and children go to their igloos. This is the talk of men; let it
be for the ears of men."

"There be guns in plenty for all," he said when the women had
unwillingly withdrawn. "I doubt not there will be two guns for each
man, without thought of the flour and sugar and other things. And it
is easy. The six Sunlanders in Neegah's igloo will we kill to-night
while they sleep. To-morrow will we go in peace to the ship to
trade, and there, when the time favors, kill all their brothers. And
to-morrow night there shall be feasting and merriment and division
of wealth. And the least man shall possess more than did ever the
greatest before. Is it wise, that which I have spoken, brothers?"

A low growl of approval answered him, and preparation for the attack
was begun. The six Hungry Folk, as became members of a wealthier
tribe, were armed with rifles and plenteously supplied with
ammunition. But it was only here and there that a Mandell possessed a
gun, many of which were broken, and there was a general slackness of
powder and shells. This poverty of war weapons, however, was relieved
by myriads of bone-headed arrows and casting-spears for work at a
distance, and for close quarters steel knives of Russian and Yankee
make.

"Let there be no noise," Tyee finally instructed; "but be there many
on every side of the igloo, and close, so that the Sunlanders may not
break through. Then do you, Neegah, with six of the young men behind,
crawl in to where they sleep. Take no guns, which be prone to go
off at unexpected times, but put the strength of your arms into the
knives."

"And be it understood that no harm befall Mesahchie, who is worth a
price," Neegah whispered hoarsely.

Flat upon the ground, the small army concentred on the igloo, and
behind, deliciously expectant, crouched many women and children, come
out to witness the murder. The brief August night was passing, and in
the gray of dawn could be dimly discerned the creeping forms of Neegah
and the young men. Without pause, on hands and knees, they entered the
long passageway and disappeared. Tyee rose up and rubbed his hands.
All was going well. Head after head in the big circle lifted and
waited. Each man pictured the scene according to his nature--the
sleeping men, the plunge of the knives, and the sudden death in the
dark.

A loud hail, in the voice of a Sunlander, rent the silence, and a
shot rang out. Then an uproar broke loose inside the igloo. Without
premeditation, the circle swept forward into the passageway. On the
inside, half a dozen repeating rifles began to chatter, and the
Mandells, jammed in the confined space, were powerless. Those at the
front strove madly to retreat from the fire-spitting guns in their
very faces, and those in the rear pressed as madly forward to the
attack. The bullets from the big 45:90's drove through half a dozen
men at a shot, and the passageway, gorged with surging, helpless men,
became a shambles. The rifles, pumped without aim into the mass,
withered it away like a machine gun, and against that steady stream of
death no man could advance.

"Never was there the like!" panted one of the Hungry Folk. "I did
but look in, and the dead were piled like seals on the ice after a
killing!"

"Did I not say, mayhap, they were fighters?" cackled the weazened old
hunter.

"It was to be expected," Aab-Waak answered stoutly. "We fought in a
trap of our making."

"O ye fools!" Tyee chided. "Ye sons of fools! It was not planned, this
thing ye have done. To Neegah and the six young men only was it given
to go inside. My cunning is superior to the cunning of the Sunlanders,
but ye take away its edge, and rob me of its strength, and make it
worse than no cunning at all!"

No one made reply, and all eyes centred on the igloo, which loomed
vague and monstrous against the clear northeast sky. Through a hole
in the roof the smoke from the rifles curled slowly upward in the
pulseless air, and now and again a wounded man crawled painfully
through the gray.

"Let each ask of his neighbor for Neegah and the six young men," Tyee
commanded.

And after a time the answer came back, "Neegah and the six young men
are not."

"And many more are not!" wailed a woman to the rear.

"The more wealth for those who are left," Tyee grimly consoled. Then,
turning to Aab-Waak, he said: "Go thou, and gather together many
sealskins filled with oil. Let the hunters empty them on the outside
wood of the igloo and of the passage. And let them put fire to it ere
the Sunlanders make holes in the igloo for their guns."

Even as he spoke a hole appeared in the dirt plastered between the
logs, a rifle muzzle protruded, and one of the Hungry Folk clapped
hand to his side and leaped in the air. A second shot, through the
lungs, brought him to the ground. Tyee and the rest scattered to
either side, out of direct range, and Aab-Waak hastened the men
forward with the skins of oil. Avoiding the loopholes, which were
making on every side of the igloo, they emptied the skins on the dry
drift-logs brought down by the Mandell River from the tree-lands to
the south. Ounenk ran forward with a blazing brand, and the flames
leaped upward. Many minutes passed, without sign, and they held their
weapons ready as the fire gained headway.

Tyee rubbed his hands gleefully as the dry structure burned and
crackled. "Now we have them, brothers! In the trap!"

"And no one may gainsay me the gun of Bill-Man," Aab-Waak announced.

"Save Bill-Man," squeaked the old hunter. "For behold, he cometh now!"

Covered with a singed and blackened blanket, the big white man leaped
out of the blazing entrance, and on his heels, likewise shielded, came
Mesahchie, and the five other Sunlanders. The Hungry Folk tried to
check the rush with an ill-directed volley, while the Mandells hurled
in a cloud of spears and arrows. But the Sunlanders cast their flaming
blankets from them as they ran, and it was seen that each bore on his
shoulders a small pack of ammunition. Of all their possessions, they
had chosen to save that. Running swiftly and with purpose, they broke
the circle and headed directly for the great cliff, which towered
blackly in the brightening day a half-mile to the rear of the village.

But Tyee knelt on one knee and lined the sights of his rifle on the
rearmost Sunlander. A great shout went up when he pulled the trigger
and the man fell forward, struggled partly up, and fell again. Without
regard for the rain of arrows, another Sunlander ran back, bent over
him, and lifted him across his shoulders. But the Mandell spearmen
were crowding up into closer range, and a strong cast transfixed the
wounded man. He cried out and became swiftly limp as his comrade
lowered him to the ground. In the meanwhile, Bill-Man and the three
others had made a stand and were driving a leaden hail into the
advancing spearmen. The fifth Sunlander bent over his stricken fellow,
felt the heart, and then coolly cut the straps of the pack and stood
up with the ammunition and extra gun.

"Now is he a fool!" cried Tyee, leaping high, as he ran forward, to
clear the squirming body of one of the Hungry Folk.

His own rifle was clogged so that he could not use it, and he called
out for some one to spear the Sunlander, who had turned and was
running for safety under the protecting fire. The little old hunter
poised his spear on the throwing-stick, swept his arm back as he ran,
and delivered the cast.

"By the body of the Wolf, say I, it was a good throw!" Tyee praised,
as the fleeing man pitched forward, the spear standing upright between
his shoulders and swaying slowly forward and back.

The little weazened old man coughed and sat down. A streak of red
showed on his lips and welled into a thick stream. He coughed again,
and a strange whistling came and went with his breath.

"They, too, are unafraid, being great fighters," he wheezed, pawing
aimlessly with his hands. "And behold! Bill-Man comes now!"

Tyee glanced up. Four Mandells and one of the Hungry Folk had rushed
upon the fallen man and were spearing him from his knees back to the
earth. In the twinkling of an eye, Tyee saw four of them cut down by
the bullets of the Sunlanders. The fifth, as yet unhurt, seized the
two rifles, but as he stood up to make off he was whirled almost
completely around by the impact of a bullet in the arm, steadied by
a second, and overthrown by the shock of a third. A moment later and
Bill-Man was on the spot, cutting the pack-straps and picking up the
guns.

This Tyee saw, and his own people falling as they straggled forward,
and he was aware of a quick doubt, and resolved to lie where he was
and see more. For some unaccountable reason, Mesahchie was running
back to Bill-Man; but before she could reach him, Tyee saw Peelo run
out and throw arms about her. He essayed to sling her across his
shoulder, but she grappled with him, tearing and scratching at his
face. Then she tripped him, and the pair fell heavily. When they
regained their feet, Peelo had shifted his grip so that one arm
was passed under her chin, the wrist pressing into her throat and
strangling her. He buried his face in her breast, taking the blows of
her hands on his thick mat of hair, and began slowly to force her off
the field. Then it was, retreating with the weapons of his fallen
comrades, that Bill-Man came upon them. As Mesahchie saw him, she
twirled the victim around and held him steady. Bill-Man swung the
rifle in his right hand, and hardly easing his stride, delivered the
blow. Tyee saw Peelo drive to the earth as smote by a falling star,
and the Sunlander and Neegah's daughter fleeing side by side.

A bunch of Mandells, led by one of the Hungry Folk, made a futile rush
which melted away into the earth before the scorching fire.

Tyee caught his breath and murmured, "Like the young frost in the
morning sun."

"As I say, they are great fighters," the old hunter whispered weakly,
far gone in hemorrhage. "I know. I have heard. They be sea-robbers and
hunters of seals; and they shoot quick and true, for it is their way
of life and the work of their hands."

"Like the young frost in the morning sun," Tyee repeated, crouching
for shelter behind the dying man and peering at intervals about him.

It was no longer a fight, for no Mandell man dared venture forward,
and as it was, they were too close to the Sunlanders to go back. Three
tried it, scattering and scurrying like rabbits; but one came down
with a broken leg, another was shot through the body, and the third,
twisting and dodging, fell on the edge of the village. So the
tribesmen crouched in the hollow places and burrowed into the dirt in
the open, while the Sunlanders' bullets searched the plain.

"Move not," Tyee pleaded, as Aab-Waak came worming over the ground to
him. "Move not, good Aab-Waak, else you bring death upon us."

"Death sits upon many," Aab-Waak laughed; "wherefore, as you say,
there will be much wealth in division. My father breathes fast and
short behind the big rock yon, and beyond, twisted like in a knot,
lieth my brother. But their share shall be my share, and it is well."

"As you say, good Aab-Waak, and as I have said; but before division
must come that which we may divide, and the Sunlanders be not yet
dead."

A bullet glanced from a rock before them, and singing shrilly, rose
low over their heads on its second flight. Tyee ducked and shivered,
but Aab-Waak grinned and sought vainly to follow it with his eyes.

"So swiftly they go, one may not see them," he observed.

"But many be dead of us," Tyee went on.

"And many be left," was the reply. "And they hug close to the earth,
for they have become wise in the fashion of righting. Further, they
are angered. Moreover, when we have killed the Sunlanders on the ship,
there will remain but four on the land. These may take long to kill,
but in the end it will happen."

"How may we go down to the ship when we cannot go this way or that?"
Tyee questioned.

"It is a bad place where lie Bill-Man and his brothers," Aab-Waak
explained. "We may come upon them from every side, which is not good.
So they aim to get their backs against the cliff and wait until their
brothers of the ship come to give them aid."

"Never shall they come from the ship, their brothers! I have said it."

Tyee was gathering courage again, and when the Sunlanders verified the
prediction by retreating to the cliff, he was light-hearted as ever.

"There be only three of us!" complained one of the Hungry Folk as they
came together for council.

"Therefore, instead of two, shall you have four guns each," was Tyee's
rejoinder.

"We did good fighting."

"Ay; and if it should happen that two of you be left, then will you
have six guns each. Therefore, fight well."

"And if there be none of them left?" Aab-Waak whispered slyly.

"Then will _we_ have the guns, you and I," Tyee whispered back.

However, to propitiate the Hungry Folk, he made one of them leader
of the ship expedition. This party comprised fully two-thirds of the
tribesmen, and departed for the coast, a dozen miles away, laden with
skins and things to trade. The remaining men were disposed in a large
half-circle about the breastwork which Bill-Man and his Sunlanders had
begun to throw up. Tyee was quick to note the virtues of things, and
at once set his men to digging shallow trenches.

"The time will go before they are aware," he explained to Aab-Waak;
"and their minds being busy, they will not think overmuch of the dead
that are, nor gather trouble to themselves. And in the dark of night
they may creep closer, so that when the Sunlanders look forth in the
morning light they will find us very near."

In the midday heat the men ceased from their work and made a meal of
dried fish and seal oil which the women brought up. There was some
clamor for the food of the Sunlanders in the igloo of Neegah, but Tyee
refused to divide it until the return of the ship party. Speculations
upon the outcome became rife, but in the midst of it a dull boom
drifted up over the land from the sea. The keen-eyed ones made out
a dense cloud of smoke, which quickly disappeared, and which they
averred was directly over the ship of the Sunlanders. Tyee was of the
opinion that it was a big gun. Aab-Waak did not know, but thought it
might be a signal of some sort. Anyway, he said, it was time something
happened.

Five or six hours afterward a solitary man was descried coming across
the wide flat from the sea, and the women and children poured out upon
him in a body. It was Ounenk, naked, winded, and wounded. The blood
still trickled down his face from a gash on the forehead. His left
arm, frightfully mangled, hung helpless at his side. But most
significant of all, there was a wild gleam in his eyes which betokened
the women knew not what.

"Where be Peshack?" an old squaw queried sharply.

"And Olitlie?" "And Polak?" "And Mah-Kook?" the voices took up the
cry.

But he said nothing, brushing his way through the clamorous mass and
directing his staggering steps toward Tyee. The old squaw raised the
wail, and one by one the women joined her as they swung in behind. The
men crawled out of their trenches and ran back to gather about Tyee,
and it was noticed that the Sunlanders climbed upon their barricade to
see.

Ounenk halted, swept the blood from his eyes, and looked about. He
strove to speak, but his dry lips were glued together. Likeeta fetched
him water, and he grunted and drank again.

"Was it a fight?" Tyee demanded finally,--"a good fight?"

"Ho! ho! ho!" So suddenly and so fiercely did Ounenk laugh that every
voice hushed. "Never was there such a fight! So I say, I, Ounenk,
fighter beforetime of beasts and men. And ere I forget, let me speak
fat words and wise. By fighting will the Sunlanders teach us Mandell
Folk how to fight. And if we fight long enough, we shall be great
fighters, even as the Sunlanders, or else we shall be--dead. Ho! ho!
ho! It was a fight!"

"Where be thy brothers?" Tyee shook him till he shrieked from the pain
of his hurts.

Ounenk sobered. "My brothers? They are not."

"And Pome-Lee?" cried one of the two Hungry Folk; "Pome-Lee, the son
of my mother?"

"Pome-Lee is not," Ounenk answered in a monotonous voice.

"And the Sunlanders?" from Aab-Waak.

"The Sunlanders are not."

"Then the ship of the Sunlanders, and the wealth and guns and things?"
Tyee demanded.

"Neither the ship of the Sunlanders, nor the wealth and guns and
things," was the unvarying response. "All are not. Nothing is. I only
am."

"And thou art a fool."

"It may be so," Ounenk answered, unruffled.

"I have seen that which would well make me a fool."

Tyee held his tongue, and all waited till it should please Ounenk to
tell the story in his own way.

"We took no guns, O Tyee," he at last began; "no guns, my
brothers--only knives and hunting bows and spears. And in twos and
threes, in our kayaks, we came to the ship. They were glad to see us,
the Sunlanders, and we spread our skins and they brought out
their articles of trade, and everything was well. And Pome-Lee
waited--waited till the sun was well overhead and they sat at meat,
when he gave the cry and we fell upon them. Never was there such a
fight, and never such fighters. Half did we kill in the quickness
of surprise, but the half that was left became as devils, and they
multiplied themselves, and everywhere they fought like devils. Three
put their backs against the mast of the ship, and we ringed them with
our dead before they died. And some got guns and shot with both eyes
wide open, and very quick and sure. And one got a big gun, from which
at one time he shot many small bullets. And so, behold!"

Ounenk pointed to his ear, neatly pierced by a buckshot.

"But I, Ounenk, drove my spear through his back from behind. And in
such fashion, one way and another, did we kill them all--all save the
head man. And him we were about, many of us, and he was alone, when he
made a great cry and broke through us, five or six dragging upon him,
and ran down inside the ship. And then, when the wealth of the
ship was ours, and only the head man down below whom we would kill
presently, why then there was a sound as of all the guns in the
world--a mighty sound! And like a bird I rose up in the air, and the
living Mandell Folk, and the dead Sunlanders, the little kayaks, the
big ship, the guns, the wealth--everything rose up in the air. So I
say, I, Ounenk, who tell the tale, am the only one left."

A great silence fell upon the assemblage. Tyee looked at Aab-Waak with
awe-struck eyes, but forbore to speak. Even the women were too stunned
to wail the dead.

Ounenk looked about him with pride. "I, only, am left," he repeated.

But at that instant a rifle cracked from Bill-Man's barricade, and
there was a sharp spat and thud on the chest of Ounenk. He swayed
backward and came forward again, a look of startled surprise on his
face. He gasped, and his lips writhed in a grim smile. There was a
shrinking together of the shoulders and a bending of the knees. He
shook himself, as might a drowsing man, and straightened up. But the
shrinking and bending began again, and he sank down slowly, quite
slowly, to the ground.

It was a clean mile from the pit of the Sunlanders, and death had
spanned it. A great cry of rage went up, and in it there was much of
blood-vengeance, much of the unreasoned ferocity of the brute. Tyee
and Aab-Waak tried to hold the Mandell Folk back, were thrust aside,
and could only turn and watch the mad charge. But no shots came
from the Sunlanders, and ere half the distance was covered, many,
affrighted by the mysterious silence of the pit, halted and waited.
The wilder spirits bore on, and when they had cut the remaining
distance in half, the pit still showed no sign of life. At two hundred
yards they slowed down and bunched; at one hundred, they stopped, a
score of them, suspicious, and conferred together.

Then a wreath of smoke crowned the barricade, and they scattered like
a handful of pebbles thrown at random. Four went down, and four more,
and they continued swiftly to fall, one and two at a time, till but
one remained, and he in full flight with death singing about his ears.
It was Nok, a young hunter, long-legged and tall, and he ran as never
before. He skimmed across the naked open like a bird, and soared and
sailed and curved from side to side. The rifles in the pit rang out
in solid volley; they flut-flut-flut-flutted in ragged sequence; and
still Nok rose and dipped and rose again unharmed. There was a lull in
the firing, as though the Sunlanders had given over, and Nok curved
less and less in his flight till he darted straight forward at every
leap. And then, as he leaped cleanly and well, one lone rifle barked
from the pit, and he doubled up in mid-air, struck the ground in a
ball, and like a ball bounced from the impact, and came down in a
broken heap.

"Who so swift as the swift-winged lead?" Aab-Waak pondered.

Tyee grunted and turned away. The incident was closed and there was
more pressing matter at hand. One Hungry Man and forty fighters, some
of them hurt, remained; and there were four Sunlanders yet to reckon
with.

"We will keep them in their hole by the cliff," he said, "and when
famine has gripped them hard we will slay them like children."

"But of what matter to fight?" queried Oloof, one of the younger men.
"The wealth of the Sunlanders is not; only remains that in the igloo
of Neegah, a paltry quantity--"

He broke off hastily as the air by his ear split sharply to the
passage of a bullet.

Tyee laughed scornfully. "Let that be thy answer. What else may we do
with this mad breed of Sunlanders which will not die?"

"What a thing is foolishness!" Oloof protested, his ears furtively
alert for the coming of other bullets. "It is not right that they
should fight so, these Sunlanders. Why will they not die easily? They
are fools not to know that they are dead men, and they give us much
trouble."

"We fought before for great wealth; we fight now that we may live,"
Aab-Waak summed up succinctly.

That night there was a clash in the trenches, and shots exchanged. And
in the morning the igloo of Neegah was found empty of the Sunlanders'
possessions. These they themselves had taken, for the signs of their
trail were visible to the sun. Oloof climbed to the brow of the cliff
to hurl great stones down into the pit, but the cliff overhung, and he
hurled down abuse and insult instead, and promised bitter torture to
them in the end. Bill-Man mocked him back in the tongue of the Bear
Folk, and Tyee, lifting his head from a trench to see, had his
shoulder scratched deeply by a bullet.

And in the dreary days that followed, and in the wild nights when they
pushed the trenches closer, there was much discussion as to the wisdom
of letting the Sunlanders go. But of this they were afraid, and the
women raised a cry always at the thought This much they had seen of
the Sunlanders; they cared to see no more. All the time the whistle
and blub-blub of bullets filled the air, and all the time the
death-list grew. In the golden sunrise came the faint, far crack of a
rifle, and a stricken woman would throw up her hands on the distant
edge of the village; in the noonday heat, men in the trenches heard
the shrill sing-song and knew their deaths; or in the gray afterglow
of evening, the dirt kicked up in puffs by the winking fires. And
through the nights the long "Wah-hoo-ha-a wah-hoo-ha-a!" of mourning
women held dolorous sway.

As Tyee had promised, in the end famine gripped the Sunlanders. And
once, when an early fall gale blew, one of them crawled through the
darkness past the trenches and stole many dried fish.

But he could not get back with them, and the sun found him vainly
hiding in the village. So he fought the great fight by himself, and
in a narrow ring of Mandell Folk shot four with his revolver, and ere
they could lay hands on him for the torture, turned it on himself and
died.

This threw a gloom upon the people. Oloof put the question, "If one
man die so hard, how hard will die the three who yet are left?"

Then Mesahchie stood up on the barricade and called in by name three
dogs which had wandered close,--meat and life,--which set back the day
of reckoning and put despair in the hearts of the Mandell Folk. And on
the head of Mesahchie were showered the curses of a generation.

The days dragged by. The sun hurried south, the nights grew long and
longer, and there was a touch of frost in the air. And still the
Sunlanders held the pit. Hearts were breaking under the unending
strain, and Tyee thought hard and deep. Then he sent forth word that
all the skins and hides of all the tribe be collected. These he had
made into huge cylindrical bales, and behind each bale he placed a
man.

When the word was given the brief day was almost spent, and it was
slow work and tedious, rolling the big bales forward foot by foot The
bullets of the Sunlanders blub-blubbed and thudded against them, but
could not go through, and the men howled their delight But the dark
was at hand, and Tyee, secure of success, called the bales back to the
trenches.

In the morning, in the face of an unearthly silence from the pit, the
real advance began. At first with large intervals between, the bales
slowly converged as the circle drew in. At a hundred yards they were
quite close together, so that Tyee's order to halt was passed along
in whispers. The pit showed no sign of life. They watched long and
sharply, but nothing stirred. The advance was taken up and the
manoeuvre repeated at fifty yards. Still no sign nor sound. Tyee shook
his head, and even Aab-Waak was dubious. But the order was given to go
on, and go on they did, till bale touched bale and a solid rampart of
skin and hide bowed out from the cliff about the pit and back to the
cliff again.

Tyee looked back and saw the women and children clustering blackly in
the deserted trenches. He looked ahead at the silent pit. The men were
wriggling nervously, and he ordered every second bale forward. This
double line advanced till bale touched bale as before. Then Aab-Waak,
of his own will, pushed one bale forward alone. When it touched the
barricade, he waited a long while. After that he tossed unresponsive
rocks over into the pit, and finally, with great care, stood up and
peered in. A carpet of empty cartridges, a few white-picked dog bones,
and a soggy place where water dripped from a crevice, met his eyes.
That was all. The Sunlanders were gone.

There were murmurings of witchcraft, vague complaints, dark looks
which foreshadowed to Tyee dread things which yet might come to pass,
and he breathed easier when Aab-Waak took up the trail along the base
of the cliff.

"The cave!" Tyee cried. "They foresaw my wisdom of the skin-bales and
fled away into the cave!"

The cliff was honey-combed with a labyrinth of subterranean passages
which found vent in an opening midway between the pit and where the
trench tapped the wall. Thither, and with many exclamations, the
tribesmen followed Aab-Waak, and, arrived, they saw plainly where the
Sunlanders had climbed to the mouth, twenty and odd feet above.

"Now the thing is done," Tyee said, rubbing his hands. "Let word go
forth that rejoicing be made, for they are in the trap now, these
Sunlanders, in the trap. The young men shall climb up, and the mouth
of the cave be filled with stones, so that Bill-Man and his brothers
and Mesahchie shall by famine be pinched to shadows and die cursing in
the silence and dark."

Cries of delight and relief greeted this, and Howgah, the last of the
Hungry Folk, swarmed up the steep slant and drew himself, crouching,
upon the lip of the opening. But as he crouched, a muffled report
rushed forth, and as he clung desperately to the slippery edge, a
second. His grip loosed with reluctant weakness, and he pitched down
at the feet of Tyee, quivered for a moment like some monstrous jelly,
and was still.

"How should I know they were great fighters and unafraid?" Tyee
demanded, spurred to defence by recollection of the dark looks and
vague complaints.

"We were many and happy," one of the men stated baldly. Another
fingered his spear with a prurient hand.

But Oloof cried them cease. "Give ear, my brothers! There be another
way! As a boy I chanced upon it playing along the steep. It is hidden
by the rocks, and there is no reason that a man should go there;
wherefore it is secret, and no man knows. It is very small, and you
crawl on your belly a long way, and then you are in the cave. To-night
we will so crawl, without noise, on our bellies, and come upon the
Sunlanders from behind. And to-morrow we will be at peace, and never
again will we quarrel with the Sunlanders in the years to come."

"Never again!" chorussed the weary men. "Never again!" And Tyee joined
with them.

That night, with the memory of their dead in their hearts, and in
their hands stones and spears and knives, the horde of women and
children collected about the known mouth of the cave. Down the twenty
and odd precarious feet to the ground no Sunlander could hope to pass
and live. In the village remained only the wounded men, while every
able man--and there were thirty of them--followed Oloof to the secret
opening. A hundred feet of broken ledges and insecurely heaped rocks
were between it and the earth, and because of the rocks, which might
be displaced by the touch of hand or foot, but one man climbed at a
time. Oloof went up first, called softly for the next to come on, and
disappeared inside. A man followed, a second, and a third, and so on,
till only Tyee remained. He received the call of the last man, but a
quick doubt assailed him and he stayed to ponder. Half an hour later
he swung up to the opening and peered in. He could feel the narrowness
of the passage, and the darkness before him took on solidity. The fear
of the walled-in earth chilled him and he could not venture. All the
men who had died, from Neegah the first of the Mandells, to Howgah
the last of the Hungry Folk, came and sat with him, but he chose the
terror of their company rather than face the horror which he felt to
lurk in the thick blackness. He had been sitting long when something
soft and cold fluttered lightly on his cheek, and he knew the first
winter's snow was falling. The dim dawn came, and after that the
bright day, when he heard a low guttural sobbing, which came and went
at intervals along the passage and which drew closer each time and
more distinct He slipped over the edge, dropped his feet to the first
ledge, and waited.

That which sobbed made slow progress, but at last, after many halts,
it reached him, and he was sure no Sunlander made the noise. So he
reached a hand inside, and where there should have been a head felt
the shoulders of a man uplifted on bent arms. The head he found later,
not erect, but hanging straight down so that the crown rested on the
floor of the passage.

"Is it you, Tyee?" the head said. "For it is I, Aab-Waak, who am
helpless and broken as a rough-flung spear. My head is in the dirt,
and I may not climb down unaided."

Tyee clambered in, dragged him up with his back against the wall, but
the head hung down on the chest and sobbed and wailed.

"Ai-oo-o, ai-oo-o!" it went "Oloof forgot, for Mesahchie likewise knew
the secret and showed the Sunlanders, else they would not have waited
at the end of the narrow way. Wherefore, I am a broken man, and
helpless--ai-oo-o, ai-oo-o!"

"And did they die, the cursed Sunlanders, at the end of the narrow
way?" Tyee demanded.

"How should I know they waited?" Aab-Waak gurgled. "For my brothers
had gone before, many of them, and there was no sound of struggle.
How should I know why there should be no sound of struggle? And ere
I knew, two hands were about my neck so that I could not cry out and
warn my brothers yet to come. And then there were two hands more on my
head, and two more on my feet. In this fashion the three Sunlanders
had me. And while the hands held my head in the one place, the hands
on my feet swung my body around, and as we wring the neck of a duck in
the marsh, so my week was wrung.

"But it was not given that I should die," he went on, a remnant of
pride yet glimmering. "I, only, am left. Oloof and the rest lie on
their backs in a row, and their faces turn this way and that, and the
faces of some be underneath where the backs of their heads should be.
It is not good to look upon; for when life returned to me I saw them
all by the light of a torch which the Sunlanders left, and I had been
laid with them in the row."

"So? So?" Tyee mused, too stunned for speech.

He started suddenly, and shivered, for the voice of Bill-Man shot out
at him from the passage.

"It is well," it said. "I look for the man who crawls with the broken
neck, and lo, do I find Tyee. Throw down thy gun, Tyee, so that I may
hear it strike among the rocks."

Tyee obeyed passively, and Bill-Man crawled forward into the light.
Tyee looked at him curiously. He was gaunt and worn and dirty, and his
eyes burned like twin coals in their cavernous sockets.

"I am hungry, Tyee," he said. "Very hungry."

"And I am dirt at thy feet," Tyee responded.

"Thy word is my law. Further, I commanded my people not to withstand
thee. I counselled--"

But Bill-Man had turned and was calling back into the passage. "Hey!
Charley! Jim! Fetch the woman along and come on!"

"We go now to eat," he said, when his comrades and Mesahchie had
joined him.

Tyee rubbed his hands deprecatingly. "We have little, but it is
thine."

"After that we go south on the snow," Bill-Man continued.

"May you go without hardship and the trail be easy."

"It is a long way. We will need dogs and food--much!"

"Thine the pick of our dogs and the food they may carry."

Bill-Man slipped over the edge of the opening and prepared to descend.
"But we come again, Tyee. We come again, and our days shall be long in
the land."

And so they departed into the trackless south, Bill-Man, his brothers,
and Mesahchie. And when the next year came, the _Search Number Two_
rode at anchor in Mandell Bay. The few Mandell men, who survived
because their wounds had prevented their crawling into the cave, went
to work at the best of the Sunlanders and dug in the ground. They hunt
and fish no more, but receive a daily wage, with which they buy flour,
sugar, calico, and such things which the _Search Number Two_ brings on
her yearly trip from the Sunlands.

And this mine is worked in secret, as many Northland mines have been
worked; and no white man outside the Company, which is Bill-Man, Jim,
and Charley, knows the whereabouts of Mandell on the rim of the polar
sea. Aab-Waak still carries his head on one shoulder, is become an
oracle, and preaches peace to the younger generation, for which he
receives a pension from the Company. Tyee is foreman of the mine. But
he has achieved a new theory concerning the Sunlanders.

"They that live under the path of the sun are not soft," he says,
smoking his pipe and watching the day-shift take itself off and the
night-shift go on. "For the sun enters into their blood and burns them
with a great fire till they are filled with lusts and passions. They
burn always, so that they may not know when they are beaten. Further,
there is an unrest in them, which is a devil, and they are flung out
over the earth to toil and suffer and fight without end. I know. I am
Tyee."




THE SICKNESS OF LONE CHIEF


This is a tale that was told to me by two old men. We sat in the smoke
of a mosquito-smudge, in the cool of the day, which was midnight;
and ever and anon, throughout the telling, we smote lustily and with
purpose at such of the winged pests as braved the smoke for a snack at
our hides. To the right, beneath us, twenty feet down the crumbling
bank, the Yukon gurgled lazily. To the left, on the rose-leaf rim of
the low-lying hills, smouldered the sleepy sun, which saw no sleep
that night nor was destined to see sleep for many nights to come.

The old men who sat with me and valorously slew mosquitoes were
Lone Chief and Mutsak, erstwhile comrades in arms, and now withered
repositories of tradition and ancient happening. They were the last
of their generation and without honor among the younger set which had
grown up on the farthest fringe of a mining civilization. Who cared
for tradition in these days, when spirits could be evoked from black
bottles, and black bottles could be evoked from the complaisant white
men for a few hours' sweat or a mangy fur? Of what potency the fearful
rites and masked mysteries of shamanism, when daily that living
wonder, the steamboat, coughed and spluttered up and down the Yukon in
defiance of all law, a veritable fire-breathing monster? And of what
value was hereditary prestige, when he who now chopped the most wood,
or best conned a stern-wheeler through the island mazes, attained the
chiefest consideration of his fellows?

Of a truth, having lived too long, they had fallen on evil days, these
two old men, Lone Chief and Mutsak, and in the new order they were
without honor or place. So they waited drearily for death, and the
while their hearts warmed to the strange white man who shared with
them the torments of the mosquito-smudge and lent ready ear to their
tales of old time before the steamboat came.

"So a girl was chosen for me," Lone Chief was saying. His voice,
shrill and piping, ever and again dropped plummet-like into a hoarse
and rattling bass, and, just as one became accustomed to it, soaring
upward into the thin treble--alternate cricket chirpings and bullfrog
croakings, as it were.

"So a girl was chosen for me," he was saying. "For my father, who was
Kask-ta-ka, the Otter, was angered because I looked not with a needful
eye upon women. He was an old man, and chief of his tribe. I was the
last of his sons to be alive, and through me, only, could he look to
see his blood go down among those to come after and as yet unborn. But
know, O White Man, that I was very sick; and when neither the hunting
nor the fishing delighted me, and by meat my belly was not made warm,
how should I look with favor upon women? or prepare for the feast
of marriage? or look forward to the prattle and troubles of little
children?"

"Ay," Mutsak interrupted. "For had not Lone Chief fought in the arms
of a great bear till his head was cracked and blood ran from out his
ears?"

Lone Chief nodded vigorously. "Mutsak speaks true. In the time that
followed, my head was well, and it was not well. For though the flesh
healed and the sore went away, yet was I sick inside. When I walked,
my legs shook under me, and when I looked at the light, my eyes became
filled with tears. And when I opened my eyes, the world outside went
around and around, and when I closed my eyes, my head inside went
around and around, and all the things I had ever seen went around and
around inside my head. And above my eyes there was a great pain, as
though something heavy rested always upon me, or like a band that is
drawn tight and gives much hurt. And speech was slow to me, and I
waited long for each right word to come to my tongue. And when I
waited not long, all manner of words crowded in, and my tongue spoke
foolishness. I was very sick, and when my father, the Otter, brought
the girl Kasaan before me--"

"Who was a young girl, and strong, my sister's child," Mutsak broke
in. "Strong-hipped for children was Kasaan, and straight-legged and
quick of foot. She made better moccasins than any of all the young
girls, and the bark-rope she braided was the stoutest. And she had a
smile in her eyes, and a laugh on her lips; and her temper was not
hasty, nor was she unmindful that men give the law and women ever
obey."

"As I say, I was very sick," Lone Chief went on. "And when my father,
the Otter, brought the girl Kasaan before me, I said rather should
they make me ready for burial than for marriage. Whereat the face of
my father went black with anger, and he said that I should be served
according to my wish, and that I who was yet alive should be made
ready for death as one already dead--"

"Which be not the way of our people, O White Man," spoke up Mutsak.
"For know that these things that were done to Lone Chief it was our
custom to do only to dead men. But the Otter was very angry."

"Ay," said Lone Chief. "My father, the Otter, was a man short of
speech and swift of deed. And he commanded the people to gather before
the lodge wherein I lay. And when they were gathered, he commanded
them to mourn for his son who was dead--"

"And before the lodge they sang the
death-song--_O-o-o-o-o-o-a-haa-ha-a-ich-klu-kuk-ich-klu-kuk_," wailed
Mutsak, in so excellent an imitation that all the tendrils of my spine
crawled and curved in sympathy.

"And inside the lodge," continued Lone Chief, "my mother blackened her
face with soot, and flung ashes upon her head, and mourned for me as
one already dead; for so had my father commanded. So Okiakuta, my
mother, mourned with much noise, and beat her breasts and tore her
hair; and likewise Hooniak, my sister, and Seenatah, my mother's
sister; and the noise they made caused a great ache in my head, and I
felt that I would surely and immediately die.

"And the elders of the tribe gathered about me where I lay and
discussed the journey my soul must take. One spoke of the thick and
endless forests where lost souls wandered crying, and where I, too,
might chance to wander and never see the end. And another spoke of
the big rivers, rapid with bad water, where evil spirits shrieked and
lifted up their formless arms to drag one down by the hair. For these
rivers, all said together, a canoe must be provided me. And yet
another spoke of the storms, such as no live man ever saw, when the
stars rained down out of the sky, and the earth gaped wide in many
cracks, and all the rivers in the heart of the earth rushed out and
in. Whereupon they that sat by me flung up their arms and wailed
loudly; and those outside heard, and wailed more loudly. And as to
them I was as dead, so was I to my own mind dead. I did not know when,
or how, yet did I know that I had surely died.

"And Okiakuta, my mother, laid beside me my squirrel-skin parka. Also
she laid beside me my parka of caribou hide, and my rain coat of seal
gut, and my wet-weather muclucs, that my soul should be warm and dry
on its long journey. Further, there was mention made of a steep hill,
thick with briers and devil's-club, and she fetched heavy moccasins to
make the way easy for my feet.

"And when the elders spoke of the great beasts I should have to slay,
the young men laid beside me my strongest bow and straightest arrows,
my throwing-stick, my spear and knife. And when the elders spoke of
the darkness and silence of the great spaces my soul must wander
through, my mother wailed yet more loudly and flung yet more ashes
upon her head.

"And the girl, Kasaan, crept in, very timid and quiet, and dropped a
little bag upon the things for my journey. And in the little bag, I
knew, were the flint and steel and the well-dried tinder for the fires
my soul must build. And the blankets were chosen which were to be
wrapped around me. Also were the slaves selected that were to be
killed that my soul might have company. There were seven of these
slaves, for my father was rich and powerful, and it was fit that I,
his son, should have proper burial. These slaves we had got in war
from the Mukumuks, who live down the Yukon. On the morrow, Skolka, the
shaman, would kill them, one by one, so that their souls should go
questing with mine through the Unknown. Among other things, they would
carry my canoe till we came to the big river, rapid with bad water.
And there being no room, and their work being done, they would come no
farther, but remain and howl forever in the dark and endless forest.

"And as I looked on my fine warm clothes, and my blankets and weapons
of war, and as I thought of the seven slaves to be slain, I felt proud
of my burial and knew that I must be the envy of many men. And all the
while my father, the Otter, sat silent and black. And all that day and
night the people sang my death-song and beat the drums, till it seemed
that I had surely died a thousand times.

"But in the morning my father arose and made talk. He had been a
fighting man all his days, he said, as the people knew. Also the
people knew that it were a greater honor to die fighting in battle
than on the soft skins by the fire. And since I was to die anyway, it
were well that I should go against the Mukumuks and be slain. Thus
would I attain honor and chieftainship in the final abode of the dead,
and thus would honor remain to my father, who was the Otter. Wherefore
he gave command that a war party be made ready to go down the river.
And that when we came upon the Mukumuks I was to go forth alone from
my party, giving semblance of battle, and so be slain."

"Nay, but hear, O White Man!" cried Mutsak, unable longer to contain
himself. "Skolka, the shaman, whispered long that night in the ear of
the Otter, and it was his doing that Lone Chief should be sent forth
to die. For the Otter being old, and Lone Chief the last of his sons,
Skolka had it in mind to become chief himself over the people. And
when the people had made great noise for a day and a night and Lone
Chief was yet alive, Skolka was become afraid that he would not die.
So it was the counsel of Skolka, with fine words of honor and deeds,
that spoke through the mouth of the Otter.

"Ay," replied Lone Chief. "Well did I know it was the doing of Skolka,
but I was unmindful, being very sick. I had no heart for anger, nor
belly for stout words, and I cared little, one way or the other, only
I cared to die and have done with it all. So, O White Man, the war
party was made ready. No tried fighters were there, nor elders, crafty
and wise--naught but five score of young men who had seen little
fighting. And all the village gathered together above the bank of the
river to see us depart. And we departed amid great rejoicing and the
singing of my praises. Even thou, O White Man, wouldst rejoice at
sight of a young man going forth to battle, even though doomed to die.

"So we went forth, the five score young men, and Mutsak came also, for
he was likewise young and untried. And by command of my father, the
Otter, my canoe was lashed on either side to the canoe of Mutsak and
the canoe of Kannakut. Thus was my strength saved me from the work of
the paddles, so that, for all of my sickness, I might make a brave
show at the end. And thus we went down the river.

"Nor will I weary thee with the tale of the journey, which was not
long. And not far above the village of the Mukumuks we came upon two
of their fighting men in canoes, that fled at the sight of us. And
then, according to the command of my father, my canoe was cast loose
and I was left to drift down all alone. Also, according to his
command, were the young men to see me die, so that they might return
and tell the manner of my death. Upon this, my father, the Otter,
and Skolka, the shaman, had been very clear, with stern promises of
punishment in case they were not obeyed.

"I dipped my paddle and shouted words of scorn after the fleeing
warriors. And the vile things I shouted made them turn their heads in
anger, when they beheld that the young men held back, and that I came
on alone. Whereupon, when they had made a safe distance, the two
warriors drew their canoes somewhat apart and waited side by side for
me to come between. And I came between, spear in hand, and singing the
war-song of my people. Each flung a spear, but I bent my body, and
the spears whistled over me, and I was unhurt. Then, and we were all
together, we three, I cast my spear at the one to the right, and it
drove into his throat and he pitched backward into the water.

"Great was my surprise thereat, for I had killed a man. I turned to
the one on the left and drove strong with my paddle, to meet Death
face to face; but the man's second spear, which was his last, but bit
into the flesh of my shoulder. Then was I upon him, making no cast,
but pressing the point into his breast and working it through him with
both my hands. And while I worked, pressing with all my strength, he
smote me upon my head, once and twice, with the broad of his paddle.

"Even as the point of the spear sprang out beyond his back, he smote
me upon the head. There was a flash, as of bright light, and inside my
head I felt something give, with a snap--just like that, with a snap.
And the weight that pressed above my eyes so long was lifted, and the
band that bound my brows so tight was broken. And a great gladness
came upon me, and my heart sang with joy.

"This be death, I thought; wherefore I thought that death was very
good. And then I saw the two empty canoes, and I knew that I was not
dead, but well again. The blows of the man upon my head had made me
well. I knew that I had killed, and the taste of the blood made me
fierce, and I drove my paddle into the breast of the Yukon and urged
my canoe toward the village of the Mukumuks. The young men behind me
gave a great cry. I looked over my shoulder and saw the water foaming
white from their paddles--"

"Ay, it foamed white from our paddles," said Mutsak. "For we
remembered the command of the Otter, and of Skolka, that we behold
with our own eyes the manner of Lone Chief's death. A young man of
the Mukumuks, on his way to a salmon trap, beheld the coming of Lone
Chief, and of the five score men behind him. And the young man fled
in his canoe, straight for the village, that alarm might be given and
preparation made. But Lone Chief hurried after him, and we hurried
after Lone Chief to behold the manner of his death. Only, in the face
of the village, as the young man leaped to the shore, Lone Chief rose
up in his canoe and made a mighty cast. And the spear entered the body
of the young man above the hips, and the young man fell upon his face.

"Whereupon Lone Chief leaped up the bank war-club in hand and a great
war-cry on his lips, and dashed into the village. The first man he met
was Itwilie, chief over the Mukumuks, and him Lone Chief smote upon
the head with his war-club, so that he fell dead upon the ground. And
for fear we might not behold the manner of his death, we too, the five
score young men, leaped to the shore and followed Lone Chief into the
village. Only the Mukumuks did not understand, and thought we had come
to fight; so their bow-thongs sang and their arrows whistled among us.
Whereat we forgot our errand, and fell upon them with our spears and
clubs; and they being unprepared, there was great slaughter--"

"With my own hands I slew their shaman," proclaimed Lone Chief, his
withered face a-work with memory of that old-time day. "With my own
hands I slew him, who was a greater shaman than Skolka, our own
shaman. And each time I faced a man, I thought, 'Now cometh Death; and
each time I slew the man, and Death came not. It seemed the breath of
life was strong in my nostrils and I could not die--"

"And we followed Lone Chief the length of the village and back again,"
continued Mutsak. "Like a pack of wolves we followed him, back and
forth, and here and there, till there were no more Mukumuks left to
fight. Then we gathered together five score men-slaves, and double as
many women, and countless children, and we set fire and burned all
the houses and lodges, and departed. And that was the last of the
Mukumuks."

"And that was the last of the Mukumuks," Lone Chief repeated
exultantly. "And when we came to our own village, the people were
amazed at our burden of wealth and slaves, and in that I was still
alive they were more amazed. And my father, the Otter, came trembling
with gladness at the things I had done. For he was an old man, and I
the last of his sons. And all the tried fighting men came, and the
crafty and wise, till all the people were gathered together. And then
I arose, and with a voice like thunder, commanded Skolka, the shaman,
to stand forth--"

"Ay, O White Man," exclaimed Mutsak. "With a voice like thunder, that
made the people shake at the knees and become afraid."

"And when Skolka had stood forth," Lone Chief went on, "I said that
I was not minded to die. Also, I said it were not well that
disappointment come to the evil spirits that wait beyond the grave.
Wherefore I deemed it fit that the soul of Skolka fare forth into the
Unknown, where doubtless it would howl forever in the dark and endless
forest. And then I slew him, as he stood there, in the face of all
the people. Even I, Lone Chief, with my own hands, slew Skolka, the
shaman, in the face of all the people. And when a murmuring arose, I
cried aloud--"

"With a voice like thunder," prompted Mutsak.

"Ay, with a voice like thunder I cried aloud: 'Behold, O ye people! I
am Lone Chief, slayer of Skolka, the false shaman! Alone among men,
have I passed down through the gateway of Death and returned again.
Mine eyes have looked upon the unseen things. Mine ears have heard the
unspoken words. Greater am I than Skolka, the shaman. Greater than all
shamans am I. Likewise am I a greater chief than my father, the Otter.
All his days did he fight with the Mukumuks, and lo, in one day have I
destroyed them all. As with the breathing of a breath have I destroyed
them. Wherefore, my father, the Otter, being old, and Skolka, the
shaman, being dead, I shall be both chief and shaman. Henceforth shall
I be both chief and shaman to you, O my people. And if any man dispute
my word, let that man stand forth!'

"I waited, but no man stood forth. Then I cried: 'Hoh! I have tasted
blood! Now bring meat, for I am hungry. Break open the caches, tear
down the fish-racks, and let the feast be big. Let there be merriment,
and songs, not of burial, but marriage. And last of all, let the girl
Kasaan be brought. The girl Kasaan, who is to be the mother of the
children of Lone Chief!'

"And at my words, and because that he was very old, my father, the
Otter, wept like a woman, and put his arms about my knees. And from
that day I was both chief and shaman. And great honor was mine, and
all men yielded me obedience."

"Until the steamboat came," Mutsak prompted.

"Ay," said Lone Chief. "Until the steamboat came."




KEESH, THE SON OF KEESH


"Thus will I give six blankets, warm and double; six files, large and
hard; six Hudson Bay knives, keen-edged and long; two canoes, the work
of Mogum, The Maker of Things; ten dogs, heavy-shouldered and strong
in the harness; and three guns--the trigger of one be broken, but it
is a good gun and can doubtless be mended."

Keesh paused and swept his eyes over the circle of intent faces. It
was the time of the Great Fishing, and he was bidding to Gnob for
Su-Su his daughter. The place was the St. George Mission by the Yukon,
and the tribes had gathered for many a hundred miles. From north,
south, east, and west they had come, even from Tozikakat and far
Tana-naw.

"And further, O Gnob, thou art chief of the Tana-naw; and I, Keesh,
the son of Keesh, am chief of the Thlunget. Wherefore, when my seed
springs from the loins of thy daughter, there shall be a friendship
between the tribes, a great friendship, and Tana-naw and Thlunget
shall be brothers of the blood in the time to come. What I have said
I will do, that will I do. And how is it with you, O Gnob, in this
matter?"

Gnob nodded his head gravely, his gnarled and age-twisted face
inscrutably masking the soul that dwelt behind. His narrow eyes
burned like twin coals through their narrow slits, as he piped in a
high-cracked voice, "But that is not all."

"What more?" Keesh demanded. "Have I not offered full measure? Was
there ever yet a Tana-naw maiden who fetched so great a price? Then
name her!"

An open snicker passed round the circle, and Keesh knew that he stood
in shame before these people.

"Nay, nay, good Keesh, thou dost not understand." Gnob made a soft,
stroking gesture. "The price is fair. It is a good price. Nor do I
question the broken trigger. But that is not all. What of the man?"

"Ay, what of the man?" the circle snarled.

"It is said," Gnob's shrill voice piped, "it is said that Keesh does
not walk in the way of his fathers. It is said that he has wandered
into the dark, after strange gods, and that he is become afraid."

The face of Keesh went dark. "It is a lie!" he thundered. "Keesh is
afraid of no man!"

"It is said," old Gnob piped on, "that he has harkened to the speech
of the white man up at the Big House, and that he bends head to the
white man's god, and, moreover, that blood is displeasing to the white
man's god."

Keesh dropped his eyes, and his hands clenched passionately. The
savage circle laughed derisively, and in the ear of Gnob whispered
Madwan, the shaman, high-priest of the tribe and maker of medicine.

The shaman poked among the shadows on the rim of the firelight and
roused up a slender young boy, whom he brought face to face with
Keesh; and in the hand of Keesh he thrust a knife.

Gnob leaned forward. "Keesh! O Keesh! Darest thou to kill a man?
Behold! This be Kitz-noo, a slave. Strike, O Keesh, strike with the
strength of thy arm!"

The boy trembled and waited the stroke. Keesh looked at him, and
thoughts of Mr. Brown's higher morality floated through his mind, and
strong upon him was a vision of the leaping flames of Mr. Brown's
particular brand of hell-fire. The knife fell to the ground, and the
boy sighed and went out beyond the firelight with shaking knees. At
the feet of Gnob sprawled a wolf-dog, which bared its gleaming teeth
and prepared to spring after the boy. But the shaman ground his foot
into the brute's body, and so doing, gave Gnob an idea.

"And then, O Keesh, what wouldst thou do, should a man do this thing
to you?"--as he spoke, Gnob held a ribbon of salmon to White Fang, and
when the animal attempted to take it, smote him sharply on the nose
with a stick. "And afterward, O Keesh, wouldst thou do thus?"--White
Fang was cringing back on his belly and fawning to the hand of Gnob.

"Listen!"--leaning on the arm of Madwan, Gnob had risen to his feet.
"I am very old, and because I am very old I will tell thee things.
Thy father, Keesh, was a mighty man. And he did love the song of the
bowstring in battle, and these eyes have beheld him cast a spear till
the head stood out beyond a man's body. But thou art unlike. Since
thou left the Raven to worship the Wolf, thou art become afraid of
blood, and thou makest thy people afraid. This is not good. For
behold, when I was a boy, even as Kitz-noo there, there was no white
man in all the land. But they came, one by one, these white men, till
now they are many. And they are a restless breed, never content to
rest by the fire with a full belly and let the morrow bring its own
meat. A curse was laid upon them, it would seem, and they must work it
out in toil and hardship."

Keesh was startled. A recollection of a hazy story told by Mr. Brown
of one Adam, of old time, came to him, and it seemed that Mr. Brown
had spoken true.

"So they lay hands upon all they behold, these white men, and they go
everywhere and behold all things. And ever do more follow in their
steps, so that if nothing be done they will come to possess all the
land and there will be no room for the tribes of the Raven. Wherefore
it is meet that we fight with them till none are left. Then will
we hold the passes and the land, and perhaps our children and our
children's children shall flourish and grow fat. There is a great
struggle to come, when Wolf and Raven shall grapple; but Keesh will
not fight, nor will he let his people fight. So it is not well that he
should take to him my daughter. Thus have I spoken, I, Gnob, chief of
the Tana-naw."

"But the white men are good and great," Keesh made answer. "The white
men have taught us many things. The white men have given us blankets
and knives and guns, such as we have never made and never could make.
I remember in what manner we lived before they came. I was unborn
then, but I have it from my father. When we went on the hunt we
must creep so close to the moose that a spear-cast would cover the
distance. To-day we use the white man's rifle, and farther away than
can a child's cry be heard. We ate fish and meat and berries--there
was nothing else to eat--and we ate without salt. How many be there
among you who care to go back to the fish and meat without salt?"

It would have sunk home, had not Madwan leaped to his feet ere silence
could come. "And first a question to thee, Keesh. The white man up at
the Big House tells you that it is wrong to kill. Yet do we not know
that the white men kill? Have we forgotten the great fight on the
Koyokuk? or the great fight at Nuklukyeto, where three white men
killed twenty of the Tozikakats? Do you think we no longer remember
the three men of the Tana-naw that the white man Macklewrath killed?
Tell me, O Keesh, why does the Shaman Brown teach you that it is wrong
to fight, when all his brothers fight?"

"Nay, nay, there is no need to answer," Gnob piped, while Keesh
struggled with the paradox. "It is very simple. The Good Man Brown
would hold the Raven tight whilst his brothers pluck the feathers." He
raised his voice. "But so long as there is one Tana-naw to strike
a blow, or one maiden to bear a man-child, the Raven shall not be
plucked!"

Gnob turned to a husky young man across the fire. "And what sayest
thou, Makamuk, who art brother to Su-Su?"

Makamuk came to his feet. A long face-scar lifted his upper lip into
a perpetual grin which belied the glowing ferocity of his eyes.
"This day," he began with cunning irrelevance, "I came by the Trader
Macklewrath's cabin. And in the door I saw a child laughing at the
sun. And the child looked at me with the Trader Macklewrath's eyes,
and it was frightened. The mother ran to it and quieted it. The mother
was Ziska, the Thlunget woman."

A snarl of rage rose up and drowned his voice, which he stilled by
turning dramatically upon Keesh with outstretched arm and accusing
finger.

"So? You give your women away, you Thlunget, and come to the Tana-naw
for more? But we have need of our women, Keesh; for we must breed men,
many men, against the day when the Raven grapples with the Wolf."

Through the storm of applause, Gnob's voice shrilled clear. "And thou,
Nossabok, who art her favorite brother?"

The young fellow was slender and graceful, with the strong aquiline
nose and high brows of his type; but from some nervous affliction the
lid of one eye drooped at odd times in a suggestive wink. Even as he
arose it so drooped and rested a moment against his cheek. But it was
not greeted with the accustomed laughter. Every face was grave. "I,
too, passed by the Trader Macklewrath's cabin," he rippled in soft,
girlish tones, wherein there was much of youth and much of his sister.
"And I saw Indians with the sweat running into their eyes and their
knees shaking with weariness--I say, I saw Indians groaning under the
logs for the store which the Trader Macklewrath is to build. And with
my eyes I saw them chopping wood to keep the Shaman Brown's Big House
warm through the frost of the long nights. This be squaw work. Never
shall the Tana-naw do the like. We shall be blood brothers to men, not
squaws; and the Thlunget be squaws."

A deep silence fell, and all eyes centred on Keesh. He looked about
him carefully, deliberately, full into the face of each grown man.
"So," he said passionlessly. And "So," he repeated. Then turned on his
heel without further word and passed out into the darkness.

Wading among sprawling babies and bristling wolf-dogs, he threaded
the great camp, and on its outskirts came upon a woman at work by the
light of a fire. With strings of bark stripped from the long roots of
creeping vines, she was braiding rope for the Fishing. For some time,
without speech, he watched her deft hands bringing law and order out
of the unruly mass of curling fibres. She was good to look upon,
swaying there to her task, strong-limbed, deep-chested, and with hips
made for motherhood. And the bronze of her face was golden in the
flickering light, her hair blue-black, her eyes jet.

"O Su-Su," he spoke finally, "thou hast looked upon me kindly in the
days that have gone and in the days yet young--"

"I looked kindly upon thee for that thou wert chief of the Thlunget,"
she answered quickly, "and because thou wert big and strong."

"Ay--"

"But that was in the old days of the Fishing," she hastened to add,
"before the Shaman Brown came and taught thee ill things and led thy
feet on strange trails."

"But I would tell thee the--"

She held up one hand in a gesture which reminded him of her father.
"Nay, I know already the speech that stirs in thy throat, O Keesh, and
I make answer now. It so happeneth that the fish of the water and the
beasts of the forest bring forth after their kind. And this is good.
Likewise it happeneth to women. It is for them to bring forth their
kind, and even the maiden, while she is yet a maiden, feels the pang
of the birth, and the pain of the breast, and the small hands at the
neck. And when such feeling is strong, then does each maiden look
about her with secret eyes for the man--for the man who shall be fit
to father her kind. So have I felt. So did I feel when I looked upon
thee and found thee big and strong, a hunter and fighter of beasts and
men, well able to win meat when I should eat for two, well able to
keep danger afar off when my helplessness drew nigh. But that was
before the day the Shaman Brown came into the land and taught thee--"

"But it is not right, Su-Su. I have it on good word--"

"It is not right to kill. I know what thou wouldst say. Then breed
thou after thy kind, the kind that does not kill; but come not on such
quest among the Tana-naw. For it is said in the time to come, that
the Raven shall grapple with the Wolf. I do not know, for this be the
affair of men; but I do know that it is for me to bring forth men
against that time."

"Su-Su," Keesh broke in, "thou must hear me--"

"A _man_ would beat me with a stick and make me hear," she sneered.
"But thou ... here!" She thrust a bunch of bark into his hand. "I
cannot give thee myself, but this, yes. It looks fittest in thy hands.
It is squaw work, so braid away."

He flung it from him, the angry blood pounding a muddy path under his
bronze.

"One thing more," she went on. "There be an old custom which thy
father and mine were not strangers to. When a man falls in battle, his
scalp is carried away in token. Very good. But thou, who have forsworn
the Raven, must do more. Thou must bring me, not scalps, but heads,
two heads, and then will I give thee, not bark, but a brave-beaded
belt, and sheath, and long Russian knife. Then will I look kindly upon
thee once again, and all will be well."

"So," the man pondered. "So." Then he turned and passed out through
the light.

"Nay, O Keesh!" she called after him. "Not two heads, but three at
least!"

       *       *       *       *       *

But Keesh remained true to his conversion, lived uprightly, and made
his tribespeople obey the gospel as propounded by the Rev. Jackson
Brown. Through all the time of the Fishing he gave no heed to the
Tana-naw, nor took notice of the sly things which were said, nor of
the laughter of the women of the many tribes. After the Fishing, Gnob
and his people, with great store of salmon, sun-dried and smoke-cured,
departed for the Hunting on the head reaches of the Tana-naw. Keesh
watched them go, but did not fail in his attendance at Mission
service, where he prayed regularly and led the singing with his deep
bass voice.

The Rev. Jackson Brown delighted in that deep bass voice, and because
of his sterling qualities deemed him the most promising convert.
Macklewrath doubted this. He did not believe in the efficacy of the
conversion of the heathen, and he was not slow in speaking his mind.
But Mr. Brown was a large man, in his way, and he argued it out with
such convincingness, all of one long fall night, that the trader,
driven from position after position, finally announced in desperation,
"Knock out my brains with apples, Brown, if I don't become a convert
myself, if Keesh holds fast, true blue, for two years!" Mr. Brown
never lost an opportunity, so he clinched the matter on the spot
with a virile hand-grip, and thenceforth the conduct of Keesh was to
determine the ultimate abiding-place of Macklewrath's soul.

But there came news one day, after the winter's rime had settled down
over the land sufficiently for travel. A Tana-naw man arrived at the
St. George Mission in quest of ammunition and bringing information
that Su-Su had set eyes on Nee-Koo, a nervy young hunter who had bid
brilliantly for her by old Gnob's fire. It was at about this time that
the Rev. Jackson Brown came upon Keesh by the wood-trail which leads
down to the river. Keesh had his best dogs in the harness, and shoved
under the sled-lashings was his largest and finest pair of snow-shoes.

"Where goest thou, O Keesh? Hunting?" Mr. Brown asked, falling into
the Indian manner.

Keesh looked him steadily in the eyes for a full minute, then started
up his dogs. Then again, turning his deliberate gaze upon the
missionary, he answered, "No; I go to hell."

       *       *       *       *       *

In an open space, striving to burrow into the snow as though for
shelter from the appalling desolateness, huddled three dreary lodges.
Ringed all about, a dozen paces away, was the sombre forest. Overhead
there was no keen, blue sky of naked space, but a vague, misty
curtain, pregnant with snow, which had drawn between. There was no
wind, no sound, nothing but the snow and silence. Nor was there even
the general stir of life about the camp; for the hunting party had run
upon the flank of the caribou herd and the kill had been large. Thus,
after the period of fasting had come the plenitude of feasting, and
thus, in broad daylight, they slept heavily under their roofs of
moosehide.

By a fire, before one of the lodges, five pairs of snow-shoes stood
on end in their element, and by the fire sat Su-Su. The hood of her
squirrel-skin parka was about her hair, and well drawn up around her
throat; but her hands were unmittened and nimbly at work with needle
and sinew, completing the last fantastic design on a belt of leather
faced with bright scarlet cloth. A dog, somewhere at the rear of one
of the lodges, raised a short, sharp bark, then ceased as abruptly as
it had begun. Once, her father, in the lodge at her back, gurgled and
grunted in his sleep. "Bad dreams," she smiled to herself. "He grows
old, and that last joint was too much."

She placed the last bead, knotted the sinew, and replenished the fire.
Then, after gazing long into the flames, she lifted her head to the
harsh _crunch-crunch_ of a moccasined foot against the flinty snow
granules. Keesh was at her side, bending slightly forward to a load
which he bore upon his back. This was wrapped loosely in a soft-tanned
moosehide, and he dropped it carelessly into the snow and sat down.
They looked at each other long and without speech.

"It is a far fetch, O Keesh," she said at last, "a far fetch from St.
George Mission by the Yukon."

"Ay," he made answer, absently, his eyes fixed keenly upon the belt
and taking note of its girth. "But where is the knife?" he demanded.

"Here." She drew it from inside her parka and flashed its naked length
in the firelight. "It is a good knife."

"Give it me!" he commanded.

"Nay, O Keesh," she laughed. "It may be that thou wast not born to
wear it."

"Give it me!" he reiterated, without change of tone. "I was so born."

But her eyes, glancing coquettishly past him to the moosehide, saw the
snow about it slowly reddening. "It is blood, Keesh?" she asked.

"Ay, it is blood. But give me the belt and the long Russian knife."

She felt suddenly afraid, but thrilled when he took the belt roughly
from her, thrilled to the roughness. She looked at him softly, and was
aware of a pain at the breast and of small hands clutching her throat.

"It was made for a smaller man," he remarked grimly, drawing in his
abdomen and clasping the buckle at the first hole.

Su-Su smiled, and her eyes were yet softer. Again she felt the soft
hands at her throat. He was good to look upon, and the belt was indeed
small, made for a smaller man; but what did it matter? She could make
many belts.

"But the blood?" she asked, urged on by a hope new-born and growing.
"The blood, Keesh? Is it ... are they ... heads?"

"Ay."

"They must be very fresh, else would the blood be frozen."

"Ay, it is not cold, and they be fresh, quite fresh."

"Oh, Keesh!" Her face was warm and bright. "And for me?"

"Ay; for thee."

He took hold of a corner of the hide, flirted it open, and rolled the
heads out before her.

"Three," he whispered savagely; "nay, four at least."

But she sat transfixed. There they lay--the soft-featured Nee-Koo; the
gnarled old face of Gnob; Makamuk, grinning at her with his lifted
upper lip; and lastly, Nossabok, his eyelid, up to its old trick,
drooped on his girlish cheek in a suggestive wink. There they lay, the
firelight flashing upon and playing over them, and from each of them a
widening circle dyed the snow to scarlet.

Thawed by the fire, the white crust gave way beneath the head of Gnob,
which rolled over like a thing alive, spun around, and came to rest at
her feet. But she did not move. Keesh, too, sat motionless, his eyes
unblinking, centred steadfastly upon her.

Once, in the forest, an overburdened pine dropped its load of snow,
and the echoes reverberated hollowly down the gorge; but neither
stirred. The short day had been waning fast, and darkness was wrapping
round the camp when White Fang trotted up toward the fire. He paused
to reconnoitre, but not being driven back, came closer. His nose shot
swiftly to the side, nostrils a-tremble and bristles rising along the
spine; and straight and true, he followed the sudden scent to his
master's head. He sniffed it gingerly at first and licked the forehead
with his red lolling tongue. Then he sat abruptly down, pointed his
nose up at the first faint star, and raised the long wolf-howl.

This brought Su-Su to herself. She glanced across at Keesh, who had
unsheathed the Russian knife and was watching her intently. His face
was firm and set, and in it she read the law. Slipping back the hood
of her parka, she bared her neck and rose to her feet There she paused
and took a long look about her, at the rimming forest, at the faint
stars in the sky, at the camp, at the snow-shoes in the snow--a last
long comprehensive look at life. A light breeze stirred her hair from
the side, and for the space of one deep breath she turned her head and
followed it around until she met it full-faced.

Then she thought of her children, ever to be unborn, and she walked
over to Keesh and said, "I am ready."




THE DEATH OF LIGOUN

Blood for blood, rank for rank.

--_Thlinket Code_.


"Hear now the death of Ligoun--"

The speaker ceased, or rather suspended utterance, and gazed upon me
with an eye of understanding. I held the bottle between our eyes and
the fire, indicated with my thumb the depth of the draught, and shoved
it over to him; for was he not Palitlum, the Drinker? Many tales had
he told me, and long had I waited for this scriptless scribe to speak
of the things concerning Ligoun; for he, of all men living, knew these
things best.

He tilted back his head with a grunt that slid swiftly into a gurgle,
and the shadow of a man's torso, monstrous beneath a huge inverted
bottle, wavered and danced on the frown of the cliff at our backs.
Palitlum released his lips from the glass with a caressing suck and
glanced regretfully up into the ghostly vault of the sky where played
the wan white light of the summer borealis.

"It be strange," he said; "cold like water and hot like fire. To
the drinker it giveth strength, and from the drinker it taketh away
strength. It maketh old men young, and young men old. To the man
who is weary it leadeth him to get up and go onward, and to the man
unweary it burdeneth him into sleep. My brother was possessed of the
heart of a rabbit, yet did he drink of it, and forthwith slay four of
his enemies. My father was like a great wolf, showing his teeth to all
men, yet did he drink of it and was shot through the back, running
swiftly away. It be most strange."

"It is 'Three Star,' and a better than what they poison their bellies
with down there," I answered, sweeping my hand, as it were, over the
yawning chasm of blackness and down to where the beach fires glinted
far below--tiny jets of flame which gave proportion and reality to the
night.

Palitlum sighed and shook his head. "Wherefore I am here with thee."

And here he embraced the bottle and me in a look which told more
eloquently than speech of his shameless thirst.

"Nay," I said, snuggling the bottle in between my knees. "Speak now of
Ligoun. Of the 'Three Star' we will hold speech hereafter."

"There be plenty, and I am not wearied," he pleaded brazenly. "But the
feel of it on my lips, and I will speak great words of Ligoun and his
last days."

"From the drinker it taketh away strength," I mocked, "and to the man
unweary it burdeneth him into sleep."

"Thou art wise," he rejoined, without anger and pridelessly. "Like all
of thy brothers, thou art wise. Waking or sleeping, the 'Three Star'
be with thee, yet never have I known thee to drink overlong or
overmuch. And the while you gather to you the gold that hides in our
mountains and the fish that swim in our seas; and Palitlum, and the
brothers of Palitlum, dig the gold for thee and net the fish, and are
glad to be made glad when out of thy wisdom thou deemest it fit that
the 'Three Star' should wet our lips."

"I was minded to hear of Ligoun," I said impatiently. "The night grows
short, and we have a sore journey to-morrow."

I yawned and made as though to rise, but Palitlum betrayed a quick
anxiety, and with abruptness began:--

"It was Ligoun's desire, in his old age, that peace should be among
the tribes. As a young man he had been first of the fighting men and
chief over the war-chiefs of the Islands and the Passes. All his days
had been full of fighting. More marks he boasted of bone and lead and
iron than any other man. Three wives he had, and for each wife two
sons; and the sons, eldest born and last and all died by his side in
battle. Restless as the bald-face, he ranged wide and far--north to
Unalaska and the Shallow Sea; south to the Queen Charlottes, ay, even
did he go with the Kakes, it is told, to far Puget Sound, and slay thy
brothers in their sheltered houses.

"But, as I say, in his old age he looked for peace among the tribes.
Not that he was become afraid, or overfond of the corner by the
fire and the well-filled pot. For he slew with the shrewdness and
blood-hunger of the fiercest, drew in his belly to famine with the
youngest, and with the stoutest faced the bitter seas and stinging
trail. But because of his many deeds, and in punishment, a warship
carried him away, even to thy country, O Hair-Face and Boston Man; and
the years were many ere he came back, and I was grown to something
more than a boy and something less than a young man. And Ligoun, being
childless in his old age, made much of me, and grown wise, gave me of
his wisdom.

"'It be good to fight, O Palitlum,' said he. Nay, O Hair-Face, for
I was unknown as Palitlum in those days, being called Olo, the
Ever-Hungry. The drink was to come after. 'It be good to fight,' spoke
Ligoun, 'but it be foolish. In the Boston Man Country, as I saw with
mine eyes, they are not given to fighting one with another, and they
be strong. Wherefore, of their strength, they come against us of the
Islands and Passes, and we are as camp smoke and sea mist before them.
Wherefore I say it be good to fight, most good, but it be likewise
foolish.'

"And because of this, though first always of the fighting men,
Ligoun's voice was loudest, ever, for peace. And when he was very old,
being greatest of chiefs and richest of men, he gave a potlatch. Never
was there such a potlatch. Five hundred canoes were lined against the
river bank, and in each canoe there came not less than ten of men and
women. Eight tribes were there; from the first and oldest man to the
last and youngest babe were they there. And then there were men from
far-distant tribes, great travellers and seekers who had heard of the
potlatch of Ligoun. And for the length of seven days they filled their
bellies with his meat and drink. Eight thousand blankets did he give
to them, as I well know, for who but I kept the tally and apportioned
according to degree and rank? And in the end Ligoun was a poor man;
but his name was on all men's lips, and other chiefs gritted their
teeth in envy that he should be so great.

"And so, because there was weight to his words, he counselled peace;
and he journeyed to every potlatch and feast and tribal gathering that
he might counsel peace. And so it came that we journeyed together,
Ligoun and I, to the great feast given by Niblack, who was chief over
the river Indians of the Skoot, which is not far from the Stickeen.
This was in the last days, and Ligoun was very old and very close to
death. He coughed of cold weather and camp smoke, and often the red
blood ran from out his mouth till we looked for him to die.

"'Nay,' he said once at such time; 'it were better that I should die
when the blood leaps to the knife, and there is a clash of steel and
smell of powder, and men crying aloud what of the cold iron and quick
lead.' So, it be plain, O Hair-Face, that his heart was yet strong for
battle.

"It is very far from the Chilcat to the Skoot, and we were many days
in the canoes. And the while the men bent to the paddles, I sat at the
feet of Ligoun and received the Law. Of small need for me to say the
Law, O Hair-Face, for it be known to me that in this thou art well
skilled. Yet do I speak of the Law of blood for blood, and rank for
rank. Also did Ligoun go deeper into the matter, saying:--

"'But know this, O Olo, that there be little honor in the killing of a
man less than thee. Kill always the man who is greater, and thy honor
shall be according to his greatness. But if, of two men, thou killest
the lesser, then is shame thine, for which the very squaws will lift
their lips at thee. As I say, peace be good; but remember, O Olo, if
kill thou must, that thou killest by the Law.'

"It is a way of the Thlinket-folk," Palitlum vouchsafed half
apologetically.

And I remembered the gun-fighters and bad men of my own Western land,
and was not perplexed at the way of the Thlinket-folk.

"In time," Palitlum continued, "we came to Chief Niblack and the
Skoots. It was a feast great almost as the potlatch of Ligoun. There
were we of the Chilcat, and the Sitkas, and the Stickeens who are
neighbors to the Skoots, and the Wrangels and the Hoonahs. There were
Sundowns and Tahkos from Port Houghton, and their neighbors the Awks
from Douglass Channel; the Naass River people, and the Tongas from
north of Dixon, and the Kakes who come from the island called
Kupreanoff. Then there were Siwashes from Vancouver, Cassiars from the
Gold Mountains, Teslin men, and even Sticks from the Yukon Country.

"It was a mighty gathering. But first of all, there was to be a
meeting of the chiefs with Niblack, and a drowning of all enmities in
quass. The Russians it was who showed us the way of making quass, for
so my father told me,--my father, who got it from his father before
him. But to this quass had Niblack added many things, such as sugar,
flour, dried apples, and hops, so that it was a man's drink, strong
and good. Not so good as 'Three Star,' O Hair-Face, yet good.

"This quass-feast was for the chiefs, and the chiefs only, and there
was a score of them. But Ligoun being very old and very great, it was
given that I walk with him that he might lean upon my shoulder and
that I might ease him down when he took his seat and raise him up when
he arose. At the door of Niblack's house, which was of logs and very
big, each chief, as was the custom, laid down his spear or rifle and
his knife. For as thou knowest, O Hair-Face, strong drink quickens,
and old hates flame up, and head and hand are swift to act. But I
noted that Ligoun had brought two knives, the one he left outside the
door, the other slipped under his blanket, snug to the grip. The other
chiefs did likewise, and I was troubled for what was to come.

"The chiefs were ranged, sitting, in a big circle about the room. I
stood at Ligoun's elbow. In the middle was the barrel of quass, and by
it a slave to serve the drink. First, Niblack made oration, with much
show of friendship and many fine words. Then he gave a sign, and the
slave dipped a gourd full of quass and passed it to Ligoun, as was
fit, for his was the highest rank.

"Ligoun drank it, to the last drop, and I gave him my strength to get
on his feet so that he, too, might make oration. He had kind speech
for the many tribes, noted the greatness of Niblack to give such a
feast, counselled for peace as was his custom, and at the end said
that the quass was very good.

"Then Niblack drank, being next of rank to Ligoun, and after him one
chief and another in degree and order. And each spoke friendly words
and said that the quass was good, till all had drunk. Did I say all?
Nay, not all, O Hair-Face. For last of them was one, a lean and
catlike man, young of face, with a quick and daring eye, who drank
darkly, and spat forth upon the ground, and spoke no word.

"To not say that the quass was good were insult; to spit forth upon
the ground were worse than insult. And this very thing did he do. He
was known for a chief over the Sticks of the Yukon, and further naught
was known of him.

"As I say, it was an insult. But mark this, O Hair-Face: it was an
insult, not to Niblack the feast-giver, but to the man chiefest of
rank who sat among those of the circle. And that man was Ligoun. There
was no sound. All eyes were upon him to see what he might do. He made
no movement. His withered lips trembled not into speech; nor did a
nostril quiver, nor an eyelid droop. But I saw that he looked wan
and gray, as I have seen old men look of bitter mornings when famine
pressed, and the women wailed and the children whimpered, and there
was no meat nor sign of meat. And as the old men looked, so looked
Ligoun.

"There was no sound. It were as a circle of the dead, but that each
chief felt beneath his blanket to make sure, and that each chief
glanced to his neighbor, right and left, with a measuring eye. I was
a stripling; the things I had seen were few; yet I knew it to be the
moment one meets but once in all a lifetime.

"The Stick rose up, with every eye upon him, and crossed the room till
he stood before Ligoun.

"'I am Opitsah, the Knife,' he said.

"But Ligoun said naught, nor looked at him, but gazed unblinking at
the ground.

"'You are Ligoun,' Opitsah said. 'You have killed many men. I am still
alive.'

"And still Ligoun said naught, though he made the sign to me and with
my strength arose and stood upright on his two feet. He was as an old
pine, naked and gray, but still a-shoulder to the frost and storm. His
eyes were unblinking, and as he had not heard Opitsah, so it seemed he
did not see him.

"And Opitsah was mad with anger, and danced stiff-legged before him,
as men do when they wish to give another shame. And Opitsah sang a
song of his own greatness and the greatness of his people, filled with
bad words for the Chilcats and for Ligoun. And as he danced and sang,
Opitsah threw off his blanket and with his knife drew bright circles
before the face of Ligoun. And the song he sang was the Song of the
Knife.

"And there was no other sound, only the singing of Opitsah, and the
circle of chiefs that were as dead, save that the flash of the knife
seemed to draw smouldering fire from their eyes. And Ligoun, also, was
very still. Yet did he know his death, and was unafraid. And the knife
sang closer and yet closer to his face, but his eyes were unblinking
and he swayed not to right or left, or this way or that.

"And Opitsah drove in the knife, so, twice on the forehead of Ligoun,
and the red blood leaped after it. And then it was that Ligoun gave me
the sign to bear up under him with my youth that he might walk. And he
laughed with a great scorn, full in the face of Opitsah, the Knife.
And he brushed Opitsah to the side, as one brushes to the side a
low-hanging branch on the trail and passes on.

"And I knew and understood, for there was but shame in the killing of
Opitsah before the faces of a score of greater chiefs. I remembered
the Law, and knew Ligoun had it in mind to kill by the Law. And who,
chiefest of rank but himself, was there but Niblack? And toward
Niblack, leaning on my arm, he walked. And to his other arm, clinging
and striking, was Opitsah, too small to soil with his blood the hands
of so great a man. And though the knife of Opitsah bit in again and
again, Ligoun noted it not, nor winced. And in this fashion we three
went our way across the room, Niblack sitting in his blanket and
fearful of our coming.

"And now old hates flamed up and forgotten grudges were remembered.
Lamuk, a Kake, had had a brother drowned in the bad water of the
Stickeen, and the Stickeens had not paid in blankets for their bad
water, as was the custom to pay. So Lamuk drove straight with his
long knife to the heart of Klok-Kutz the Stickeen. And Katchahook
remembered a quarrel of the Naass River people with the Tongas of
north of Dixon, and the chief of the Tongas he slew with a pistol
which made much noise. And the blood-hunger gripped all the men who
sat in the circle, and chief slew chief, or was slain, as chance might
be. Also did they stab and shoot at Ligoun, for whoso killed him won
great honor and would be unforgotten for the deed. And they were about
him like wolves about a moose, only they were so many they were in
their own way, and they slew one another to make room. And there was
great confusion.

"But Ligoun went slowly, without haste, as though many years were yet
before him. It seemed that he was certain he would make his kill, in
his own way, ere they could slay him. And as I say, he went slowly,
and knives bit into him, and he was red with blood. And though none
sought after me, who was a mere stripling, yet did the knives find me,
and the hot bullets burn me. And still Ligoun leaned his weight on my
youth, and Opitsah struck at him, and we three went forward. And when
we stood by Niblack, he was afraid, and covered his head with his
blanket. The Skoots were ever cowards.

"And Goolzug and Kadishan, the one a fish-eater and the other a
meat-killer, closed together for the honor of their tribes. And they
raged madly about, and in their battling swung against the knees of
Opitsah, who was overthrown and trampled upon. And a knife, singing
through the air, smote Skulpin, of the Sitkas, in the throat, and he
flung his arms out blindly, reeling, and dragged me down in his fall.

"And from the ground I beheld Ligoun bend over Niblack, and uncover
the blanket from his head, and turn up his face to the light. And
Ligoun was in no haste. Being blinded with his own blood, he swept
it out of his eyes with the back of his hand, so he might see and be
sure. And when he was sure that the upturned face was the face of
Niblack, he drew the knife across his throat as one draws a knife
across the throat of a trembling deer. And then Ligoun stood erect,
singing his death-song and swaying gently to and fro. And Skulpin, who
had dragged me down, shot with a pistol from where he lay, and Ligoun
toppled and fell, as an old pine topples and falls in the teeth of the
wind."

Palitlum ceased. His eyes, smouldering moodily, were bent upon the
fire, and his cheek was dark with blood.

"And thou, Palitlum?" I demanded. "And thou?"

"I? I did remember the Law, and I slew Opitsah the Knife, which was
well. And I drew Ligoun's own knife from the throat of Niblack, and
slew Skulpin, who had dragged me down. For I was a stripling, and I
could slay any man and it were honor. And further, Ligoun being dead,
there was no need for my youth, and I laid about me with his knife,
choosing the chiefest of rank that yet remained."

Palitlum fumbled under his shirt and drew forth a beaded sheath, and
from the sheath, a knife. It was a knife home-wrought and crudely
fashioned from a whip-saw file; a knife such as one may find possessed
by old men in a hundred Alaskan villages.

"The knife of Ligoun?" I said, and Palitlum nodded.

"And for the knife of Ligoun," I said, "will I give thee ten bottles
of 'Three Star.'"

But Palitlum looked at me slowly. "Hair-Face, I am weak as water, and
easy as a woman. I have soiled my belly with quass, and hooch, and
'Three Star.' My eyes are blunted, my ears have lost their keenness,
and my strength has gone into fat. And I am without honor in these
days, and am called Palitlum, the Drinker. Yet honor was mine at the
potlatch of Niblack, on the Skoot, and the memory of it, and the
memory of Ligoun, be dear to me. Nay, didst thou turn the sea itself
into 'Three Star' and say that it were all mine for the knife, yet
would I keep the knife. I am Palitlum, the Drinker, but I was once
Olo, the Ever-Hungry, who bore up Ligoun with his youth!"

"Thou art a great man, Palitlum," I said, "and I honor thee."

Palitlum reached out his hand.

"The 'Three Star' between thy knees be mine for the tale I have told,"
he said.

And as I looked on the frown of the cliff at our backs, I saw the
shadow of a man's torso, monstrous beneath a huge inverted bottle.




LI WAN, THE FAIR


"The sun sinks, Canim, and the heat of the day is gone!"

So called Li Wan to the man whose head was hidden beneath the
squirrel-skin robe, but she called softly, as though divided between
the duty of waking him and the fear of him awake. For she was afraid
of this big husband of hers, who was like unto none of the men she had
known. The moose-meat sizzled uneasily, and she moved the frying-pan
to one side of the red embers. As she did so she glanced warily at the
two Hudson Bay dogs dripping eager slaver from their scarlet tongues
and following her every movement. They were huge, hairy fellows,
crouched to leeward in the thin smoke-wake of the fire to escape the
swarming myriads of mosquitoes. As Li Wan gazed down the steep to
where the Klondike flung its swollen flood between the hills, one of
the dogs bellied its way forward like a worm, and with a deft, catlike
stroke of the paw dipped a chunk of hot meat out of the pan to the
ground. But Li Wan caught him from out the tail of her eye, and he
sprang back with a snap and a snarl as she rapped him over the nose
with a stick of firewood.

"Nay, Olo," she laughed, recovering the meat without removing her eye
from him. "Thou art ever hungry, and for that thy nose leads thee into
endless troubles."

But the mate of Olo joined him, and together they defied the woman.
The hair on their backs and shoulders bristled in recurrent waves
of anger, and the thin lips writhed and lifted into ugly wrinkles,
exposing the flesh-tearing fangs, cruel and menacing. Their very noses
serrulated and shook in brute passion, and they snarled as the wolves
snarl, with all the hatred and malignity of the breed impelling them
to spring upon the woman and drag her down.

"And thou, too, Bash, fierce as thy master and never at peace with the
hand that feeds thee! This is not thy quarrel, so that be thine! and
that!"

As she cried, she drove at them with the firewood, but they avoided
the blows and refused to retreat. They separated and approached her
from either side, crouching low and snarling. Li Wan had struggled
with the wolf-dog for mastery from the time she toddled among the
skin-bales of the teepee, and she knew a crisis was at hand. Bash
had halted, his muscles stiff and tense for the spring; Olo was yet
creeping into striking distance.

Grasping two blazing sticks by the charred ends, she faced the brutes.
The one held back, but Bash sprang, and she met him in mid-air with
the flaming weapon. There were sharp yelps of pain and swift odors of
burning hair and flesh as he rolled in the dirt and the woman ground
the fiery embers into his mouth. Snapping wildly, he flung himself
sidewise out of her reach and in a frenzy of fear scrambled for
safety. Olo, on the other side, had begun his retreat, when Li Wan
reminded him of her primacy by hurling a heavy stick of wood into his
ribs. Then the pair retreated under a rain of firewood, and on the
edge of the camp fell to licking their wounds and whimpering by turns
and snarling.

Li Wan blew the ashes off the meat and sat down again. Her heart had
not gone up a beat, and the incident was already old, for this was
the routine of life. Canim had not stirred during the disorder, but
instead had set up a lusty snoring.

"Come, Canim!" she called. "The heat of the day is gone, and the trail
waits for our feet."

The squirrel-skin robe was agitated and cast aside by a brown arm.
Then the man's eyelids fluttered and drooped again.

"His pack is heavy," she thought, "and he is tired with the work of
the morning."

A mosquito stung her on the neck, and she daubed the unprotected spot
with wet clay from a ball she had convenient to hand. All morning,
toiling up the divide and enveloped in a cloud of the pests, the man
and woman had plastered themselves with the sticky mud, which, drying
in the sun, covered their faces with masks of clay. These masks,
broken in divers places by the movement of the facial muscles, had
constantly to be renewed, so that the deposit was irregular of depth
and peculiar of aspect.

Li Wan shook Canim gently but with persistence till he roused and
sat up. His first glance was to the sun, and after consulting the
celestial timepiece he hunched over to the fire and fell-to ravenously
on the meat. He was a large Indian fully six feet in height,
deep-chested and heavy-muscled, and his eyes were keener and vested
with greater mental vigor than the average of his kind. The lines of
will had marked his face deeply, and this, coupled with a sternness
and primitiveness, advertised a native indomitability, unswerving of
purpose, and prone, when thwarted, to sullen cruelty.

"To-morrow, Li Wan, we shall feast." He sucked a marrow-bone clean
and threw it to the dogs. "We shall have _flapjacks_ fried in _bacon
grease_, and _sugar_, which is more toothsome--"

"_Flapjacks_?" she questioned, mouthing the word curiously.

"Ay," Canim answered with superiority; "and I shall teach you new ways
of cookery. Of these things I speak you are ignorant, and of many more
things besides. You have lived your days in a little corner of the
earth and know nothing. But I,"--he straightened himself and looked at
her pridefully,--"I am a great traveller, and have been all places,
even among the white people, and I am versed in their ways, and in
the ways of many peoples. I am not a tree, born to stand in one place
always and know not what there be over the next hill; for I am Canim,
the Canoe, made to go here and there and to journey and quest up and
down the length and breadth of the world."

She bowed her head humbly. "It is true. I have eaten fish and meat and
berries all my days and lived in a little corner of the earth. Nor did
I dream the world was so large until you stole me from my people and
I cooked and carried for you on the endless trails." She looked up at
him suddenly. "Tell me, Canim, does this trail ever end?"

"Nay," he answered. "My trail is like the world; it never ends. My
trail _is_ the world, and I have travelled it since the time my legs
could carry me, and I shall travel it until I die. My father and my
mother may be dead, but it is long since I looked upon them, and I
do not care. My tribe is like your tribe. It stays in the one
place--which is far from here,--but I care naught for my tribe, for I
am Canim, the Canoe!"

"And must I, Li Wan, who am weary, travel always your trail until I
die?"

"You, Li Wan, are my wife, and the wife travels the husband's trail
wheresoever it goes. It is the law. And were it not the law, yet would
it be the law of Canim, who is lawgiver unto himself and his."

She bowed her head again, for she knew no other law than that man was
the master of woman.

"Be not in haste," Canim cautioned her, as she began to strap the
meagre camp outfit to her pack. "The sun is yet hot, and the trail
leads down and the footing is good."

She dropped her work obediently and resumed her seat.

Canim regarded her with speculative interest. "You do not squat on
your hams like other women," he remarked.

"No," she answered. "It never came easy. It tires me, and I cannot
take my rest that way."

"And why is it your feet point not straight before you?"

"I do not know, save that they are unlike the feet of other women."

A satisfied light crept into his eyes, but otherwise he gave no sign.

"Like other women, your hair is black; but have you ever noticed that
it is soft and fine, softer and finer than the hair of other women?"

"I have noticed," she answered shortly, for she was not pleased at
such cold analysis of her sex-deficiencies.

"It is a year, now, since I took you from your people," he went on,
"and you are nigh as shy and afraid of me as when first I looked upon
you. How does this thing be?"

Li Wan shook her head. "I am afraid of you, Canim, you are so big and
strange. And further, before you looked upon me even, I was afraid of
all the young men. I do not know ... I cannot say ... only it seemed,
somehow, as though I should not be for them, as though ..."

"Ay," he encouraged, impatient at her faltering.

"As though they were not my kind."

"Not your kind?" he demanded slowly. "Then what is your kind?"

"I do not know, I ..." She shook her head in a bewildered manner. "I
cannot put into words the way I felt. It was strangeness in me. I was
unlike other maidens, who sought the young men slyly. I could not
care for the young men that way. It would have been a great wrong, it
seemed, and an ill deed."

"What is the first thing you remember?" Canim asked with abrupt
irrelevance.

"Pow-Wah-Kaan, my mother."

"And naught else before Pow-Wah-Kaan?"

"Naught else."

But Canim, holding her eyes with his, searched her secret soul and saw
it waver.

"Think, and think hard, Li Wan!" he threatened.

She stammered, and her eyes were piteous and pleading, but his will
dominated her and wrung from her lips the reluctant speech.

"But it was only dreams, Canim, ill dreams of childhood, shadows of
things not real, visions such as the dogs, sleeping in the sun-warmth,
behold and whine out against."

"Tell me," he commanded, "of the things before Pow-Wah-Kaan, your
mother."

"They are forgotten memories," she protested. "As a child I dreamed
awake, with my eyes open to the day, and when I spoke of the strange
things I saw I was laughed at, and the other children were afraid
and drew away from me. And when I spoke of the things I saw to
Pow-Wah-Kaan, she chided me and said they were evil; also she beat me.
It was a sickness, I believe, like the falling-sickness that comes to
old men; and in time I grew better and dreamed no more. And now ...
I cannot remember"--she brought her hand in a confused manner to her
forehead--"they are there, somewhere, but I cannot find them,
only ..."

"Only," Canim repeated, holding her.

"Only one thing. But you will laugh at its foolishness, it is so
unreal."

"Nay, Li Wan. Dreams are dreams. They may be memories of other lives
we have lived. I was once a moose. I firmly believe I was once a
moose, what of the things I have seen in dreams, and heard."

Strive as he would to hide it, a growing anxiety was manifest, but Li
Wan, groping after the words with which to paint the picture, took no
heed.

"I see a snow-tramped space among the trees," she began, "and across
the snow the sign of a man where he has dragged himself heavily on
hand and knee. And I see, too, the man in the snow, and it seems I am
very close to him when I look. He is unlike real men, for he has hair
on his face, much hair, and the hair of his face and head is yellow
like the summer coat of the weasel. His eyes are closed, but they open
and search about. They are blue like the sky, and look into mine and
search no more. And his hand moves, slow, as from weakness, and
I feel ..."

"Ay," Canim whispered hoarsely. "You feel--?"

"No! no!" she cried in haste. "I feel nothing. Did I say 'feel'? I did
not mean it. It could not be that I should mean it. I see, and I see
only, and that is all I see--a man in the snow, with eyes like the
sky, and hair like the weasel. I have seen it many times, and always
it is the same--a man in the snow--"

"And do you see yourself?" he asked, leaning forward and regarding her
intently. "Do you ever see yourself and the man in the snow?"

"Why should I see myself? Am I not real?"

His muscles relaxed and he sank back, an exultant satisfaction in his
eyes which he turned from her so that she might not see.

"I will tell you, Li Wan," he spoke decisively; "you were a little
bird in some life before, a little moose-bird, when you saw this
thing, and the memory of it is with you yet. It is not strange. I was
once a moose, and my father's father afterward became a bear--so said
the shaman, and the shaman cannot lie. Thus, on the Trail of the Gods
we pass from life to life, and the gods know only and understand.
Dreams and the shadows of dreams be memories, nothing more, and the
dog, whining asleep in the sun-warmth, doubtless sees and remembers
things gone before. Bash, there, was a warrior once. I do firmly
believe he was once a warrior."

Canim tossed a bone to the brute and got upon his feet. "Come, let us
begone. The sun is yet hot, but it will get no cooler."

"And these white people, what are they like?" Li Wan made bold to ask.

"Like you and me," he answered, "only they are less dark of skin. You
will be among them ere the day is dead."

Canim lashed the sleeping-robe to his one-hundred-and-fifty-pound
pack, smeared his face with wet clay, and sat down to rest till Li Wan
had finished loading the dogs. Olo cringed at sight of the club in her
hand, and gave no trouble when the bundle of forty pounds and odd was
strapped upon him. But Bash was aggrieved and truculent, and could not
forbear to whimper and snarl as he was forced to receive the burden.
He bristled his back and bared his teeth as she drew the straps tight,
the while throwing all the malignancy of his nature into the glances
shot at her sideways and backward. And Canim chuckled and said, "Did I
not say he was once a very great warrior?"

"These furs will bring a price," he remarked as he adjusted his
head-strap and lifted his pack clear of the ground. "A big price. The
white men pay well for such goods, for they have no time to hunt and
are soft to the cold. Soon shall we feast, Li Wan, as you have feasted
never in all the lives you have lived before."

She grunted acknowledgment and gratitude for her lord's condescension,
slipped into the harness, and bent forward to the load.

"The next time I am born, I would be born a white man," he added, and
swung off down the trail which dived into the gorge at his feet.

The dogs followed close at his heels, and Li Wan brought up the rear.
But her thoughts were far away, across the Ice Mountains to the east,
to the little corner of the earth where her childhood had been lived.
Ever as a child, she remembered, she had been looked upon as strange,
as one with an affliction. Truly she had dreamed awake and been
scolded and beaten for the remarkable visions she saw, till, after a
time, she had outgrown them. But not utterly. Though they troubled her
no more waking, they came to her in her sleep, grown woman that she
was, and many a night of nightmare was hers, filled with fluttering
shapes, vague and meaningless. The talk with Canim had excited her,
and down all the twisted slant of the divide she harked back to the
mocking fantasies of her dreams.

"Let us take breath," Canim said, when they had tapped midway the bed
of the main creek.

He rested his pack on a jutting rock, slipped the head-strap, and sat
down. Li Wan joined him, and the dogs sprawled panting on the ground
beside them. At their feet rippled the glacial drip of the hills, but
it was muddy and discolored, as if soiled by some commotion of the
earth.

"Why is this?" Li Wan asked.

"Because of the white men who work in the ground. Listen!" He held up
his hand, and they heard the ring of pick and shovel, and the sound of
men's voices. "They are made mad by _gold_, and work without ceasing
that they may find it. _Gold?_ It is yellow and comes from the ground,
and is considered of great value. It is also a measure of price."

But Li Wan's roving eyes had called her attention from him. A few
yards below and partly screened by a clump of young spruce, the tiered
logs of a cabin rose to meet its overhanging roof of dirt. A thrill
ran through her, and all her dream-phantoms roused up and stirred
about uneasily.

"Canim," she whispered in an agony of apprehension. "Canim, what is
that?"

"The white man's teepee, in which he eats and sleeps."

She eyed it wistfully, grasping its virtues at a glance and thrilling
again at the unaccountable sensations it aroused. "It must be very
warm in time of frost," she said aloud, though she felt that she must
make strange sounds with her lips.

She felt impelled to utter them, but did not, and the next instant
Canim said, "It is called a _cabin_."

Her heart gave a great leap. The sounds! the very sounds! She looked
about her in sudden awe. How should she know that strange word before
ever she heard it? What could be the matter? And then with a shock,
half of fear and half of delight, she realized that for the first time
in her life there had been sanity and significance in the promptings
of her dreams.

"_Cabin_" she repeated to herself. "_Cabin._" An incoherent flood of
dream-stuff welled up and up till her head was dizzy and her
heart seemed bursting. Shadows, and looming bulks of things, and
unintelligible associations fluttered and whirled about, and she
strove vainly with her consciousness to grasp and hold them. For
she felt that there, in that welter of memories, was the key of the
mystery; could she but grasp and hold it, all would be clear and
plain--

O Canim! O Pow-Wah-Kaan! O shades and shadows, what was that?

She turned to Canim, speechless and trembling, the dream-stuff in mad,
overwhelming riot. She was sick and fainting, and could only listen
to the ravishing sounds which proceeded from the cabin in a wonderful
rhythm.

"Hum, _fiddle,_" Canim vouchsafed.

But she did not hear him, for in the ecstasy she was experiencing,
it seemed at last that all things were coming clear. Now! now! she
thought. A sudden moisture swept into her eyes, and the tears trickled
down her cheeks. The mystery was unlocking, but the faintness was
overpowering her. If only she could hold herself long enough! If
only--but the landscape bent and crumpled up, and the hills swayed
back and forth across the sky as she sprang upright and screamed,
"_Daddy! Daddy!_" Then the sun reeled, and darkness smote her, and she
pitched forward limp and headlong among the rocks.

Canim looked to see if her neck had been broken by the heavy pack,
grunted his satisfaction, and threw water upon her from the creek. She
came to slowly, with choking sobs, and sat up.

"It is not good, the hot sun on the head," he ventured.

And she answered, "No, it is not good, and the pack bore upon me
hard."

"We shall camp early, so that you may sleep long and win strength," he
said gently. "And if we go now, we shall be the quicker to bed."

Li Wan said nothing, but tottered to her feet in obedience and stirred
up the dogs. She took the swing of his pace mechanically, and followed
him past the cabin, scarce daring to breathe. But no sounds issued
forth, though the door was open and smoke curling upward from the
sheet-iron stovepipe.

They came upon a man in the bend of the creek, white of skin and blue
of eye, and for a moment Li Wan saw the other man in the snow. But she
saw dimly, for she was weak and tired from what she had undergone.
Still, she looked at him curiously, and stopped with Canim to watch
him at his work. He was washing gravel in a large pan, with a
circular, tilting movement; and as they looked, giving a deft flirt,
he flashed up the yellow gold in a broad streak across the bottom of
the pan.

"Very rich, this creek," Canim told her, as they went on. "Sometime I
will find such a creek, and then I shall be a big man."

Cabins and men grew more plentiful, till they came to where the main
portion of the creek was spread out before them. It was the scene of a
vast devastation. Everywhere the earth was torn and rent as though by
a Titan's struggles. Where there were no upthrown mounds of gravel,
great holes and trenches yawned, and chasms where the thick rime of
the earth had been peeled to bed-rock. There was no worn channel for
the creek, and its waters, dammed up, diverted, flying through the air
on giddy flumes, trickling into sinks and low places, and raised by
huge water-wheels, were used and used again a thousand times. The
hills had been stripped of their trees, and their raw sides gored and
perforated by great timber-slides and prospect holes. And over all,
like a monstrous race of ants, was flung an army of men--mud-covered,
dirty, dishevelled men, who crawled in and out of the holes of their
digging, crept like big bugs along the flumes, and toiled and sweated
at the gravel-heaps which they kept in constant unrest--men, as far as
the eye could see, even to the rims of the hilltops, digging, tearing,
and scouring the face of nature.

Li Wan was appalled at the tremendous upheaval. "Truly, these men are
mad," she said to Canim.

"Small wonder. The gold they dig after is a great thing," he replied.
"It is the greatest thing in the world."

For hours they threaded the chaos of greed, Canim eagerly intent,
Li Wan weak and listless. She knew she had been on the verge
of disclosure, and she felt that she was still on the verge of
disclosure, but the nervous strain she had undergone had tired her,
and she passively waited for the thing, she knew not what, to happen.
From every hand her senses snatched up and conveyed to her innumerable
impressions, each of which became a dull excitation to her jaded
imagination. Somewhere within her, responsive notes were answering to
the things without, forgotten and undreamed-of correspondences were
being renewed; and she was aware of it in an incurious way, and her
soul was troubled, but she was not equal to the mental exultation
necessary to transmute and understand. So she plodded wearily on
at the heels of her lord, content to wait for that which she knew,
somewhere, somehow, must happen.

After undergoing the mad bondage of man, the creek finally returned to
its ancient ways, all soiled and smirched from its toil, and coiled
lazily among the broad flats and timbered spaces where the valley
widened to its mouth. Here the "pay" ran out, and men were loth to
loiter with the lure yet beyond. And here, as Li Wan paused to prod
Olo with her staff, she heard the mellow silver of a woman's laughter.

Before a cabin sat a woman, fair of skin and rosy as a child, dimpling
with glee at the words of another woman in the doorway. But the woman
who sat shook about her great masses of dark, wet hair which yielded
up its dampness to the warm caresses of the sun.

For an instant Li Wan stood transfixed. Then she was aware of a
blinding flash, and a snap, as though something gave way; and the
woman before the cabin vanished, and the cabin and the tall spruce
timber, and the jagged sky-line, and Li Wan saw another woman, in the
shine of another sun, brushing great masses of black hair, and
singing as she brushed. And Li Wan heard the words of the song, and
understood, and was a child again. She was smitten with a vision,
wherein all the troublesome dreams merged and became one, and shapes
and shadows took up their accustomed round, and all was clear and
plain and real. Many pictures jostled past, strange scenes, and trees,
and flowers, and people; and she saw them and knew them all.

"When you were a little bird, a little moose-bird," Canim said, his
eyes upon her and burning into her.

"When I was a little moose-bird," she whispered, so faint and low he
scarcely heard. And she knew she lied, as she bent her head to the
strap and took the swing of the trail.

And such was the strangeness of it, the real now became unreal. The
mile tramp and the pitching of camp by the edge of the stream seemed
like a passage in a nightmare. She cooked the meat, fed the dogs, and
unlashed the packs as in a dream, and it was not until Canim began to
sketch his next wandering that she became herself again.

"The Klondike runs into the Yukon," he was saying; "a mighty river,
mightier than the Mackenzie, of which you know. So we go, you and I,
down to Fort o' Yukon. With dogs, in time of winter, it is twenty
sleeps. Then we follow the Yukon away into the west--one hundred
sleeps, two hundred--I have never heard. It is very far. And then we
come to the sea. You know nothing of the sea, so let me tell you. As
the lake is to the island, so the sea is to the land; all the rivers
run to it, and it is without end. I have seen it at Hudson Bay; I have
yet to see it in Alaska. And then we may take a great canoe upon the
sea, you and I, Li Wan, or we may follow the land into the south many
a hundred sleeps. And after that I do not know, save that I am Canim,
the Canoe, wanderer and far-journeyer over the earth!"

She sat and listened, and fear ate into her heart as she pondered over
this plunge into the illimitable wilderness. "It is a weary way," was
all she said, head bowed on knee in resignation.

Then it was a splendid thought came to her, and at the wonder of it
she was all aglow. She went down to the stream and washed the dried
clay from her face. When the ripples died away, she stared long at her
mirrored features; but sun and weather-beat had done their work, and,
what of roughness and bronze, her skin was not soft and dimpled as a
child's. But the thought was still splendid and the glow unabated as
she crept in beside her husband under the sleeping-robe.

She lay awake, staring up at the blue of the sky and waiting for Canim
to sink into the first deep sleep. When this came about, she wormed
slowly and carefully away, tucked the robe around him, and stood up.
At her second step, Bash growled savagely. She whispered persuasively
to him and glanced at the man. Canim was snoring profoundly. Then she
turned, and with swift, noiseless feet sped up the back trail.

Mrs. Evelyn Van Wyck was just preparing for bed. Bored by the duties
put upon her by society, her wealth, and widowed blessedness, she had
journeyed into the Northland and gone to housekeeping in a cosey cabin
on the edge of the diggings. Here, aided and abetted by her friend and
companion, Myrtle Giddings, she played at living close to the soil,
and cultivated the primitive with refined abandon.

She strove to get away from the generations of culture and parlor
selection, and sought the earth-grip her ancestors had forfeited.
Likewise she induced mental states which she fondly believed to
approximate those of the stone-folk, and just now, as she put up her
hair for the pillow, she was indulging her fancy with a palaeolithic
wooing. The details consisted principally of cave-dwellings and
cracked marrow-bones, intersprinkled with fierce carnivora, hairy
mammoths, and combats with rude flaked knives of flint; but the
sensations were delicious. And as Evelyn Van Wyck fled through
the sombre forest aisles before the too arduous advances of her
slant-browed, skin-clad wooer, the door of the cabin opened, without
the courtesy of a knock, and a skin-clad woman, savage and primitive,
came in.

"Mercy!"

With a leap that would have done credit to a cave-woman, Miss Giddings
landed in safety behind the table. But Mrs. Van Wyck held her ground.
She noticed that the intruder was laboring under a strong excitement,
and cast a swift glance backward to assure herself that the way was
clear to the bunk, where the big Colt's revolver lay beneath a pillow.

"Greeting, O Woman of the Wondrous Hair," said Li Wan.

But she said it in her own tongue, the tongue spoken in but a little
corner of the earth, and the women did not understand.

"Shall I go for help?" Miss Giddings quavered.

"The poor creature is harmless, I think," Mrs. Van Wyck replied. "And
just look at her skin-clothes, ragged and trail-worn and all that.
They are certainly unique. I shall buy them for my collection. Get my
sack, Myrtle, please, and set up the scales."

Li Wan followed the shaping of the lips, but the words were
unintelligible, and then, and for the first time, she realized, in
a moment of suspense and indecision, that there was no medium of
communication between them.

And at the passion of her dumbness she cried out, with arms stretched
wide apart, "O Woman, thou art sister of mine!"

The tears coursed down her cheeks as she yearned toward them, and the
break in her voice carried the sorrow she could not utter. But Miss
Giddings was trembling, and even Mrs. Van Wyck was disturbed.

"I would live as you live. Thy ways are my ways, and our ways be one.
My husband is Canim, the Canoe, and he is big and strange, and I am
afraid. His trail is all the world and never ends, and I am weary. My
mother was like you, and her hair was as thine, and her eyes. And life
was soft to me then, and the sun warm."

She knelt humbly, and bent her head at Mrs. Van Wyck's feet. But Mrs.
Van Wyck drew away, frightened at her vehemence.

Li Wan stood up, panting for speech. Her dumb lips could not
articulate her overmastering consciousness of kind.

"Trade? you trade?" Mrs. Van Wyck questioned, slipping, after the
fashion of the superior peoples, into pigeon tongue.

She touched Li Wan's ragged skins to indicate her choice, and poured
several hundreds of gold into the blower. She stirred the dust about
and trickled its yellow lustre temptingly through her fingers. But Li
Wan saw only the fingers, milk-white and shapely, tapering daintily
to the rosy, jewel-like nails. She placed her own hand alongside, all
work-worn and calloused, and wept.

Mrs. Van Wyck misunderstood. "Gold," she encouraged. "Good gold! You
trade? You changee for changee?" And she laid her hand again on Li
Wan's skin garments.

"How much? You sell? How much?" she persisted, running her hand
against the way of the hair so that she might make sure of the
sinew-thread seam.

But Li Wan was deaf as well, and the woman's speech was without
significance. Dismay at her failure sat upon her. How could she
identify herself with these women? For she knew they were of the one
breed, blood-sisters among men and the women of men. Her eyes roved
wildly about the interior, taking in the soft draperies hanging
around, the feminine garments, the oval mirror, and the dainty toilet
accessories beneath. And the things haunted her, for she had seen like
things before; and as she looked at them her lips involuntarily formed
sounds which her throat trembled to utter. Then a thought flashed upon
her, and she steadied herself. She must be calm. She must control
herself, for there must be no misunderstanding this time, or
else,--and she shook with a storm of suppressed tears and steadied
herself again.

She put her hand on the table. "_Table_," she clearly and distinctly
enunciated. "_Table_," she repeated.

She looked at Mrs. Van Wyck, who nodded approbation. Li Wan exulted,
but brought her will to bear and held herself steady. "_Stove_" she
went on. "_Stove_."

And at every nod of Mrs. Van Wyck, Li Wan's excitement mounted.
Now stumbling and halting, and again in feverish haste, as the
recrudescence of forgotten words was fast or slow, she moved about the
cabin, naming article after article. And when she paused finally,
it was in triumph, with body erect and head thrown back, expectant,
waiting.

"Cat," Mrs. Van Wyck, laughing, spelled out in kindergarten fashion.
"I--see--the--cat--catch--the--rat."

Li Wan nodded her head seriously. They were beginning to understand
her at last, these women. The blood flushed darkly under her bronze at
the thought, and she smiled and nodded her head still more vigorously.

Mrs. Van Wyck turned to her companion. "Received a smattering of
mission education somewhere, I fancy, and has come to show it off."

"Of course," Miss Giddings tittered. "Little fool! We shall lose our
sleep with her vanity."

"All the same I want that jacket. If it _is_ old, the workmanship
is good--a most excellent specimen." She returned to her visitor.
"Changee for changee? You! Changee for changee? How much? Eh? How
much, you?"

"Perhaps she'd prefer a dress or something," Miss Giddings suggested.

Mrs. Van Wyck went up to Li Wan and made signs that she would exchange
her wrapper for the jacket. And to further the transaction, she took
Li Wan's hand and placed it amid the lace and ribbons of the flowing
bosom, and rubbed the fingers back and forth so they might feel the
texture. But the jewelled butterfly which loosely held the fold in
place was insecurely fastened, and the front of the gown slipped to
the side, exposing a firm white breast, which had never known the
lip-clasp of a child.

Mrs. Van Wyck coolly repaired the mischief; but Li Wan uttered a loud
cry, and ripped and tore at her skin-shirt till her own breast showed
firm and white as Evelyn Van Wyck's. Murmuring inarticulately and
making swift signs, she strove to establish the kinship.

"A half-breed," Mrs. Van Wyck commented. "I thought so from her hair."

Miss Giddings made a fastidious gesture. "Proud of her father's white
skin. It's beastly! Do give her something, Evelyn, and make her go."

But the other woman sighed. "Poor creature, I wish I could do
something for her."

A heavy foot crunched the gravel without. Then the cabin door swung
wide, and Canim stalked in. Miss Giddings saw a vision of sudden
death, and screamed; but Mrs. Van Wyck faced him composedly.

"What do you want?" she demanded.

"How do?" Canim answered suavely and directly, pointing at the same
time to Li Wan. "Um my wife."

He reached out for her, but she waved him back.

"Speak, Canim! Tell them that I am--"

"Daughter of Pow-Wah-Kaan? Nay, of what is it to them that they
should care? Better should I tell them thou art an ill wife, given to
creeping from thy husband's bed when sleep is heavy in his eyes."

Again he reached out for her, but she fled away from him to Mrs. Van
Wyck, at whose feet she made frenzied appeal, and whose knees she
tried to clasp. But the lady stepped back and gave permission with her
eyes to Canim. He gripped Li Wan under the shoulders and raised her to
her feet. She fought with him, in a madness of despair, till his chest
was heaving with the exertion, and they had reeled about over half the
room.

"Let me go, Canim," she sobbed.

But he twisted her wrist till she ceased to struggle. "The memories of
the little moose-bird are overstrong and make trouble," he began.

"I know! I know!" she broke in. "I see the man in the snow, and as
never before I see him crawl on hand and knee. And I, who am a little
child, am carried on his back. And this is before Pow-Wah-Kaan and the
time I came to live in a little corner of the earth."

"You know," he answered, forcing her toward the door; "but you will go
with me down the Yukon and forget."

"Never shall I forget! So long as my skin is white shall I remember!"
She clutched frantically at the door-post and looked a last appeal to
Mrs. Evelyn Van Wyck.

"Then will I teach thee to forget, I, Canim, the Canoe!"

As he spoke he pulled her fingers clear and passed out with her upon
the trail.




THE LEAGUE OF THE OLD MEN


At the Barracks a man was being tried for his life. He was an old man,
a native from the Whitefish River, which empties into the Yukon below
Lake Le Barge. All Dawson was wrought up over the affair, and likewise
the Yukon-dwellers for a thousand miles up and down. It has been the
custom of the land-robbing and sea-robbing Anglo-Saxon to give the law
to conquered peoples, and ofttimes this law is harsh. But in the
case of Imber the law for once seemed inadequate and weak. In the
mathematical nature of things, equity did not reside in the punishment
to be accorded him. The punishment was a foregone conclusion, there
could be no doubt of that; and though it was capital, Imber had but
one life, while the tale against him was one of scores.

In fact, the blood of so many was upon his hands that the killings
attributed to him did not permit of precise enumeration. Smoking a
pipe by the trail-side or lounging around the stove, men made rough
estimates of the numbers that had perished at his hand. They had been
whites, all of them, these poor murdered people, and they had been
slain singly, in pairs, and in parties. And so purposeless and wanton
had been these killings, that they had long been a mystery to the
mounted police, even in the time of the captains, and later, when the
creeks realized, and a governor came from the Dominion to make the
land pay for its prosperity.

But more mysterious still was the coming of Imber to Dawson to give
himself up. It was in the late spring, when the Yukon was growling and
writhing under its ice, that the old Indian climbed painfully up the
bank from the river trail and stood blinking on the main street. Men
who had witnessed his advent, noted that he was weak and tottery, and
that he staggered over to a heap of cabin-logs and sat down. He sat
there a full day, staring straight before him at the unceasing tide of
white men that flooded past. Many a head jerked curiously to the side
to meet his stare, and more than one remark was dropped anent the old
Siwash with so strange a look upon his face. No end of men remembered
afterward that they had been struck by his extraordinary figure, and
forever afterward prided themselves upon their swift discernment of
the unusual.

But it remained for Dickensen, Little Dickensen, to be the hero of the
occasion. Little Dickensen had come into the land with great dreams
and a pocketful of cash; but with the cash the dreams vanished, and
to earn his passage back to the States he had accepted a clerical
position with the brokerage firm of Holbrook and Mason. Across
the street from the office of Holbrook and Mason was the heap of
cabin-logs upon which Imber sat. Dickensen looked out of the window
at him before he went to lunch; and when he came back from lunch he
looked out of the window, and the old Siwash was still there.

Dickensen continued to look out of the window, and he, too, forever
afterward prided himself upon his swiftness of discernment. He was a
romantic little chap, and he likened the immobile old heathen to the
genius of the Siwash race, gazing calm-eyed upon the hosts of the
invading Saxon. The hours swept along, but Imber did not vary his
posture, did not by a hair's-breadth move a muscle; and Dickensen
remembered the man who once sat upright on a sled in the main street
where men passed to and fro. They thought the man was resting, but
later, when they touched him, they found him stiff and cold, frozen to
death in the midst of the busy street. To undouble him, that he might
fit into a coffin, they had been forced to lug him to a fire and thaw
him out a bit. Dickensen shivered at the recollection.

Later on, Dickensen went out on the sidewalk to smoke a cigar and cool
off; and a little later Emily Travis happened along. Emily Travis was
dainty and delicate and rare, and whether in London or Klondike she
gowned herself as befitted the daughter of a millionnaire mining
engineer. Little Dickensen deposited his cigar on an outside window
ledge where he could find it again, and lifted his hat.

They chatted for ten minutes or so, when Emily Travis, glancing past
Dickensen's shoulder, gave a startled little scream. Dickensen turned
about to see, and was startled, too. Imber had crossed the street
and was standing there, a gaunt and hungry-looking shadow, his gaze
riveted upon the girl.

"What do you want?" Little Dickensen demanded, tremulously plucky.

Imber grunted and stalked up to Emily Travis. He looked her over,
keenly and carefully, every square inch of her. Especially did he
appear interested in her silky brown hair, and in the color of her
cheek, faintly sprayed and soft, like the downy bloom of a butterfly
wing. He walked around her, surveying her with the calculating eye of
a man who studies the lines upon which a horse or a boat is builded.
In the course of his circuit the pink shell of her ear came between
his eye and the westering sun, and he stopped to contemplate its
rosy transparency. Then he returned to her face and looked long and
intently into her blue eyes. He grunted and laid a hand on her arm
midway between the shoulder and elbow. With his other hand he lifted
her forearm and doubled it back. Disgust and wonder showed in his
face, and he dropped her arm with a contemptuous grunt. Then he
muttered a few guttural syllables, turned his back upon her, and
addressed himself to Dickensen.

Dickensen could not understand his speech, and Emily Travis laughed.
Imber turned from one to the other, frowning, but both shook their
heads. He was about to go away, when she called out:

"Oh, Jimmy! Come here!"

Jimmy came from the other side of the street. He was a big, hulking
Indian clad in approved white-man style, with an Eldorado king's
sombrero on his head. He talked with Imber, haltingly, with throaty
spasms. Jimmy was a Sitkan, possessed of no more than a passing
knowledge of the interior dialects.

"Him Whitefish man," he said to Emily Travis. "Me savve um talk no
very much. Him want to look see chief white man."

"The Governor," suggested Dickensen.

Jimmy talked some more with the Whitefish man, and his face went grave
and puzzled.

"I t'ink um want Cap'n Alexander," he explained. "Him say um kill
white man, white woman, white boy, plenty kill um white people. Him
want to die."

"Insane, I guess," said Dickensen.

"What you call dat?" queried Jimmy.

Dickensen thrust a finger figuratively inside his head and imparted a
rotary motion thereto.

"Mebbe so, mebbe so," said Jimmy, returning to Imber, who still
demanded the chief man of the white men.

A mounted policeman (unmounted for Klondike service) joined the group
and heard Imber's wish repeated. He was a stalwart young fellow,
broad-shouldered, deep-chested, legs cleanly built and stretched wide
apart, and tall though Imber was, he towered above him by half a head.
His eyes were cool, and gray, and steady, and he carried himself with
the peculiar confidence of power that is bred of blood and
tradition. His splendid masculinity was emphasized by his excessive
boyishness,--he was a mere lad,--and his smooth cheek promised a blush
as willingly as the cheek of a maid.

Imber was drawn to him at once. The fire leaped into his eyes at sight
of a sabre slash that scarred his cheek. He ran a withered hand down
the young fellow's leg and caressed the swelling thew. He smote the
broad chest with his knuckles, and pressed and prodded the thick
muscle-pads that covered the shoulders like a cuirass. The group had
been added to by curious passers-by--husky miners, mountaineers,
and frontiersmen, sons of the long-legged and broad-shouldered
generations. Imber glanced from one to another, then he spoke aloud in
the Whitefish tongue.

"What did he say?" asked Dickensen.

"Him say um all the same one man, dat p'liceman," Jimmy interpreted.

Little Dickensen was little, and what of Miss Travis, he felt sorry
for having asked the question.

The policeman was sorry for him and stepped into the breach. "I fancy
there may be something in his story. I'll take him up to the captain
for examination. Tell him to come along with me, Jimmy."

Jimmy indulged in more throaty spasms, and Imber grunted and looked
satisfied.

"But ask him what he said, Jimmy, and what he meant when he took hold
of my arm."

So spoke Emily Travis, and Jimmy put the question and received the
answer.

"Him say you no afraid," said Jimmy.

Emily Travis looked pleased.

"Him say you no _skookum_, no strong, all the same very soft like
little baby. Him break you, in um two hands, to little pieces. Him
t'ink much funny, very strange, how you can be mother of men so big,
so strong, like dat p'liceman."

Emily Travers kept her eyes up and unfaltering, but her cheeks
were sprayed with scarlet. Little Dickensen blushed and was quite
embarrassed. The policeman's face blazed with his boy's blood.

"Come along, you," he said gruffly, setting his shoulder to the crowd
and forcing a way.

Thus it was that Imber found his way to the Barracks, where he made
full and voluntary confession, and from the precincts of which he
never emerged.

Imber looked very tired. The fatigue of hopelessness and age was
in his face. His shoulders drooped depressingly, and his eyes were
lack-lustre. His mop of hair should have been white, but sun and
weatherbeat had burned and bitten it so that it hung limp and lifeless
and colorless. He took no interest in what went on around him. The
courtroom was jammed with the men of the creeks and trails, and there
was an ominous note in the rumble and grumble of their low-pitched
voices, which came to his ears like the growl of the sea from deep
caverns.

He sat close by a window, and his apathetic eyes rested now and again
on the dreary scene without. The sky was overcast, and a gray drizzle
was falling. It was flood-time on the Yukon. The ice was gone, and the
river was up in the town. Back and forth on the main street, in canoes
and poling-boats, passed the people that never rested. Often he saw
these boats turn aside from the street and enter the flooded square
that marked the Barracks' parade-ground. Sometimes they disappeared
beneath him, and he heard them jar against the house-logs and their
occupants scramble in through the window. After that came the slush
of water against men's legs as they waded across the lower room and
mounted the stairs. Then they appeared in the doorway, with doffed
hats and dripping sea-boots, and added themselves to the waiting
crowd.

And while they centred their looks on him, and in grim anticipation
enjoyed the penalty he was to pay, Imber looked at them, and mused on
their ways, and on their Law that never slept, but went on unceasing,
in good times and bad, in flood and famine, through trouble and terror
and death, and which would go on unceasing, it seemed to him, to the
end of time.

A man rapped sharply on a table, and the conversation droned away into
silence. Imber looked at the man. He seemed one in authority, yet
Imber divined the square-browed man who sat by a desk farther back
to be the one chief over them all and over the man who had rapped.
Another man by the same table uprose and began to read aloud from many
fine sheets of paper. At the top of each sheet he cleared his throat,
at the bottom moistened his fingers. Imber did not understand his
speech, but the others did, and he knew that it made them angry.
Sometimes it made them very angry, and once a man cursed him, in
single syllables, stinging and tense, till a man at the table rapped
him to silence.

For an interminable period the man read. His monotonous, sing-song
utterance lured Imber to dreaming, and he was dreaming deeply when the
man ceased. A voice spoke to him in his own Whitefish tongue, and he
roused up, without surprise, to look upon the face of his sister's
son, a young man who had wandered away years agone to make his
dwelling with the whites.

"Thou dost not remember me," he said by way of greeting.

"Nay," Imber answered. "Thou art Howkan who went away. Thy mother be
dead."

"She was an old woman," said Howkan.

But Imber did not hear, and Howkan, with hand upon his shoulder,
roused him again.

"I shall speak to thee what the man has spoken, which is the tale of
the troubles thou hast done and which thou hast told, O fool, to the
Captain Alexander. And thou shalt understand and say if it be true
talk or talk not true. It is so commanded."

Howkan had fallen among the mission folk and been taught by them to
read and write. In his hands he held the many fine sheets from which
the man had read aloud, and which had been taken down by a clerk when
Imber first made confession, through the mouth of Jimmy, to Captain
Alexander. Howkan began to read. Imber listened for a space, when a
wonderment rose up in his face and he broke in abruptly.

"That be my talk, Howkan. Yet from thy lips it comes when thy ears
have not heard."

Howkan smirked with self-appreciation. His hair was parted in the
middle. "Nay, from the paper it comes, O Imber. Never have my ears
heard. From the paper it comes, through my eyes, into my head, and out
of my mouth to thee. Thus it comes."

"Thus it comes? It be there in the paper?" Imber's voice sank in
whisperful awe as he crackled the sheets 'twixt thumb and finger and
stared at the charactery scrawled thereon. "It be a great medicine,
Howkan, and thou art a worker of wonders."

"It be nothing, it be nothing," the young man responded carelessly
and pridefully. He read at hazard from the document: "_In that year,
before the break of the ice, came an old man, and a boy who was
lame of one foot. These also did I kill, and the old man made much
noise--_"

"It be true," Imber interrupted breathlessly. "He made much noise and
would not die for a long time. But how dost thou know, Howkan? The
chief man of the white men told thee, mayhap? No one beheld me, and
him alone have I told."

Howkan shook his head with impatience. "Have I not told thee it be
there in the paper, O fool?"

Imber stared hard at the ink-scrawled surface. "As the hunter looks
upon the snow and says, Here but yesterday there passed a rabbit; and
here by the willow scrub it stood and listened, and heard, and was
afraid; and here it turned upon its trail; and here it went with great
swiftness, leaping wide; and here, with greater swiftness and wider
leapings, came a lynx; and here, where the claws cut deep into the
snow, the lynx made a very great leap; and here it struck, with the
rabbit under and rolling belly up; and here leads off the trail of the
lynx alone, and there is no more rabbit,--as the hunter looks upon the
markings of the snow and says thus and so and here, dost thou, too,
look upon the paper and say thus and so and here be the things old
Imber hath done?"

"Even so," said Howkan. "And now do thou listen, and keep thy woman's
tongue between thy teeth till thou art called upon for speech."

Thereafter, and for a long time, Howkan read to him the confession,
and Imber remained musing and silent At the end, he said:

"It be my talk, and true talk, but I am grown old, Howkan, and
forgotten things come back to me which were well for the head man
there to know. First, there was the man who came over the Ice
Mountains, with cunning traps made of iron, who sought the beaver of
the Whitefish. Him I slew. And there were three men seeking gold
on the Whitefish long ago. Them also I slew, and left them to the
wolverines. And at the Five Fingers there was a man with a raft and
much meat."

At the moments when Imber paused to remember, Howkan translated and
a clerk reduced to writing. The courtroom listened stolidly to each
unadorned little tragedy, till Imber told of a red-haired man whose
eyes were crossed and whom he had killed with a remarkably long shot.

"Hell," said a man in the forefront of the onlookers. He said it
soulfully and sorrowfully. He was red-haired. "Hell," he repeated.
"That was my brother Bill." And at regular intervals throughout the
session, his solemn "Hell" was heard in the courtroom; nor did his
comrades check him, nor did the man at the table rap him to order.

Imber's head drooped once more, and his eyes went dull, as though a
film rose up and covered them from the world. And he dreamed as only
age can dream upon the colossal futility of youth.

Later, Howkan roused him again, saying: "Stand up, O Imber. It be
commanded that thou tellest why you did these troubles, and slew these
people, and at the end journeyed here seeking the Law."

Imber rose feebly to his feet and swayed back and forth. He began to
speak in a low and faintly rumbling voice, but Howkan interrupted him.

"This old man, he is damn crazy," he said in English to the
square-browed man. "His talk is foolish and like that of a child."

"We will hear his talk which is like that of a child," said the
square-browed man. "And we will hear it, word for word, as he speaks
it. Do you understand?"

Howkan understood, and Imber's eyes flashed, for he had witnessed the
play between his sister's son and the man in authority. And then began
the story, the epic of a bronze patriot which might well itself
be wrought into bronze for the generations unborn. The crowd fell
strangely silent, and the square-browed judge leaned head on hand and
pondered his soul and the soul of his race. Only was heard the deep
tones of Imber, rhythmically alternating with the shrill voice of
the interpreter, and now and again, like the bell of the Lord, the
wondering and meditative "Hell" of the red-haired man.

"I am Imber of the Whitefish people." So ran the interpretation of
Howkan, whose inherent barbarism gripped hold of him, and who lost his
mission culture and veneered civilization as he caught the savage ring
and rhythm of old Imber's tale. "My father was Otsbaok, a strong man.
The land was warm with sunshine and gladness when I was a boy. The
people did not hunger after strange things, nor hearken to new voices,
and the ways of their fathers were their ways. The women found favor
in the eyes of the young men, and the young men looked upon them
with content. Babes hung at the breasts of the women, and they were
heavy-hipped with increase of the tribe. Men were men in those days.
In peace and plenty, and in war and famine, they were men.

"At that time there was more fish in the water than now, and more meat
in the forest. Our dogs were wolves, warm with thick hides and hard
to the frost and storm. And as with our dogs so with us, for we were
likewise hard to the frost and storm. And when the Pellys came into
our land we slew them and were slain. For we were men, we Whitefish,
and our fathers and our fathers' fathers had fought against the Pellys
and determined the bounds of the land.

"As I say, with our dogs, so with us. And one day came the first white
man. He dragged himself, so, on hand and knee, in the snow. And his
skin was stretched tight, and his bones were sharp beneath. Never was
such a man, we thought, and we wondered of what strange tribe he was,
and of its land. And he was weak, most weak, like a little child, so
that we gave him a place by the fire, and warm furs to lie upon, and
we gave him food as little children are given food.

"And with him was a dog, large as three of our dogs, and very weak.
The hair of this dog was short, and not warm, and the tail was frozen
so that the end fell off. And this strange dog we fed, and bedded by
the fire, and fought from it our dogs, which else would have killed
him. And what of the moose meat and the sun-dried salmon, the man and
dog took strength to themselves; and what of the strength they became
big and unafraid. And the man spoke loud words and laughed at the old
men and young men, and looked boldly upon the maidens. And the dog
fought with our dogs, and for all of his short hair and softness slew
three of them in one day.

"When we asked the man concerning his people, he said, 'I have many
brothers,' and laughed in a way that was not good. And when he was in
his full strength he went away, and with him went Noda, daughter to
the chief. First, after that, was one of our bitches brought to pup.
And never was there such a breed of dogs,--big-headed, thick-jawed,
and short-haired, and helpless. Well do I remember my father, Otsbaok,
a strong man. His face was black with anger at such helplessness, and
he took a stone, so, and so, and there was no more helplessness. And
two summers after that came Noda back to us with a man-child in the
hollow of her arm.

"And that was the beginning. Came a second white man, with
short-haired dogs, which he left behind him when he went. And with
him went six of our strongest dogs, for which, in trade, he had given
Koo-So-Tee, my mother's brother, a wonderful pistol that fired with
great swiftness six times. And Koo-So-Tee was very big, what of the
pistol, and laughed at our bows and arrows. 'Woman's things,' he
called them, and went forth against the bald-face grizzly, with the
pistol in his hand. Now it be known that it is not good to hunt
the bald-face with a pistol, but how were we to know? and how was
Koo-So-Tee to know? So he went against the bald-face, very brave, and
fired the pistol with great swiftness six times; and the bald-face but
grunted and broke in his breast like it were an egg, and like honey
from a bee's nest dripped the brains of Koo-So-Tee upon the ground. He
was a good hunter, and there was no one to bring meat to his squaw and
children. And we were bitter, and we said, 'That which for the white
men is well, is for us not well.' And this be true. There be many
white men and fat, but their ways have made us few and lean.

"Came the third white man, with great wealth of all manner of
wonderful foods and things. And twenty of our strongest dogs he took
from us in trade. Also, what of presents and great promises, ten of
our young hunters did he take with him on a journey which fared no
man knew where. It is said they died in the snow of the Ice Mountains
where man has never been, or in the Hills of Silence which are beyond
the edge of the earth. Be that as it may, dogs and young hunters were
seen never again by the Whitefish people.

"And more white men came with the years, and ever, with pay and
presents, they led the young men away with them. And sometimes the
young men came back with strange tales of dangers and toils in the
lands beyond the Pellys, and sometimes they did not come back. And we
said: 'If they be unafraid of life, these white men, it is because
they have many lives; but we be few by the Whitefish, and the young
men shall go away no more.' But the young men did go away; and the
young women went also; and we were very wroth.

"It be true, we ate flour, and salt pork, and drank tea which was a
great delight; only, when we could not get tea, it was very bad and we
became short of speech and quick of anger. So we grew to hunger for
the things the white men brought in trade. Trade! trade! all the time
was it trade! One winter we sold our meat for clocks that would not
go, and watches with broken guts, and files worn smooth, and pistols
without cartridges and worthless. And then came famine, and we were
without meat, and two score died ere the break of spring.

"'Now are we grown weak,' we said; 'and the Pellys will fall upon us,
and our bounds be overthrown.' But as it fared with us, so had it
fared with the Pellys, and they were too weak to come against us.

"My father, Otsbaok, a strong man, was now old and very wise. And he
spoke to the chief, saying: 'Behold, our dogs be worthless. No longer
are they thick-furred and strong, and they die in the frost and
harness. Let us go into the village and kill them, saving only the
wolf ones, and these let us tie out in the night that they may mate
with the wild wolves of the forest. Thus shall we have dogs warm and
strong again.'

"And his word was harkened to, and we Whitefish became known for our
dogs, which were the best in the land. But known we were not for
ourselves. The best of our young men and women had gone away with the
white men to wander on trail and river to far places. And the young
women came back old and broken, as Noda had come, or they came not at
all. And the young men came back to sit by our fires for a time,
full of ill speech and rough ways, drinking evil drinks and gambling
through long nights and days, with a great unrest always in their
hearts, till the call of the white men came to them and they went away
again to the unknown places. And they were without honor and respect,
jeering the old-time customs and laughing in the faces of chief and
shamans.

"As I say, we were become a weak breed, we Whitefish. We sold our warm
skins and furs for tobacco and whiskey and thin cotton things that
left us shivering in the cold. And the coughing sickness came upon us,
and men and women coughed and sweated through the long nights, and
the hunters on trail spat blood upon the snow. And now one, and now
another, bled swiftly from the mouth and died. And the women bore few
children, and those they bore were weak and given to sickness. And
other sicknesses came to us from the white men, the like of which we
had never known and could not understand. Smallpox, likewise measles,
have I heard these sicknesses named, and we died of them as die the
salmon in the still eddies when in the fall their eggs are spawned and
there is no longer need for them to live.

"And yet, and here be the strangeness of it, the white men come as
the breath of death; all their ways lead to death, their nostrils
are filled with it; and yet they do not die. Theirs the whiskey,
and tobacco, and short-haired dogs; theirs the many sicknesses, the
smallpox and measles, the coughing and mouth-bleeding; theirs the
white skin, and softness to the frost and storm; and theirs the
pistols that shoot six times very swift and are worthless. And yet
they grow fat on their many ills, and prosper, and lay a heavy hand
over all the world and tread mightily upon its peoples. And their
women, too, are soft as little babes, most breakable and never broken,
the mothers of men. And out of all this softness, and sickness, and
weakness, come strength, and power, and authority. They be gods, or
devils, as the case may be. I do not know. What do I know, I,
old Imber of the Whitefish? Only do I know that they are past
understanding, these white men, far-wanderers and fighters over the
earth that they be.

"As I say, the meat in the forest became less and less. It be true,
the white man's gun is most excellent and kills a long way off; but of
what worth the gun, when there is no meat to kill? When I was a boy on
the Whitefish there was moose on every hill, and each year came the
caribou uncountable. But now the hunter may take the trail ten days
and not one moose gladden his eyes, while the caribou uncountable come
no more at all. Small worth the gun, I say, killing a long way off,
when there be nothing to kill.

"And I, Imber, pondered upon these things, watching the while the
Whitefish, and the Pellys, and all the tribes of the land, perishing
as perished the meat of the forest. Long I pondered. I talked with the
shamans and the old men who were wise. I went apart that the sounds of
the village might not disturb me, and I ate no meat so that my belly
should not press upon me and make me slow of eye and ear. I sat long
and sleepless in the forest, wide-eyed for the sign, my ears patient
and keen for the word that was to come. And I wandered alone in the
blackness of night to the river bank, where was wind-moaning and
sobbing of water, and where I sought wisdom from the ghosts of old
shamans in the trees and dead and gone.

"And in the end, as in a vision, came to me the short-haired and
detestable dogs, and the way seemed plain. By the wisdom of Otsbaok,
my father and a strong man, had the blood of our own wolf-dogs been
kept clean, wherefore had they remained warm of hide and strong in
the harness. So I returned to my village and made oration to the men.
'This be a tribe, these white men,' I said. 'A very large tribe, and
doubtless there is no longer meat in their land, and they are come
among us to make a new land for themselves. But they weaken us, and we
die. They are a very hungry folk. Already has our meat gone from us,
and it were well, if we would live, that we deal by them as we have
dealt by their dogs.'

"And further oration I made, counselling fight. And the men of the
Whitefish listened, and some said one thing, and some another, and
some spoke of other and worthless things, and no man made brave talk
of deeds and war. But while the young men were weak as water and
afraid, I watched that the old men sat silent, and that in their eyes
fires came and went. And later, when the village slept and no one
knew, I drew the old men away into the forest and made more talk. And
now we were agreed, and we remembered the good young days, and the
free land, and the times of plenty, and the gladness and sunshine; and
we called ourselves brothers, and swore great secrecy, and a mighty
oath to cleanse the land of the evil breed that had come upon it. It
be plain we were fools, but how were we to know, we old men of the
Whitefish?

"And to hearten the others, I did the first deed. I kept guard upon
the Yukon till the first canoe came down. In it were two white men,
and when I stood upright upon the bank and raised my hand they changed
their course and drove in to me. And as the man in the bow lifted his
head, so, that he might know wherefore I wanted him, my arrow sang
through the air straight to his throat, and he knew. The second man,
who held paddle in the stern, had his rifle half to his shoulder when
the first of my three spear-casts smote him.

"'These be the first,' I said, when the old men had gathered to me.
'Later we will bind together all the old men of all the tribes, and
after that the young men who remain strong, and the work will become
easy.'

"And then the two dead white men we cast into the river. And of the
canoe, which was a very good canoe, we made a fire, and a fire, also,
of the things within the canoe. But first we looked at the things, and
they were pouches of leather which we cut open with our knives. And
inside these pouches were many papers, like that from which thou hast
read, O Howkan, with markings on them which we marvelled at and could
not understand. Now, I am become wise, and I know them for the speech
of men as thou hast told me."

A whisper and buzz went around the courtroom when Howkan finished
interpreting the affair of the canoe, and one man's voice spoke up:
"That was the lost '91 mail, Peter James and Delaney bringing it
in and last spoken at Le Barge by Matthews going out." The clerk
scratched steadily away, and another paragraph was added to the
history of the North.

"There be little more," Imber went on slowly. "It be there on the
paper, the things we did. We were old men, and we did not understand.
Even I, Imber, do not now understand. Secretly we slew, and continued
to slay, for with our years we were crafty and we had learned the
swiftness of going without haste. When white men came among us with
black looks and rough words, and took away six of the young men with
irons binding them helpless, we knew we must slay wider and farther.
And one by one we old men departed up river and down to the unknown
lands. It was a brave thing. Old we were, and unafraid, but the fear
of far places is a terrible fear to men who are old.

"So we slew, without haste and craftily. On the Chilcoot and in the
Delta we slew, from the passes to the sea, wherever the white men
camped or broke their trails. It be true, they died, but it was
without worth. Ever did they come over the mountains, ever did they
grow and grow, while we, being old, became less and less. I remember,
by the Caribou Crossing, the camp of a white man. He was a very little
white man, and three of the old men came upon him in his sleep. And
the next day I came upon the four of them. The white man alone still
breathed, and there was breath in him to curse me once and well before
he died.

"And so it went, now one old man, and now another. Sometimes the word
reached us long after of how they died, and sometimes it did not reach
us. And the old men of the other tribes were weak and afraid, and
would not join with us. As I say, one by one, till I alone was left.
I am Imber, of the Whitefish people. My father was Otsbaok, a strong
man. There are no Whitefish now. Of the old men I am the last. The
young men and young women are gone away, some to live with the Pellys,
some with the Salmons, and more with the white men. I am very old,
and very tired, and it being vain fighting the Law, as thou sayest,
Howkan, I am come seeking the Law."

"O Imber, thou art indeed a fool," said Howkan.

But Imber was dreaming. The square-browed judge likewise dreamed,
and all his race rose up before him in a mighty phantasmagoria--his
steel-shod, mail-clad race, the lawgiver and world-maker among the
families of men. He saw it dawn red-flickering across the dark
forests and sullen seas; he saw it blaze, bloody and red, to full and
triumphant noon; and down the shaded slope he saw the blood-red sands
dropping into night. And through it all he observed the Law, pitiless
and potent, ever unswerving and ever ordaining, greater than the motes
of men who fulfilled it or were crushed by it, even as it was greater
than he, his heart speaking for softness.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILDREN OF THE FROST ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The iron heel
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The iron heel

Author: Jack London

Release date: May 3, 2006 [eBook #1164]
                Most recently updated: October 29, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Donald Lainson and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRON HEEL ***

[Illustration]




The Iron Heel

by Jack London


Contents

 FOREWORD
 I. MY EAGLE
 II. CHALLENGES
 III. JACKSONS ARM
 IV. SLAVES OF THE MACHINE
 V. THE PHILOMATHS
 VI. ADUMBRATIONS
 VII. THE BISHOPS VISION
 VIII. THE MACHINE BREAKERS
 IX. THE MATHEMATICS OF A DREAM
 X. THE VORTEX
 XI. THE GREAT ADVENTURE
 XII. THE BISHOP
 XIII. THE GENERAL STRIKE
 XIV. THE BEGINNING OF THE END
 XV. LAST DAYS
 XVI. THE END
 XVII. THE SCARLET LIVERY
 XVIII. IN THE SHADOW OF SONOMA
 XIX. TRANSFORMATION
 XX. A LOST OLIGARCH
 XXI. THE ROARING ABYSMAL BEAST
 XXII. THE CHICAGO COMMUNE
 XXIII. THE PEOPLE OF THE ABYSS
 XXIV. NIGHTMARE
 XXV. THE TERRORISTS




At first, this Earth, a stage so gloomed with woe
    You almost sicken at the shifting of the scenes.
And yet be patient. Our Playwright may show
    In some fifth act what this Wild Drama means.




THE IRON HEEL




FOREWORD


It cannot be said that the Everhard Manuscript is an important
historical document. To the historian it bristles with errorsnot
errors of fact, but errors of interpretation. Looking back across the
seven centuries that have lapsed since Avis Everhard completed her
manuscript, events, and the bearings of events, that were confused and
veiled to her, are clear to us. She lacked perspective. She was too
close to the events she writes about. Nay, she was merged in the events
she has described.

Nevertheless, as a personal document, the Everhard Manuscript is of
inestimable value. But here again enter error of perspective, and
vitiation due to the bias of love. Yet we smile, indeed, and forgive
Avis Everhard for the heroic lines upon which she modelled her husband.
We know to-day that he was not so colossal, and that he loomed among
the events of his times less largely than the Manuscript would lead us
to believe.

We know that Ernest Everhard was an exceptionally strong man, but not
so exceptional as his wife thought him to be. He was, after all, but
one of a large number of heroes who, throughout the world, devoted
their lives to the Revolution; though it must be conceded that he did
unusual work, especially in his elaboration and interpretation of
working-class philosophy. Proletarian science and proletarian
philosophy were his phrases for it, and therein he shows the
provincialism of his minda defect, however, that was due to the times
and that none in that day could escape.

But to return to the Manuscript. Especially valuable is it in
communicating to us the _feel_ of those terrible times. Nowhere do we
find more vividly portrayed the psychology of the persons that lived in
that turbulent period embraced between the years 1912 and 1932their
mistakes and ignorance, their doubts and fears and misapprehensions,
their ethical delusions, their violent passions, their inconceivable
sordidness and selfishness. These are the things that are so hard for
us of this enlightened age to understand. History tells us that these
things were, and biology and psychology tell us why they were; but
history and biology and psychology do not make these things alive. We
accept them as facts, but we are left without sympathetic comprehension
of them.

This sympathy comes to us, however, as we peruse the Everhard
Manuscript. We enter into the minds of the actors in that long-ago
world-drama, and for the time being their mental processes are our
mental processes. Not alone do we understand Avis Everhards love for
her hero-husband, but we feel, as he felt, in those first days, the
vague and terrible loom of the Oligarchy. The Iron Heel (well named) we
feel descending upon and crushing mankind.

And in passing we note that that historic phrase, the Iron Heel,
originated in Ernest Everhards mind. This, we may say, is the one moot
question that this new-found document clears up. Previous to this, the
earliest-known use of the phrase occurred in the pamphlet, Ye Slaves,
written by George Milford and published in December, 1912. This George
Milford was an obscure agitator about whom nothing is known, save the
one additional bit of information gained from the Manuscript, which
mentions that he was shot in the Chicago Commune. Evidently he had
heard Ernest Everhard make use of the phrase in some public speech,
most probably when he was running for Congress in the fall of 1912.
From the Manuscript we learn that Everhard used the phrase at a private
dinner in the spring of 1912. This is, without discussion, the
earliest-known occasion on which the Oligarchy was so designated.

The rise of the Oligarchy will always remain a cause of secret wonder
to the historian and the philosopher. Other great historical events
have their place in social evolution. They were inevitable. Their
coming could have been predicted with the same certitude that
astronomers to-day predict the outcome of the movements of stars.
Without these other great historical events, social evolution could not
have proceeded. Primitive communism, chattel slavery, serf slavery, and
wage slavery were necessary stepping-stones in the evolution of
society. But it were ridiculous to assert that the Iron Heel was a
necessary stepping-stone. Rather, to-day, is it adjudged a step aside,
or a step backward, to the social tyrannies that made the early world a
hell, but that were as necessary as the Iron Heel was unnecessary.

Black as Feudalism was, yet the coming of it was inevitable. What else
than Feudalism could have followed upon the breakdown of that great
centralized governmental machine known as the Roman Empire? Not so,
however, with the Iron Heel. In the orderly procedure of social
evolution there was no place for it. It was not necessary, and it was
not inevitable. It must always remain the great curiosity of historya
whim, a fantasy, an apparition, a thing unexpected and undreamed; and
it should serve as a warning to those rash political theorists of
to-day who speak with certitude of social processes.

Capitalism was adjudged by the sociologists of the time to be the
culmination of bourgeois rule, the ripened fruit of the bourgeois
revolution. And we of to-day can but applaud that judgment. Following
upon Capitalism, it was held, even by such intellectual and
antagonistic giants as Herbert Spencer, that Socialism would come. Out
of the decay of self-seeking capitalism, it was held, would arise that
flower of the ages, the Brotherhood of Man. Instead of which, appalling
alike to us who look back and to those that lived at the time,
capitalism, rotten-ripe, sent forth that monstrous offshoot, the
Oligarchy.

Too late did the socialist movement of the early twentieth century
divine the coming of the Oligarchy. Even as it was divined, the
Oligarchy was therea fact established in blood, a stupendous and awful
reality. Nor even then, as the Everhard Manuscript well shows, was any
permanence attributed to the Iron Heel. Its overthrow was a matter of a
few short years, was the judgment of the revolutionists. It is true,
they realized that the Peasant Revolt was unplanned, and that the First
Revolt was premature; but they little realized that the Second Revolt,
planned and mature, was doomed to equal futility and more terrible
punishment.

It is apparent that Avis Everhard completed the Manuscript during the
last days of preparation for the Second Revolt; hence the fact that
there is no mention of the disastrous outcome of the Second Revolt. It
is quite clear that she intended the Manuscript for immediate
publication, as soon as the Iron Heel was overthrown, so that her
husband, so recently dead, should receive full credit for all that he
had ventured and accomplished. Then came the frightful crushing of the
Second Revolt, and it is probable that in the moment of danger, ere she
fled or was captured by the Mercenaries, she hid the Manuscript in the
hollow oak at Wake Robin Lodge.

Of Avis Everhard there is no further record. Undoubtedly she was
executed by the Mercenaries; and, as is well known, no record of such
executions was kept by the Iron Heel. But little did she realize, even
then, as she hid the Manuscript and prepared to flee, how terrible had
been the breakdown of the Second Revolt. Little did she realize that
the tortuous and distorted evolution of the next three centuries would
compel a Third Revolt and a Fourth Revolt, and many Revolts, all
drowned in seas of blood, ere the world-movement of labor should come
into its own. And little did she dream that for seven long centuries
the tribute of her love to Ernest Everhard would repose undisturbed in
the heart of the ancient oak of Wake Robin Lodge.

ANTHONY MEREDITH

ARDIS,

November 27, 419 B.O.M.




 THE IRON HEEL




CHAPTER I.
MY EAGLE


The soft summer wind stirs the redwoods, and Wild-Water ripples sweet
cadences over its mossy stones. There are butterflies in the sunshine,
and from everywhere arises the drowsy hum of bees. It is so quiet and
peaceful, and I sit here, and ponder, and am restless. It is the quiet
that makes me restless. It seems unreal. All the world is quiet, but it
is the quiet before the storm. I strain my ears, and all my senses, for
some betrayal of that impending storm. Oh, that it may not be
premature! That it may not be premature![1]

 [1] The Second Revolt was largely the work of Ernest Everhard, though
 he coperated, of course, with the European leaders. The capture and
 secret execution of Everhard was the great event of the spring of 1932
 A.D. Yet so thoroughly had he prepared for the revolt, that his
 fellow-conspirators were able, with little confusion or delay, to
 carry out his plans. It was after Everhards execution that his wife
 went to Wake Robin Lodge, a small bungalow in the Sonoma Hills of
 California.

Small wonder that I am restless. I think, and think, and I cannot cease
from thinking. I have been in the thick of life so long that I am
oppressed by the peace and quiet, and I cannot forbear from dwelling
upon that mad maelstrom of death and destruction so soon to burst
forth. In my ears are the cries of the stricken; and I can see, as I
have seen in the past,[2] all the marring and mangling of the sweet,
beautiful flesh, and the souls torn with violence from proud bodies and
hurled to God. Thus do we poor humans attain our ends, striving through
carnage and destruction to bring lasting peace and happiness upon the
earth.

 [2] Without doubt she here refers to the Chicago Commune.

And then I am lonely. When I do not think of what is to come, I think
of what has been and is no moremy Eagle, beating with tireless wings
the void, soaring toward what was ever his sun, the flaming ideal of
human freedom. I cannot sit idly by and wait the great event that is
his making, though he is not here to see. He devoted all the years of
his manhood to it, and for it he gave his life. It is his handiwork. He
made it.[3]

 [3] With all respect to Avis Everhard, it must be pointed out that
 Everhard was but one of many able leaders who planned the Second
 Revolt. And we to-day, looking back across the centuries, can safely
 say that even had he lived, the Second Revolt would not have been less
 calamitous in its outcome than it was.

And so it is, in this anxious time of waiting, that I shall write of my
husband. There is much light that I alone of all persons living can
throw upon his character, and so noble a character cannot be blazoned
forth too brightly. His was a great soul, and, when my love grows
unselfish, my chiefest regret is that he is not here to witness
to-morrows dawn. We cannot fail. He has built too stoutly and too
surely for that. Woe to the Iron Heel! Soon shall it be thrust back
from off prostrate humanity. When the word goes forth, the labor hosts
of all the world shall rise. There has been nothing like it in the
history of the world. The solidarity of labor is assured, and for the
first time will there be an international revolution wide as the world
is wide.[4]

 [4] The Second Revolt was truly international. It was a colossal
 plantoo colossal to be wrought by the genius of one man alone. Labor,
 in all the oligarchies of the world, was prepared to rise at the
 signal. Germany, Italy, France, and all Australasia were labor
 countriessocialist states. They were ready to lend aid to the
 revolution. Gallantly they did; and it was for this reason, when the
 Second Revolt was crushed, that they, too, were crushed by the united
 oligarchies of the world, their socialist governments being replaced
 by oligarchical governments.

You see, I am full of what is impending. I have lived it day and night
utterly and for so long that it is ever present in my mind. For that
matter, I cannot think of my husband without thinking of it. He was the
soul of it, and how can I possibly separate the two in thought?

As I have said, there is much light that I alone can throw upon his
character. It is well known that he toiled hard for liberty and
suffered sore. How hard he toiled and how greatly he suffered, I well
know; for I have been with him during these twenty anxious years and I
know his patience, his untiring effort, his infinite devotion to the
Cause for which, only two months gone, he laid down his life.

I shall try to write simply and to tell here how Ernest Everhard
entered my lifehow I first met him, how he grew until I became a part
of him, and the tremendous changes he wrought in my life. In this way
may you look at him through my eyes and learn him as I learned himin
all save the things too secret and sweet for me to tell.

It was in February, 1912, that I first met him, when, as a guest of my
fathers[5] at dinner, he came to our house in Berkeley. I cannot say
that my very first impression of him was favorable. He was one of many
at dinner, and in the drawing-room where we gathered and waited for all
to arrive, he made a rather incongruous appearance. It was preachers
night, as my father privately called it, and Ernest was certainly out
of place in the midst of the churchmen.

 [5] John Cunningham, Avis Everhards father, was a professor at the
 State University at Berkeley, California. His chosen field was
 physics, and in addition he did much original research and was greatly
 distinguished as a scientist. His chief contribution to science was
 his studies of the electron and his monumental work on the
 Identification of Matter and Energy, wherein he established, beyond
 cavil and for all time, that the ultimate unit of matter and the
 ultimate unit of force were identical. This idea had been earlier
 advanced, but not demonstrated, by Sir Oliver Lodge and other students
 in the new field of radio-activity.

In the first place, his clothes did not fit him. He wore a ready-made
suit of dark cloth that was ill adjusted to his body. In fact, no
ready-made suit of clothes ever could fit his body. And on this night,
as always, the cloth bulged with his muscles, while the coat between
the shoulders, what of the heavy shoulder-development, was a maze of
wrinkles. His neck was the neck of a prize-fighter,[6] thick and
strong. So this was the social philosopher and ex-horseshoer my father
had discovered, was my thought. And he certainly looked it with those
bulging muscles and that bull-throat. Immediately I classified hima
sort of prodigy, I thought, a Blind Tom[7] of the working class.

 [6] In that day it was the custom of men to compete for purses of
 money. They fought with their hands. When one was beaten into
 insensibility or killed, the survivor took the money.

 [7] This obscure reference applies to a blind negro musician who took
 the world by storm in the latter half of the nineteenth century of the
 Christian Era.

And then, when he shook hands with me! His handshake was firm and
strong, but he looked at me boldly with his black eyestoo boldly, I
thought. You see, I was a creature of environment, and at that time had
strong class instincts. Such boldness on the part of a man of my own
class would have been almost unforgivable. I know that I could not
avoid dropping my eyes, and I was quite relieved when I passed him on
and turned to greet Bishop Morehousea favorite of mine, a sweet and
serious man of middle age, Christ-like in appearance and goodness, and
a scholar as well.

But this boldness that I took to be presumption was a vital clew to the
nature of Ernest Everhard. He was simple, direct, afraid of nothing,
and he refused to waste time on conventional mannerisms. You pleased
me, he explained long afterward; and why should I not fill my eyes
with that which pleases me? I have said that he was afraid of nothing.
He was a natural aristocratand this in spite of the fact that he was
in the camp of the non-aristocrats. He was a superman, a blond beast
such as Nietzsche[8] has described, and in addition he was aflame with
democracy.

 [8] Friederich Nietzsche, the mad philosopher of the nineteenth
 century of the Christian Era, who caught wild glimpses of truth, but
 who, before he was done, reasoned himself around the great circle of
 human thought and off into madness.

In the interest of meeting the other guests, and what of my unfavorable
impression, I forgot all about the working-class philosopher, though
once or twice at table I noticed himespecially the twinkle in his eye
as he listened to the talk first of one minister and then of another.
He has humor, I thought, and I almost forgave him his clothes. But the
time went by, and the dinner went by, and he never opened his mouth to
speak, while the ministers talked interminably about the working class
and its relation to the church, and what the church had done and was
doing for it. I noticed that my father was annoyed because Ernest did
not talk. Once father took advantage of a lull and asked him to say
something; but Ernest shrugged his shoulders and with an I have
nothing to say went on eating salted almonds.

But father was not to be denied. After a while he said:

We have with us a member of the working class. I am sure that he can
present things from a new point of view that will be interesting and
refreshing. I refer to Mr. Everhard.

The others betrayed a well-mannered interest, and urged Ernest for a
statement of his views. Their attitude toward him was so broadly
tolerant and kindly that it was really patronizing. And I saw that
Ernest noted it and was amused. He looked slowly about him, and I saw
the glint of laughter in his eyes.

I am not versed in the courtesies of ecclesiastical controversy, he
began, and then hesitated with modesty and indecision.

Go on, they urged, and Dr. Hammerfield said: We do not mind the
truth that is in any man. If it is sincere, he amended.

Then you separate sincerity from truth? Ernest laughed quickly.

Dr. Hammerfield gasped, and managed to answer, The best of us may be
mistaken, young man, the best of us.

Ernests manner changed on the instant. He became another man.

All right, then, he answered; and let me begin by saying that you
are all mistaken. You know nothing, and worse than nothing, about the
working class. Your sociology is as vicious and worthless as is your
method of thinking.

It was not so much what he said as how he said it. I roused at the
first sound of his voice. It was as bold as his eyes. It was a
clarion-call that thrilled me. And the whole table was aroused, shaken
alive from monotony and drowsiness.

What is so dreadfully vicious and worthless in our method of thinking,
young man? Dr. Hammerfield demanded, and already there was something
unpleasant in his voice and manner of utterance.

You are metaphysicians. You can prove anything by metaphysics; and
having done so, every metaphysician can prove every other metaphysician
wrongto his own satisfaction. You are anarchists in the realm of
thought. And you are mad cosmos-makers. Each of you dwells in a cosmos
of his own making, created out of his own fancies and desires. You do
not know the real world in which you live, and your thinking has no
place in the real world except in so far as it is phenomena of mental
aberration.

Do you know what I was reminded of as I sat at table and listened to
you talk and talk? You reminded me for all the world of the scholastics
of the Middle Ages who gravely and learnedly debated the absorbing
question of how many angels could dance on the point of a needle. Why,
my dear sirs, you are as remote from the intellectual life of the
twentieth century as an Indian medicine-man making incantation in the
primeval forest ten thousand years ago.

As Ernest talked he seemed in a fine passion; his face glowed, his eyes
snapped and flashed, and his chin and jaw were eloquent with
aggressiveness. But it was only a way he had. It always aroused people.
His smashing, sledge-hammer manner of attack invariably made them
forget themselves. And they were forgetting themselves now. Bishop
Morehouse was leaning forward and listening intently. Exasperation and
anger were flushing the face of Dr. Hammerfield. And others were
exasperated, too, and some were smiling in an amused and superior way.
As for myself, I found it most enjoyable. I glanced at father, and I
was afraid he was going to giggle at the effect of this human bombshell
he had been guilty of launching amongst us.

Your terms are rather vague, Dr. Hammerfield interrupted. Just
precisely what do you mean when you call us metaphysicians?

I call you metaphysicians because you reason metaphysically, Ernest
went on. Your method of reasoning is the opposite to that of science.
There is no validity to your conclusions. You can prove everything and
nothing, and no two of you can agree upon anything. Each of you goes
into his own consciousness to explain himself and the universe. As well
may you lift yourselves by your own bootstraps as to explain
consciousness by consciousness.

I do not understand, Bishop Morehouse said. It seems to me that all
things of the mind are metaphysical. That most exact and convincing of
all sciences, mathematics, is sheerly metaphysical. Each and every
thought-process of the scientific reasoner is metaphysical. Surely you
will agree with me?

As you say, you do not understand, Ernest replied. The metaphysician
reasons deductively out of his own subjectivity. The scientist reasons
inductively from the facts of experience. The metaphysician reasons
from theory to facts, the scientist reasons from facts to theory. The
metaphysician explains the universe by himself, the scientist explains
himself by the universe.

Thank God we are not scientists, Dr. Hammerfield murmured
complacently.

What are you then? Ernest demanded.

Philosophers.

There you go, Ernest laughed. You have left the real and solid earth
and are up in the air with a word for a flying machine. Pray come down
to earth and tell me precisely what you do mean by philosophy.

Philosophy is (Dr. Hammerfield paused and cleared his
throat)something that cannot be defined comprehensively except to
such minds and temperaments as are philosophical. The narrow scientist
with his nose in a test-tube cannot understand philosophy.

Ernest ignored the thrust. It was always his way to turn the point back
upon an opponent, and he did it now, with a beaming brotherliness of
face and utterance.

Then you will undoubtedly understand the definition I shall now make
of philosophy. But before I make it, I shall challenge you to point out
error in it or to remain a silent metaphysician. Philosophy is merely
the widest science of all. Its reasoning method is the same as that of
any particular science and of all particular sciences. And by that same
method of reasoning, the inductive method, philosophy fuses all
particular sciences into one great science. As Spencer says, the data
of any particular science are partially unified knowledge. Philosophy
unifies the knowledge that is contributed by all the sciences.
Philosophy is the science of science, the master science, if you
please. How do you like my definition?

Very creditable, very creditable, Dr. Hammerfield muttered lamely.

But Ernest was merciless.

Remember, he warned, my definition is fatal to metaphysics. If you
do not now point out a flaw in my definition, you are disqualified
later on from advancing metaphysical arguments. You must go through
life seeking that flaw and remaining metaphysically silent until you
have found it.

Ernest waited. The silence was painful. Dr. Hammerfield was pained. He
was also puzzled. Ernests sledge-hammer attack disconcerted him. He
was not used to the simple and direct method of controversy. He looked
appealingly around the table, but no one answered for him. I caught
father grinning into his napkin.

There is another way of disqualifying the metaphysicians, Ernest
said, when he had rendered Dr. Hammerfields discomfiture complete.
Judge them by their works. What have they done for mankind beyond the
spinning of airy fancies and the mistaking of their own shadows for
gods? They have added to the gayety of mankind, I grant; but what
tangible good have they wrought for mankind? They philosophized, if you
will pardon my misuse of the word, about the heart as the seat of the
emotions, while the scientists were formulating the circulation of the
blood. They declaimed about famine and pestilence as being scourges of
God, while the scientists were building granaries and draining cities.
They builded gods in their own shapes and out of their own desires,
while the scientists were building roads and bridges. They were
describing the earth as the centre of the universe, while the
scientists were discovering America and probing space for the stars and
the laws of the stars. In short, the metaphysicians have done nothing,
absolutely nothing, for mankind. Step by step, before the advance of
science, they have been driven back. As fast as the ascertained facts
of science have overthrown their subjective explanations of things,
they have made new subjective explanations of things, including
explanations of the latest ascertained facts. And this, I doubt not,
they will go on doing to the end of time. Gentlemen, a metaphysician is
a medicine man. The difference between you and the Eskimo who makes a
fur-clad blubber-eating god is merely a difference of several thousand
years of ascertained facts. That is all.

Yet the thought of Aristotle ruled Europe for twelve centuries, Dr.
Ballingford announced pompously. And Aristotle was a metaphysician.

Dr. Ballingford glanced around the table and was rewarded by nods and
smiles of approval.

Your illustration is most unfortunate, Ernest replied. You refer to
a very dark period in human history. In fact, we call that period the
Dark Ages. A period wherein science was raped by the metaphysicians,
wherein physics became a search for the Philosophers Stone, wherein
chemistry became alchemy, and astronomy became astrology. Sorry the
domination of Aristotles thought!

Dr. Ballingford looked pained, then he brightened up and said:

Granted this horrible picture you have drawn, yet you must confess
that metaphysics was inherently potent in so far as it drew humanity
out of this dark period and on into the illumination of the succeeding
centuries.

Metaphysics had nothing to do with it, Ernest retorted.

What? Dr. Hammerfield cried. It was not the thinking and the
speculation that led to the voyages of discovery?

Ah, my dear sir, Ernest smiled, I thought you were disqualified. You
have not yet picked out the flaw in my definition of philosophy. You
are now on an unsubstantial basis. But it is the way of the
metaphysicians, and I forgive you. No, I repeat, metaphysics had
nothing to do with it. Bread and butter, silks and jewels, dollars and
cents, and, incidentally, the closing up of the overland trade-routes
to India, were the things that caused the voyages of discovery. With
the fall of Constantinople, in 1453, the Turks blocked the way of the
caravans to India. The traders of Europe had to find another route.
Here was the original cause for the voyages of discovery. Columbus
sailed to find a new route to the Indies. It is so stated in all the
history books. Incidentally, new facts were learned about the nature,
size, and form of the earth, and the Ptolemaic system went glimmering.

Dr. Hammerfield snorted.

You do not agree with me? Ernest queried. Then wherein am I wrong?

I can only reaffirm my position, Dr. Hammerfield retorted tartly. It
is too long a story to enter into now.

No story is too long for the scientist, Ernest said sweetly. That is
why the scientist gets to places. That is why he got to America.

I shall not describe the whole evening, though it is a joy to me to
recall every moment, every detail, of those first hours of my coming to
know Ernest Everhard.

Battle royal raged, and the ministers grew red-faced and excited,
especially at the moments when Ernest called them romantic
philosophers, shadow-projectors, and similar things. And always he
checked them back to facts. The fact, man, the irrefragable fact! he
would proclaim triumphantly, when he had brought one of them a cropper.
He bristled with facts. He tripped them up with facts, ambuscaded them
with facts, bombarded them with broadsides of facts.

You seem to worship at the shrine of fact, Dr. Hammerfield taunted
him.

There is no God but Fact, and Mr. Everhard is its prophet, Dr.
Ballingford paraphrased.

Ernest smilingly acquiesced.

Im like the man from Texas, he said. And, on being solicited, he
explained. You see, the man from Missouri always says, Youve got to
show me. But the man from Texas says, Youve got to put it in my
hand. From which it is apparent that he is no metaphysician.

Another time, when Ernest had just said that the metaphysical
philosophers could never stand the test of truth, Dr. Hammerfield
suddenly demanded:

What is the test of truth, young man? Will you kindly explain what has
so long puzzled wiser heads than yours?

Certainly, Ernest answered. His cocksureness irritated them. The
wise heads have puzzled so sorely over truth because they went up into
the air after it. Had they remained on the solid earth, they would have
found it easily enoughay, they would have found that they themselves
were precisely testing truth with every practical act and thought of
their lives.

The test, the test, Dr. Hammerfield repeated impatiently. Never mind
the preamble. Give us that which we have sought so longthe test of
truth. Give it us, and we will be as gods.

There was an impolite and sneering scepticism in his words and manner
that secretly pleased most of them at the table, though it seemed to
bother Bishop Morehouse.

Dr. Jordan[9] has stated it very clearly, Ernest said. His test of
truth is: Will it work? Will you trust your life to it?

 [9] A noted educator of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
 centuries of the Christian Era. He was president of the Stanford
 University, a private benefaction of the times.

Pish! Dr. Hammerfield sneered. You have not taken Bishop
Berkeley[10] into account. He has never been answered.

 [10] An idealistic monist who long puzzled the philosophers of that
 time with his denial of the existence of matter, but whose clever
 argument was finally demolished when the new empiric facts of science
 were philosophically generalized.

The noblest metaphysician of them all, Ernest laughed. But your
example is unfortunate. As Berkeley himself attested, his metaphysics
didnt work.

Dr. Hammerfield was angry, righteously angry. It was as though he had
caught Ernest in a theft or a lie.

Young man, he trumpeted, that statement is on a par with all you
have uttered to-night. It is a base and unwarranted assumption.

I am quite crushed, Ernest murmured meekly. Only I dont know what
hit me. Youll have to put it in my hand, Doctor.

I will, I will, Dr. Hammerfield spluttered. How do you know? You do
not know that Bishop Berkeley attested that his metaphysics did not
work. You have no proof. Young man, they have always worked.

I take it as proof that Berkeleys metaphysics did not work, because
Ernest paused calmly for a moment. Because Berkeley made an invariable
practice of going through doors instead of walls. Because he trusted
his life to solid bread and butter and roast beef. Because he shaved
himself with a razor that worked when it removed the hair from his
face.

But those are actual things! Dr. Hammerfield cried. Metaphysics is
of the mind.

And they workin the mind? Ernest queried softly.

The other nodded.

And even a multitude of angels can dance on the point of a needlein
the mind, Ernest went on reflectively. And a blubber-eating, fur-clad
god can exist and workin the mind; and there are no proofs to the
contraryin the mind. I suppose, Doctor, you live in the mind?

My mind to me a kingdom is, was the answer.

Thats another way of saying that you live up in the air. But you come
back to earth at meal-time, I am sure, or when an earthquake happens
along. Or, tell me, Doctor, do you have no apprehension in an
earthquake that that incorporeal body of yours will be hit by an
immaterial brick?

Instantly, and quite unconsciously, Dr. Hammerfields hand shot up to
his head, where a scar disappeared under the hair. It happened that
Ernest had blundered on an apposite illustration. Dr. Hammerfield had
been nearly killed in the Great Earthquake[11] by a falling chimney.
Everybody broke out into roars of laughter.

 [11] The Great Earthquake of 1906 A.D. that destroyed San Francisco.

Well? Ernest asked, when the merriment had subsided. Proofs to the
contrary?

And in the silence he asked again, Well? Then he added, Still well,
but not so well, that argument of yours.

But Dr. Hammerfield was temporarily crushed, and the battle raged on in
new directions. On point after point, Ernest challenged the ministers.
When they affirmed that they knew the working class, he told them
fundamental truths about the working class that they did not know, and
challenged them for disproofs. He gave them facts, always facts,
checked their excursions into the air, and brought them back to the
solid earth and its facts.

How the scene comes back to me! I can hear him now, with that war-note
in his voice, flaying them with his facts, each fact a lash that stung
and stung again. And he was merciless. He took no quarter,[12] and gave
none. I can never forget the flaying he gave them at the end:

 [12] This figure arises from the customs of the times. When, among men
 fighting to the death in their wild-animal way, a beaten man threw
 down his weapons, it was at the option of the victor to slay him or
 spare him.

You have repeatedly confessed to-night, by direct avowal or ignorant
statement, that you do not know the working class. But you are not to
be blamed for this. How can you know anything about the working class?
You do not live in the same locality with the working class. You herd
with the capitalist class in another locality. And why not? It is the
capitalist class that pays you, that feeds you, that puts the very
clothes on your backs that you are wearing to-night. And in return you
preach to your employers the brands of metaphysics that are especially
acceptable to them; and the especially acceptable brands are acceptable
because they do not menace the established order of society.

Here there was a stir of dissent around the table.

Oh, I am not challenging your sincerity, Ernest continued. You are
sincere. You preach what you believe. There lies your strength and your
valueto the capitalist class. But should you change your belief to
something that menaces the established order, your preaching would be
unacceptable to your employers, and you would be discharged. Every
little while some one or another of you is so discharged.[13] Am I not
right?

 [13] During this period there were many ministers cast out of the
 church for preaching unacceptable doctrine. Especially were they cast
 out when their preaching became tainted with socialism.

This time there was no dissent. They sat dumbly acquiescent, with the
exception of Dr. Hammerfield, who said:

It is when their thinking is wrong that they are asked to resign.

Which is another way of saying when their thinking is unacceptable,
Ernest answered, and then went on. So I say to you, go ahead and
preach and earn your pay, but for goodness sake leave the working
class alone. You belong in the enemys camp. You have nothing in common
with the working class. Your hands are soft with the work others have
performed for you. Your stomachs are round with the plenitude of
eating. (Here Dr. Ballingford winced, and every eye glanced at his
prodigious girth. It was said he had not seen his own feet in years.)
And your minds are filled with doctrines that are buttresses of the
established order. You are as much mercenaries (sincere mercenaries, I
grant) as were the men of the Swiss Guard.[14] Be true to your salt and
your hire; guard, with your preaching, the interests of your employers;
but do not come down to the working class and serve as false leaders.
You cannot honestly be in the two camps at once. The working class has
done without you. Believe me, the working class will continue to do
without you. And, furthermore, the working class can do better without
you than with you.

 [14] The hired foreign palace guards of Louis XVI, a king of France
 that was beheaded by his people.




CHAPTER II.
CHALLENGES


After the guests had gone, father threw himself into a chair and gave
vent to roars of Gargantuan laughter. Not since the death of my mother
had I known him to laugh so heartily.

Ill wager Dr. Hammerfield was never up against anything like it in
his life, he laughed. The courtesies of ecclesiastical controversy!
Did you notice how he began like a lambEverhard, I mean, and how
quickly he became a roaring lion? He has a splendidly disciplined mind.
He would have made a good scientist if his energies had been directed
that way.

I need scarcely say that I was deeply interested in Ernest Everhard. It
was not alone what he had said and how he had said it, but it was the
man himself. I had never met a man like him. I suppose that was why, in
spite of my twenty-four years, I had not married. I liked him; I had to
confess it to myself. And my like for him was founded on things beyond
intellect and argument. Regardless of his bulging muscles and
prize-fighters throat, he impressed me as an ingenuous boy. I felt
that under the guise of an intellectual swashbuckler was a delicate and
sensitive spirit. I sensed this, in ways I knew not, save that they
were my womans intuitions.

There was something in that clarion-call of his that went to my heart.
It still rang in my ears, and I felt that I should like to hear it
againand to see again that glint of laughter in his eyes that belied
the impassioned seriousness of his face. And there were further reaches
of vague and indeterminate feelings that stirred in me. I almost loved
him then, though I am confident, had I never seen him again, that the
vague feelings would have passed away and that I should easily have
forgotten him.

But I was not destined never to see him again. My fathers new-born
interest in sociology and the dinner parties he gave would not permit.
Father was not a sociologist. His marriage with my mother had been very
happy, and in the researches of his own science, physics, he had been
very happy. But when mother died, his own work could not fill the
emptiness. At first, in a mild way, he had dabbled in philosophy; then,
becoming interested, he had drifted on into economics and sociology. He
had a strong sense of justice, and he soon became fired with a passion
to redress wrong. It was with gratitude that I hailed these signs of a
new interest in life, though I little dreamed what the outcome would
be. With the enthusiasm of a boy he plunged excitedly into these new
pursuits, regardless of whither they led him.

He had been used always to the laboratory, and so it was that he turned
the dining room into a sociological laboratory. Here came to dinner all
sorts and conditions of men,scientists, politicians, bankers,
merchants, professors, labor leaders, socialists, and anarchists. He
stirred them to discussion, and analyzed their thoughts of life and
society.

He had met Ernest shortly prior to the preachers night. And after
the guests were gone, I learned how he had met him, passing down a
street at night and stopping to listen to a man on a soap-box who was
addressing a crowd of workingmen. The man on the box was Ernest. Not
that he was a mere soap-box orator. He stood high in the councils of
the socialist party, was one of the leaders, and was the acknowledged
leader in the philosophy of socialism. But he had a certain clear way
of stating the abstruse in simple language, was a born expositor and
teacher, and was not above the soap-box as a means of interpreting
economics to the workingmen.

My father stopped to listen, became interested, effected a meeting,
and, after quite an acquaintance, invited him to the ministers dinner.
It was after the dinner that father told me what little he knew about
him. He had been born in the working class, though he was a descendant
of the old line of Everhards that for over two hundred years had lived
in America.[1] At ten years of age he had gone to work in the mills,
and later he served his apprenticeship and became a horseshoer. He was
self-educated, had taught himself German and French, and at that time
was earning a meagre living by translating scientific and philosophical
works for a struggling socialist publishing house in Chicago. Also, his
earnings were added to by the royalties from the small sales of his own
economic and philosophic works.

 [1] The distinction between being native born and foreign born was
 sharp and invidious in those days.

This much I learned of him before I went to bed, and I lay long awake,
listening in memory to the sound of his voice. I grew frightened at my
thoughts. He was so unlike the men of my own class, so alien and so
strong. His masterfulness delighted me and terrified me, for my fancies
wantonly roved until I found myself considering him as a lover, as a
husband. I had always heard that the strength of men was an
irresistible attraction to women; but he was too strong. No! no! I
cried out. It is impossible, absurd! And on the morrow I awoke to
find in myself a longing to see him again. I wanted to see him
mastering men in discussion, the war-note in his voice; to see him, in
all his certitude and strength, shattering their complacency, shaking
them out of their ruts of thinking. What if he did swashbuckle? To use
his own phrase, it worked, it produced effects. And, besides, his
swashbuckling was a fine thing to see. It stirred one like the onset of
battle.

Several days passed during which I read Ernests books, borrowed from
my father. His written word was as his spoken word, clear and
convincing. It was its absolute simplicity that convinced even while
one continued to doubt. He had the gift of lucidity. He was the perfect
expositor. Yet, in spite of his style, there was much that I did not
like. He laid too great stress on what he called the class struggle,
the antagonism between labor and capital, the conflict of interest.

Father reported with glee Dr. Hammerfields judgment of Ernest, which
was to the effect that he was an insolent young puppy, made bumptious
by a little and very inadequate learning. Also, Dr. Hammerfield
declined to meet Ernest again.

But Bishop Morehouse turned out to have become interested in Ernest,
and was anxious for another meeting. A strong young man, he said;
and very much alive, very much alive. But he is too sure, too sure.

Ernest came one afternoon with father. The Bishop had already arrived,
and we were having tea on the veranda. Ernests continued presence in
Berkeley, by the way, was accounted for by the fact that he was taking
special courses in biology at the university, and also that he was hard
at work on a new book entitled Philosophy and Revolution.[2]

 [2] This book continued to be secretly printed throughout the three
 centuries of the Iron Heel. There are several copies of various
 editions in the National Library of Ardis.

The veranda seemed suddenly to have become small when Ernest arrived.
Not that he was so very largehe stood only five feet nine inches; but
that he seemed to radiate an atmosphere of largeness. As he stopped to
meet me, he betrayed a certain slight awkwardness that was strangely at
variance with his bold-looking eyes and his firm, sure hand that
clasped for a moment in greeting. And in that moment his eyes were just
as steady and sure. There seemed a question in them this time, and as
before he looked at me over long.

I have been reading your Working-class Philosophy, I said, and his
eyes lighted in a pleased way.

Of course, he answered, you took into consideration the audience to
which it was addressed.

I did, and it is because I did that I have a quarrel with you, I
challenged.

I, too, have a quarrel with you, Mr. Everhard, Bishop Morehouse said.

Ernest shrugged his shoulders whimsically and accepted a cup of tea.

The Bishop bowed and gave me precedence.

You foment class hatred, I said. I consider it wrong and criminal to
appeal to all that is narrow and brutal in the working class. Class
hatred is anti-social, and, it seems to me, anti-socialistic.

Not guilty, he answered. Class hatred is neither in the text nor in
the spirit of anything I have ever written.

Oh! I cried reproachfully, and reached for his book and opened it.

He sipped his tea and smiled at me while I ran over the pages.

Page one hundred and thirty-two, I read aloud: The class struggle,
therefore, presents itself in the present stage of social development
between the wage-paying and the wage-paid classes.

I looked at him triumphantly.

No mention there of class hatred, he smiled back.

But, I answered, you say class struggle.

A different thing from class hatred, he replied. And, believe me, we
foment no hatred. We say that the class struggle is a law of social
development. We are not responsible for it. We do not make the class
struggle. We merely explain it, as Newton explained gravitation. We
explain the nature of the conflict of interest that produces the class
struggle.

But there should be no conflict of interest! I cried.

I agree with you heartily, he answered. That is what we socialists
are trying to bring about,the abolition of the conflict of interest.
Pardon me. Let me read an extract. He took his book and turned back
several pages. Page one hundred and twenty-six: The cycle of class
struggles which began with the dissolution of rude, tribal communism
and the rise of private property will end with the passing of private
property in the means of social existence.

But I disagree with you, the Bishop interposed, his pale, ascetic
face betraying by a faint glow the intensity of his feelings. Your
premise is wrong. There is no such thing as a conflict of interest
between labor and capitalor, rather, there ought not to be.

Thank you, Ernest said gravely. By that last statement you have
given me back my premise.

But why should there be a conflict? the Bishop demanded warmly.

Ernest shrugged his shoulders. Because we are so made, I guess.

But we are not so made! cried the other.

Are you discussing the ideal man? Ernest asked, unselfish and
godlike, and so few in numbers as to be practically non-existent, or
are you discussing the common and ordinary average man?

The common and ordinary man, was the answer.

Who is weak and fallible, prone to error?

Bishop Morehouse nodded.

And petty and selfish?

Again he nodded.

Watch out! Ernest warned. I said selfish.

The average man IS selfish, the Bishop affirmed valiantly.

Wants all he can get?

Wants all he can gettrue but deplorable.

Then Ive got you. Ernests jaw snapped like a trap. Let me show
you. Here is a man who works on the street railways.

He couldnt work if it werent for capital, the Bishop interrupted.

True, and you will grant that capital would perish if there were no
labor to earn the dividends.

The Bishop was silent.

Wont you? Ernest insisted.

The Bishop nodded.

Then our statements cancel each other, Ernest said in a
matter-of-fact tone, and we are where we were. Now to begin again. The
workingmen on the street railway furnish the labor. The stockholders
furnish the capital. By the joint effort of the workingmen and the
capital, money is earned.[3] They divide between them this money that
is earned. Capitals share is called dividends. Labors share is
called wages.

 [3] In those days, groups of predatory individuals controlled all the
 means of transportation, and for the use of same levied toll upon the
 public.

Very good, the Bishop interposed. And there is no reason that the
division should not be amicable.

You have already forgotten what we had agreed upon, Ernest replied.
We agreed that the average man is selfish. He is the man that is. You
have gone up in the air and are arranging a division between the kind
of men that ought to be but are not. But to return to the earth, the
workingman, being selfish, wants all he can get in the division. The
capitalist, being selfish, wants all he can get in the division. When
there is only so much of the same thing, and when two men want all they
can get of the same thing, there is a conflict of interest between
labor and capital. And it is an irreconcilable conflict. As long as
workingmen and capitalists exist, they will continue to quarrel over
the division. If you were in San Francisco this afternoon, youd have
to walk. There isnt a street car running.

Another strike?[4] the Bishop queried with alarm.

 [4] These quarrels were very common in those irrational and anarchic
 times. Sometimes the laborers refused to work. Sometimes the
 capitalists refused to let the laborers work. In the violence and
 turbulence of such disagreements much property was destroyed and many
 lives lost. All this is inconceivable to usas inconceivable as
 another custom of that time, namely, the habit the men of the lower
 classes had of breaking the furniture when they quarrelled with their
 wives.

Yes, theyre quarrelling over the division of the earnings of the
street railways.

Bishop Morehouse became excited.

It is wrong! he cried. It is so short-sighted on the part of the
workingmen. How can they hope to keep our sympathy

When we are compelled to walk, Ernest said slyly.

But Bishop Morehouse ignored him and went on:

Their outlook is too narrow. Men should be men, not brutes. There will
be violence and murder now, and sorrowing widows and orphans. Capital
and labor should be friends. They should work hand in hand and to their
mutual benefit.

Ah, now you are up in the air again, Ernest remarked dryly. Come
back to earth. Remember, we agreed that the average man is selfish.

But he ought not to be! the Bishop cried.

And there I agree with you, was Ernests rejoinder. He ought not to
be selfish, but he will continue to be selfish as long as he lives in a
social system that is based on pig-ethics.

The Bishop was aghast, and my father chuckled.

Yes, pig-ethics, Ernest went on remorselessly. That is the meaning
of the capitalist system. And that is what your church is standing for,
what you are preaching for every time you get up in the pulpit.
Pig-ethics! There is no other name for it.

Bishop Morehouse turned appealingly to my father, but he laughed and
nodded his head.

Im afraid Mr. Everhard is right, he said. _Laissez-faire_, the
let-alone policy of each for himself and devil take the hindmost. As
Mr. Everhard said the other night, the function you churchmen perform
is to maintain the established order of society, and society is
established on that foundation.

But that is not the teaching of Christ! cried the Bishop.

The Church is not teaching Christ these days, Ernest put in quickly.
That is why the workingmen will have nothing to do with the Church.
The Church condones the frightful brutality and savagery with which the
capitalist class treats the working class.

The Church does not condone it, the Bishop objected.

The Church does not protest against it, Ernest replied. And in so
far as the Church does not protest, it condones, for remember the
Church is supported by the capitalist class.

I had not looked at it in that light, the Bishop said naively. You
must be wrong. I know that there is much that is sad and wicked in this
world. I know that the Church has lost thewhat you call the
proletariat.[5]

 [5] _Proletariat:_ Derived originally from the Latin _proletarii_, the
 name given in the census of Servius Tullius to those who were of value
 to the state only as the rearers of offspring (_proles_); in other
 words, they were of no importance either for wealth, or position, or
 exceptional ability.

You never had the proletariat, Ernest cried. The proletariat has
grown up outside the Church and without the Church.

I do not follow you, the Bishop said faintly.

Then let me explain. With the introduction of machinery and the
factory system in the latter part of the eighteenth century, the great
mass of the working people was separated from the land. The old system
of labor was broken down. The working people were driven from their
villages and herded in factory towns. The mothers and children were put
to work at the new machines. Family life ceased. The conditions were
frightful. It is a tale of blood.

I know, I know, Bishop Morehouse interrupted with an agonized
expression on his face. It was terrible. But it occurred a century and
a half ago.

And there, a century and a half ago, originated the modern
proletariat, Ernest continued. And the Church ignored it. While a
slaughter-house was made of the nation by the capitalist, the Church
was dumb. It did not protest, as to-day it does not protest. As Austin
Lewis[6] says, speaking of that time, those to whom the command Feed
my lambs had been given, saw those lambs sold into slavery and worked
to death without a protest.[7] The Church was dumb, then, and before I
go on I want you either flatly to agree with me or flatly to disagree
with me. Was the Church dumb then?

 [6] Candidate for Governor of California on the Socialist ticket in
 the fall election of 1906 Christian Era. An Englishman by birth, a
 writer of many books on political economy and philosophy, and one of
 the Socialist leaders of the times.

 [7] There is no more horrible page in history than the treatment of
 the child and women slaves in the English factories in the latter half
 of the eighteenth century of the Christian Era. In such industrial
 hells arose some of the proudest fortunes of that day.

Bishop Morehouse hesitated. Like Dr. Hammerfield, he was unused to this
fierce infighting, as Ernest called it.

The history of the eighteenth century is written, Ernest prompted.
If the Church was not dumb, it will be found not dumb in the books.

I am afraid the Church was dumb, the Bishop confessed.

And the Church is dumb to-day.

There I disagree, said the Bishop.

Ernest paused, looked at him searchingly, and accepted the challenge.

All right, he said. Let us see. In Chicago there are women who toil
all the week for ninety cents. Has the Church protested?

This is news to me, was the answer. Ninety cents per week! It is
horrible!

Has the Church protested? Ernest insisted.

The Church does not know. The Bishop was struggling hard.

Yet the command to the Church was, Feed my lambs, Ernest sneered.
And then, the next moment, Pardon my sneer, Bishop. But can you wonder
that we lose patience with you? When have you protested to your
capitalistic congregations at the working of children in the Southern
cotton mills?[8] Children, six and seven years of age, working every
night at twelve-hour shifts? They never see the blessed sunshine. They
die like flies. The dividends are paid out of their blood. And out of
the dividends magnificent churches are builded in New England, wherein
your kind preaches pleasant platitudes to the sleek, full-bellied
recipients of those dividends.

 [8] Everhard might have drawn a better illustration from the Southern
 Churchs outspoken defence of chattel slavery prior to what is known
 as the War of the Rebellion. Several such illustrations, culled from
 the documents of the times, are here appended. In 1835 A.D., the
 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church resolved that: _slavery
 is recognized in both the Old and the New Testaments, and is not
 condemned by the authority of God._ The Charleston Baptist
 Association issued the following, in an address, in 1835 A.D.: _The
 right of masters to dispose of the time of their slaves has been
 distinctly recognized by the Creator of all things, who is surely at
 liberty to vest the right of property over any object whomsoever He
 pleases._ The Rev. E. D. Simon, Doctor of Divinity and professor in
 the Randolph-Macon Methodist College of Virginia, wrote: _Extracts
 from Holy Writ unequivocally assert the right of property in slaves,
 together with the usual incidents to that right. The right to buy and
 sell is clearly stated. Upon the whole, then, whether we consult the
 Jewish policy instituted by God himself, or the uniform opinion and
 practice of mankind in all ages, or the injunctions of the New
 Testament and the moral law, we are brought to the conclusion that
 slavery is not immoral. Having established the point that the first
 African slaves were legally brought into bondage, the right to detain
 their children in bondage follows as an indispensable consequence.
 Thus we see that the slavery that exists in America was founded in
 right._
    It is not at all remarkable that this same note should have been
    struck by the Church a generation or so later in relation to the
    defence of capitalistic property. In the great museum at Asgard
    there is a book entitled Essays in Application, written by Henry
    van Dyke. The book was published in 1905 of the Christian Era. From
    what we can make out, Van Dyke must have been a churchman. The book
    is a good example of what Everhard would have called bourgeois
    thinking. Note the similarity between the utterance of the
    Charleston Baptist Association quoted above, and the following
    utterance of Van Dyke seventy years later: _The Bible teaches that
    God owns the world. He distributes to every man according to His
    own good pleasure, conformably to general laws._

I did not know, the Bishop murmured faintly. His face was pale, and
he seemed suffering from nausea.

Then you have not protested?

The Bishop shook his head.

Then the Church is dumb to-day, as it was in the eighteenth century?

The Bishop was silent, and for once Ernest forbore to press the point.

And do not forget, whenever a churchman does protest, that he is
discharged.

I hardly think that is fair, was the objection.

Will you protest? Ernest demanded.

Show me evils, such as you mention, in our own community, and I will
protest.

Ill show you, Ernest said quietly. I am at your disposal. I will
take you on a journey through hell.

And I shall protest. The Bishop straightened himself in his chair,
and over his gentle face spread the harshness of the warrior. The
Church shall not be dumb!

You will be discharged, was the warning.

I shall prove the contrary, was the retort. I shall prove, if what
you say is so, that the Church has erred through ignorance. And,
furthermore, I hold that whatever is horrible in industrial society is
due to the ignorance of the capitalist class. It will mend all that is
wrong as soon as it receives the message. And this message it shall be
the duty of the Church to deliver.

Ernest laughed. He laughed brutally, and I was driven to the Bishops
defence.

Remember, I said, you see but one side of the shield. There is much
good in us, though you give us credit for no good at all. Bishop
Morehouse is right. The industrial wrong, terrible as you say it is, is
due to ignorance. The divisions of society have become too widely
separated.

The wild Indian is not so brutal and savage as the capitalist class,
he answered; and in that moment I hated him.

You do not know us, I answered. We are not brutal and savage.

Prove it, he challenged.

How can I prove it . . . to you? I was growing angry.

He shook his head. I do not ask you to prove it to me. I ask you to
prove it to yourself.

I know, I said.

You know nothing, was his rude reply.

There, there, children, father said soothingly.

I dont care I began indignantly, but Ernest interrupted.

I understand you have money, or your father has, which is the same
thingmoney invested in the Sierra Mills.

What has that to do with it? I cried.

Nothing much, he began slowly, except that the gown you wear is
stained with blood. The food you eat is a bloody stew. The blood of
little children and of strong men is dripping from your very
roof-beams. I can close my eyes, now, and hear it drip, drop, drip,
drop, all about me.

And suiting the action to the words, he closed his eyes and leaned back
in his chair. I burst into tears of mortification and hurt vanity. I
had never been so brutally treated in my life. Both the Bishop and my
father were embarrassed and perturbed. They tried to lead the
conversation away into easier channels; but Ernest opened his eyes,
looked at me, and waved them aside. His mouth was stern, and his eyes
too; and in the latter there was no glint of laughter. What he was
about to say, what terrible castigation he was going to give me, I
never knew; for at that moment a man, passing along the sidewalk,
stopped and glanced in at us. He was a large man, poorly dressed, and
on his back was a great load of rattan and bamboo stands, chairs, and
screens. He looked at the house as if debating whether or not he should
come in and try to sell some of his wares.

That mans name is Jackson, Ernest said.

With that strong body of his he should be at work, and not
peddling,[9] I answered curtly.

 [9] In that day there were many thousands of these poor merchants
 called _pedlers_. They carried their whole stock in trade from door to
 door. It was a most wasteful expenditure of energy. Distribution was
 as confused and irrational as the whole general system of society.

Notice the sleeve of his left arm, Ernest said gently.

I looked, and saw that the sleeve was empty.

It was some of the blood from that arm that I heard dripping from your
roof-beams, Ernest said with continued gentleness. He lost his arm in
the Sierra Mills, and like a broken-down horse you turned him out on
the highway to die. When I say you, I mean the superintendent and the
officials that you and the other stockholders pay to manage the mills
for you. It was an accident. It was caused by his trying to save the
company a few dollars. The toothed drum of the picker caught his arm.
He might have let the small flint that he saw in the teeth go through.
It would have smashed out a double row of spikes. But he reached for
the flint, and his arm was picked and clawed to shreds from the finger
tips to the shoulder. It was at night. The mills were working overtime.
They paid a fat dividend that quarter. Jackson had been working many
hours, and his muscles had lost their resiliency and snap. They made
his movements a bit slow. That was why the machine caught him. He had a
wife and three children.

And what did the company do for him? I asked.

Nothing. Oh, yes, they did do something. They successfully fought the
damage suit he brought when he came out of hospital. The company
employs very efficient lawyers, you know.

You have not told the whole story, I said with conviction. Or else
you do not know the whole story. Maybe the man was insolent.

Insolent! Ha! ha! His laughter was Mephistophelian. Great God!
Insolent! And with his arm chewed off! Nevertheless he was a meek and
lowly servant, and there is no record of his having been insolent.

But the courts, I urged. The case would not have been decided
against him had there been no more to the affair than you have
mentioned.

Colonel Ingram is leading counsel for the company. He is a shrewd
lawyer. Ernest looked at me intently for a moment, then went on. Ill
tell you what you do, Miss Cunningham. You investigate Jacksons case.

I had already determined to, I said coldly.

All right, he beamed good-naturedly, and Ill tell you where to find
him. But I tremble for you when I think of all you are to prove by
Jacksons arm.

And so it came about that both the Bishop and I accepted Ernests
challenges. They went away together, leaving me smarting with a sense
of injustice that had been done me and my class. The man was a beast. I
hated him, then, and consoled myself with the thought that his behavior
was what was to be expected from a man of the working class.




CHAPTER III.
JACKSONS ARM


Little did I dream the fateful part Jacksons arm was to play in my
life. Jackson himself did not impress me when I hunted him out. I found
him in a crazy, ramshackle[1] house down near the bay on the edge of
the marsh. Pools of stagnant water stood around the house, their
surfaces covered with a green and putrid-looking scum, while the stench
that arose from them was intolerable.

 [1] An adjective descriptive of ruined and dilapidated houses in which
 great numbers of the working people found shelter in those days. They
 invariably paid rent, and, considering the value of such houses,
 enormous rent, to the landlords.

I found Jackson the meek and lowly man he had been described. He was
making some sort of rattan-work, and he toiled on stolidly while I
talked with him. But in spite of his meekness and lowliness, I fancied
I caught the first note of a nascent bitterness in him when he said:

They might a-given me a job as watchman,[2] anyway.

 [2] In those days thievery was incredibly prevalent. Everybody stole
 property from everybody else. The lords of society stole legally or
 else legalized their stealing, while the poorer classes stole
 illegally. Nothing was safe unless guarded. Enormous numbers of men
 were employed as watchmen to protect property. The houses of the
 well-to-do were a combination of safe deposit vault and fortress. The
 appropriation of the personal belongings of others by our own children
 of to-day is looked upon as a rudimentary survival of the
 theft-characteristic that in those early times was universal.

I got little out of him. He struck me as stupid, and yet the deftness
with which he worked with his one hand seemed to belie his stupidity.
This suggested an idea to me.

How did you happen to get your arm caught in the machine? I asked.

He looked at me in a slow and pondering way, and shook his head. I
dont know. It just happened.

Carelessness? I prompted.

No, he answered, I aint for callin it that. I was workin
overtime, an I guess I was tired out some. I worked seventeen years in
them mills, an Ive took notice that most of the accidents happens
just before whistle-blow.[3] Im willin to bet that more accidents
happens in the hour before whistle-blow than in all the rest of the
day. A man aint so quick after workin steady for hours. Ive seen too
many of em cut up an gouged an chawed not to know.

 [3] The laborers were called to work and dismissed by savage,
 screaming, nerve-racking steam-whistles.

Many of them? I queried.

Hundreds an hundreds, an children, too.

With the exception of the terrible details, Jacksons story of his
accident was the same as that I had already heard. When I asked him if
he had broken some rule of working the machinery, he shook his head.

I chucked off the belt with my right hand, he said, an made a reach
for the flint with my left. I didnt stop to see if the belt was off. I
thought my right hand had done itonly it didnt. I reached quick, and
the belt wasnt all the way off. And then my arm was chewed off.

It must have been painful, I said sympathetically.

The crunchin of the bones wasnt nice, was his answer.

His mind was rather hazy concerning the damage suit. Only one thing was
clear to him, and that was that he had not got any damages. He had a
feeling that the testimony of the foremen and the superintendent had
brought about the adverse decision of the court. Their testimony, as he
put it, wasnt what it ought to have ben. And to them I resolved to
go.

One thing was plain, Jacksons situation was wretched. His wife was in
ill health, and he was unable to earn, by his rattan-work and peddling,
sufficient food for the family. He was back in his rent, and the oldest
boy, a lad of eleven, had started to work in the mills.

They might a-given me that watchmans job, were his last words as I
went away.

By the time I had seen the lawyer who had handled Jacksons case, and
the two foremen and the superintendent at the mills who had testified,
I began to feel that there was something after all in Ernests
contention.

He was a weak and inefficient-looking man, the lawyer, and at sight of
him I did not wonder that Jacksons case had been lost. My first
thought was that it had served Jackson right for getting such a lawyer.
But the next moment two of Ernests statements came flashing into my
consciousness: The company employs very efficient lawyers and
Colonel Ingram is a shrewd lawyer. I did some rapid thinking. It
dawned upon me that of course the company could afford finer legal
talent than could a workingman like Jackson. But this was merely a
minor detail. There was some very good reason, I was sure, why
Jacksons case had gone against him.

Why did you lose the case? I asked.

The lawyer was perplexed and worried for a moment, and I found it in my
heart to pity the wretched little creature. Then he began to whine. I
do believe his whine was congenital. He was a man beaten at birth. He
whined about the testimony. The witnesses had given only the evidence
that helped the other side. Not one word could he get out of them that
would have helped Jackson. They knew which side their bread was
buttered on. Jackson was a fool. He had been brow-beaten and confused
by Colonel Ingram. Colonel Ingram was brilliant at cross-examination.
He had made Jackson answer damaging questions.

How could his answers be damaging if he had the right on his side? I
demanded.

Whats right got to do with it? he demanded back. You see all those
books. He moved his hand over the array of volumes on the walls of his
tiny office. All my reading and studying of them has taught me that
law is one thing and right is another thing. Ask any lawyer. You go to
Sunday-school to learn what is right. But you go to those books to
learn . . . law.

Do you mean to tell me that Jackson had the right on his side and yet
was beaten? I queried tentatively. Do you mean to tell me that there
is no justice in Judge Caldwells court?

The little lawyer glared at me a moment, and then the belligerence
faded out of his face.

I hadnt a fair chance, he began whining again. They made a fool out
of Jackson and out of me, too. What chance had I? Colonel Ingram is a
great lawyer. If he wasnt great, would he have charge of the law
business of the Sierra Mills, of the Erston Land Syndicate, of the
Berkeley Consolidated, of the Oakland, San Leandro, and Pleasanton
Electric? Hes a corporation lawyer, and corporation lawyers are not
paid for being fools.[4] What do you think the Sierra Mills alone give
him twenty thousand dollars a year for? Because hes worth twenty
thousand dollars a year to them, thats what for. Im not worth that
much. If I was, I wouldnt be on the outside, starving and taking cases
like Jacksons. What do you think Id have got if Id won Jacksons
case?

 [4] The function of the corporation lawyer was to serve, by corrupt
 methods, the money-grabbing propensities of the corporations. It is on
 record that Theodore Roosevelt, at that time President of the United
 States, said in 1905 A.D., in his address at Harvard Commencement:
 _We all know that, as things actually are, many of the most
 influential and most highly remunerated members of the Bar in every
 centre of wealth, make it their special task to work out bold and
 ingenious schemes by which their wealthy clients, individual or
 corporate, can evade the laws which were made to regulate, in the
 interests of the public, the uses of great wealth._

Youd have robbed him, most probably, I answered.

Of course I would, he cried angrily. Ive got to live, havent
I?[5]

 [5] A typical illustration of the internecine strife that permeated
 all society. Men preyed upon one another like ravening wolves. The big
 wolves ate the little wolves, and in the social pack Jackson was one
 of the least of the little wolves.

He has a wife and children, I chided.

So have I a wife and children, he retorted. And theres not a soul
in this world except myself that cares whether they starve or not.

His face suddenly softened, and he opened his watch and showed me a
small photograph of a woman and two little girls pasted inside the
case.

There they are. Look at them. Weve had a hard time, a hard time. I
had hoped to send them away to the country if Id won Jacksons case.
Theyre not healthy here, but I cant afford to send them away.

When I started to leave, he dropped back into his whine.

I hadnt the ghost of a chance. Colonel Ingram and Judge Caldwell are
pretty friendly. Im not saying that if Id got the right kind of
testimony out of their witnesses on cross-examination, that friendship
would have decided the case. And yet I must say that Judge Caldwell did
a whole lot to prevent my getting that very testimony. Why, Judge
Caldwell and Colonel Ingram belong to the same lodge and the same club.
They live in the same neighborhoodone I cant afford. And their wives
are always in and out of each others houses. Theyre always having
whist parties and such things back and forth.

And yet you think Jackson had the right of it? I asked, pausing for
the moment on the threshold.

I dont think; I know it, was his answer. And at first I thought he
had some show, too. But I didnt tell my wife. I didnt want to
disappoint her. She had her heart set on a trip to the country hard
enough as it was.

Why did you not call attention to the fact that Jackson was trying to
save the machinery from being injured? I asked Peter Donnelly, one of
the foremen who had testified at the trial.

He pondered a long time before replying. Then he cast an anxious look
about him and said:

Because Ive a good wife an three of the sweetest children ye ever
laid eyes on, thats why.

I do not understand, I said.

In other words, because it wouldnt a-ben healthy, he answered.

You mean I began.

But he interrupted passionately.

I mean what I said. Its long years Ive worked in the mills. I began
as a little lad on the spindles. I worked up ever since. Its by hard
work I got to my present exalted position. Im a foreman, if you
please. An I doubt me if theres a man in the mills thatd put out a
hand to drag me from drownin. I used to belong to the union. But Ive
stayed by the company through two strikes. They called me scab.
Theres not a man among em to-day to take a drink with me if I asked
him. Dye see the scars on me head where I was struck with flying
bricks? There aint a child at the spindles but what would curse me
name. Me only friend is the company. Its not me duty, but me bread an
butter an the life of me children to stand by the mills. Thats why.

Was Jackson to blame? I asked.

He should a-got the damages. He was a good worker an never made
trouble.

Then you were not at liberty to tell the whole truth, as you had sworn
to do?

He shook his head.

The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? I said
solemnly.

Again his face became impassioned, and he lifted it, not to me, but to
heaven.

Id let me soul an body burn in everlastin hell for them children of
mine, was his answer.

Henry Dallas, the superintendent, was a vulpine-faced creature who
regarded me insolently and refused to talk. Not a word could I get from
him concerning the trial and his testimony. But with the other foreman
I had better luck. James Smith was a hard-faced man, and my heart sank
as I encountered him. He, too, gave me the impression that he was not a
free agent, and as we talked I began to see that he was mentally
superior to the average of his kind. He agreed with Peter Donnelly that
Jackson should have got damages, and he went farther and called the
action heartless and cold-blooded that had turned the worker adrift
after he had been made helpless by the accident. Also, he explained
that there were many accidents in the mills, and that the companys
policy was to fight to the bitter end all consequent damage suits.

It means hundreds of thousands a year to the stockholders, he said;
and as he spoke I remembered the last dividend that had been paid my
father, and the pretty gown for me and the books for him that had been
bought out of that dividend. I remembered Ernests charge that my gown
was stained with blood, and my flesh began to crawl underneath my
garments.

When you testified at the trial, you didnt point out that Jackson
received his accident through trying to save the machinery from
damage? I said.

No, I did not, was the answer, and his mouth set bitterly. I
testified to the effect that Jackson injured himself by neglect and
carelessness, and that the company was not in any way to blame or
liable.

Was it carelessness? I asked.

Call it that, or anything you want to call it. The fact is, a man gets
tired after hes been working for hours.

I was becoming interested in the man. He certainly was of a superior
kind.

You are better educated than most workingmen, I said.

I went through high school, he replied. I worked my way through
doing janitor-work. I wanted to go through the university. But my
father died, and I came to work in the mills.

I wanted to become a naturalist, he explained shyly, as though
confessing a weakness. I love animals. But I came to work in the
mills. When I was promoted to foreman I got married, then the family
came, and . . . well, I wasnt my own boss any more.

What do you mean by that? I asked.

I was explaining why I testified at the trial the way I didwhy I
followed instructions.

Whose instructions?

Colonel Ingram. He outlined the evidence I was to give.

And it lost Jacksons case for him.

He nodded, and the blood began to rise darkly in his face.

And Jackson had a wife and two children dependent on him.

I know, he said quietly, though his face was growing darker.

Tell me, I went on, was it easy to make yourself over from what you
were, say in high school, to the man you must have become to do such a
thing at the trial?

The suddenness of his outburst startled and frightened me. He ripped[6]
out a savage oath, and clenched his fist as though about to strike me.

 [6] It is interesting to note the virilities of language that were
 common speech in that day, as indicative of the life, red of claw and
 fang, that was then lived. Reference is here made, of course, not to
 the oath of Smith, but to the verb _ripped_ used by Avis Everhard.

I beg your pardon, he said the next moment. No, it was not easy. And
now I guess you can go away. Youve got all you wanted out of me. But
let me tell you this before you go. It wont do you any good to repeat
anything Ive said. Ill deny it, and there are no witnesses. Ill deny
every word of it; and if I have to, Ill do it under oath on the
witness stand.

After my interview with Smith I went to my fathers office in the
Chemistry Building and there encountered Ernest. It was quite
unexpected, but he met me with his bold eyes and firm hand-clasp, and
with that curious blend of his awkwardness and ease. It was as though
our last stormy meeting was forgotten; but I was not in the mood to
have it forgotten.

I have been looking up Jacksons case, I said abruptly.

He was all interested attention, and waited for me to go on, though I
could see in his eyes the certitude that my convictions had been
shaken.

He seems to have been badly treated, I confessed. IIthink some of
his blood is dripping from our roof-beams.

Of course, he answered. If Jackson and all his fellows were treated
mercifully, the dividends would not be so large.

I shall never be able to take pleasure in pretty gowns again, I
added.

I felt humble and contrite, and was aware of a sweet feeling that
Ernest was a sort of father confessor. Then, as ever after, his
strength appealed to me. It seemed to radiate a promise of peace and
protection.

Nor will you be able to take pleasure in sackcloth, he said gravely.
There are the jute mills, you know, and the same thing goes on there.
It goes on everywhere. Our boasted civilization is based upon blood,
soaked in blood, and neither you nor I nor any of us can escape the
scarlet stain. The men you talked withwho were they?

I told him all that had taken place.

And not one of them was a free agent, he said. They were all tied to
the merciless industrial machine. And the pathos of it and the tragedy
is that they are tied by their heartstrings. Their childrenalways the
young life that it is their instinct to protect. This instinct is
stronger than any ethic they possess. My father! He lied, he stole, he
did all sorts of dishonorable things to put bread into my mouth and
into the mouths of my brothers and sisters. He was a slave to the
industrial machine, and it stamped his life out, worked him to death.

But you, I interjected. You are surely a free agent.

Not wholly, he replied. I am not tied by my heartstrings. I am often
thankful that I have no children, and I dearly love children. Yet if I
married I should not dare to have any.

That surely is bad doctrine, I cried.

I know it is, he said sadly. But it is expedient doctrine. I am a
revolutionist, and it is a perilous vocation.

I laughed incredulously.

If I tried to enter your fathers house at night to steal his
dividends from the Sierra Mills, what would he do?

He sleeps with a revolver on the stand by the bed, I answered. He
would most probably shoot you.

And if I and a few others should lead a million and a half of men[7]
into the houses of all the well-to-do, there would be a great deal of
shooting, wouldnt there?

 [7] This reference is to the socialist vote cast in the United States
 in 1910. The rise of this vote clearly indicates the swift growth of
 the party of revolution. Its voting strength in the United States in
 1888 was 2068; in 1902, 127,713; in 1904, 435,040; in 1908, 1,108,427;
 and in 1910, 1,688,211.

Yes, but you are not doing that, I objected.

It is precisely what I am doing. And we intend to take, not the mere
wealth in the houses, but all the sources of that wealth, all the
mines, and railroads, and factories, and banks, and stores. That is the
revolution. It is truly perilous. There will be more shooting, I am
afraid, than even I dream of. But as I was saying, no one to-day is a
free agent. We are all caught up in the wheels and cogs of the
industrial machine. You found that you were, and that the men you
talked with were. Talk with more of them. Go and see Colonel Ingram.
Look up the reporters that kept Jacksons case out of the papers, and
the editors that run the papers. You will find them all slaves of the
machine.

A little later in our conversation I asked him a simple little question
about the liability of workingmen to accidents, and received a
statistical lecture in return.

It is all in the books, he said. The figures have been gathered, and
it has been proved conclusively that accidents rarely occur in the
first hours of the morning work, but that they increase rapidly in the
succeeding hours as the workers grow tired and slower in both their
muscular and mental processes.

Why, do you know that your father has three times as many chances for
safety of life and limb than has a working-man? He has. The
insurance[8] companies know. They will charge him four dollars and
twenty cents a year on a thousand-dollar accident policy, and for the
same policy they will charge a laborer fifteen dollars.

 [8] In the terrible wolf-struggle of those centuries, no man was
 permanently safe, no matter how much wealth he amassed. Out of fear
 for the welfare of their families, men devised the scheme of
 insurance. To us, in this intelligent age, such a device is laughably
 absurd and primitive. But in that age insurance was a very serious
 matter. The amusing part of it is that the funds of the insurance
 companies were frequently plundered and wasted by the very officials
 who were intrusted with the management of them.

And you? I asked; and in the moment of asking I was aware of a
solicitude that was something more than slight.

Oh, as a revolutionist, I have about eight chances to the workingmans
one of being injured or killed, he answered carelessly. The insurance
companies charge the highly trained chemists that handle explosives
eight times what they charge the workingmen. I dont think theyd
insure me at all. Why did you ask?

My eyes fluttered, and I could feel the blood warm in my face. It was
not that he had caught me in my solicitude, but that I had caught
myself, and in his presence.

Just then my father came in and began making preparations to depart
with me. Ernest returned some books he had borrowed, and went away
first. But just as he was going, he turned and said:

Oh, by the way, while you are ruining your own peace of mind and I am
ruining the Bishops, youd better look up Mrs. Wickson and Mrs.
Pertonwaithe. Their husbands, you know, are the two principal
stockholders in the Mills. Like all the rest of humanity, those two
women are tied to the machine, but they are so tied that they sit on
top of it.




CHAPTER IV.
SLAVES OF THE MACHINE


The more I thought of Jacksons arm, the more shaken I was. I was
confronted by the concrete. For the first time I was seeing life. My
university life, and study and culture, had not been real. I had
learned nothing but theories of life and society that looked all very
well on the printed page, but now I had seen life itself. Jacksons arm
was a fact of life. The fact, man, the irrefragable fact! of Ernests
was ringing in my consciousness.

It seemed monstrous, impossible, that our whole society was based upon
blood. And yet there was Jackson. I could not get away from him.
Constantly my thought swung back to him as the compass to the Pole. He
had been monstrously treated. His blood had not been paid for in order
that a larger dividend might be paid. And I knew a score of happy
complacent families that had received those dividends and by that much
had profited by Jacksons blood. If one man could be so monstrously
treated and society move on its way unheeding, might not many men be so
monstrously treated? I remembered Ernests women of Chicago who toiled
for ninety cents a week, and the child slaves of the Southern cotton
mills he had described. And I could see their wan white hands, from
which the blood had been pressed, at work upon the cloth out of which
had been made my gown. And then I thought of the Sierra Mills and the
dividends that had been paid, and I saw the blood of Jackson upon my
gown as well. Jackson I could not escape. Always my meditations led me
back to him.

Down in the depths of me I had a feeling that I stood on the edge of a
precipice. It was as though I were about to see a new and awful
revelation of life. And not I alone. My whole world was turning over.
There was my father. I could see the effect Ernest was beginning to
have on him. And then there was the Bishop. When I had last seen him he
had looked a sick man. He was at high nervous tension, and in his eyes
there was unspeakable horror. From the little I learned I knew that
Ernest had been keeping his promise of taking him through hell. But
what scenes of hell the Bishops eyes had seen, I knew not, for he
seemed too stunned to speak about them.

Once, the feeling strong upon me that my little world and all the world
was turning over, I thought of Ernest as the cause of it; and also I
thought, We were so happy and peaceful before he came! And the next
moment I was aware that the thought was a treason against truth, and
Ernest rose before me transfigured, the apostle of truth, with shining
brows and the fearlessness of one of Gods own angels, battling for the
truth and the right, and battling for the succor of the poor and lonely
and oppressed. And then there arose before me another figure, the
Christ! He, too, had taken the part of the lowly and oppressed, and
against all the established power of priest and pharisee. And I
remembered his end upon the cross, and my heart contracted with a pang
as I thought of Ernest. Was he, too, destined for a cross?he, with his
clarion call and war-noted voice, and all the fine mans vigor of him!

And in that moment I knew that I loved him, and that I was melting with
desire to comfort him. I thought of his life. A sordid, harsh, and
meagre life it must have been. And I thought of his father, who had
lied and stolen for him and been worked to death. And he himself had
gone into the mills when he was ten! All my heart seemed bursting with
desire to fold my arms around him, and to rest his head on my
breasthis head that must be weary with so many thoughts; and to give
him restjust restand easement and forgetfulness for a tender space.

I met Colonel Ingram at a church reception. Him I knew well and had
known well for many years. I trapped him behind large palms and rubber
plants, though he did not know he was trapped. He met me with the
conventional gayety and gallantry. He was ever a graceful man,
diplomatic, tactful, and considerate. And as for appearance, he was the
most distinguished-looking man in our society. Beside him even the
venerable head of the university looked tawdry and small.

And yet I found Colonel Ingram situated the same as the unlettered
mechanics. He was not a free agent. He, too, was bound upon the wheel.
I shall never forget the change in him when I mentioned Jacksons case.
His smiling good nature vanished like a ghost. A sudden, frightful
expression distorted his well-bred face. I felt the same alarm that I
had felt when James Smith broke out. But Colonel Ingram did not curse.
That was the slight difference that was left between the workingman and
him. He was famed as a wit, but he had no wit now. And, unconsciously,
this way and that he glanced for avenues of escape. But he was trapped
amid the palms and rubber trees.

Oh, he was sick of the sound of Jacksons name. Why had I brought the
matter up? He did not relish my joke. It was poor taste on my part, and
very inconsiderate. Did I not know that in his profession personal
feelings did not count? He left his personal feelings at home when he
went down to the office. At the office he had only professional
feelings.

Should Jackson have received damages? I asked.

Certainly, he answered. That is, personally, I have a feeling that
he should. But that has nothing to do with the legal aspects of the
case.

He was getting his scattered wits slightly in hand.

Tell me, has right anything to do with the law? I asked.

You have used the wrong initial consonant, he smiled in answer.

Might? I queried; and he nodded his head. And yet we are supposed to
get justice by means of the law?

That is the paradox of it, he countered. We do get justice.

You are speaking professionally now, are you not? I asked.

Colonel Ingram blushed, actually blushed, and again he looked anxiously
about him for a way of escape. But I blocked his path and did not offer
to move.

Tell me, I said, when one surrenders his personal feelings to his
professional feelings, may not the action be defined as a sort of
spiritual mayhem?

I did not get an answer. Colonel Ingram had ingloriously bolted,
overturning a palm in his flight.

Next I tried the newspapers. I wrote a quiet, restrained, dispassionate
account of Jacksons case. I made no charges against the men with whom
I had talked, nor, for that matter, did I even mention them. I gave the
actual facts of the case, the long years Jackson had worked in the
mills, his effort to save the machinery from damage and the consequent
accident, and his own present wretched and starving condition. The
three local newspapers rejected my communication, likewise did the two
weeklies.

I got hold of Percy Layton. He was a graduate of the university, had
gone in for journalism, and was then serving his apprenticeship as
reporter on the most influential of the three newspapers. He smiled
when I asked him the reason the newspapers suppressed all mention of
Jackson or his case.

Editorial policy, he said. We have nothing to do with that. Its up
to the editors.

But why is it policy? I asked.

Were all solid with the corporations, he answered. If you paid
advertising rates, you couldnt get any such matter into the papers. A
man who tried to smuggle it in would lose his job. You couldnt get it
in if you paid ten times the regular advertising rates.

How about your own policy? I questioned. It would seem your function
is to twist truth at the command of your employers, who, in turn, obey
the behests of the corporations.

I havent anything to do with that. He looked uncomfortable for the
moment, then brightened as he saw his way out. I, myself, do not write
untruthful things. I keep square all right with my own conscience. Of
course, theres lots thats repugnant in the course of the days work.
But then, you see, thats all part of the days work, he wound up
boyishly.

Yet you expect to sit at an editors desk some day and conduct a
policy.

Ill be case-hardened by that time, was his reply.

Since you are not yet case-hardened, tell me what you think right now
about the general editorial policy.

I dont think, he answered quickly. One cant kick over the ropes if
hes going to succeed in journalism. Ive learned that much, at any
rate.

And he nodded his young head sagely.

But the right? I persisted.

You dont understand the game. Of course its all right, because it
comes out all right, dont you see?

Delightfully vague, I murmured; but my heart was aching for the youth
of him, and I felt that I must either scream or burst into tears.

I was beginning to see through the appearances of the society in which
I had always lived, and to find the frightful realities that were
beneath. There seemed a tacit conspiracy against Jackson, and I was
aware of a thrill of sympathy for the whining lawyer who had
ingloriously fought his case. But this tacit conspiracy grew large. Not
alone was it aimed against Jackson. It was aimed against every
workingman who was maimed in the mills. And if against every man in the
mills, why not against every man in all the other mills and factories?
In fact, was it not true of all the industries?

And if this was so, then society was a lie. I shrank back from my own
conclusions. It was too terrible and awful to be true. But there was
Jackson, and Jacksons arm, and the blood that stained my gown and
dripped from my own roof-beams. And there were many Jacksonshundreds
of them in the mills alone, as Jackson himself had said. Jackson I
could not escape.

I saw Mr. Wickson and Mr. Pertonwaithe, the two men who held most of
the stock in the Sierra Mills. But I could not shake them as I had
shaken the mechanics in their employ. I discovered that they had an
ethic superior to that of the rest of society. It was what I may call
the aristocratic ethic or the master ethic.[1] They talked in large
ways of policy, and they identified policy and right. And to me they
talked in fatherly ways, patronizing my youth and inexperience. They
were the most hopeless of all I had encountered in my quest. They
believed absolutely that their conduct was right. There was no question
about it, no discussion. They were convinced that they were the
saviours of society, and that it was they who made happiness for the
many. And they drew pathetic pictures of what would be the sufferings
of the working class were it not for the employment that they, and they
alone, by their wisdom, provided for it.

 [1] Before Avis Everhard was born, John Stuart Mill, in his essay, _On
 Liberty_, wrote: Wherever there is an ascendant class, a large
 portion of the morality emanates from its class interests and its
 class feelings of superiority.

Fresh from these two masters, I met Ernest and related my experience.
He looked at me with a pleased expression, and said:

Really, this is fine. You are beginning to dig truth for yourself. It
is your own empirical generalization, and it is correct. No man in the
industrial machine is a free-will agent, except the large capitalist,
and he isnt, if youll pardon the Irishism.[2] You see, the masters
are quite sure that they are right in what they are doing. That is the
crowning absurdity of the whole situation. They are so tied by their
human nature that they cant do a thing unless they think it is right.
They must have a sanction for their acts.

 [2] Verbal contradictions, called _bulls_, were long an amiable
 weakness of the ancient Irish.

When they want to do a thing, in business of course, they must wait
till there arises in their brains, somehow, a religious, or ethical, or
scientific, or philosophic, concept that the thing is right. And then
they go ahead and do it, unwitting that one of the weaknesses of the
human mind is that the wish is parent to the thought. No matter what
they want to do, the sanction always comes. They are superficial
casuists. They are Jesuitical. They even see their way to doing wrong
that right may come of it. One of the pleasant and axiomatic fictions
they have created is that they are superior to the rest of mankind in
wisdom and efficiency. Therefrom comes their sanction to manage the
bread and butter of the rest of mankind. They have even resurrected the
theory of the divine right of kingscommercial kings in their case.[3]

 [3] The newspapers, in 1902 of that era, credited the president of the
 Anthracite Coal Trust, George F. Baer, with the enunciation of the
 following principle: _The rights and interests of the laboring man
 will be protected by the Christian men to whom God in His infinite
 wisdom has given the property interests of the country._

The weakness in their position lies in that they are merely business
men. They are not philosophers. They are not biologists nor
sociologists. If they were, of course all would be well. A business man
who was also a biologist and a sociologist would know, approximately,
the right thing to do for humanity. But, outside the realm of business,
these men are stupid. They know only business. They do not know mankind
nor society, and yet they set themselves up as arbiters of the fates of
the hungry millions and all the other millions thrown in. History, some
day, will have an excruciating laugh at their expense.

I was not surprised when I had my talk out with Mrs. Wickson and Mrs.
Pertonwaithe. They were society women.[4] Their homes were palaces.
They had many homes scattered over the country, in the mountains, on
lakes, and by the sea. They were tended by armies of servants, and
their social activities were bewildering. They patronized the
university and the churches, and the pastors especially bowed at their
knees in meek subservience.[5] They were powers, these two women, what
of the money that was theirs. The power of subsidization of thought was
theirs to a remarkable degree, as I was soon to learn under Ernests
tuition.

 [4] _Society_ is here used in a restricted sense, a common usage of
 the times to denote the gilded drones that did no labor, but only
 glutted themselves at the honey-vats of the workers. Neither the
 business men nor the laborers had time or opportunity for _society_.
 _Society_ was the creation of the idle rich who toiled not and who in
 this way played.

 [5] Bring on your tainted money, was the expressed sentiment of the
 Church during this period.

They aped their husbands, and talked in the same large ways about
policy, and the duties and responsibilities of the rich. They were
swayed by the same ethic that dominated their husbandsthe ethic of
their class; and they uttered glib phrases that their own ears did not
understand.

Also, they grew irritated when I told them of the deplorable condition
of Jacksons family, and when I wondered that they had made no
voluntary provision for the man. I was told that they thanked no one
for instructing them in their social duties. When I asked them flatly
to assist Jackson, they as flatly refused. The astounding thing about
it was that they refused in almost identically the same language, and
this in face of the fact that I interviewed them separately and that
one did not know that I had seen or was going to see the other. Their
common reply was that they were glad of the opportunity to make it
perfectly plain that no premium would ever be put on carelessness by
them; nor would they, by paying for accident, tempt the poor to hurt
themselves in the machinery.[6]

 [6] In the files of the _Outlook_, a critical weekly of the period, in
 the number dated August 18, 1906, is related the circumstance of a
 workingman losing his arm, the details of which are quite similar to
 those of Jacksons case as related by Avis Everhard.

And they were sincere, these two women. They were drunk with conviction
of the superiority of their class and of themselves. They had a
sanction, in their own class-ethic, for every act they performed. As I
drove away from Mrs. Pertonwaithes great house, I looked back at it,
and I remembered Ernests expression that they were bound to the
machine, but that they were so bound that they sat on top of it.




CHAPTER V.
THE PHILOMATHS


Ernest was often at the house. Nor was it my father, merely, nor the
controversial dinners, that drew him there. Even at that time I
flattered myself that I played some part in causing his visits, and it
was not long before I learned the correctness of my surmise. For never
was there such a lover as Ernest Everhard. His gaze and his hand-clasp
grew firmer and steadier, if that were possible; and the question that
had grown from the first in his eyes, grew only the more imperative.

My impression of him, the first time I saw him, had been unfavorable.
Then I had found myself attracted toward him. Next came my repulsion,
when he so savagely attacked my class and me. After that, as I saw that
he had not maligned my class, and that the harsh and bitter things he
said about it were justified, I had drawn closer to him again. He
became my oracle. For me he tore the sham from the face of society and
gave me glimpses of reality that were as unpleasant as they were
undeniably true.

As I have said, there was never such a lover as he. No girl could live
in a university town till she was twenty-four and not have love
experiences. I had been made love to by beardless sophomores and gray
professors, and by the athletes and the football giants. But not one of
them made love to me as Ernest did. His arms were around me before I
knew. His lips were on mine before I could protest or resist. Before
his earnestness conventional maiden dignity was ridiculous. He swept me
off my feet by the splendid invincible rush of him. He did not propose.
He put his arms around me and kissed me and took it for granted that we
should be married. There was no discussion about it. The only
discussionand that arose afterwardwas when we should be married.

It was unprecedented. It was unreal. Yet, in accordance with Ernests
test of truth, it worked. I trusted my life to it. And fortunate was
the trust. Yet during those first days of our love, fear of the future
came often to me when I thought of the violence and impetuosity of his
love-making. Yet such fears were groundless. No woman was ever blessed
with a gentler, tenderer husband. This gentleness and violence on his
part was a curious blend similar to the one in his carriage of
awkwardness and ease. That slight awkwardness! He never got over it,
and it was delicious. His behavior in our drawing-room reminded me of a
careful bull in a china shop.[1]

 [1] In those days it was still the custom to fill the living rooms
 with bric-a-brac. They had not discovered simplicity of living. Such
 rooms were museums, entailing endless labor to keep clean. The
 dust-demon was the lord of the household. There were a myriad devices
 for catching dust, and only a few devices for getting rid of it.

It was at this time that vanished my last doubt of the completeness of
my love for him (a subconscious doubt, at most). It was at the
Philomath Cluba wonderful night of battle, wherein Ernest bearded the
masters in their lair. Now the Philomath Club was the most select on
the Pacific Coast. It was the creation of Miss Brentwood, an enormously
wealthy old maid; and it was her husband, and family, and toy. Its
members were the wealthiest in the community, and the strongest-minded
of the wealthy, with, of course, a sprinkling of scholars to give it
intellectual tone.

The Philomath had no club house. It was not that kind of a club. Once a
month its members gathered at some one of their private houses to
listen to a lecture. The lecturers were usually, though not always,
hired. If a chemist in New York made a new discovery in say radium, all
his expenses across the continent were paid, and as well he received a
princely fee for his time. The same with a returning explorer from the
polar regions, or the latest literary or artistic success. No visitors
were allowed, while it was the Philomaths policy to permit none of its
discussions to get into the papers. Thus great statesmenand there had
been such occasionswere able fully to speak their minds.

I spread before me a wrinkled letter, written to me by Ernest twenty
years ago, and from it I copy the following:

Your father is a member of the Philomath, so you are able to come.
Therefore come next Tuesday night. I promise you that you will have the
time of your life. In your recent encounters, you failed to shake the
masters. If you come, Ill shake them for you. Ill make them snarl
like wolves. You merely questioned their morality. When their morality
is questioned, they grow only the more complacent and superior. But I
shall menace their money-bags. That will shake them to the roots of
their primitive natures. If you can come, you will see the cave-man, in
evening dress, snarling and snapping over a bone. I promise you a great
caterwauling and an illuminating insight into the nature of the beast.

Theyve invited me in order to tear me to pieces. This is the idea of
Miss Brentwood. She clumsily hinted as much when she invited me. Shes
given them that kind of fun before. They delight in getting
trustful-souled gentle reformers before them. Miss Brentwood thinks I
am as mild as a kitten and as good-natured and stolid as the family
cow. Ill not deny that I helped to give her that impression. She was
very tentative at first, until she divined my harmlessness. I am to
receive a handsome feetwo hundred and fifty dollarsas befits the man
who, though a radical, once ran for governor. Also, I am to wear
evening dress. This is compulsory. I never was so apparelled in my
life. I suppose Ill have to hire one somewhere. But Id do more than
that to get a chance at the Philomaths.

Of all places, the Club gathered that night at the Pertonwaithe house.
Extra chairs had been brought into the great drawing-room, and in all
there must have been two hundred Philomaths that sat down to hear
Ernest. They were truly lords of society. I amused myself with running
over in my mind the sum of the fortunes represented, and it ran well
into the hundreds of millions. And the possessors were not of the idle
rich. They were men of affairs who took most active parts in industrial
and political life.

We were all seated when Miss Brentwood brought Ernest in. They moved at
once to the head of the room, from where he was to speak. He was in
evening dress, and, what of his broad shoulders and kingly head, he
looked magnificent. And then there was that faint and unmistakable
touch of awkwardness in his movements. I almost think I could have
loved him for that alone. And as I looked at him I was aware of a great
joy. I felt again the pulse of his palm on mine, the touch of his lips;
and such pride was mine that I felt I must rise up and cry out to the
assembled company: He is mine! He has held me in his arms, and I, mere
I, have filled that mind of his to the exclusion of all his
multitudinous and kingly thoughts!

At the head of the room, Miss Brentwood introduced him to Colonel Van
Gilbert, and I knew that the latter was to preside. Colonel Van Gilbert
was a great corporation lawyer. In addition, he was immensely wealthy.
The smallest fee he would deign to notice was a hundred thousand
dollars. He was a master of law. The law was a puppet with which he
played. He moulded it like clay, twisted and distorted it like a
Chinese puzzle into any design he chose. In appearance and rhetoric he
was old-fashioned, but in imagination and knowledge and resource he was
as young as the latest statute. His first prominence had come when he
broke the Shardwell will.[2] His fee for this one act was five hundred
thousand dollars. From then on he had risen like a rocket. He was often
called the greatest lawyer in the countrycorporation lawyer, of
course; and no classification of the three greatest lawyers in the
United States could have excluded him.

 [2] This breaking of wills was a peculiar feature of the period. With
 the accumulation of vast fortunes, the problem of disposing of these
 fortunes after death was a vexing one to the accumulators. Will-making
 and will-breaking became complementary trades, like armor-making and
 gun-making. The shrewdest will-making lawyers were called in to make
 wills that could not be broken. But these wills were always broken,
 and very often by the very lawyers that had drawn them up.
 Nevertheless the delusion persisted in the wealthy class that an
 absolutely unbreakable will could be cast; and so, through the
 generations, clients and lawyers pursued the illusion. It was a
 pursuit like unto that of the Universal Solvent of the medival
 alchemists.

He arose and began, in a few well-chosen phrases that carried an
undertone of faint irony, to introduce Ernest. Colonel Van Gilbert was
subtly facetious in his introduction of the social reformer and member
of the working class, and the audience smiled. It made me angry, and I
glanced at Ernest. The sight of him made me doubly angry. He did not
seem to resent the delicate slurs. Worse than that, he did not seem to
be aware of them. There he sat, gentle, and stolid, and somnolent. He
really looked stupid. And for a moment the thought rose in my mind,
What if he were overawed by this imposing array of power and brains?
Then I smiled. He couldnt fool me. But he fooled the others, just as
he had fooled Miss Brentwood. She occupied a chair right up to the
front, and several times she turned her head toward one or another of
her _confrres_ and smiled her appreciation of the remarks.

Colonel Van Gilbert done, Ernest arose and began to speak. He began in
a low voice, haltingly and modestly, and with an air of evident
embarrassment. He spoke of his birth in the working class, and of the
sordidness and wretchedness of his environment, where flesh and spirit
were alike starved and tormented. He described his ambitions and
ideals, and his conception of the paradise wherein lived the people of
the upper classes. As he said:

Up above me, I knew, were unselfishnesses of the spirit, clean and
noble thinking, keen intellectual living. I knew all this because I
read Seaside Library[3] novels, in which, with the exception of the
villains and adventuresses, all men and women thought beautiful
thoughts, spoke a beautiful tongue, and performed glorious deeds. In
short, as I accepted the rising of the sun, I accepted that up above me
was all that was fine and noble and gracious, all that gave decency and
dignity to life, all that made life worth living and that remunerated
one for his travail and misery.

 [3] A curious and amazing literature that served to make the working
 class utterly misapprehend the nature of the leisure class.

He went on and traced his life in the mills, the learning of the
horseshoeing trade, and his meeting with the socialists. Among them, he
said, he had found keen intellects and brilliant wits, ministers of the
Gospel who had been broken because their Christianity was too wide for
any congregation of mammon-worshippers, and professors who had been
broken on the wheel of university subservience to the ruling class. The
socialists were revolutionists, he said, struggling to overthrow the
irrational society of the present and out of the material to build the
rational society of the future. Much more he said that would take too
long to write, but I shall never forget how he described the life among
the revolutionists. All halting utterance vanished. His voice grew
strong and confident, and it glowed as he glowed, and as the thoughts
glowed that poured out from him. He said:

Amongst the revolutionists I found, also, warm faith in the human,
ardent idealism, sweetnesses of unselfishness, renunciation, and
martyrdomall the splendid, stinging things of the spirit. Here life
was clean, noble, and alive. I was in touch with great souls who
exalted flesh and spirit over dollars and cents, and to whom the thin
wail of the starved slum child meant more than all the pomp and
circumstance of commercial expansion and world empire. All about me
were nobleness of purpose and heroism of effort, and my days and nights
were sunshine and starshine, all fire and dew, with before my eyes,
ever burning and blazing, the Holy Grail, Christs own Grail, the warm
human, long-suffering and maltreated but to be rescued and saved at the
last.

As before I had seen him transfigured, so now he stood transfigured
before me. His brows were bright with the divine that was in him, and
brighter yet shone his eyes from the midst of the radiance that seemed
to envelop him as a mantle. But the others did not see this radiance,
and I assumed that it was due to the tears of joy and love that dimmed
my vision. At any rate, Mr. Wickson, who sat behind me, was unaffected,
for I heard him sneer aloud, Utopian.[4]

 [4] The people of that age were phrase slaves. The abjectness of their
 servitude is incomprehensible to us. There was a magic in words
 greater than the conjurers art. So befuddled and chaotic were their
 minds that the utterance of a single word could negative the
 generalizations of a lifetime of serious research and thought. Such a
 word was the adjective _Utopian_. The mere utterance of it could damn
 any scheme, no matter how sanely conceived, of economic amelioration
 or regeneration. Vast populations grew frenzied over such phrases as
 an honest dollar and a full dinner pail. The coinage of such
 phrases was considered strokes of genius.

Ernest went on to his rise in society, till at last he came in touch
with members of the upper classes, and rubbed shoulders with the men
who sat in the high places. Then came his disillusionment, and this
disillusionment he described in terms that did not flatter his
audience. He was surprised at the commonness of the clay. Life proved
not to be fine and gracious. He was appalled by the selfishness he
encountered, and what had surprised him even more than that was the
absence of intellectual life. Fresh from his revolutionists, he was
shocked by the intellectual stupidity of the master class. And then, in
spite of their magnificent churches and well-paid preachers, he had
found the masters, men and women, grossly material. It was true that
they prattled sweet little ideals and dear little moralities, but in
spite of their prattle the dominant key of the life they lived was
materialistic. And they were without real moralityfor instance, that
which Christ had preached but which was no longer preached.

I met men, he said, who invoked the name of the Prince of Peace in
their diatribes against war, and who put rifles in the hands of
Pinkertons[5] with which to shoot down strikers in their own factories.
I met men incoherent with indignation at the brutality of
prize-fighting, and who, at the same time, were parties to the
adulteration of food that killed each year more babes than even
red-handed Herod had killed.

 [5] Originally, they were private detectives; but they quickly became
 hired fighting men of the capitalists, and ultimately developed into
 the Mercenaries of the Oligarchy.

This delicate, aristocratic-featured gentleman was a dummy director
and a tool of corporations that secretly robbed widows and orphans.
This gentleman, who collected fine editions and was a patron of
literature, paid blackmail to a heavy-jowled, black-browed boss of a
municipal machine. This editor, who published patent medicine
advertisements, called me a scoundrelly demagogue because I dared him
to print in his paper the truth about patent medicines.[6] This man,
talking soberly and earnestly about the beauties of idealism and the
goodness of God, had just betrayed his comrades in a business deal.
This man, a pillar of the church and heavy contributor to foreign
missions, worked his shop girls ten hours a day on a starvation wage
and thereby directly encouraged prostitution. This man, who endowed
chairs in universities and erected magnificent chapels, perjured
himself in courts of law over dollars and cents. This railroad magnate
broke his word as a citizen, as a gentleman, and as a Christian, when
he granted a secret rebate, and he granted many secret rebates. This
senator was the tool and the slave, the little puppet, of a brutal
uneducated machine boss;[7] so was this governor and this supreme court
judge; and all three rode on railroad passes; and, also, this sleek
capitalist owned the machine, the machine boss, and the railroads that
issued the passes.

 [6] _Patent medicines_ were patent lies, but, like the charms and
 indulgences of the Middle Ages, they deceived the people. The only
 difference lay in that the patent medicines were more harmful and more
 costly.

 [7] Even as late as 1912, A.D., the great mass of the people still
 persisted in the belief that they ruled the country by virtue of their
 ballots. In reality, the country was ruled by what were called
 _political machines_. At first the machine bosses charged the master
 capitalists extortionate tolls for legislation; but in a short time
 the master capitalists found it cheaper to own the political machines
 themselves and to hire the machine bosses.

And so it was, instead of in paradise, that I found myself in the arid
desert of commercialism. I found nothing but stupidity, except for
business. I found none clean, noble, and alive, though I found many who
were alivewith rottenness. What I did find was monstrous selfishness
and heartlessness, and a gross, gluttonous, practised, and practical
materialism.

Much more Ernest told them of themselves and of his disillusionment.
Intellectually they had bored him; morally and spiritually they had
sickened him; so that he was glad to go back to his revolutionists, who
were clean, noble, and alive, and all that the capitalists were not.

And now, he said, let me tell you about that revolution.

But first I must say that his terrible diatribe had not touched them. I
looked about me at their faces and saw that they remained complacently
superior to what he had charged. And I remembered what he had told me:
that no indictment of their morality could shake them. However, I could
see that the boldness of his language had affected Miss Brentwood. She
was looking worried and apprehensive.

Ernest began by describing the army of revolution, and as he gave the
figures of its strength (the votes cast in the various countries), the
assemblage began to grow restless. Concern showed in their faces, and I
noticed a tightening of lips. At last the gage of battle had been
thrown down. He described the international organization of the
socialists that united the million and a half in the United States with
the twenty-three millions and a half in the rest of the world.

Such an army of revolution, he said, twenty-five millions strong, is
a thing to make rulers and ruling classes pause and consider. The cry
of this army is: No quarter! We want all that you possess. We will be
content with nothing less than all that you possess. We want in our
hands the reins of power and the destiny of mankind. Here are our
hands. They are strong hands. We are going to take your governments,
your palaces, and all your purpled ease away from you, and in that day
you shall work for your bread even as the peasant in the field or the
starved and runty clerk in your metropolises. Here are our hands. They
are strong hands!

And as he spoke he extended from his splendid shoulders his two great
arms, and the horseshoers hands were clutching the air like eagles
talons. He was the spirit of regnant labor as he stood there, his hands
outreaching to rend and crush his audience. I was aware of a faintly
perceptible shrinking on the part of the listeners before this figure
of revolution, concrete, potential, and menacing. That is, the women
shrank, and fear was in their faces. Not so with the men. They were of
the active rich, and not the idle, and they were fighters. A low,
throaty rumble arose, lingered on the air a moment, and ceased. It was
the forerunner of the snarl, and I was to hear it many times that
nightthe token of the brute in man, the earnest of his primitive
passions. And they were unconscious that they had made this sound. It
was the growl of the pack, mouthed by the pack, and mouthed in all
unconsciousness. And in that moment, as I saw the harshness form in
their faces and saw the fight-light flashing in their eyes, I realized
that not easily would they let their lordship of the world be wrested
from them.

Ernest proceeded with his attack. He accounted for the existence of the
million and a half of revolutionists in the United States by charging
the capitalist class with having mismanaged society. He sketched the
economic condition of the cave-man and of the savage peoples of to-day,
pointing out that they possessed neither tools nor machines, and
possessed only a natural efficiency of one in producing power. Then he
traced the development of machinery and social organization so that
to-day the producing power of civilized man was a thousand times
greater than that of the savage.

Five men, he said, can produce bread for a thousand. One man can
produce cotton cloth for two hundred and fifty people, woollens for
three hundred, and boots and shoes for a thousand. One would conclude
from this that under a capable management of society modern civilized
man would be a great deal better off than the cave-man. But is he? Let
us see. In the United States to-day there are fifteen million[8] people
living in poverty; and by poverty is meant that condition in life in
which, through lack of food and adequate shelter, the mere standard of
working efficiency cannot be maintained. In the United States to-day,
in spite of all your so-called labor legislation, there are three
millions of child laborers.[9] In twelve years their numbers have been
doubled. And in passing I will ask you managers of society why you did
not make public the census figures of 1910? And I will answer for you,
that you were afraid. The figures of misery would have precipitated the
revolution that even now is gathering.

 [8] Robert Hunter, in 1906, in a book entitled Poverty, pointed out
 that at that time there were ten millions in the United States living
 in poverty.

 [9] In the United States Census of 1900 (the last census the figures
 of which were made public), the number of child laborers was placed at
 1,752,187.

But to return to my indictment. If modern mans producing power is a
thousand times greater than that of the cave-man, why then, in the
United States to-day, are there fifteen million people who are not
properly sheltered and properly fed? Why then, in the United States
to-day, are there three million child laborers? It is a true
indictment. The capitalist class has mismanaged. In face of the facts
that modern man lives more wretchedly than the cave-man, and that his
producing power is a thousand times greater than that of the cave-man,
no other conclusion is possible than that the capitalist class has
mismanaged, that you have mismanaged, my masters, that you have
criminally and selfishly mismanaged. And on this count you cannot
answer me here to-night, face to face, any more than can your whole
class answer the million and a half of revolutionists in the United
States. You cannot answer. I challenge you to answer. And furthermore,
I dare to say to you now that when I have finished you will not answer.
On that point you will be tongue-tied, though you will talk wordily
enough about other things.

You have failed in your management. You have made a shambles of
civilization. You have been blind and greedy. You have risen up (as you
to-day rise up), shamelessly, in our legislative halls, and declared
that profits were impossible without the toil of children and babes.
Dont take my word for it. It is all in the records against you. You
have lulled your conscience to sleep with prattle of sweet ideals and
dear moralities. You are fat with power and possession, drunken with
success; and you have no more hope against us than have the drones,
clustered about the honey-vats, when the worker-bees spring upon them
to end their rotund existence. You have failed in your management of
society, and your management is to be taken away from you. A million
and a half of the men of the working class say that they are going to
get the rest of the working class to join with them and take the
management away from you. This is the revolution, my masters. Stop it
if you can.

For an appreciable lapse of time Ernests voice continued to ring
through the great room. Then arose the throaty rumble I had heard
before, and a dozen men were on their feet clamoring for recognition
from Colonel Van Gilbert. I noticed Miss Brentwoods shoulders moving
convulsively, and for the moment I was angry, for I thought that she
was laughing at Ernest. And then I discovered that it was not laughter,
but hysteria. She was appalled by what she had done in bringing this
firebrand before her blessed Philomath Club.

Colonel Van Gilbert did not notice the dozen men, with passion-wrought
faces, who strove to get permission from him to speak. His own face was
passion-wrought. He sprang to his feet, waving his arms, and for a
moment could utter only incoherent sounds. Then speech poured from him.
But it was not the speech of a one-hundred-thousand-dollar lawyer, nor
was the rhetoric old-fashioned.

Fallacy upon fallacy! he cried. Never in all my life have I heard so
many fallacies uttered in one short hour. And besides, young man, I
must tell you that you have said nothing new. I learned all that at
college before you were born. Jean Jacques Rousseau enunciated your
socialistic theory nearly two centuries ago. A return to the soil,
forsooth! Reversion! Our biology teaches the absurdity of it. It has
been truly said that a little learning is a dangerous thing, and you
have exemplified it to-night with your madcap theories. Fallacy upon
fallacy! I was never so nauseated in my life with overplus of fallacy.
That for your immature generalizations and childish reasonings!

He snapped his fingers contemptuously and proceeded to sit down. There
were lip-exclamations of approval on the part of the women, and hoarser
notes of confirmation came from the men. As for the dozen men who were
clamoring for the floor, half of them began speaking at once. The
confusion and babel was indescribable. Never had Mrs. Pertonwaithes
spacious walls beheld such a spectacle. These, then, were the cool
captains of industry and lords of society, these snarling, growling
savages in evening clothes. Truly Ernest had shaken them when he
stretched out his hands for their moneybags, his hands that had
appeared in their eyes as the hands of the fifteen hundred thousand
revolutionists.

But Ernest never lost his head in a situation. Before Colonel Van
Gilbert had succeeded in sitting down, Ernest was on his feet and had
sprung forward.

One at a time! he roared at them.

The sound arose from his great lungs and dominated the human tempest.
By sheer compulsion of personality he commanded silence.

One at a time, he repeated softly. Let me answer Colonel Van
Gilbert. After that the rest of you can come at mebut one at a time,
remember. No mass-plays here. This is not a football field.

As for you, he went on, turning toward Colonel Van Gilbert, you have
replied to nothing I have said. You have merely made a few excited and
dogmatic assertions about my mental caliber. That may serve you in your
business, but you cant talk to me like that. I am not a workingman,
cap in hand, asking you to increase my wages or to protect me from the
machine at which I work. You cannot be dogmatic with truth when you
deal with me. Save that for dealing with your wage-slaves. They will
not dare reply to you because you hold their bread and butter, their
lives, in your hands.

As for this return to nature that you say you learned at college
before I was born, permit me to point out that on the face of it you
cannot have learned anything since. Socialism has no more to do with
the state of nature than has differential calculus with a Bible class.
I have called your class stupid when outside the realm of business.
You, sir, have brilliantly exemplified my statement.

This terrible castigation of her hundred-thousand-dollar lawyer was too
much for Miss Brentwoods nerves. Her hysteria became violent, and she
was helped, weeping and laughing, out of the room. It was just as well,
for there was worse to follow.

Dont take my word for it, Ernest continued, when the interruption
had been led away. Your own authorities with one unanimous voice will
prove you stupid. Your own hired purveyors of knowledge will tell you
that you are wrong. Go to your meekest little assistant instructor of
sociology and ask him what is the difference between Rousseaus theory
of the return to nature and the theory of socialism; ask your greatest
orthodox bourgeois political economists and sociologists; question
through the pages of every text-book written on the subject and stored
on the shelves of your subsidized libraries; and from one and all the
answer will be that there is nothing congruous between the return to
nature and socialism. On the other hand, the unanimous affirmative
answer will be that the return to nature and socialism are
diametrically opposed to each other. As I say, dont take my word for
it. The record of your stupidity is there in the books, your own books
that you never read. And so far as your stupidity is concerned, you are
but the exemplar of your class.

You know law and business, Colonel Van Gilbert. You know how to serve
corporations and increase dividends by twisting the law. Very good.
Stick to it. You are quite a figure. You are a very good lawyer, but
you are a poor historian, you know nothing of sociology, and your
biology is contemporaneous with Pliny.

Here Colonel Van Gilbert writhed in his chair. There was perfect quiet
in the room. Everybody sat fascinatedparalyzed, I may say. Such
fearful treatment of the great Colonel Van Gilbert was unheard of,
undreamed of, impossible to believethe great Colonel Van Gilbert
before whom judges trembled when he arose in court. But Ernest never
gave quarter to an enemy.

This is, of course, no reflection on you, Ernest said. Every man to
his trade. Only you stick to your trade, and Ill stick to mine. You
have specialized. When it comes to a knowledge of the law, of how best
to evade the law or make new law for the benefit of thieving
corporations, I am down in the dirt at your feet. But when it comes to
sociologymy tradeyou are down in the dirt at my feet. Remember that.
Remember, also, that your law is the stuff of a day, and that you are
not versatile in the stuff of more than a day. Therefore your dogmatic
assertions and rash generalizations on things historical and
sociological are not worth the breath you waste on them.

Ernest paused for a moment and regarded him thoughtfully, noting his
face dark and twisted with anger, his panting chest, his writhing body,
and his slim white hands nervously clenching and unclenching.

But it seems you have breath to use, and Ill give you a chance to use
it. I indicted your class. Show me that my indictment is wrong. I
pointed out to you the wretchedness of modern manthree million child
slaves in the United States, without whose labor profits would not be
possible, and fifteen million under-fed, ill-clothed, and worse-housed
people. I pointed out that modern mans producing power through social
organization and the use of machinery was a thousand times greater than
that of the cave-man. And I stated that from these two facts no other
conclusion was possible than that the capitalist class had mismanaged.
This was my indictment, and I specifically and at length challenged you
to answer it. Nay, I did more. I prophesied that you would not answer.
It remains for your breath to smash my prophecy. You called my speech
fallacy. Show the fallacy, Colonel Van Gilbert. Answer the indictment
that I and my fifteen hundred thousand comrades have brought against
your class and you.

Colonel Van Gilbert quite forgot that he was presiding, and that in
courtesy he should permit the other clamorers to speak. He was on his
feet, flinging his arms, his rhetoric, and his control to the winds,
alternately abusing Ernest for his youth and demagoguery, and savagely
attacking the working class, elaborating its inefficiency and
worthlessness.

For a lawyer, you are the hardest man to keep to a point I ever saw,
Ernest began his answer to the tirade. My youth has nothing to do with
what I have enunciated. Nor has the worthlessness of the working class.
I charged the capitalist class with having mismanaged society. You have
not answered. You have made no attempt to answer. Why? Is it because
you have no answer? You are the champion of this whole audience. Every
one here, except me, is hanging on your lips for that answer. They are
hanging on your lips for that answer because they have no answer
themselves. As for me, as I said before, I know that you not only
cannot answer, but that you will not attempt an answer.

This is intolerable! Colonel Van Gilbert cried out. This is insult!

That you should not answer is intolerable, Ernest replied gravely.
No man can be intellectually insulted. Insult, in its very nature, is
emotional. Recover yourself. Give me an intellectual answer to my
intellectual charge that the capitalist class has mismanaged society.

Colonel Van Gilbert remained silent, a sullen, superior expression on
his face, such as will appear on the face of a man who will not bandy
words with a ruffian.

Do not be downcast, Ernest said. Take consolation in the fact that
no member of your class has ever yet answered that charge. He turned
to the other men who were anxious to speak. And now its your chance.
Fire away, and do not forget that I here challenge you to give the
answer that Colonel Van Gilbert has failed to give.

It would be impossible for me to write all that was said in the
discussion. I never realized before how many words could be spoken in
three short hours. At any rate, it was glorious. The more his opponents
grew excited, the more Ernest deliberately excited them. He had an
encyclopaedic command of the field of knowledge, and by a word or a
phrase, by delicate rapier thrusts, he punctured them. He named the
points of their illogic. This was a false syllogism, that conclusion
had no connection with the premise, while that next premise was an
impostor because it had cunningly hidden in it the conclusion that was
being attempted to be proved. This was an error, that was an
assumption, and the next was an assertion contrary to ascertained truth
as printed in all the text-books.

And so it went. Sometimes he exchanged the rapier for the club and went
smashing amongst their thoughts right and left. And always he demanded
facts and refused to discuss theories. And his facts made for them a
Waterloo. When they attacked the working class, he always retorted,
The pot calling the kettle black; that is no answer to the charge that
your own face is dirty. And to one and all he said: Why have you not
answered the charge that your class has mismanaged? You have talked
about other things and things concerning other things, but you have not
answered. Is it because you have no answer?

It was at the end of the discussion that Mr. Wickson spoke. He was the
only one that was cool, and Ernest treated him with a respect he had
not accorded the others.

No answer is necessary, Mr. Wickson said with slow deliberation. I
have followed the whole discussion with amazement and disgust. I am
disgusted with you gentlemen, members of my class. You have behaved
like foolish little schoolboys, what with intruding ethics and the
thunder of the common politician into such a discussion. You have been
outgeneralled and outclassed. You have been very wordy, and all you
have done is buzz. You have buzzed like gnats about a bear. Gentlemen,
there stands the bear (he pointed at Ernest), and your buzzing has
only tickled his ears.

Believe me, the situation is serious. That bear reached out his paws
tonight to crush us. He has said there are a million and a half of
revolutionists in the United States. That is a fact. He has said that
it is their intention to take away from us our governments, our
palaces, and all our purpled ease. That, also, is a fact. A change, a
great change, is coming in society; but, haply, it may not be the
change the bear anticipates. The bear has said that he will crush us.
What if we crush the bear?

The throat-rumble arose in the great room, and man nodded to man with
indorsement and certitude. Their faces were set hard. They were
fighters, that was certain.

But not by buzzing will we crush the bear, Mr. Wickson went on coldly
and dispassionately. We will hunt the bear. We will not reply to the
bear in words. Our reply shall be couched in terms of lead. We are in
power. Nobody will deny it. By virtue of that power we shall remain in
power.

He turned suddenly upon Ernest. The moment was dramatic.

This, then, is our answer. We have no words to waste on you. When you
reach out your vaunted strong hands for our palaces and purpled ease,
we will show you what strength is. In roar of shell and shrapnel and in
whine of machine-guns will our answer be couched.[10] We will grind you
revolutionists down under our heel, and we shall walk upon your faces.
The world is ours, we are its lords, and ours it shall remain. As for
the host of labor, it has been in the dirt since history began, and I
read history aright. And in the dirt it shall remain so long as I and
mine and those that come after us have the power. There is the word. It
is the king of wordsPower. Not God, not Mammon, but Power. Pour it
over your tongue till it tingles with it. Power.

 [10] To show the tenor of thought, the following definition is quoted
 from The Cynics Word Book (1906 A.D.), written by one Ambrose
 Bierce, an avowed and confirmed misanthrope of the period: Grapeshot,
 _n. An argument which the future is preparing in answer to the demands
 of American Socialism._

I am answered, Ernest said quietly. It is the only answer that could
be given. Power. It is what we of the working class preach. We know,
and well we know by bitter experience, that no appeal for the right,
for justice, for humanity, can ever touch you. Your hearts are hard as
your heels with which you tread upon the faces of the poor. So we have
preached power. By the power of our ballots on election day will we
take your government away from you

What if you do get a majority, a sweeping majority, on election day?
Mr. Wickson broke in to demand. Suppose we refuse to turn the
government over to you after you have captured it at the ballot-box?

That, also, have we considered, Ernest replied. And we shall give
you an answer in terms of lead. Power you have proclaimed the king of
words. Very good. Power it shall be. And in the day that we sweep to
victory at the ballot-box, and you refuse to turn over to us the
government we have constitutionally and peacefully captured, and you
demand what we are going to do about itin that day, I say, we shall
answer you; and in roar of shell and shrapnel and in whine of
machine-guns shall our answer be couched.

You cannot escape us. It is true that you have read history aright. It
is true that labor has from the beginning of history been in the dirt.
And it is equally true that so long as you and yours and those that
come after you have power, that labor shall remain in the dirt. I agree
with you. I agree with all that you have said. Power will be the
arbiter, as it always has been the arbiter. It is a struggle of
classes. Just as your class dragged down the old feudal nobility, so
shall it be dragged down by my class, the working class. If you will
read your biology and your sociology as clearly as you do your history,
you will see that this end I have described is inevitable. It does not
matter whether it is in one year, ten, or a thousandyour class shall
be dragged down. And it shall be done by power. We of the labor hosts
have conned that word over till our minds are all a-tingle with it.
Power. It is a kingly word.

And so ended the night with the Philomaths.




CHAPTER VI.
ADUMBRATIONS


It was about this time that the warnings of coming events began to fall
about us thick and fast. Ernest had already questioned fathers policy
of having socialists and labor leaders at his house, and of openly
attending socialist meetings; and father had only laughed at him for
his pains. As for myself, I was learning much from this contact with
the working-class leaders and thinkers. I was seeing the other side of
the shield. I was delighted with the unselfishness and high idealism I
encountered, though I was appalled by the vast philosophic and
scientific literature of socialism that was opened up to me. I was
learning fast, but I learned not fast enough to realize then the peril
of our position.

There were warnings, but I did not heed them. For instance, Mrs.
Pertonwaithe and Mrs. Wickson exercised tremendous social power in the
university town, and from them emanated the sentiment that I was a
too-forward and self-assertive young woman with a mischievous penchant
for officiousness and interference in other persons affairs. This I
thought no more than natural, considering the part I had played in
investigating the case of Jacksons arm. But the effect of such a
sentiment, enunciated by two such powerful social arbiters, I
underestimated.

True, I noticed a certain aloofness on the part of my general friends,
but this I ascribed to the disapproval that was prevalent in my circles
of my intended marriage with Ernest. It was not till some time
afterward that Ernest pointed out to me clearly that this general
attitude of my class was something more than spontaneous, that behind
it were the hidden springs of an organized conduct. You have given
shelter to an enemy of your class, he said. And not alone shelter,
for you have given your love, yourself. This is treason to your class.
Think not that you will escape being penalized.

But it was before this that father returned one afternoon. Ernest was
with me, and we could see that father was angryphilosophically angry.
He was rarely really angry; but a certain measure of controlled anger
he allowed himself. He called it a tonic. And we could see that he was
tonic-angry when he entered the room.

What do you think? he demanded. I had luncheon with Wilcox.

Wilcox was the superannuated president of the university, whose
withered mind was stored with generalizations that were young in 1870,
and which he had since failed to revise.

I was invited, father announced. I was sent for.

He paused, and we waited.

Oh, it was done very nicely, Ill allow; but I was reprimanded. I! And
by that old fossil!

Ill wager I know what you were reprimanded for, Ernest said.

Not in three guesses, father laughed.

One guess will do, Ernest retorted. And it wont be a guess. It will
be a deduction. You were reprimanded for your private life.

The very thing! father cried. How did you guess?

I knew it was coming. I warned you before about it.

Yes, you did, father meditated. But I couldnt believe it. At any
rate, it is only so much more clinching evidence for my book.

It is nothing to what will come, Ernest went on, if you persist in
your policy of having these socialists and radicals of all sorts at
your house, myself included.

Just what old Wilcox said. And of all unwarranted things! He said it
was in poor taste, utterly profitless, anyway, and not in harmony with
university traditions and policy. He said much more of the same vague
sort, and I couldnt pin him down to anything specific. I made it
pretty awkward for him, and he could only go on repeating himself and
telling me how much he honored me, and all the world honored me, as a
scientist. It wasnt an agreeable task for him. I could see he didnt
like it.

He was not a free agent, Ernest said. The leg-bar[1] is not always
worn graciously.

 [1] _Leg-bar_the African slaves were so manacled; also criminals. It
 was not until the coming of the Brotherhood of Man that the leg-bar
 passed out of use.

Yes. I got that much out of him. He said the university needed ever so
much more money this year than the state was willing to furnish; and
that it must come from wealthy personages who could not but be offended
by the swerving of the university from its high ideal of the
passionless pursuit of passionless intelligence. When I tried to pin
him down to what my home life had to do with swerving the university
from its high ideal, he offered me a two years vacation, on full pay,
in Europe, for recreation and research. Of course I couldnt accept it
under the circumstances.

It would have been far better if you had, Ernest said gravely.

It was a bribe, father protested; and Ernest nodded.

Also, the beggar said that there was talk, tea-table gossip and so
forth, about my daughter being seen in public with so notorious a
character as you, and that it was not in keeping with university tone
and dignity. Not that he personally objectedoh, no; but that there was
talk and that I would understand.

Ernest considered this announcement for a moment, and then said, and
his face was very grave, withal there was a sombre wrath in it:

There is more behind this than a mere university ideal. Somebody has
put pressure on President Wilcox.

Do you think so? father asked, and his face showed that he was
interested rather than frightened.

I wish I could convey to you the conception that is dimly forming in
my own mind, Ernest said. Never in the history of the world was
society in so terrific flux as it is right now. The swift changes in
our industrial system are causing equally swift changes in our
religious, political, and social structures. An unseen and fearful
revolution is taking place in the fibre and structure of society. One
can only dimly feel these things. But they are in the air, now, to-day.
One can feel the loom of themthings vast, vague, and terrible. My mind
recoils from contemplation of what they may crystallize into. You heard
Wickson talk the other night. Behind what he said were the same
nameless, formless things that I feel. He spoke out of a superconscious
apprehension of them.

You mean . . . ? father began, then paused.

I mean that there is a shadow of something colossal and menacing that
even now is beginning to fall across the land. Call it the shadow of an
oligarchy, if you will; it is the nearest I dare approximate it. What
its nature may be I refuse to imagine.[2] But what I wanted to say was
this: You are in a perilous positiona peril that my own fear enhances
because I am not able even to measure it. Take my advice and accept the
vacation.

 [2] Though, like Everhard, they did not dream of the nature of it,
 there were men, even before his time, who caught glimpses of the
 shadow. John C. Calhoun said: _A power has risen up in the government
 greater than the people themselves, consisting of many and various and
 powerful interests, combined into one mass, and held together by the
 cohesive power of the vast surplus in the banks_. And that great
 humanist, Abraham Lincoln, said, just before his assassination: _I
 see in the near future a crisis approaching that unnerves me and
 causes me to tremble for the safety of my country. . . . Corporations
 have been enthroned, an era of corruption in high places will follow,
 and the money-power of the country will endeavor to prolong its reign
 by working upon the prejudices of the people until the wealth is
 aggregated in a few hands and the Republic is destroyed._

But it would be cowardly, was the protest.

Not at all. You are an old man. You have done your work in the world,
and a great work. Leave the present battle to youth and strength. We
young fellows have our work yet to do. Avis will stand by my side in
what is to come. She will be your representative in the battle-front.

But they cant hurt me, father objected. Thank God I am independent.
Oh, I assure you, I know the frightful persecution they can wage on a
professor who is economically dependent on his university. But I am
independent. I have not been a professor for the sake of my salary. I
can get along very comfortably on my own income, and the salary is all
they can take away from me.

But you do not realize, Ernest answered. If all that I fear be so,
your private income, your principal itself, can be taken from you just
as easily as your salary.

Father was silent for a few minutes. He was thinking deeply, and I
could see the lines of decision forming in his face. At last he spoke.

I shall not take the vacation. He paused again. I shall go on with
my book.[3] You may be wrong, but whether you are wrong or right, I
shall stand by my guns.

 [3] This book, Economics and Education, was published in that year.
 Three copies of it are extant; two at Ardis, and one at Asgard. It
 dealt, in elaborate detail, with one factor in the persistence of the
 established, namely, the capitalistic bias of the universities and
 common schools. It was a logical and crushing indictment of the whole
 system of education that developed in the minds of the students only
 such ideas as were favorable to the capitalistic regime, to the
 exclusion of all ideas that were inimical and subversive. The book
 created a furor, and was promptly suppressed by the Oligarchy.

All right, Ernest said. You are travelling the same path that Bishop
Morehouse is, and toward a similar smash-up. Youll both be
proletarians before youre done with it.

The conversation turned upon the Bishop, and we got Ernest to explain
what he had been doing with him.

He is soul-sick from the journey through hell I have given him. I took
him through the homes of a few of our factory workers. I showed him the
human wrecks cast aside by the industrial machine, and he listened to
their life stories. I took him through the slums of San Francisco, and
in drunkenness, prostitution, and criminality he learned a deeper cause
than innate depravity. He is very sick, and, worse than that, he has
got out of hand. He is too ethical. He has been too severely touched.
And, as usual, he is unpractical. He is up in the air with all kinds of
ethical delusions and plans for mission work among the cultured. He
feels it is his bounden duty to resurrect the ancient spirit of the
Church and to deliver its message to the masters. He is overwrought.
Sooner or later he is going to break out, and then theres going to be
a smash-up. What form it will take I cant even guess. He is a pure,
exalted soul, but he is so unpractical. Hes beyond me. I cant keep
his feet on the earth. And through the air he is rushing on to his
Gethsemane. And after this his crucifixion. Such high souls are made
for crucifixion.

And you? I asked; and beneath my smile was the seriousness of the
anxiety of love.

Not I, he laughed back. I may be executed, or assassinated, but I
shall never be crucified. I am planted too solidly and stolidly upon
the earth.

But why should you bring about the crucifixion of the Bishop? I
asked. You will not deny that you are the cause of it.

Why should I leave one comfortable soul in comfort when there are
millions in travail and misery? he demanded back.

Then why did you advise father to accept the vacation?

Because I am not a pure, exalted soul, was the answer. Because I am
solid and stolid and selfish. Because I love you and, like Ruth of old,
thy people are my people. As for the Bishop, he has no daughter.
Besides, no matter how small the good, nevertheless his little
inadequate wail will be productive of some good in the revolution, and
every little bit counts.

I could not agree with Ernest. I knew well the noble nature of Bishop
Morehouse, and I could not conceive that his voice raised for
righteousness would be no more than a little inadequate wail. But I did
not yet have the harsh facts of life at my fingers ends as Ernest had.
He saw clearly the futility of the Bishops great soul, as coming
events were soon to show as clearly to me.

It was shortly after this day that Ernest told me, as a good story, the
offer he had received from the government, namely, an appointment as
United States Commissioner of Labor. I was overjoyed. The salary was
comparatively large, and would make safe our marriage. And then it
surely was congenial work for Ernest, and, furthermore, my jealous
pride in him made me hail the proffered appointment as a recognition of
his abilities.

Then I noticed the twinkle in his eyes. He was laughing at me.

You are not going to . . . to decline? I quavered.

It is a bribe, he said. Behind it is the fine hand of Wickson, and
behind him the hands of greater men than he. It is an old trick, old as
the class struggle is oldstealing the captains from the army of labor.
Poor betrayed labor! If you but knew how many of its leaders have been
bought out in similar ways in the past. It is cheaper, so much cheaper,
to buy a general than to fight him and his whole army. There wasbut
Ill not call any names. Im bitter enough over it as it is. Dear
heart, I am a captain of labor. I could not sell out. If for no other
reason, the memory of my poor old father and the way he was worked to
death would prevent.

The tears were in his eyes, this great, strong hero of mine. He never
could forgive the way his father had been malformedthe sordid lies and
the petty thefts he had been compelled to, in order to put food in his
childrens mouths.

My father was a good man, Ernest once said to me. The soul of him
was good, and yet it was twisted, and maimed, and blunted by the
savagery of his life. He was made into a broken-down beast by his
masters, the arch-beasts. He should be alive to-day, like your father.
He had a strong constitution. But he was caught in the machine and
worked to deathfor profit. Think of it. For profithis life blood
transmuted into a wine-supper, or a jewelled gewgaw, or some similar
sense-orgy of the parasitic and idle rich, his masters, the
arch-beasts.




CHAPTER VII.
THE BISHOPS VISION


The Bishop is out of hand, Ernest wrote me. He is clear up in the
air. Tonight he is going to begin putting to rights this very miserable
world of ours. He is going to deliver his message. He has told me so,
and I cannot dissuade him. To-night he is chairman of the I.P.H.,[1]
and he will embody his message in his introductory remarks.

 [1] There is no clew to the name of the organization for which these
 initials stand.

May I bring you to hear him? Of course, he is foredoomed to futility.
It will break your heartit will break his; but for you it will be an
excellent object lesson. You know, dear heart, how proud I am because
you love me. And because of that I want you to know my fullest value, I
want to redeem, in your eyes, some small measure of my unworthiness.
And so it is that my pride desires that you shall know my thinking is
correct and right. My views are harsh; the futility of so noble a soul
as the Bishop will show you the compulsion for such harshness. So come
to-night. Sad though this nights happening will be, I feel that it
will but draw you more closely to me.

The I.P.H. held its convention that night in San Francisco.[2] This
convention had been called to consider public immorality and the remedy
for it. Bishop Morehouse presided. He was very nervous as he sat on the
platform, and I could see the high tension he was under. By his side
were Bishop Dickinson; H. H. Jones, the head of the ethical department
in the University of California; Mrs. W. W. Hurd, the great charity
organizer; Philip Ward, the equally great philanthropist; and several
lesser luminaries in the field of morality and charity. Bishop
Morehouse arose and abruptly began:

 [2] It took but a few minutes to cross by ferry from Berkeley to San
 Francisco. These, and the other bay cities, practically composed one
 community.

I was in my brougham, driving through the streets. It was night-time.
Now and then I looked through the carriage windows, and suddenly my
eyes seemed to be opened, and I saw things as they really are. At first
I covered my eyes with my hands to shut out the awful sight, and then,
in the darkness, the question came to me: What is to be done? What is
to be done? A little later the question came to me in another way: What
would the Master do? And with the question a great light seemed to fill
the place, and I saw my duty sun-clear, as Saul saw his on the way to
Damascus.

I stopped the carriage, got out, and, after a few minutes
conversation, persuaded two of the public women to get into the
brougham with me. If Jesus was right, then these two unfortunates were
my sisters, and the only hope of their purification was in my affection
and tenderness.

I live in one of the loveliest localities of San Francisco. The house
in which I live cost a hundred thousand dollars, and its furnishings,
books, and works of art cost as much more. The house is a mansion. No,
it is a palace, wherein there are many servants. I never knew what
palaces were good for. I had thought they were to live in. But now I
know. I took the two women of the street to my palace, and they are
going to stay with me. I hope to fill every room in my palace with such
sisters as they.

The audience had been growing more and more restless and unsettled, and
the faces of those that sat on the platform had been betraying greater
and greater dismay and consternation. And at this point Bishop
Dickinson arose, and with an expression of disgust on his face, fled
from the platform and the hall. But Bishop Morehouse, oblivious to all,
his eyes filled with his vision, continued:

Oh, sisters and brothers, in this act of mine I find the solution of
all my difficulties. I didnt know what broughams were made for, but
now I know. They are made to carry the weak, the sick, and the aged;
they are made to show honor to those who have lost the sense even of
shame.

I did not know what palaces were made for, but now I have found a use
for them. The palaces of the Church should be hospitals and nurseries
for those who have fallen by the wayside and are perishing.

He made a long pause, plainly overcome by the thought that was in him,
and nervous how best to express it.

I am not fit, dear brethren, to tell you anything about morality. I
have lived in shame and hypocrisies too long to be able to help others;
but my action with those women, sisters of mine, shows me that the
better way is easy to find. To those who believe in Jesus and his
gospel there can be no other relation between man and man than the
relation of affection. Love alone is stronger than sinstronger than
death. I therefore say to the rich among you that it is their duty to
do what I have done and am doing. Let each one of you who is prosperous
take into his house some thief and treat him as his brother, some
unfortunate and treat her as his sister, and San Francisco will need no
police force and no magistrates; the prisons will be turned into
hospitals, and the criminal will disappear with his crime.

We must give ourselves and not our money alone. We must do as Christ
did; that is the message of the Church today. We have wandered far from
the Masters teaching. We are consumed in our own flesh-pots. We have
put mammon in the place of Christ. I have here a poem that tells the
whole story. I should like to read it to you. It was written by an
erring soul who yet saw clearly.[3] It must not be mistaken for an
attack upon the Catholic Church. It is an attack upon all churches,
upon the pomp and splendor of all churches that have wandered from the
Masters path and hedged themselves in from his lambs. Here it is:

The silver trumpets rang across the Dome;
    The people knelt upon the ground with awe;
    And borne upon the necks of men I saw,
Like some great God, the Holy Lord of Rome.

Priest-like, he wore a robe more white than foam,
    And, king-like, swathed himself in royal red,
    Three crowns of gold rose high upon his head;
In splendor and in light the Pope passed home.

My heart stole back across wide wastes of years
    To One who wandered by a lonely sea;
And sought in vain for any place of rest:
Foxes have holes, and every bird its nest,
    I, only I, must wander wearily,
And bruise my feet, and drink wine salt with tears.

 [3] Oscar Wilde, one of the lords of language of the nineteenth
 century of the Christian Era.

The audience was agitated, but unresponsive. Yet Bishop Morehouse was
not aware of it. He held steadily on his way.

And so I say to the rich among you, and to all the rich, that bitterly
you oppress the Masters lambs. You have hardened your hearts. You have
closed your ears to the voices that are crying in the landthe voices
of pain and sorrow that you will not hear but that some day will be
heard. And so I say

But at this point H. H. Jones and Philip Ward, who had already risen
from their chairs, led the Bishop off the platform, while the audience
sat breathless and shocked.

Ernest laughed harshly and savagely when he had gained the street. His
laughter jarred upon me. My heart seemed ready to burst with suppressed
tears.

He has delivered his message, Ernest cried. The manhood and the
deep-hidden, tender nature of their Bishop burst out, and his Christian
audience, that loved him, concluded that he was crazy! Did you see them
leading him so solicitously from the platform? There must have been
laughter in hell at the spectacle.

Nevertheless, it will make a great impression, what the Bishop did and
said to-night, I said.

Think so? Ernest queried mockingly.

It will make a sensation, I asserted. Didnt you see the reporters
scribbling like mad while he was speaking?

Not a line of which will appear in to-morrows papers.

I cant believe it, I cried.

Just wait and see, was the answer. Not a line, not a thought that he
uttered. The daily press? The daily suppressage!

But the reporters, I objected. I saw them.

Not a word that he uttered will see print. You have forgotten the
editors. They draw their salaries for the policy they maintain. Their
policy is to print nothing that is a vital menace to the established.
The Bishops utterance was a violent assault upon the established
morality. It was heresy. They led him from the platform to prevent him
from uttering more heresy. The newspapers will purge his heresy in the
oblivion of silence. The press of the United States? It is a parasitic
growth that battens on the capitalist class. Its function is to serve
the established by moulding public opinion, and right well it serves
it.

Let me prophesy. To-morrows papers will merely mention that the
Bishop is in poor health, that he has been working too hard, and that
he broke down last night. The next mention, some days hence, will be to
the effect that he is suffering from nervous prostration and has been
given a vacation by his grateful flock. After that, one of two things
will happen: either the Bishop will see the error of his way and return
from his vacation a well man in whose eyes there are no more visions,
or else he will persist in his madness, and then you may expect to see
in the papers, couched pathetically and tenderly, the announcement of
his insanity. After that he will be left to gibber his visions to
padded walls.

Now there you go too far! I cried out.

In the eyes of society it will truly be insanity, he replied. What
honest man, who is not insane, would take lost women and thieves into
his house to dwell with him sisterly and brotherly? True, Christ died
between two thieves, but that is another story. Insanity? The mental
processes of the man with whom one disagrees, are always wrong.
Therefore the mind of the man is wrong. Where is the line between wrong
mind and insane mind? It is inconceivable that any sane man can
radically disagree with ones most sane conclusions.

There is a good example of it in this evenings paper. Mary McKenna
lives south of Market Street. She is a poor but honest woman. She is
also patriotic. But she has erroneous ideas concerning the American
flag and the protection it is supposed to symbolize. And heres what
happened to her. Her husband had an accident and was laid up in
hospital three months. In spite of taking in washing, she got behind in
her rent. Yesterday they evicted her. But first, she hoisted an
American flag, and from under its folds she announced that by virtue of
its protection they could not turn her out on to the cold street. What
was done? She was arrested and arraigned for insanity. To-day she was
examined by the regular insanity experts. She was found insane. She was
consigned to the Napa Asylum.

But that is far-fetched, I objected. Suppose I should disagree with
everybody about the literary style of a book. They wouldnt send me to
an asylum for that.

Very true, he replied. But such divergence of opinion would
constitute no menace to society. Therein lies the difference. The
divergence of opinion on the parts of Mary McKenna and the Bishop do
menace society. What if all the poor people should refuse to pay rent
and shelter themselves under the American flag? Landlordism would go
crumbling. The Bishops views are just as perilous to society. Ergo, to
the asylum with him.

But still I refused to believe.

Wait and see, Ernest said, and I waited.

Next morning I sent out for all the papers. So far Ernest was right.
Not a word that Bishop Morehouse had uttered was in print. Mention was
made in one or two of the papers that he had been overcome by his
feelings. Yet the platitudes of the speakers that followed him were
reported at length.

Several days later the brief announcement was made that he had gone
away on a vacation to recover from the effects of overwork. So far so
good, but there had been no hint of insanity, nor even of nervous
collapse. Little did I dream the terrible road the Bishop was destined
to travelthe Gethsemane and crucifixion that Ernest had pondered
about.




CHAPTER VIII.
THE MACHINE BREAKERS


It was just before Ernest ran for Congress, on the socialist ticket,
that father gave what he privately called his Profit and Loss dinner.
Ernest called it the dinner of the Machine Breakers. In point of fact,
it was merely a dinner for business mensmall business men, of course.
I doubt if one of them was interested in any business the total
capitalization of which exceeded a couple of hundred thousand dollars.
They were truly representative middle-class business men.

There was Owen, of Silverberg, Owen & Companya large grocery firm with
several branch stores. We bought our groceries from them. There were
both partners of the big drug firm of Kowalt & Washburn, and Mr.
Asmunsen, the owner of a large granite quarry in Contra Costa County.
And there were many similar men, owners or part-owners in small
factories, small businesses and small industriessmall capitalists, in
short.

They were shrewd-faced, interesting men, and they talked with
simplicity and clearness. Their unanimous complaint was against the
corporations and trusts. Their creed was, Bust the Trusts. All
oppression originated in the trusts, and one and all told the same tale
of woe. They advocated government ownership of such trusts as the
railroads and telegraphs, and excessive income taxes, graduated with
ferocity, to destroy large accumulations. Likewise they advocated, as a
cure for local ills, municipal ownership of such public utilities as
water, gas, telephones, and street railways.

Especially interesting was Mr. Asmunsens narrative of his tribulations
as a quarry owner. He confessed that he never made any profits out of
his quarry, and this, in spite of the enormous volume of business that
had been caused by the destruction of San Francisco by the big
earthquake. For six years the rebuilding of San Francisco had been
going on, and his business had quadrupled and octupled, and yet he was
no better off.

The railroad knows my business just a little bit better than I do, he
said. It knows my operating expenses to a cent, and it knows the terms
of my contracts. How it knows these things I can only guess. It must
have spies in my employ, and it must have access to the parties to all
my contracts. For look you, when I place a big contract, the terms of
which favor me a goodly profit, the freight rate from my quarry to
market is promptly raised. No explanation is made. The railroad gets my
profit. Under such circumstances I have never succeeded in getting the
railroad to reconsider its raise. On the other hand, when there have
been accidents, increased expenses of operating, or contracts with less
profitable terms, I have always succeeded in getting the railroad to
lower its rate. What is the result? Large or small, the railroad always
gets my profits.

What remains to you over and above, Ernest interrupted to ask, would
roughly be the equivalent of your salary as a manager did the railroad
own the quarry.

The very thing, Mr. Asmunsen replied. Only a short time ago I had my
books gone through for the past ten years. I discovered that for those
ten years my gain was just equivalent to a managers salary. The
railroad might just as well have owned my quarry and hired me to run
it.

But with this difference, Ernest laughed; the railroad would have
had to assume all the risk which you so obligingly assumed for it.

Very true, Mr. Asmunsen answered sadly.

Having let them have their say, Ernest began asking questions right and
left. He began with Mr. Owen.

You started a branch store here in Berkeley about six months ago?

Yes, Mr. Owen answered.

And since then Ive noticed that three little corner groceries have
gone out of business. Was your branch store the cause of it?

Mr. Owen affirmed with a complacent smile. They had no chance against
us.

Why not?

We had greater capital. With a large business there is always less
waste and greater efficiency.

And your branch store absorbed the profits of the three small ones. I
see. But tell me, what became of the owners of the three stores?

One is driving a delivery wagon for us. I dont know what happened to
the other two.

Ernest turned abruptly on Mr. Kowalt.

You sell a great deal at cut-rates.[1] What have become of the owners
of the small drug stores that you forced to the wall?

 [1] A lowering of selling price to cost, and even to less than cost.
 Thus, a large company could sell at a loss for a longer period than a
 small company, and so drive the small company out of business. A
 common device of competition.

One of them, Mr. Haasfurther, has charge now of our prescription
department, was the answer.

And you absorbed the profits they had been making?

Surely. That is what we are in business for.

And you? Ernest said suddenly to Mr. Asmunsen. You are disgusted
because the railroad has absorbed your profits?

Mr. Asmunsen nodded.

What you want is to make profits yourself?

Again Mr. Asmunsen nodded.

Out of others?

There was no answer.

Out of others? Ernest insisted.

That is the way profits are made, Mr. Asmunsen replied curtly.

Then the business game is to make profits out of others, and to
prevent others from making profits out of you. Thats it, isnt it?

Ernest had to repeat his question before Mr. Asmunsen gave an answer,
and then he said:

Yes, thats it, except that we do not object to the others making
profits so long as they are not extortionate.

By extortionate you mean large; yet you do not object to making large
profits yourself? . . . Surely not?

And Mr. Asmunsen amiably confessed to the weakness. There was one other
man who was quizzed by Ernest at this juncture, a Mr. Calvin, who had
once been a great dairy-owner.

Some time ago you were fighting the Milk Trust, Ernest said to him;
and now you are in Grange politics.[2] How did it happen?

 [2] Many efforts were made during this period to organize the
 perishing farmer class into a political party, the aim of which was to
 destroy the trusts and corporations by drastic legislation. All such
 attempts ended in failure.

Oh, I havent quit the fight, Mr. Calvin answered, and he looked
belligerent enough. Im fighting the Trust on the only field where it
is possible to fightthe political field. Let me show you. A few years
ago we dairymen had everything our own way.

But you competed among yourselves? Ernest interrupted.

Yes, that was what kept the profits down. We did try to organize, but
independent dairymen always broke through us. Then came the Milk
Trust.

Financed by surplus capital from Standard Oil,[3] Ernest said.

 [3] The first successful great trustalmost a generation in advance of
 the rest.

Yes, Mr. Calvin acknowledged. But we did not know it at the time.
Its agents approached us with a club. Come in and be fat, was their
proposition, or stay out and starve. Most of us came in. Those that
didnt, starved. Oh, it paid us . . . at first. Milk was raised a cent
a quart. One-quarter of this cent came to us. Three-quarters of it went
to the Trust. Then milk was raised another cent, only we didnt get any
of that cent. Our complaints were useless. The Trust was in control. We
discovered that we were pawns. Finally, the additional quarter of a
cent was denied us. Then the Trust began to squeeze us out. What could
we do? We were squeezed out. There were no dairymen, only a Milk
Trust.

But with milk two cents higher, I should think you could have
competed, Ernest suggested slyly.

So we thought. We tried it. Mr. Calvin paused a moment. It broke us.
The Trust could put milk upon the market more cheaply than we. It could
sell still at a slight profit when we were selling at actual loss. I
dropped fifty thousand dollars in that venture. Most of us went
bankrupt.[4] The dairymen were wiped out of existence.

 [4] Bankruptcya peculiar institution that enabled an individual, who
 had failed in competitive industry, to forego paying his debts. The
 effect was to ameliorate the too savage conditions of the
 fang-and-claw social struggle.

So the Trust took your profits away from you, Ernest said, and
youve gone into politics in order to legislate the Trust out of
existence and get the profits back?

Mr. Calvins face lighted up. That is precisely what I say in my
speeches to the farmers. Thats our whole idea in a nutshell.

And yet the Trust produces milk more cheaply than could the
independent dairymen? Ernest queried.

Why shouldnt it, with the splendid organization and new machinery its
large capital makes possible?

There is no discussion, Ernest answered. It certainly should, and,
furthermore, it does.

Mr. Calvin here launched out into a political speech in exposition of
his views. He was warmly followed by a number of the others, and the
cry of all was to destroy the trusts.

Poor simple folk, Ernest said to me in an undertone. They see
clearly as far as they see, but they see only to the ends of their
noses.

A little later he got the floor again, and in his characteristic way
controlled it for the rest of the evening.

I have listened carefully to all of you, he began, and I see plainly
that you play the business game in the orthodox fashion. Life sums
itself up to you in profits. You have a firm and abiding belief that
you were created for the sole purpose of making profits. Only there is
a hitch. In the midst of your own profit-making along comes the trust
and takes your profits away from you. This is a dilemma that interferes
somehow with the aim of creation, and the only way out, as it seems to
you, is to destroy that which takes from you your profits.

I have listened carefully, and there is only one name that will
epitomize you. I shall call you that name. You are machine-breakers. Do
you know what a machine-breaker is? Let me tell you. In the eighteenth
century, in England, men and women wove cloth on hand-looms in their
own cottages. It was a slow, clumsy, and costly way of weaving cloth,
this cottage system of manufacture. Along came the steam-engine and
labor-saving machinery. A thousand looms assembled in a large factory,
and driven by a central engine wove cloth vastly more cheaply than
could the cottage weavers on their hand-looms. Here in the factory was
combination, and before it competition faded away. The men and women
who had worked the hand-looms for themselves now went into the
factories and worked the machine-looms, not for themselves, but for the
capitalist owners. Furthermore, little children went to work on the
machine-looms, at lower wages, and displaced the men. This made hard
times for the men. Their standard of living fell. They starved. And
they said it was all the fault of the machines. Therefore, they
proceeded to break the machines. They did not succeed, and they were
very stupid.

Yet you have not learned their lesson. Here are you, a century and a
half later, trying to break machines. By your own confession the trust
machines do the work more efficiently and more cheaply than you can.
That is why you cannot compete with them. And yet you would break those
machines. You are even more stupid than the stupid workmen of England.
And while you maunder about restoring competition, the trusts go on
destroying you.

One and all you tell the same story,the passing away of competition
and the coming on of combination. You, Mr. Owen, destroyed competition
here in Berkeley when your branch store drove the three small groceries
out of business. Your combination was more effective. Yet you feel the
pressure of other combinations on you, the trust combinations, and you
cry out. It is because you are not a trust. If you were a grocery trust
for the whole United States, you would be singing another song. And the
song would be, Blessed are the trusts. And yet again, not only is
your small combination not a trust, but you are aware yourself of its
lack of strength. You are beginning to divine your own end. You feel
yourself and your branch stores a pawn in the game. You see the
powerful interests rising and growing more powerful day by day; you
feel their mailed hands descending upon your profits and taking a pinch
here and a pinch therethe railroad trust, the oil trust, the steel
trust, the coal trust; and you know that in the end they will destroy
you, take away from you the last per cent of your little profits.

You, sir, are a poor gamester. When you squeezed out the three small
groceries here in Berkeley by virtue of your superior combination, you
swelled out your chest, talked about efficiency and enterprise, and
sent your wife to Europe on the profits you had gained by eating up the
three small groceries. It is dog eat dog, and you ate them up. But, on
the other hand, you are being eaten up in turn by the bigger dogs,
wherefore you squeal. And what I say to you is true of all of you at
this table. You are all squealing. You are all playing the losing game,
and you are all squealing about it.

But when you squeal you dont state the situation flatly, as I have
stated it. You dont say that you like to squeeze profits out of
others, and that you are making all the row because others are
squeezing your profits out of you. No, you are too cunning for that.
You say something else. You make small-capitalist political speeches
such as Mr. Calvin made. What did he say? Here are a few of his phrases
I caught: Our original principles are all right, What this country
requires is a return to fundamental American methodsfree opportunity
for all, The spirit of liberty in which this nation was born, Let
us return to the principles of our forefathers.

When he says free opportunity for all, he means free opportunity to
squeeze profits, which freedom of opportunity is now denied him by the
great trusts. And the absurd thing about it is that you have repeated
these phrases so often that you believe them. You want opportunity to
plunder your fellow-men in your own small way, but you hypnotize
yourselves into thinking you want freedom. You are piggish and
acquisitive, but the magic of your phrases leads you to believe that
you are patriotic. Your desire for profits, which is sheer selfishness,
you metamorphose into altruistic solicitude for suffering humanity.
Come on now, right here amongst ourselves, and be honest for once. Look
the matter in the face and state it in direct terms.

There were flushed and angry faces at the table, and withal a measure
of awe. They were a little frightened at this smooth-faced young
fellow, and the swing and smash of his words, and his dreadful trait of
calling a spade a spade. Mr. Calvin promptly replied.

And why not? he demanded. Why can we not return to the ways of our
fathers when this republic was founded? You have spoken much truth, Mr.
Everhard, unpalatable though it has been. But here amongst ourselves
let us speak out. Let us throw off all disguise and accept the truth as
Mr. Everhard has flatly stated it. It is true that we smaller
capitalists are after profits, and that the trusts are taking our
profits away from us. It is true that we want to destroy the trusts in
order that our profits may remain to us. And why can we not do it? Why
not? I say, why not?

Ah, now we come to the gist of the matter, Ernest said with a pleased
expression. Ill try to tell you why not, though the telling will be
rather hard. You see, you fellows have studied business, in a small
way, but you have not studied social evolution at all. You are in the
midst of a transition stage now in economic evolution, but you do not
understand it, and thats what causes all the confusion. Why cannot you
return? Because you cant. You can no more make water run up hill than
can you cause the tide of economic evolution to flow back in its
channel along the way it came. Joshua made the sun stand still upon
Gibeon, but you would outdo Joshua. You would make the sun go backward
in the sky. You would have time retrace its steps from noon to morning.

In the face of labor-saving machinery, of organized production, of the
increased efficiency of combination, you would set the economic sun
back a whole generation or so to the time when there were no great
capitalists, no great machinery, no railroadsa time when a host of
little capitalists warred with each other in economic anarchy, and when
production was primitive, wasteful, unorganized, and costly. Believe
me, Joshuas task was easier, and he had Jehovah to help him. But God
has forsaken you small capitalists. The sun of the small capitalists is
setting. It will never rise again. Nor is it in your power even to make
it stand still. You are perishing, and you are doomed to perish utterly
from the face of society.

This is the fiat of evolution. It is the word of God. Combination is
stronger than competition. Primitive man was a puny creature hiding in
the crevices of the rocks. He combined and made war upon his
carnivorous enemies. They were competitive beasts. Primitive man was a
combinative beast, and because of it he rose to primacy over all the
animals. And man has been achieving greater and greater combinations
ever since. It is combination _versus_ competition, a thousand
centuries long struggle, in which competition has always been worsted.
Whoso enlists on the side of competition perishes.

But the trusts themselves arose out of competition, Mr. Calvin
interrupted.

Very true, Ernest answered. And the trusts themselves destroyed
competition. That, by your own word, is why you are no longer in the
dairy business.

The first laughter of the evening went around the table, and even Mr.
Calvin joined in the laugh against himself.

And now, while we are on the trusts, Ernest went on, let us settle a
few things. I shall make certain statements, and if you disagree with
them, speak up. Silence will mean agreement. Is it not true that a
machine-loom will weave more cloth and weave more cheaply than a
hand-loom? He paused, but nobody spoke up. Is it not then highly
irrational to break the machine-loom and go back to the clumsy and more
costly hand-loom method of weaving? Heads nodded in acquiescence. Is
it not true that that known as a trust produces more efficiently and
cheaply than can a thousand competing small concerns? Still no one
objected. Then is it not irrational to destroy that cheap and
efficient combination?

No one answered for a long time. Then Mr. Kowalt spoke.

What are we to do, then? he demanded. To destroy the trusts is the
only way we can see to escape their domination.

Ernest was all fire and aliveness on the instant.

Ill show you another way! he cried. Let us not destroy those
wonderful machines that produce efficiently and cheaply. Let us control
them. Let us profit by their efficiency and cheapness. Let us run them
for ourselves. Let us oust the present owners of the wonderful
machines, and let us own the wonderful machines ourselves. That,
gentlemen, is socialism, a greater combination than the trusts, a
greater economic and social combination than any that has as yet
appeared on the planet. It is in line with evolution. We meet
combination with greater combination. It is the winning side. Come on
over with us socialists and play on the winning side.

Here arose dissent. There was a shaking of heads, and mutterings arose.

All right, then, you prefer to be anachronisms, Ernest laughed. You
prefer to play atavistic rles. You are doomed to perish as all
atavisms perish. Have you ever asked what will happen to you when
greater combinations than even the present trusts arise? Have you ever
considered where you will stand when the great trusts themselves
combine into the combination of combinationsinto the social, economic,
and political trust?

He turned abruptly and irrelevantly upon Mr. Calvin.

Tell me, Ernest said, if this is not true. You are compelled to form
a new political party because the old parties are in the hands of the
trusts. The chief obstacle to your Grange propaganda is the trusts.
Behind every obstacle you encounter, every blow that smites you, every
defeat that you receive, is the hand of the trusts. Is this not so?
Tell me.

Mr. Calvin sat in uncomfortable silence.

Go ahead, Ernest encouraged.

It is true, Mr. Calvin confessed. We captured the state legislature
of Oregon and put through splendid protective legislation, and it was
vetoed by the governor, who was a creature of the trusts. We elected a
governor of Colorado, and the legislature refused to permit him to take
office. Twice we have passed a national income tax, and each time the
supreme court smashed it as unconstitutional. The courts are in the
hands of the trusts. We, the people, do not pay our judges
sufficiently. But there will come a time

When the combination of the trusts will control all legislation, when
the combination of the trusts will itself be the government, Ernest
interrupted.

Never! never! were the cries that arose. Everybody was excited and
belligerent.

Tell me, Ernest demanded, what will you do when such a time comes?

We will rise in our strength! Mr. Asmunsen cried, and many voices
backed his decision.

That will be civil war, Ernest warned them.

So be it, civil war, was Mr. Asmunsens answer, with the cries of all
the men at the table behind him. We have not forgotten the deeds of
our forefathers. For our liberties we are ready to fight and die.

Ernest smiled.

Do not forget, he said, that we had tacitly agreed that liberty in
your case, gentlemen, means liberty to squeeze profits out of others.

The table was angry, now, fighting angry; but Ernest controlled the
tumult and made himself heard.

One more question. When you rise in your strength, remember, the
reason for your rising will be that the government is in the hands of
the trusts. Therefore, against your strength the government will turn
the regular army, the navy, the militia, the policein short, the whole
organized war machinery of the United States. Where will your strength
be then?

Dismay sat on their faces, and before they could recover, Ernest struck
again.

Do you remember, not so long ago, when our regular army was only fifty
thousand? Year by year it has been increased until to-day it is three
hundred thousand.

Again he struck.

Nor is that all. While you diligently pursued that favorite phantom of
yours, called profits, and moralized about that favorite fetich of
yours, called competition, even greater and more direful things have
been accomplished by combination. There is the militia.

It is our strength! cried Mr. Kowalt. With it we would repel the
invasion of the regular army.

You would go into the militia yourself, was Ernests retort, and be
sent to Maine, or Florida, or the Philippines, or anywhere else, to
drown in blood your own comrades civil-warring for their liberties.
While from Kansas, or Wisconsin, or any other state, your own comrades
would go into the militia and come here to California to drown in blood
your own civil-warring.

Now they were really shocked, and they sat wordless, until Mr. Owen
murmured:

We would not go into the militia. That would settle it. We would not
be so foolish.

Ernest laughed outright.

You do not understand the combination that has been effected. You
could not help yourself. You would be drafted into the militia.

There is such a thing as civil law, Mr. Owen insisted.

Not when the government suspends civil law. In that day when you speak
of rising in your strength, your strength would be turned against
yourself. Into the militia you would go, willy-nilly. Habeas corpus, I
heard some one mutter just now. Instead of habeas corpus you would get
post mortems. If you refused to go into the militia, or to obey after
you were in, you would be tried by drumhead court martial and shot down
like dogs. It is the law.

It is not the law! Mr. Calvin asserted positively. There is no such
law. Young man, you have dreamed all this. Why, you spoke of sending
the militia to the Philippines. That is unconstitutional. The
Constitution especially states that the militia cannot be sent out of
the country.

Whats the Constitution got to do with it? Ernest demanded. The
courts interpret the Constitution, and the courts, as Mr. Asmunsen
agreed, are the creatures of the trusts. Besides, it is as I have said,
the law. It has been the law for years, for nine years, gentlemen.

That we can be drafted into the militia? Mr. Calvin asked
incredulously. That they can shoot us by drumhead court martial if we
refuse?

Yes, Ernest answered, precisely that.

How is it that we have never heard of this law? my father asked, and
I could see that it was likewise new to him.

For two reasons, Ernest said. First, there has been no need to
enforce it. If there had, youd have heard of it soon enough. And
secondly, the law was rushed through Congress and the Senate secretly,
with practically no discussion. Of course, the newspapers made no
mention of it. But we socialists knew about it. We published it in our
papers. But you never read our papers.

I still insist you are dreaming, Mr. Calvin said stubbornly. The
country would never have permitted it.

But the country did permit it, Ernest replied. And as for my
dreaming he put his hand in his pocket and drew out a small
pamphlettell me if this looks like dream-stuff.

He opened it and began to read:

Section One, be it enacted, and so forth and so forth, that the
militia shall consist of every able-bodied male citizen of the
respective states, territories, and District of Columbia, who is more
than eighteen and less than forty-five years of age.

Section Seven, that any officer or enlisted manremember Section
One, gentlemen, you are all enlisted menthat any enlisted man of the
militia who shall refuse or neglect to present himself to such
mustering officer upon being called forth as herein prescribed, shall
be subject to trial by court martial, and shall be punished as such
court martial shall direct.

Section Eight, that courts martial, for the trial of officers or men
of the militia, shall be composed of militia officers only.

Section Nine, that the militia, when called into the actual service
of the United States, shall be subject to the same rules and articles
of war as the regular troops of the United States.

There you are gentlemen, American citizens, and fellow-militiamen.
Nine years ago we socialists thought that law was aimed against labor.
But it would seem that it was aimed against you, too. Congressman
Wiley, in the brief discussion that was permitted, said that the bill
provided for a reserve force to take the mob by the throatyoure the
mob, gentlemenand protect at all hazards life, liberty, and
property. And in the time to come, when you rise in your strength,
remember that you will be rising against the property of the trusts,
and the liberty of the trusts, according to the law, to squeeze you.
Your teeth are pulled, gentlemen. Your claws are trimmed. In the day
you rise in your strength, toothless and clawless, you will be as
harmless as any army of clams.

I dont believe it! Kowalt cried. There is no such law. It is a
canard got up by you socialists.

This bill was introduced in the House of Representatives on July 30,
1902, was the reply. It was introduced by Representative Dick of
Ohio. It was rushed through. It was passed unanimously by the Senate on
January 14, 1903. And just seven days afterward was approved by the
President of the United States.[5]

 [5] Everhard was right in the essential particulars, though his date
 of the introduction of the bill is in error. The bill was introduced
 on June 30, and not on July 30. The _Congressional Record_ is here in
 Ardis, and a reference to it shows mention of the bill on the
 following dates: June 30, December 9, 15, 16, and 17, 1902, and
 January 7 and 14, 1903. The ignorance evidenced by the business men at
 the dinner was nothing unusual. Very few people knew of the existence
 of this law. E. Untermann, a revolutionist, in July, 1903, published a
 pamphlet at Girard, Kansas, on the Militia Bill. This pamphlet had a
 small circulation among workingmen; but already had the segregation of
 classes proceeded so far, that the members of the middle class never
 heard of the pamphlet at all, and so remained in ignorance of the law.




CHAPTER IX.
THE MATHEMATICS OF A DREAM


In the midst of the consternation his revelation had produced, Ernest
began again to speak.

You have said, a dozen of you to-night, that socialism is impossible.
You have asserted the impossible, now let me demonstrate the
inevitable. Not only is it inevitable that you small capitalists shall
pass away, but it is inevitable that the large capitalists, and the
trusts also, shall pass away. Remember, the tide of evolution never
flows backward. It flows on and on, and it flows from competition to
combination, and from little combination to large combination, and from
large combination to colossal combination, and it flows on to
socialism, which is the most colossal combination of all.

You tell me that I dream. Very good. Ill give you the mathematics of
my dream; and here, in advance, I challenge you to show that my
mathematics are wrong. I shall develop the inevitability of the
breakdown of the capitalist system, and I shall demonstrate
mathematically why it must break down. Here goes, and bear with me if
at first I seem irrelevant.

Let us, first of all, investigate a particular industrial process, and
whenever I state something with which you disagree, please interrupt
me. Here is a shoe factory. This factory takes leather and makes it
into shoes. Here is one hundred dollars worth of leather. It goes
through the factory and comes out in the form of shoes, worth, let us
say, two hundred dollars. What has happened? One hundred dollars has
been added to the value of the leather. How was it added? Let us see.

Capital and labor added this value of one hundred dollars. Capital
furnished the factory, the machines, and paid all the expenses. Labor
furnished labor. By the joint effort of capital and labor one hundred
dollars of value was added. Are you all agreed so far?

Heads nodded around the table in affirmation.

Labor and capital having produced this one hundred dollars, now
proceed to divide it. The statistics of this division are fractional;
so let us, for the sake of convenience, make them roughly approximate.
Capital takes fifty dollars as its share, and labor gets in wages fifty
dollars as its share. We will not enter into the squabbling over the
division.[1] No matter how much squabbling takes place, in one
percentage or another the division is arranged. And take notice here,
that what is true of this particular industrial process is true of all
industrial processes. Am I right?

 [1] Everhard here clearly develops the cause of all the labor troubles
 of that time. In the division of the joint-product, capital wanted all
 it could get, and labor wanted all it could get. This quarrel over the
 division was irreconcilable. So long as the system of capitalistic
 production existed, labor and capital continued to quarrel over the
 division of the joint-product. It is a ludicrous spectacle to us, but
 we must not forget that we have seven centuries advantage over those
 that lived in that time.

Again the whole table agreed with Ernest.

Now, suppose labor, having received its fifty dollars, wanted to buy
back shoes. It could only buy back fifty dollars worth. Thats clear,
isnt it?

And now we shift from this particular process to the sum total of all
industrial processes in the United States, which includes the leather
itself, raw material, transportation, selling, everything. We will say,
for the sake of round figures, that the total production of wealth in
the United States in one year is four billion dollars. Then labor has
received in wages, during the same period, two billion dollars. Four
billion dollars has been produced. How much of this can labor buy back?
Two billions. There is no discussion of this, I am sure. For that
matter, my percentages are mild. Because of a thousand capitalistic
devices, labor cannot buy back even half of the total product.

But to return. We will say labor buys back two billions. Then it
stands to reason that labor can consume only two billions. There are
still two billions to be accounted for, which labor cannot buy back and
consume.

Labor does not consume its two billions, even, Mr. Kowalt spoke up.
If it did, it would not have any deposits in the savings banks.

Labors deposits in the savings banks are only a sort of reserve fund
that is consumed as fast as it accumulates. These deposits are saved
for old age, for sickness and accident, and for funeral expenses. The
savings bank deposit is simply a piece of the loaf put back on the
shelf to be eaten next day. No, labor consumes all of the total product
that its wages will buy back.

Two billions are left to capital. After it has paid its expenses, does
it consume the remainder? Does capital consume all of its two
billions?

Ernest stopped and put the question point blank to a number of the men.
They shook their heads.

I dont know, one of them frankly said.

Of course you do, Ernest went on. Stop and think a moment. If
capital consumed its share, the sum total of capital could not
increase. It would remain constant. If you will look at the economic
history of the United States, you will see that the sum total of
capital has continually increased. Therefore capital does not consume
its share. Do you remember when England owned so much of our railroad
bonds? As the years went by, we bought back those bonds. What does that
mean? That part of capitals unconsumed share bought back the bonds.
What is the meaning of the fact that to-day the capitalists of the
United States own hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars of
Mexican bonds, Russian bonds, Italian bonds, Grecian bonds? The meaning
is that those hundreds and hundreds of millions were part of capitals
share which capital did not consume. Furthermore, from the very
beginning of the capitalist system, capital has never consumed all of
its share.

And now we come to the point. Four billion dollars of wealth is
produced in one year in the United States. Labor buys back and consumes
two billions. Capital does not consume the remaining two billions.
There is a large balance left over unconsumed. What is done with this
balance? What can be done with it? Labor cannot consume any of it, for
labor has already spent all its wages. Capital will not consume this
balance, because, already, according to its nature, it has consumed all
it can. And still remains the balance. What can be done with it? What
is done with it?

It is sold abroad, Mr. Kowalt volunteered.

The very thing, Ernest agreed. Because of this balance arises our
need for a foreign market. This is sold abroad. It has to be sold
abroad. There is no other way of getting rid of it. And that unconsumed
surplus, sold abroad, becomes what we call our favorable balance of
trade. Are we all agreed so far?

Surely it is a waste of time to elaborate these A B Cs of commerce,
Mr. Calvin said tartly. We all understand them.

And it is by these A B Cs I have so carefully elaborated that I shall
confound you, Ernest retorted. Theres the beauty of it. And Im
going to confound you with them right now. Here goes.

The United States is a capitalist country that has developed its
resources. According to its capitalist system of industry, it has an
unconsumed surplus that must be got rid of, and that must be got rid of
abroad.[2] What is true of the United States is true of every other
capitalist country with developed resources. Every one of such
countries has an unconsumed surplus. Dont forget that they have
already traded with one another, and that these surpluses yet remain.
Labor in all these countries has spent its wages, and cannot buy any of
the surpluses. Capital in all these countries has already consumed all
it is able according to its nature. And still remain the surpluses.
They cannot dispose of these surpluses to one another. How are they
going to get rid of them?

 [2] Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States a few years
 prior to this time, made the following public declaration: _A more
 liberal and extensive reciprocity in the purchase and sale of
 commodities is necessary, so that the overproduction of the United
 States can be satisfactorily disposed of to foreign countries._ Of
 course, this overproduction he mentions was the profits of the
 capitalist system over and beyond the consuming power of the
 capitalists. It was at this time that Senator Mark Hanna said: _The
 production of wealth in the United States is one-third larger annually
 than its consumption._ Also a fellow-Senator, Chauncey Depew, said:
 _The American people produce annually two billions more wealth than
 they consume._

Sell them to countries with undeveloped resources, Mr. Kowalt
suggested.

The very thing. You see, my argument is so clear and simple that in
your own minds you carry it on for me. And now for the next step.
Suppose the United States disposes of its surplus to a country with
undeveloped resources like, say, Brazil. Remember this surplus is over
and above trade, which articles of trade have been consumed. What,
then, does the United States get in return from Brazil?

Gold, said Mr. Kowalt.

But there is only so much gold, and not much of it, in the world,
Ernest objected.

Gold in the form of securities and bonds and so forth, Mr. Kowalt
amended.

Now youve struck it, Ernest said. From Brazil the United States, in
return for her surplus, gets bonds and securities. And what does that
mean? It means that the United States is coming to own railroads in
Brazil, factories, mines, and lands in Brazil. And what is the meaning
of that in turn?

Mr. Kowalt pondered and shook his head.

Ill tell you, Ernest continued. It means that the resources of
Brazil are being developed. And now, the next point. When Brazil, under
the capitalist system, has developed her resources, she will herself
have an unconsumed surplus. Can she get rid of this surplus to the
United States? No, because the United States has herself a surplus. Can
the United States do what she previously didget rid of her surplus to
Brazil? No, for Brazil now has a surplus, too.

What happens? The United States and Brazil must both seek out other
countries with undeveloped resources, in order to unload the surpluses
on them. But by the very process of unloading the surpluses, the
resources of those countries are in turn developed. Soon they have
surpluses, and are seeking other countries on which to unload. Now,
gentlemen, follow me. The planet is only so large. There are only so
many countries in the world. What will happen when every country in the
world, down to the smallest and last, with a surplus in its hands,
stands confronting every other country with surpluses in their hands?

He paused and regarded his listeners. The bepuzzlement in their faces
was delicious. Also, there was awe in their faces. Out of abstractions
Ernest had conjured a vision and made them see it. They were seeing it
then, as they sat there, and they were frightened by it.

We started with A B C, Mr. Calvin, Ernest said slyly. I have now
given you the rest of the alphabet. It is very simple. That is the
beauty of it. You surely have the answer forthcoming. What, then, when
every country in the world has an unconsumed surplus? Where will your
capitalist system be then?

But Mr. Calvin shook a troubled head. He was obviously questing back
through Ernests reasoning in search of an error.

Let me briefly go over the ground with you again, Ernest said. We
began with a particular industrial process, the shoe factory. We found
that the division of the joint product that took place there was
similar to the division that took place in the sum total of all
industrial processes. We found that labor could buy back with its wages
only so much of the product, and that capital did not consume all of
the remainder of the product. We found that when labor had consumed to
the full extent of its wages, and when capital had consumed all it
wanted, there was still left an unconsumed surplus. We agreed that this
surplus could only be disposed of abroad. We agreed, also, that the
effect of unloading this surplus on another country would be to develop
the resources of that country, and that in a short time that country
would have an unconsumed surplus. We extended this process to all the
countries on the planet, till every country was producing every year,
and every day, an unconsumed surplus, which it could dispose of to no
other country. And now I ask you again, what are we going to do with
those surpluses?

Still no one answered.

Mr. Calvin? Ernest queried.

It beats me, Mr. Calvin confessed.

I never dreamed of such a thing, Mr. Asmunsen said. And yet it does
seem clear as print.

It was the first time I had ever heard Karl Marxs[3] doctrine of
surplus value elaborated, and Ernest had done it so simply that I, too,
sat puzzled and dumbfounded.

 [3] Karl Marxthe great intellectual hero of Socialism. A German Jew
 of the nineteenth century. A contemporary of John Stuart Mill. It
 seems incredible to us that whole generations should have elapsed
 after the enunciation of Marxs economic discoveries, in which time he
 was sneered at by the worlds accepted thinkers and scholars. Because
 of his discoveries he was banished from his native country, and he
 died an exile in England.

Ill tell you a way to get rid of the surplus, Ernest said. Throw it
into the sea. Throw every year hundreds of millions of dollars worth
of shoes and wheat and clothing and all the commodities of commerce
into the sea. Wont that fix it?

It will certainly fix it, Mr. Calvin answered. But it is absurd for
you to talk that way.

Ernest was upon him like a flash.

Is it a bit more absurd than what you advocate, you machine-breaker,
returning to the antediluvian ways of your forefathers? What do you
propose in order to get rid of the surplus? You would escape the
problem of the surplus by not producing any surplus. And how do you
propose to avoid producing a surplus? By returning to a primitive
method of production, so confused and disorderly and irrational, so
wasteful and costly, that it will be impossible to produce a surplus.

Mr. Calvin swallowed. The point had been driven home. He swallowed
again and cleared his throat.

You are right, he said. I stand convicted. It is absurd. But weve
got to do something. It is a case of life and death for us of the
middle class. We refuse to perish. We elect to be absurd and to return
to the truly crude and wasteful methods of our forefathers. We will put
back industry to its pre-trust stage. We will break the machines. And
what are you going to do about it?

But you cant break the machines, Ernest replied. You cannot make
the tide of evolution flow backward. Opposed to you are two great
forces, each of which is more powerful than you of the middle class.
The large capitalists, the trusts, in short, will not let you turn
back. They dont want the machines destroyed. And greater than the
trusts, and more powerful, is labor. It will not let you destroy the
machines. The ownership of the world, along with the machines, lies
between the trusts and labor. That is the battle alignment. Neither
side wants the destruction of the machines. But each side wants to
possess the machines. In this battle the middle class has no place. The
middle class is a pygmy between two giants. Dont you see, you poor
perishing middle class, you are caught between the upper and nether
millstones, and even now has the grinding begun.

I have demonstrated to you mathematically the inevitable breakdown of
the capitalist system. When every country stands with an unconsumed and
unsalable surplus on its hands, the capitalist system will break down
under the terrific structure of profits that it itself has reared. And
in that day there wont be any destruction of the machines. The
struggle then will be for the ownership of the machines. If labor wins,
your way will be easy. The United States, and the whole world for that
matter, will enter upon a new and tremendous era. Instead of being
crushed by the machines, life will be made fairer, and happier, and
nobler by them. You of the destroyed middle class, along with
laborthere will be nothing but labor then; so you, and all the rest of
labor, will participate in the equitable distribution of the products
of the wonderful machines. And we, all of us, will make new and more
wonderful machines. And there wont be any unconsumed surplus, because
there wont be any profits.

But suppose the trusts win in this battle over the ownership of the
machines and the world? Mr. Kowalt asked.

Then, Ernest answered, you, and labor, and all of us, will be
crushed under the iron heel of a despotism as relentless and terrible
as any despotism that has blackened the pages of the history of man.
That will be a good name for that despotism, the Iron Heel.[4]

 [4] The earliest known use of that name to designate the Oligarchy.

There was a long pause, and every man at the table meditated in ways
unwonted and profound.

But this socialism of yours is a dream, Mr. Calvin said; and
repeated, a dream.

Ill show you something that isnt a dream, then, Ernest answered.
And that something I shall call the Oligarchy. You call it the
Plutocracy. We both mean the same thing, the large capitalists or the
trusts. Let us see where the power lies today. And in order to do so,
let us apportion society into its class divisions.

There are three big classes in society. First comes the Plutocracy,
which is composed of wealthy bankers, railway magnates, corporation
directors, and trust magnates. Second, is the middle class, your class,
gentlemen, which is composed of farmers, merchants, small
manufacturers, and professional men. And third and last comes my class,
the proletariat, which is composed of the wage-workers.[5]

 [5] This division of society made by Everhard is in accordance with
 that made by Lucien Sanial, one of the statistical authorities of that
 time. His calculation of the membership of these divisions by
 occupation, from the United States Census of 1900, is as follows:
 Plutocratic class, 250,251; Middle class, 8,429,845; and Proletariat
 class, 20,393,137.

You cannot but grant that the ownership of wealth constitutes
essential power in the United States to-day. How is this wealth owned
by these three classes? Here are the figures. The Plutocracy owns
sixty-seven billions of wealth. Of the total number of persons engaged
in occupations in the United States, only nine-tenths of one per cent
are from the Plutocracy, yet the Plutocracy owns seventy per cent of
the total wealth. The middle class owns twenty-four billions.
Twenty-nine per cent of those in occupations are from the middle class,
and they own twenty-five per cent of the total wealth. Remains the
proletariat. It owns four billions. Of all persons in occupations,
seventy per cent come from the proletariat; and the proletariat owns
four per cent of the total wealth. Where does the power lie,
gentlemen?

From your own figures, we of the middle class are more powerful than
labor, Mr. Asmunsen remarked.

Calling us weak does not make you stronger in the face of the strength
of the Plutocracy, Ernest retorted. And furthermore, Im not done
with you. There is a greater strength than wealth, and it is greater
because it cannot be taken away. Our strength, the strength of the
proletariat, is in our muscles, in our hands to cast ballots, in our
fingers to pull triggers. This strength we cannot be stripped of. It is
the primitive strength, it is the strength that is to life germane, it
is the strength that is stronger than wealth, and that wealth cannot
take away.

But your strength is detachable. It can be taken away from you. Even
now the Plutocracy is taking it away from you. In the end it will take
it all away from you. And then you will cease to be the middle class.
You will descend to us. You will become proletarians. And the beauty of
it is that you will then add to our strength. We will hail you
brothers, and we will fight shoulder to shoulder in the cause of
humanity.

You see, labor has nothing concrete of which to be despoiled. Its
share of the wealth of the country consists of clothes and household
furniture, with here and there, in very rare cases, an unencumbered
home. But you have the concrete wealth, twenty-four billions of it, and
the Plutocracy will take it away from you. Of course, there is the
large likelihood that the proletariat will take it away first. Dont
you see your position, gentlemen? The middle class is a wobbly little
lamb between a lion and a tiger. If one doesnt get you, the other
will. And if the Plutocracy gets you first, why its only a matter of
time when the Proletariat gets the Plutocracy.

Even your present wealth is not a true measure of your power. The
strength of your wealth at this moment is only an empty shell. That is
why you are crying out your feeble little battle-cry, Return to the
ways of our fathers. You are aware of your impotency. You know that
your strength is an empty shell. And Ill show you the emptiness of it.

What power have the farmers? Over fifty per cent are thralls by virtue
of the fact that they are merely tenants or are mortgaged. And all of
them are thralls by virtue of the fact that the trusts already own or
control (which is the same thing only better)own and control all the
means of marketing the crops, such as cold storage, railroads,
elevators, and steamship lines. And, furthermore, the trusts control
the markets. In all this the farmers are without power. As regards
their political and governmental power, Ill take that up later, along
with the political and governmental power of the whole middle class.

Day by day the trusts squeeze out the farmers as they squeezed out Mr.
Calvin and the rest of the dairymen. And day by day are the merchants
squeezed out in the same way. Do you remember how, in six months, the
Tobacco Trust squeezed out over four hundred cigar stores in New York
City alone? Where are the old-time owners of the coal fields? You know
today, without my telling you, that the Railroad Trust owns or controls
the entire anthracite and bituminous coal fields. Doesnt the Standard
Oil Trust[6] own a score of the ocean lines? And does it not also
control copper, to say nothing of running a smelter trust as a little
side enterprise? There are ten thousand cities in the United States
to-night lighted by the companies owned or controlled by Standard Oil,
and in as many cities all the electric transportation,urban, suburban,
and interurban,is in the hands of Standard Oil. The small capitalists
who were in these thousands of enterprises are gone. You know that.
Its the same way that you are going.

 [6] Standard Oil and Rockefellersee footnote [10]

The small manufacturer is like the farmer; and small manufacturers and
farmers to-day are reduced, to all intents and purposes, to feudal
tenure. For that matter, the professional men and the artists are at
this present moment villeins in everything but name, while the
politicians are henchmen. Why do you, Mr. Calvin, work all your nights
and days to organize the farmers, along with the rest of the middle
class, into a new political party? Because the politicians of the old
parties will have nothing to do with your atavistic ideas; and with
your atavistic ideas, they will have nothing to do because they are
what I said they are, henchmen, retainers of the Plutocracy.

I spoke of the professional men and the artists as villeins. What else
are they? One and all, the professors, the preachers, and the editors,
hold their jobs by serving the Plutocracy, and their service consists
of propagating only such ideas as are either harmless to or
commendatory of the Plutocracy. Whenever they propagate ideas that
menace the Plutocracy, they lose their jobs, in which case, if they
have not provided for the rainy day, they descend into the proletariat
and either perish or become working-class agitators. And dont forget
that it is the press, the pulpit, and the university that mould public
opinion, set the thought-pace of the nation. As for the artists, they
merely pander to the little less than ignoble tastes of the Plutocracy.

But after all, wealth in itself is not the real power; it is the means
to power, and power is governmental. Who controls the government
to-day? The proletariat with its twenty millions engaged in
occupations? Even you laugh at the idea. Does the middle class, with
its eight million occupied members? No more than the proletariat. Who,
then, controls the government? The Plutocracy, with its paltry quarter
of a million of occupied members. But this quarter of a million does
not control the government, though it renders yeoman service. It is the
brain of the Plutocracy that controls the government, and this brain
consists of seven[7] small and powerful groups of men. And do not
forget that these groups are working to-day practically in unison.

 [7] Even as late as 1907, it was considered that eleven groups
 dominated the country, but this number was reduced by the amalgamation
 of the five railroad groups into a supreme combination of all the
 railroads. These five groups so amalgamated, along with their
 financial and political allies, were (1) James J. Hill with his
 control of the Northwest; (2) the Pennsylvania railway group, Schiff
 financial manager, with big banking firms of Philadelphia and New
 York; (3) Harriman, with Frick for counsel and Odell as political
 lieutenant, controlling the central continental, Southwestern and
 Southern Pacific Coast lines of transportation; (4) the Gould family
 railway interests; and (5) Moore, Reid, and Leeds, known as the Rock
 Island crowd. These strong oligarchs arose out of the conflict of
 competition and travelled the inevitable road toward combination.

Let me point out the power of but one of them, the railroad group. It
employs forty thousand lawyers to defeat the people in the courts. It
issues countless thousands of free passes to judges, bankers, editors,
ministers, university men, members of state legislatures, and of
Congress. It maintains luxurious lobbies[8] at every state capital, and
at the national capital; and in all the cities and towns of the land it
employs an immense army of pettifoggers and small politicians whose
business is to attend primaries, pack conventions, get on juries, bribe
judges, and in every way to work for its interests.[9]

 [8] _Lobby_a peculiar institution for bribing, bulldozing, and
 corrupting the legislators who were supposed to represent the peoples
 interests.

 [9] A decade before this speech of Everhards, the New York Board of
 Trade issued a report from which the following is quoted: _The
 railroads control absolutely the legislatures of a majority of the
 states of the Union; they make and unmake United States Senators,
 congressmen, and governors, and are practically dictators of the
 governmental policy of the United States._

Gentlemen, I have merely sketched the power of one of the seven groups
that constitute the brain of the Plutocracy.[10] Your twenty-four
billions of wealth does not give you twenty-five cents worth of
governmental power. It is an empty shell, and soon even the empty shell
will be taken away from you. The Plutocracy has all power in its hands
to-day. It to-day makes the laws, for it owns the Senate, Congress, the
courts, and the state legislatures. And not only that. Behind law must
be force to execute the law. To-day the Plutocracy makes the law, and
to enforce the law it has at its beck and call the police, the army,
the navy, and, lastly, the militia, which is you, and me, and all of
us.

 [10] Rockefeller began as a member of the proletariat, and through
 thrift and cunning succeeded in developing the first perfect trust,
 namely that known as Standard Oil. We cannot forbear giving the
 following remarkable page from the history of the times, to show how
 the need for reinvestment of the Standard Oil surplus crushed out
 small capitalists and hastened the breakdown of the capitalist system.
 David Graham Phillips was a radical writer of the period, and the
 quotation, by him, is taken from a copy of the _Saturday Evening
 Post_, dated October 4, 1902 A.D. This is the only copy of this
 publication that has come down to us, and yet, from its appearance and
 content, we cannot but conclude that it was one of the popular
 periodicals with a large circulation. The quotation here follows:
    _About ten years ago Rockefellers income was given as thirty
    millions by an excellent authority. He had reached the limit of
    profitable investment of profits in the oil industry. Here, then,
    were these enormous sums in cash pouring inmore than $2,000,000 a
    month for John Davison Rockefeller alone. The problem of
    reinvestment became more serious. It became a nightmare. The oil
    income was swelling, swelling, and the number of sound investments
    limited, even more limited than it is now. It was through no
    special eagerness for more gains that the Rockefellers began to
    branch out from oil into other things. They were forced, swept on
    by this inrolling tide of wealth which their monopoly magnet
    irresistibly attracted. They developed a staff of investment
    seekers and investigators. It is said that the chief of this staff
    has a salary of $125,000 a year.
    The first conspicuous excursion and incursion of the Rockefellers
    was into the railway field. By 1895 they controlled one-fifth of
    the railway mileage of the country. What do they own or, through
    dominant ownership, control to-day? They are powerful in all the
    great railways of New York, north, east, and west, except one,
    where their share is only a few millions. They are in most of the
    great railways radiating from Chicago. They dominate in several of
    the systems that extend to the Pacific. It is their votes that make
    Mr. Morgan so potent, though, it may be added, they need his brains
    more than he needs their votes at present, and the combination of
    the two constitutes in large measure the community of interest.
    But railways could not alone absorb rapidly enough those mighty
    floods of gold. Presently John D. Rockefellers $2,500,000 a month
    had increased to four, to five, to six millions a month, to
    $75,000,000 a year. Illuminating oil was becoming all profit. The
    reinvestments of income were adding their mite of many annual
    millions.
    The Rockefellers went into gas and electricity when those
    industries had developed to the safe investment stage. And now a
    large part of the American people must begin to enrich the
    Rockefellers as soon as the sun goes down, no matter what form of
    illuminant they use. They went into farm mortgages. It is said that
    when prosperity a few years ago enabled the farmers to rid
    themselves of their mortgages, John D. Rockefeller was moved almost
    to tears; eight millions which he had thought taken care of for
    years to come at a good interest were suddenly dumped upon his
    doorstep and there set up a-squawking for a new home. This
    unexpected addition to his worriments in finding places for the
    progeny of his petroleum and their progeny and their progenys
    progeny was too much for the equanimity of a man without a
    digestion. . . .
    The Rockefellers went into minesiron and coal and copper and
    lead; into other industrial companies; into street railways, into
    national, state, and municipal bonds; into steamships and
    steamboats and telegraphy; into real estate, into skyscrapers and
    residences and hotels and business blocks; into life insurance,
    into banking. There was soon literally no field of industry where
    their millions were not at work. . . .
    The Rockefeller bankthe National City Bankis by itself far and
    away the biggest bank in the United States. It is exceeded in the
    world only by the Bank of England and the Bank of France. The
    deposits average more than one hundred millions a day; and it
    dominates the call loan market on Wall Street and the stock market.
    But it is not alone; it is the head of the Rockefeller chain of
    banks, which includes fourteen banks and trust companies in New
    York City, and banks of great strength and influence in every large
    money center in the country.
    John D. Rockefeller owns Standard Oil stock worth between four and
    five hundred millions at the market quotations. He has a hundred
    millions in the steel trust, almost as much in a single western
    railway system, half as much in a second, and so on and on and on
    until the mind wearies of the cataloguing. His income last year was
    about $100,000,000 it is doubtful if the incomes of all the
    Rothschilds together make a greater sum. And it is going up by
    leaps and bounds._

Little discussion took place after this, and the dinner soon broke up.
All were quiet and subdued, and leave-taking was done with low voices.
It seemed almost that they were scared by the vision of the times they
had seen.

The situation is, indeed, serious, Mr. Calvin said to Ernest. I have
little quarrel with the way you have depicted it. Only I disagree with
you about the doom of the middle class. We shall survive, and we shall
overthrow the trusts.

And return to the ways of your fathers, Ernest finished for him.

Even so, Mr. Calvin answered gravely. I know its a sort of
machine-breaking, and that it is absurd. But then life seems absurd
to-day, what of the machinations of the Plutocracy. And at any rate,
our sort of machine-breaking is at least practical and possible, which
your dream is not. Your socialistic dream is . . . well, a dream. We
cannot follow you.

I only wish you fellows knew a little something about evolution and
sociology, Ernest said wistfully, as they shook hands. We would be
saved so much trouble if you did.




CHAPTER X.
THE VORTEX


Following like thunder claps upon the Business Mens dinner, occurred
event after event of terrifying moment; and I, little I, who had lived
so placidly all my days in the quiet university town, found myself and
my personal affairs drawn into the vortex of the great world-affairs.
Whether it was my love for Ernest, or the clear sight he had given me
of the society in which I lived, that made me a revolutionist, I know
not; but a revolutionist I became, and I was plunged into a whirl of
happenings that would have been inconceivable three short months
before.

The crisis in my own fortunes came simultaneously with great crises in
society. First of all, father was discharged from the university. Oh,
he was not technically discharged. His resignation was demanded, that
was all. This, in itself, did not amount to much. Father, in fact, was
delighted. He was especially delighted because his discharge had been
precipitated by the publication of his book, Economics and Education.
It clinched his argument, he contended. What better evidence could be
advanced to prove that education was dominated by the capitalist class?

But this proof never got anywhere. Nobody knew he had been forced to
resign from the university. He was so eminent a scientist that such an
announcement, coupled with the reason for his enforced resignation,
would have created somewhat of a furor all over the world. The
newspapers showered him with praise and honor, and commended him for
having given up the drudgery of the lecture room in order to devote his
whole time to scientific research.

At first father laughed. Then he became angrytonic angry. Then came
the suppression of his book. This suppression was performed secretly,
so secretly that at first we could not comprehend. The publication of
the book had immediately caused a bit of excitement in the country.
Father had been politely abused in the capitalist press, the tone of
the abuse being to the effect that it was a pity so great a scientist
should leave his field and invade the realm of sociology, about which
he knew nothing and wherein he had promptly become lost. This lasted
for a week, while father chuckled and said the book had touched a sore
spot on capitalism. And then, abruptly, the newspapers and the critical
magazines ceased saying anything about the book at all. Also, and with
equal suddenness, the book disappeared from the market. Not a copy was
obtainable from any bookseller. Father wrote to the publishers and was
informed that the plates had been accidentally injured. An
unsatisfactory correspondence followed. Driven finally to an
unequivocal stand, the publishers stated that they could not see their
way to putting the book into type again, but that they were willing to
relinquish their rights in it.

And you wont find another publishing house in the country to touch
it, Ernest said. And if I were you, Id hunt cover right now. Youve
merely got a foretaste of the Iron Heel.

But father was nothing if not a scientist. He never believed in jumping
to conclusions. A laboratory experiment was no experiment if it were
not carried through in all its details. So he patiently went the round
of the publishing houses. They gave a multitude of excuses, but not one
house would consider the book.

When father became convinced that the book had actually been
suppressed, he tried to get the fact into the newspapers; but his
communications were ignored. At a political meeting of the socialists,
where many reporters were present, father saw his chance. He arose and
related the history of the suppression of the book. He laughed next day
when he read the newspapers, and then he grew angry to a degree that
eliminated all tonic qualities. The papers made no mention of the book,
but they misreported him beautifully. They twisted his words and
phrases away from the context, and turned his subdued and controlled
remarks into a howling anarchistic speech. It was done artfully. One
instance, in particular, I remember. He had used the phrase social
revolution. The reporter merely dropped out social. This was sent
out all over the country in an Associated Press despatch, and from all
over the country arose a cry of alarm. Father was branded as a nihilist
and an anarchist, and in one cartoon that was copied widely he was
portrayed waving a red flag at the head of a mob of long-haired,
wild-eyed men who bore in their hands torches, knives, and dynamite
bombs.

He was assailed terribly in the press, in long and abusive editorials,
for his anarchy, and hints were made of mental breakdown on his part.
This behavior, on the part of the capitalist press, was nothing new,
Ernest told us. It was the custom, he said, to send reporters to all
the socialist meetings for the express purpose of misreporting and
distorting what was said, in order to frighten the middle class away
from any possible affiliation with the proletariat. And repeatedly
Ernest warned father to cease fighting and to take to cover.

The socialist press of the country took up the fight, however, and
throughout the reading portion of the working class it was known that
the book had been suppressed. But this knowledge stopped with the
working class. Next, the Appeal to Reason, a big socialist publishing
house, arranged with father to bring out the book. Father was jubilant,
but Ernest was alarmed.

I tell you we are on the verge of the unknown, he insisted. Big
things are happening secretly all around us. We can feel them. We do
not know what they are, but they are there. The whole fabric of society
is a-tremble with them. Dont ask me. I dont know myself. But out of
this flux of society something is about to crystallize. It is
crystallizing now. The suppression of the book is a precipitation. How
many books have been suppressed? We havent the least idea. We are in
the dark. We have no way of learning. Watch out next for the
suppression of the socialist press and socialist publishing houses. Im
afraid its coming. We are going to be throttled.

Ernest had his hand on the pulse of events even more closely than the
rest of the socialists, and within two days the first blow was struck.
The _Appeal to Reason_ was a weekly, and its regular circulation
amongst the proletariat was seven hundred and fifty thousand. Also, it
very frequently got out special editions of from two to five millions.
These great editions were paid for and distributed by the small army of
voluntary workers who had marshalled around the _Appeal_. The first
blow was aimed at these special editions, and it was a crushing one. By
an arbitrary ruling of the Post Office, these editions were decided to
be not the regular circulation of the paper, and for that reason were
denied admission to the mails.

A week later the Post Office Department ruled that the paper was
seditious, and barred it entirely from the mails. This was a fearful
blow to the socialist propaganda. The _Appeal_ was desperate. It
devised a plan of reaching its subscribers through the express
companies, but they declined to handle it. This was the end of the
_Appeal_. But not quite. It prepared to go on with its book publishing.
Twenty thousand copies of fathers book were in the bindery, and the
presses were turning off more. And then, without warning, a mob arose
one night, and, under a waving American flag, singing patriotic songs,
set fire to the great plant of the _Appeal_ and totally destroyed it.

Now Girard, Kansas, was a quiet, peaceable town. There had never been
any labor troubles there. The _Appeal_ paid union wages; and, in fact,
was the backbone of the town, giving employment to hundreds of men and
women. It was not the citizens of Girard that composed the mob. This
mob had risen up out of the earth apparently, and to all intents and
purposes, its work done, it had gone back into the earth. Ernest saw in
the affair the most sinister import.

The Black Hundreds[1] are being organized in the United States, he
said. This is the beginning. There will be more of it. The Iron Heel
is getting bold.

 [1] The Black Hundreds were reactionary mobs organized by the
 perishing Autocracy in the Russian Revolution. These reactionary
 groups attacked the revolutionary groups, and also, at needed moments,
 rioted and destroyed property so as to afford the Autocracy the
 pretext of calling out the Cossacks.

And so perished fathers book. We were to see much of the Black
Hundreds as the days went by. Week by week more of the socialist papers
were barred from the mails, and in a number of instances the Black
Hundreds destroyed the socialist presses. Of course, the newspapers of
the land lived up to the reactionary policy of the ruling class, and
the destroyed socialist press was misrepresented and vilified, while
the Black Hundreds were represented as true patriots and saviours of
society. So convincing was all this misrepresentation that even sincere
ministers in the pulpit praised the Black Hundreds while regretting the
necessity of violence.

History was making fast. The fall elections were soon to occur, and
Ernest was nominated by the socialist party to run for Congress. His
chance for election was most favorable. The street-car strike in San
Francisco had been broken. And following upon it the teamsters strike
had been broken. These two defeats had been very disastrous to
organized labor. The whole Water Front Federation, along with its
allies in the structural trades, had backed up the teamsters, and all
had been smashed down ingloriously. It had been a bloody strike. The
police had broken countless heads with their riot clubs; and the death
list had been augmented by the turning loose of a machine-gun on the
strikers from the barns of the Marsden Special Delivery Company.

In consequence, the men were sullen and vindictive. They wanted blood,
and revenge. Beaten on their chosen field, they were ripe to seek
revenge by means of political action. They still maintained their labor
organization, and this gave them strength in the political struggle
that was on. Ernests chance for election grew stronger and stronger.
Day by day unions and more unions voted their support to the
socialists, until even Ernest laughed when the Undertakers Assistants
and the Chicken Pickers fell into line. Labor became mulish. While it
packed the socialist meetings with mad enthusiasm, it was impervious to
the wiles of the old-party politicians. The old-party orators were
usually greeted with empty halls, though occasionally they encountered
full halls where they were so roughly handled that more than once it
was necessary to call out the police reserves.

History was making fast. The air was vibrant with things happening and
impending. The country was on the verge of hard times,[2] caused by a
series of prosperous years wherein the difficulty of disposing abroad
of the unconsumed surplus had become increasingly difficult. Industries
were working short time; many great factories were standing idle
against the time when the surplus should be gone; and wages were being
cut right and left.

 [2] Under the capitalist rgime these periods of hard times were as
 inevitable as they were absurd. Prosperity always brought calamity.
 This, of course, was due to the excess of unconsumed profits that was
 piled up.

Also, the great machinist strike had been broken. Two hundred thousand
machinists, along with their five hundred thousand allies in the
metalworking trades, had been defeated in as bloody a strike as had
ever marred the United States. Pitched battles had been fought with the
small armies of armed strike-breakers[3] put in the field by the
employers associations; the Black Hundreds, appearing in scores of
wide-scattered places, had destroyed property; and, in consequence, a
hundred thousand regular soldiers of the United States had been called
out to put a frightful end to the whole affair. A number of the labor
leaders had been executed; many others had been sentenced to prison,
while thousands of the rank and file of the strikers had been herded
into bull-pens[4] and abominably treated by the soldiers.

 [3] _Strike-breakers_these were, in purpose and practice and
 everything except name, the private soldiers of the capitalists. They
 were thoroughly organized and well armed, and they were held in
 readiness to be hurled in special trains to any part of the country
 where labor went on strike or was locked out by the employers. Only
 those curious times could have given rise to the amazing spectacle of
 one, Farley, a notorious commander of strike-breakers, who, in 1906,
 swept across the United States in special trains from New York to San
 Francisco with an army of twenty-five hundred men, fully armed and
 equipped, to break a strike of the San Francisco street-car men. Such
 an act was in direct violation of the laws of the land. The fact that
 this act, and thousands of similar acts, went unpunished, goes to show
 how completely the judiciary was the creature of the Plutocracy.

 [4] _Bull-pen_in a miners strike in Idaho, in the latter part of the
 nineteenth century, it happened that many of the strikers were
 confined in a bull-pen by the troops. The practice and the name
 continued in the twentieth century.

The years of prosperity were now to be paid for. All markets were
glutted; all markets were falling; and amidst the general crumble of
prices the price of labor crumbled fastest of all. The land was
convulsed with industrial dissensions. Labor was striking here, there,
and everywhere; and where it was not striking, it was being turned out
by the capitalists. The papers were filled with tales of violence and
blood. And through it all the Black Hundreds played their part. Riot,
arson, and wanton destruction of property was their function, and well
they performed it. The whole regular army was in the field, called
there by the actions of the Black Hundreds.[5] All cities and towns
were like armed camps, and laborers were shot down like dogs. Out of
the vast army of the unemployed the strike-breakers were recruited; and
when the strike-breakers were worsted by the labor unions, the troops
always appeared and crushed the unions. Then there was the militia. As
yet, it was not necessary to have recourse to the secret militia law.
Only the regularly organized militia was out, and it was out
everywhere. And in this time of terror, the regular army was increased
an additional hundred thousand by the government.

 [5] The name only, and not the idea, was imported from Russia. The
 Black Hundreds were a development out of the secret agents of the
 capitalists, and their use arose in the labor struggles of the
 nineteenth century. There is no discussion of this. No less an
 authority of the times than Carroll D. Wright, United States
 Commissioner of Labor, is responsible for the statement. From his
 book, entitled The Battles of Labor, is quoted the declaration that
 _in some of the great historic strikes the employers themselves have
 instigated acts of violence;_ that manufacturers have deliberately
 provoked strikes in order to get rid of surplus stock; and that
 freight cars have been burned by employers agents during railroad
 strikes in order to increase disorder. It was out of these secret
 agents of the employers that the Black Hundreds arose; and it was
 they, in turn, that later became that terrible weapon of the
 Oligarchy, the agents-provocateurs.

Never had labor received such an all-around beating. The great captains
of industry, the oligarchs, had for the first time thrown their full
weight into the breach the struggling employers associations had made.
These associations were practically middle-class affairs, and now,
compelled by hard times and crashing markets, and aided by the great
captains of industry, they gave organized labor an awful and decisive
defeat. It was an all-powerful alliance, but it was an alliance of the
lion and the lamb, as the middle class was soon to learn.

Labor was bloody and sullen, but crushed. Yet its defeat did not put an
end to the hard times. The banks, themselves constituting one of the
most important forces of the Oligarchy, continued to call in credits.
The Wall Street[6] group turned the stock market into a maelstrom where
the values of all the land crumbled away almost to nothingness. And out
of all the rack and ruin rose the form of the nascent Oligarchy,
imperturbable, indifferent, and sure. Its serenity and certitude was
terrifying. Not only did it use its own vast power, but it used all the
power of the United States Treasury to carry out its plans.

 [6] _Wall Street_so named from a street in ancient New York, where
 was situated the stock exchange, and where the irrational organization
 of society permitted underhanded manipulation of all the industries of
 the country.

The captains of industry had turned upon the middle class. The
employers associations, that had helped the captains of industry to
tear and rend labor, were now torn and rent by their quondam allies.
Amidst the crashing of the middle men, the small business men and
manufacturers, the trusts stood firm. Nay, the trusts did more than
stand firm. They were active. They sowed wind, and wind, and ever more
wind; for they alone knew how to reap the whirlwind and make a profit
out of it. And such profits! Colossal profits! Strong enough themselves
to weather the storm that was largely their own brewing, they turned
loose and plundered the wrecks that floated about them. Values were
pitifully and inconceivably shrunken, and the trusts added hugely to
their holdings, even extending their enterprises into many new
fieldsand always at the expense of the middle class.

Thus the summer of 1912 witnessed the virtual death-thrust to the
middle class. Even Ernest was astounded at the quickness with which it
had been done. He shook his head ominously and looked forward without
hope to the fall elections.

Its no use, he said. We are beaten. The Iron Heel is here. I had
hoped for a peaceable victory at the ballot-box. I was wrong. Wickson
was right. We shall be robbed of our few remaining liberties; the Iron
Heel will walk upon our faces; nothing remains but a bloody revolution
of the working class. Of course we will win, but I shudder to think of
it.

And from then on Ernest pinned his faith in revolution. In this he was
in advance of his party. His fellow-socialists could not agree with
him. They still insisted that victory could be gained through the
elections. It was not that they were stunned. They were too cool-headed
and courageous for that. They were merely incredulous, that was all.
Ernest could not get them seriously to fear the coming of the
Oligarchy. They were stirred by him, but they were too sure of their
own strength. There was no room in their theoretical social evolution
for an oligarchy, therefore the Oligarchy could not be.

Well send you to Congress and it will be all right, they told him at
one of our secret meetings.

And when they take me out of Congress, Ernest replied coldly, and
put me against a wall, and blow my brains outwhat then?

Then well rise in our might, a dozen voices answered at once.

Then youll welter in your gore, was his retort. Ive heard that
song sung by the middle class, and where is it now in its might?




CHAPTER XI.
THE GREAT ADVENTURE


Mr. Wickson did not send for father. They met by chance on the
ferry-boat to San Francisco, so that the warning he gave father was not
premeditated. Had they not met accidentally, there would not have been
any warning. Not that the outcome would have been different, however.
Father came of stout old _Mayflower_[1] stock, and the blood was
imperative in him.

 [1] One of the first ships that carried colonies to America, after the
 discovery of the New World. Descendants of these original colonists
 were for a while inordinately proud of their genealogy; but in time
 the blood became so widely diffused that it ran in the veins
 practically of all Americans.

Ernest was right, he told me, as soon as he had returned home.
Ernest is a very remarkable young man, and Id rather see you his wife
than the wife of Rockefeller himself or the King of England.

Whats the matter? I asked in alarm.

The Oligarchy is about to tread upon our facesyours and mine. Wickson
as much as told me so. He was very kindfor an oligarch. He offered to
reinstate me in the university. What do you think of that? He, Wickson,
a sordid money-grabber, has the power to determine whether I shall or
shall not teach in the university of the state. But he offered me even
better than thatoffered to make me president of some great college of
physical sciences that is being plannedthe Oligarchy must get rid of
its surplus somehow, you see.

Do you remember what I told that socialist lover of your daughters?
he said. I told him that we would walk upon the faces of the working
class. And so we shall. As for you, I have for you a deep respect as a
scientist; but if you throw your fortunes in with the working
classwell, watch out for your face, that is all. And then he turned
and left me.

It means well have to marry earlier than you planned, was Ernests
comment when we told him.

I could not follow his reasoning, but I was soon to learn it. It was at
this time that the quarterly dividend of the Sierra Mills was paidor,
rather, should have been paid, for father did not receive his. After
waiting several days, father wrote to the secretary. Promptly came the
reply that there was no record on the books of fathers owning any
stock, and a polite request for more explicit information.

Ill make it explicit enough, confound him, father declared, and
departed for the bank to get the stock in question from his
safe-deposit box.

Ernest is a very remarkable man, he said when he got back and while I
was helping him off with his overcoat. I repeat, my daughter, that
young man of yours is a very remarkable young man.

I had learned, whenever he praised Ernest in such fashion, to expect
disaster.

They have already walked upon my face, father explained. There was
no stock. The box was empty. You and Ernest will have to get married
pretty quickly.

Father insisted on laboratory methods. He brought the Sierra Mills into
court, but he could not bring the books of the Sierra Mills into court.
He did not control the courts, and the Sierra Mills did. That explained
it all. He was thoroughly beaten by the law, and the bare-faced robbery
held good.

It is almost laughable now, when I look back on it, the way father was
beaten. He met Wickson accidentally on the street in San Francisco, and
he told Wickson that he was a damned scoundrel. And then father was
arrested for attempted assault, fined in the police court, and bound
over to keep the peace. It was all so ridiculous that when he got home
he had to laugh himself. But what a furor was raised in the local
papers! There was grave talk about the bacillus of violence that
infected all men who embraced socialism; and father, with his long and
peaceful life, was instanced as a shining example of how the bacillus
of violence worked. Also, it was asserted by more than one paper that
fathers mind had weakened under the strain of scientific study, and
confinement in a state asylum for the insane was suggested. Nor was
this merely talk. It was an imminent peril. But father was wise enough
to see it. He had the Bishops experience to lesson from, and he
lessoned well. He kept quiet no matter what injustice was perpetrated
on him, and really, I think, surprised his enemies.

There was the matter of the houseour home. A mortgage was foreclosed
on it, and we had to give up possession. Of course there wasnt any
mortgage, and never had been any mortgage. The ground had been bought
outright, and the house had been paid for when it was built. And house
and lot had always been free and unencumbered. Nevertheless there was
the mortgage, properly and legally drawn up and signed, with a record
of the payments of interest through a number of years. Father made no
outcry. As he had been robbed of his money, so was he now robbed of his
home. And he had no recourse. The machinery of society was in the hands
of those who were bent on breaking him. He was a philosopher at heart,
and he was no longer even angry.

I am doomed to be broken, he said to me; but that is no reason that
I should not try to be shattered as little as possible. These old bones
of mine are fragile, and Ive learned my lesson. God knows I dont want
to spend my last days in an insane asylum.

Which reminds me of Bishop Morehouse, whom I have neglected for many
pages. But first let me tell of my marriage. In the play of events, my
marriage sinks into insignificance, I know, so I shall barely mention
it.

Now we shall become real proletarians, father said, when we were
driven from our home. I have often envied that young man of yours for
his actual knowledge of the proletariat. Now I shall see and learn for
myself.

Father must have had strong in him the blood of adventure. He looked
upon our catastrophe in the light of an adventure. No anger nor
bitterness possessed him. He was too philosophic and simple to be
vindictive, and he lived too much in the world of mind to miss the
creature comforts we were giving up. So it was, when we moved to San
Francisco into four wretched rooms in the slum south of Market Street,
that he embarked upon the adventure with the joy and enthusiasm of a
childcombined with the clear sight and mental grasp of an
extraordinary intellect. He really never crystallized mentally. He had
no false sense of values. Conventional or habitual values meant nothing
to him. The only values he recognized were mathematical and scientific
facts. My father was a great man. He had the mind and the soul that
only great men have. In ways he was even greater than Ernest, than whom
I have known none greater.

Even I found some relief in our change of living. If nothing else, I
was escaping from the organized ostracism that had been our increasing
portion in the university town ever since the enmity of the nascent
Oligarchy had been incurred. And the change was to me likewise
adventure, and the greatest of all, for it was love-adventure. The
change in our fortunes had hastened my marriage, and it was as a wife
that I came to live in the four rooms on Pell Street, in the San
Francisco slum.

And this out of all remains: I made Ernest happy. I came into his
stormy life, not as a new perturbing force, but as one that made toward
peace and repose. I gave him rest. It was the guerdon of my love for
him. It was the one infallible token that I had not failed. To bring
forgetfulness, or the light of gladness, into those poor tired eyes of
hiswhat greater joy could have blessed me than that?

Those dear tired eyes. He toiled as few men ever toiled, and all his
lifetime he toiled for others. That was the measure of his manhood. He
was a humanist and a lover. And he, with his incarnate spirit of
battle, his gladiator body and his eagle spirithe was as gentle and
tender to me as a poet. He was a poet. A singer in deeds. And all his
life he sang the song of man. And he did it out of sheer love of man,
and for man he gave his life and was crucified.

And all this he did with no hope of future reward. In his conception of
things there was no future life. He, who fairly burnt with immortality,
denied himself immortalitysuch was the paradox of him. He, so warm in
spirit, was dominated by that cold and forbidding philosophy,
materialistic monism. I used to refute him by telling him that I
measured his immortality by the wings of his soul, and that I should
have to live endless aeons in order to achieve the full measurement.
Whereat he would laugh, and his arms would leap out to me, and he would
call me his sweet metaphysician; and the tiredness would pass out of
his eyes, and into them would flood the happy love-light that was in
itself a new and sufficient advertisement of his immortality.

Also, he used to call me his dualist, and he would explain how Kant, by
means of pure reason, had abolished reason, in order to worship God.
And he drew the parallel and included me guilty of a similar act. And
when I pleaded guilty, but defended the act as highly rational, he but
pressed me closer and laughed as only one of Gods own lovers could
laugh. I was wont to deny that heredity and environment could explain
his own originality and genius, any more than could the cold groping
finger of science catch and analyze and classify that elusive essence
that lurked in the constitution of life itself.

I held that space was an apparition of God, and that soul was a
projection of the character of God; and when he called me his sweet
metaphysician, I called him my immortal materialist. And so we loved
and were happy; and I forgave him his materialism because of his
tremendous work in the world, performed without thought of soul-gain
thereby, and because of his so exceeding modesty of spirit that
prevented him from having pride and regal consciousness of himself and
his soul.

But he had pride. How could he have been an eagle and not have pride?
His contention was that it was finer for a finite mortal speck of life
to feel Godlike, than for a god to feel godlike; and so it was that he
exalted what he deemed his mortality. He was fond of quoting a fragment
from a certain poem. He had never seen the whole poem, and he had tried
vainly to learn its authorship. I here give the fragment, not alone
because he loved it, but because it epitomized the paradox that he was
in the spirit of him, and his conception of his spirit. For how can a
man, with thrilling, and burning, and exaltation, recite the following
and still be mere mortal earth, a bit of fugitive force, an evanescent
form? Here it is:

Joy upon joy and gain upon gain
Are the destined rights of my birth,
And I shout the praise of my endless days
To the echoing edge of the earth.
Though I suffer all deaths that a man can die
To the uttermost end of time,
I have deep-drained this, my cup of bliss,
In every age and clime

The froth of Pride, the tang of Power,
The sweet of Womanhood!
I drain the lees upon my knees,
For oh, the draught is good;
I drink to Life, I drink to Death,
And smack my lips with song,
For when I die, another I shall pass the cup along.

The man you drove from Edens grove
    Was I, my Lord, was I,
And I shall be there when the earth and the air
    Are rent from sea to sky;
For it is my world, my gorgeous world,
    The world of my dearest woes,
From the first faint cry of the newborn
    To the rack of the womans throes.

Packed with the pulse of an unborn race,
Torn with a worlds desire,
The surging flood of my wild young blood
Would quench the judgment fire.
I am Man, Man, Man, from the tingling flesh
To the dust of my earthly goal,
From the nestling gloom of the pregnant womb
To the sheen of my naked soul.
Bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh
The whole world leaps to my will,
And the unslaked thirst of an Eden cursed
Shall harrow the earth for its fill.
Almighty God, when I drain lifes glass
Of all its rainbow gleams,
The hapless plight of eternal night
Shall be none too long for my dreams.

The man you drove from Edens grove
    Was I, my Lord, was I,
And I shall be there when the earth and the air
    Are rent from sea to sky;
For it is my world, my gorgeous world,
    The world of my dear delight,
From the brightest gleam of the Arctic stream
    To the dusk of my own love-night.

Ernest always overworked. His wonderful constitution kept him up; but
even that constitution could not keep the tired look out of his eyes.
His dear, tired eyes! He never slept more than four and one-half hours
a night; yet he never found time to do all the work he wanted to do. He
never ceased from his activities as a propagandist, and was always
scheduled long in advance for lectures to workingmens organizations.
Then there was the campaign. He did a mans full work in that alone.
With the suppression of the socialist publishing houses, his meagre
royalties ceased, and he was hard-put to make a living; for he had to
make a living in addition to all his other labor. He did a great deal
of translating for the magazines on scientific and philosophic
subjects; and, coming home late at night, worn out from the strain of
the campaign, he would plunge into his translating and toil on well
into the morning hours. And in addition to everything, there was his
studying. To the day of his death he kept up his studies, and he
studied prodigiously.

And yet he found time in which to love me and make me happy. But this
was accomplished only through my merging my life completely into his. I
learned shorthand and typewriting, and became his secretary. He
insisted that I succeeded in cutting his work in half; and so it was
that I schooled myself to understand his work. Our interests became
mutual, and we worked together and played together.

And then there were our sweet stolen moments in the midst of our
workjust a word, or caress, or flash of love-light; and our moments
were sweeter for being stolen. For we lived on the heights, where the
air was keen and sparkling, where the toil was for humanity, and where
sordidness and selfishness never entered. We loved love, and our love
was never smirched by anything less than the best. And this out of all
remains: I did not fail. I gave him resthe who worked so hard for
others, my dear, tired-eyed mortalist.




CHAPTER XII.
THE BISHOP


It was after my marriage that I chanced upon Bishop Morehouse. But I
must give the events in their proper sequence. After his outbreak at
the I. P. H. Convention, the Bishop, being a gentle soul, had yielded
to the friendly pressure brought to bear upon him, and had gone away on
a vacation. But he returned more fixed than ever in his determination
to preach the message of the Church. To the consternation of his
congregation, his first sermon was quite similar to the address he had
given before the Convention. Again he said, and at length and with
distressing detail, that the Church had wandered away from the Masters
teaching, and that Mammon had been instated in the place of Christ.

And the result was, willy-nilly, that he was led away to a private
sanitarium for mental disease, while in the newspapers appeared
pathetic accounts of his mental breakdown and of the saintliness of his
character. He was held a prisoner in the sanitarium. I called
repeatedly, but was denied access to him; and I was terribly impressed
by the tragedy of a sane, normal, saintly man being crushed by the
brutal will of society. For the Bishop was sane, and pure, and noble.
As Ernest said, all that was the matter with him was that he had
incorrect notions of biology and sociology, and because of his
incorrect notions he had not gone about it in the right way to rectify
matters.

What terrified me was the Bishops helplessness. If he persisted in the
truth as he saw it, he was doomed to an insane ward. And he could do
nothing. His money, his position, his culture, could not save him. His
views were perilous to society, and society could not conceive that
such perilous views could be the product of a sane mind. Or, at least,
it seems to me that such was societys attitude.

But the Bishop, in spite of the gentleness and purity of his spirit,
was possessed of guile. He apprehended clearly his danger. He saw
himself caught in the web, and he tried to escape from it. Denied help
from his friends, such as father and Ernest and I could have given, he
was left to battle for himself alone. And in the enforced solitude of
the sanitarium he recovered. He became again sane. His eyes ceased to
see visions; his brain was purged of the fancy that it was the duty of
society to feed the Masters lambs.

As I say, he became well, quite well, and the newspapers and the church
people hailed his return with joy. I went once to his church. The
sermon was of the same order as the ones he had preached long before
his eyes had seen visions. I was disappointed, shocked. Had society
then beaten him into submission? Was he a coward? Had he been bulldozed
into recanting? Or had the strain been too great for him, and had he
meekly surrendered to the juggernaut of the established?

I called upon him in his beautiful home. He was woefully changed. He
was thinner, and there were lines on his face which I had never seen
before. He was manifestly distressed by my coming. He plucked nervously
at his sleeve as we talked; and his eyes were restless, fluttering
here, there, and everywhere, and refusing to meet mine. His mind seemed
preoccupied, and there were strange pauses in his conversation, abrupt
changes of topic, and an inconsecutiveness that was bewildering. Could
this, then, be the firm-poised, Christ-like man I had known, with pure,
limpid eyes and a gaze steady and unfaltering as his soul? He had been
man-handled; he had been cowed into subjection. His spirit was too
gentle. It had not been mighty enough to face the organized wolf-pack
of society.

I felt sad, unutterably sad. He talked ambiguously, and was so
apprehensive of what I might say that I had not the heart to catechise
him. He spoke in a far-away manner of his illness, and we talked
disjointedly about the church, the alterations in the organ, and about
petty charities; and he saw me depart with such evident relief that I
should have laughed had not my heart been so full of tears.

The poor little hero! If I had only known! He was battling like a
giant, and I did not guess it. Alone, all alone, in the midst of
millions of his fellow-men, he was fighting his fight. Torn by his
horror of the asylum and his fidelity to truth and the right, he clung
steadfastly to truth and the right; but so alone was he that he did not
dare to trust even me. He had learned his lesson welltoo well.

But I was soon to know. One day the Bishop disappeared. He had told
nobody that he was going away; and as the days went by and he did not
reappear, there was much gossip to the effect that he had committed
suicide while temporarily deranged. But this idea was dispelled when it
was learned that he had sold all his possessions,his city mansion, his
country house at Menlo Park, his paintings, and collections, and even
his cherished library. It was patent that he had made a clean and
secret sweep of everything before he disappeared.

This happened during the time when calamity had overtaken us in our own
affairs; and it was not till we were well settled in our new home that
we had opportunity really to wonder and speculate about the Bishops
doings. And then, everything was suddenly made clear. Early one
evening, while it was yet twilight, I had run across the street and
into the butcher-shop to get some chops for Ernests supper. We called
the last meal of the day supper in our new environment.

Just at the moment I came out of the butcher-shop, a man emerged from
the corner grocery that stood alongside. A queer sense of familiarity
made me look again. But the man had turned and was walking rapidly
away. There was something about the slope of the shoulders and the
fringe of silver hair between coat collar and slouch hat that aroused
vague memories. Instead of crossing the street, I hurried after the
man. I quickened my pace, trying not to think the thoughts that formed
unbidden in my brain. No, it was impossible. It could not benot in
those faded overalls, too long in the legs and frayed at the bottoms.

I paused, laughed at myself, and almost abandoned the chase. But the
haunting familiarity of those shoulders and that silver hair! Again I
hurried on. As I passed him, I shot a keen look at his face; then I
whirled around abruptly and confrontedthe Bishop.

He halted with equal abruptness, and gasped. A large paper bag in his
right hand fell to the sidewalk. It burst, and about his feet and mine
bounced and rolled a flood of potatoes. He looked at me with surprise
and alarm, then he seemed to wilt away; the shoulders drooped with
dejection, and he uttered a deep sigh.

I held out my hand. He shook it, but his hand felt clammy. He cleared
his throat in embarrassment, and I could see the sweat starting out on
his forehead. It was evident that he was badly frightened.

The potatoes, he murmured faintly. They are precious.

Between us we picked them up and replaced them in the broken bag, which
he now held carefully in the hollow of his arm. I tried to tell him my
gladness at meeting him and that he must come right home with me.

Father will be rejoiced to see you, I said. We live only a stones
throw away.

I cant, he said, I must be going. Good-by.

He looked apprehensively about him, as though dreading discovery, and
made an attempt to walk on.

Tell me where you live, and I shall call later, he said, when he saw
that I walked beside him and that it was my intention to stick to him
now that he was found.

No, I answered firmly. You must come now.

He looked at the potatoes spilling on his arm, and at the small parcels
on his other arm.

Really, it is impossible, he said. Forgive me for my rudeness. If
you only knew.

He looked as if he were going to break down, but the next moment he had
himself in control.

Besides, this food, he went on. It is a sad case. It is terrible.
She is an old woman. I must take it to her at once. She is suffering
from want of it. I must go at once. You understand. Then I will return.
I promise you.

Let me go with you, I volunteered. Is it far?

He sighed again, and surrendered.

Only two blocks, he said. Let us hasten.

Under the Bishops guidance I learned something of my own neighborhood.
I had not dreamed such wretchedness and misery existed in it. Of
course, this was because I did not concern myself with charity. I had
become convinced that Ernest was right when he sneered at charity as a
poulticing of an ulcer. Remove the ulcer, was his remedy; give to the
worker his product; pension as soldiers those who grow honorably old in
their toil, and there will be no need for charity. Convinced of this, I
toiled with him at the revolution, and did not exhaust my energy in
alleviating the social ills that continuously arose from the injustice
of the system.

I followed the Bishop into a small room, ten by twelve, in a rear
tenement. And there we found a little old German womansixty-four years
old, the Bishop said. She was surprised at seeing me, but she nodded a
pleasant greeting and went on sewing on the pair of mens trousers in
her lap. Beside her, on the floor, was a pile of trousers. The Bishop
discovered there was neither coal nor kindling, and went out to buy
some.

I took up a pair of trousers and examined her work.

Six cents, lady, she said, nodding her head gently while she went on
stitching. She stitched slowly, but never did she cease from stitching.
She seemed mastered by the verb to stitch.

For all that work? I asked. Is that what they pay? How long does it
take you?

Yes, she answered, that is what they pay. Six cents for finishing.
Two hours sewing on each pair.

But the boss doesnt know that, she added quickly, betraying a fear
of getting him into trouble. Im slow. Ive got the rheumatism in my
hands. Girls work much faster. They finish in half that time. The boss
is kind. He lets me take the work home, now that I am old and the noise
of the machine bothers my head. If it wasnt for his kindness, Id
starve.

Yes, those who work in the shop get eight cents. But what can you do?
There is not enough work for the young. The old have no chance. Often
one pair is all I can get. Sometimes, like to-day, I am given eight
pair to finish before night.

I asked her the hours she worked, and she said it depended on the
season.

In the summer, when there is a rush order, I work from five in the
morning to nine at night. But in the winter it is too cold. The hands
do not early get over the stiffness. Then you must work latertill
after midnight sometimes.

Yes, it has been a bad summer. The hard times. God must be angry. This
is the first work the boss has given me in a week. It is true, one
cannot eat much when there is no work. I am used to it. I have sewed
all my life, in the old country and here in San Franciscothirty-three
years.

If you are sure of the rent, it is all right. The houseman is very
kind, but he must have his rent. It is fair. He only charges three
dollars for this room. That is cheap. But it is not easy for you to
find all of three dollars every month.

She ceased talking, and, nodding her head, went on stitching.

You have to be very careful as to how you spend your earnings, I
suggested.

She nodded emphatically.

After the rent its not so bad. Of course you cant buy meat. And
there is no milk for the coffee. But always there is one meal a day,
and often two.

She said this last proudly. There was a smack of success in her words.
But as she stitched on in silence, I noticed the sadness in her
pleasant eyes and the droop of her mouth. The look in her eyes became
far away. She rubbed the dimness hastily out of them; it interfered
with her stitching.

No, it is not the hunger that makes the heart ache, she explained.
You get used to being hungry. It is for my child that I cry. It was
the machine that killed her. It is true she worked hard, but I cannot
understand. She was strong. And she was youngonly forty; and she
worked only thirty years. She began young, it is true; but my man died.
The boiler exploded down at the works. And what were we to do? She was
ten, but she was very strong. But the machine killed her. Yes, it did.
It killed her, and she was the fastest worker in the shop. I have
thought about it often, and I know. That is why I cannot work in the
shop. The machine bothers my head. Always I hear it saying, I did it,
I did it. And it says that all day long. And then I think of my
daughter, and I cannot work.

The moistness was in her old eyes again, and she had to wipe it away
before she could go on stitching.

I heard the Bishop stumbling up the stairs, and I opened the door. What
a spectacle he was. On his back he carried half a sack of coal, with
kindling on top. Some of the coal dust had coated his face, and the
sweat from his exertions was running in streaks. He dropped his burden
in the corner by the stove and wiped his face on a coarse bandana
handkerchief. I could scarcely accept the verdict of my senses. The
Bishop, black as a coal-heaver, in a workingmans cheap cotton shirt
(one button was missing from the throat), and in overalls! That was the
most incongruous of allthe overalls, frayed at the bottoms, dragged
down at the heels, and held up by a narrow leather belt around the hips
such as laborers wear.

Though the Bishop was warm, the poor swollen hands of the old woman
were already cramping with the cold; and before we left her, the Bishop
had built the fire, while I had peeled the potatoes and put them on to
boil. I was to learn, as time went by, that there were many cases
similar to hers, and many worse, hidden away in the monstrous depths of
the tenements in my neighborhood.

We got back to find Ernest alarmed by my absence. After the first
surprise of greeting was over, the Bishop leaned back in his chair,
stretched out his overall-covered legs, and actually sighed a
comfortable sigh. We were the first of his old friends he had met since
his disappearance, he told us; and during the intervening weeks he must
have suffered greatly from loneliness. He told us much, though he told
us more of the joy he had experienced in doing the Masters bidding.

For truly now, he said, I am feeding his lambs. And I have learned a
great lesson. The soul cannot be ministered to till the stomach is
appeased. His lambs must be fed bread and butter and potatoes and meat;
after that, and only after that, are their spirits ready for more
refined nourishment.

He ate heartily of the supper I cooked. Never had he had such an
appetite at our table in the old days. We spoke of it, and he said that
he had never been so healthy in his life.

I walk always now, he said, and a blush was on his cheek at the
thought of the time when he rode in his carriage, as though it were a
sin not lightly to be laid.

My health is better for it, he added hastily. And I am very
happyindeed, most happy. At last I am a consecrated spirit.

And yet there was in his face a permanent pain, the pain of the world
that he was now taking to himself. He was seeing life in the raw, and
it was a different life from what he had known within the printed books
of his library.

And you are responsible for all this, young man, he said directly to
Ernest.

Ernest was embarrassed and awkward.

II warned you, he faltered.

No, you misunderstand, the Bishop answered. I speak not in reproach,
but in gratitude. I have you to thank for showing me my path. You led
me from theories about life to life itself. You pulled aside the veils
from the social shams. You were light in my darkness, but now I, too,
see the light. And I am very happy, only . . . he hesitated painfully,
and in his eyes fear leaped large. Only the persecution. I harm no
one. Why will they not let me alone? But it is not that. It is the
nature of the persecution. I shouldnt mind if they cut my flesh with
stripes, or burned me at the stake, or crucified me head-downward. But
it is the asylum that frightens me. Think of it! Of mein an asylum for
the insane! It is revolting. I saw some of the cases at the sanitarium.
They were violent. My blood chills when I think of it. And to be
imprisoned for the rest of my life amid scenes of screaming madness!
No! no! Not that! Not that!

It was pitiful. His hands shook, his whole body quivered and shrank
away from the picture he had conjured. But the next moment he was calm.

Forgive me, he said simply. It is my wretched nerves. And if the
Masters work leads there, so be it. Who am I to complain?

I felt like crying aloud as I looked at him: Great Bishop! O hero!
Gods hero!

As the evening wore on we learned more of his doings.

I sold my housemy houses, rather, he said, all my other
possessions. I knew I must do it secretly, else they would have taken
everything away from me. That would have been terrible. I often marvel
these days at the immense quantity of potatoes two or three hundred
thousand dollars will buy, or bread, or meat, or coal and kindling. He
turned to Ernest. You are right, young man. Labor is dreadfully
underpaid. I never did a bit of work in my life, except to appeal
aesthetically to PhariseesI thought I was preaching the messageand
yet I was worth half a million dollars. I never knew what half a
million dollars meant until I realized how much potatoes and bread and
butter and meat it could buy. And then I realized something more. I
realized that all those potatoes and that bread and butter and meat
were mine, and that I had not worked to make them. Then it was clear to
me, some one else had worked and made them and been robbed of them. And
when I came down amongst the poor I found those who had been robbed and
who were hungry and wretched because they had been robbed.

We drew him back to his narrative.

The money? I have it deposited in many different banks under different
names. It can never be taken away from me, because it can never be
found. And it is so good, that money. It buys so much food. I never
knew before what money was good for.

I wish we could get some of it for the propaganda, Ernest said
wistfully. It would do immense good.

Do you think so? the Bishop said. I do not have much faith in
politics. In fact, I am afraid I do not understand politics.

Ernest was delicate in such matters. He did not repeat his suggestion,
though he knew only too well the sore straits the Socialist Party was
in through lack of money.

I sleep in cheap lodging houses, the Bishop went on. But I am
afraid, and never stay long in one place. Also, I rent two rooms in
workingmens houses in different quarters of the city. It is a great
extravagance, I know, but it is necessary. I make up for it in part by
doing my own cooking, though sometimes I get something to eat in cheap
coffee-houses. And I have made a discovery. Tamales[1] are very good
when the air grows chilly late at night. Only they are so expensive.
But I have discovered a place where I can get three for ten cents. They
are not so good as the others, but they are very warming.

 [1] A Mexican dish, referred to occasionally in the literature of the
 times. It is supposed that it was warmly seasoned. No recipe of it has
 come down to us.

And so I have at last found my work in the world, thanks to you, young
man. It is the Masters work. He looked at me, and his eyes twinkled.
You caught me feeding his lambs, you know. And of course you will all
keep my secret.

He spoke carelessly enough, but there was real fear behind the speech.
He promised to call upon us again. But a week later we read in the
newspaper of the sad case of Bishop Morehouse, who had been committed
to the Napa Asylum and for whom there were still hopes held out. In
vain we tried to see him, to have his case reconsidered or
investigated. Nor could we learn anything about him except the
reiterated statements that slight hopes were still held for his
recovery.

Christ told the rich young man to sell all he had, Ernest said
bitterly. The Bishop obeyed Christs injunction and got locked up in a
madhouse. Times have changed since Christs day. A rich man to-day who
gives all he has to the poor is crazy. There is no discussion. Society
has spoken.




CHAPTER XIII.
THE GENERAL STRIKE


Of course Ernest was elected to Congress in the great socialist
landslide that took place in the fall of 1912. One great factor that
helped to swell the socialist vote was the destruction of Hearst.[1]
This the Plutocracy found an easy task. It cost Hearst eighteen million
dollars a year to run his various papers, and this sum, and more, he
got back from the middle class in payment for advertising. The source
of his financial strength lay wholly in the middle class. The trusts
did not advertise.[2] To destroy Hearst, all that was necessary was to
take away from him his advertising.

 [1] _William Randolph Hearst_a young California millionaire who
 became the most powerful newspaper owner in the country. His
 newspapers were published in all the large cities, and they appealed
 to the perishing middle class and to the proletariat. So large was his
 following that he managed to take possession of the empty shell of the
 old Democratic Party. He occupied an anomalous position, preaching an
 emasculated socialism combined with a nondescript sort of petty
 bourgeois capitalism. It was oil and water, and there was no hope for
 him, though for a short period he was a source of serious apprehension
 to the Plutocrats.

 [2] The cost of advertising was amazing in those helter- skelter
 times. Only the small capitalists competed, and therefore they did the
 advertising. There being no competition where there was a trust, there
 was no need for the trusts to advertise.

The whole middle class had not yet been exterminated. The sturdy
skeleton of it remained; but it was without power. The small
manufacturers and small business men who still survived were at the
complete mercy of the Plutocracy. They had no economic nor political
souls of their own. When the fiat of the Plutocracy went forth, they
withdrew their advertisements from the Hearst papers.

Hearst made a gallant fight. He brought his papers out at a loss of a
million and a half each month. He continued to publish the
advertisements for which he no longer received pay. Again the fiat of
the Plutocracy went forth, and the small business men and manufacturers
swamped him with a flood of notices that he must discontinue running
their old advertisements. Hearst persisted. Injunctions were served on
him. Still he persisted. He received six months imprisonment for
contempt of court in disobeying the injunctions, while he was
bankrupted by countless damage suits. He had no chance. The Plutocracy
had passed sentence on him. The courts were in the hands of the
Plutocracy to carry the sentence out. And with Hearst crashed also to
destruction the Democratic Party that he had so recently captured.

With the destruction of Hearst and the Democratic Party, there were
only two paths for his following to take. One was into the Socialist
Party; the other was into the Republican Party. Then it was that we
socialists reaped the fruit of Hearsts pseudo-socialistic preaching;
for the great Majority of his followers came over to us.

The expropriation of the farmers that took place at this time would
also have swelled our vote had it not been for the brief and futile
rise of the Grange Party. Ernest and the socialist leaders fought
fiercely to capture the farmers; but the destruction of the socialist
press and publishing houses constituted too great a handicap, while the
mouth-to-mouth propaganda had not yet been perfected. So it was that
politicians like Mr. Calvin, who were themselves farmers long since
expropriated, captured the farmers and threw their political strength
away in a vain campaign.

The poor farmers, Ernest once laughed savagely; the trusts have them
both coming and going.

And that was really the situation. The seven great trusts, working
together, had pooled their enormous surpluses and made a farm trust.
The railroads, controlling rates, and the bankers and stock exchange
gamesters, controlling prices, had long since bled the farmers into
indebtedness. The bankers, and all the trusts for that matter, had
likewise long since loaned colossal amounts of money to the farmers.
The farmers were in the net. All that remained to be done was the
drawing in of the net. This the farm trust proceeded to do.

The hard times of 1912 had already caused a frightful slump in the farm
markets. Prices were now deliberately pressed down to bankruptcy, while
the railroads, with extortionate rates, broke the back of the
farmer-camel. Thus the farmers were compelled to borrow more and more,
while they were prevented from paying back old loans. Then ensued the
great foreclosing of mortgages and enforced collection of notes. The
farmers simply surrendered the land to the farm trust. There was
nothing else for them to do. And having surrendered the land, the
farmers next went to work for the farm trust, becoming managers,
superintendents, foremen, and common laborers. They worked for wages.
They became villeins, in shortserfs bound to the soil by a living
wage. They could not leave their masters, for their masters composed
the Plutocracy. They could not go to the cities, for there, also, the
Plutocracy was in control. They had but one alternative,to leave the
soil and become vagrants, in brief, to starve. And even there they were
frustrated, for stringent vagrancy laws were passed and rigidly
enforced.

Of course, here and there, farmers, and even whole communities of
farmers, escaped expropriation by virtue of exceptional conditions. But
they were merely strays and did not count, and they were gathered in
anyway during the following year.[3]

 [3] The destruction of the Roman yeomanry proceeded far less rapidly
 than the destruction of the American farmers and small capitalists.
 There was momentum in the twentieth century, while there was
 practically none in ancient Rome.
    Numbers of the farmers, impelled by an insane lust for the soil,
    and willing to show what beasts they could become, tried to escape
    expropriation by withdrawing from any and all market-dealing. They
    sold nothing. They bought nothing. Among themselves a primitive
    barter began to spring up. Their privation and hardships were
    terrible, but they persisted. It became quite a movement, in fact.
    The manner in which they were beaten was unique and logical and
    simple. The Plutocracy, by virtue of its possession of the
    government, raised their taxes. It was the weak joint in their
    armor. Neither buying nor selling, they had no money, and in the
    end their land was sold to pay the taxes.

Thus it was that in the fall of 1912 the socialist leaders, with the
exception of Ernest, decided that the end of capitalism had come. What
of the hard times and the consequent vast army of the unemployed; what
of the destruction of the farmers and the middle class; and what of the
decisive defeat administered all along the line to the labor unions;
the socialists were really justified in believing that the end of
capitalism had come and in themselves throwing down the gauntlet to the
Plutocracy.

Alas, how we underestimated the strength of the enemy! Everywhere the
socialists proclaimed their coming victory at the ballot-box, while, in
unmistakable terms, they stated the situation. The Plutocracy accepted
the challenge. It was the Plutocracy, weighing and balancing, that
defeated us by dividing our strength. It was the Plutocracy, through
its secret agents, that raised the cry that socialism was sacrilegious
and atheistic; it was the Plutocracy that whipped the churches, and
especially the Catholic Church, into line, and robbed us of a portion
of the labor vote. And it was the Plutocracy, through its secret agents
of course, that encouraged the Grange Party and even spread it to the
cities into the ranks of the dying middle class.

Nevertheless the socialist landslide occurred. But, instead of a
sweeping victory with chief executive officers and majorities in all
legislative bodies, we found ourselves in the minority. It is true, we
elected fifty Congressmen; but when they took their seats in the spring
of 1913, they found themselves without power of any sort. Yet they were
more fortunate than the Grangers, who captured a dozen state
governments, and who, in the spring, were not permitted to take
possession of the captured offices. The incumbents refused to retire,
and the courts were in the hands of the Oligarchy. But this is too far
in advance of events. I have yet to tell of the stirring times of the
winter of 1912.

The hard times at home had caused an immense decrease in consumption.
Labor, out of work, had no wages with which to buy. The result was that
the Plutocracy found a greater surplus than ever on its hands. This
surplus it was compelled to dispose of abroad, and, what of its
colossal plans, it needed money. Because of its strenuous efforts to
dispose of the surplus in the world market, the Plutocracy clashed with
Germany. Economic clashes were usually succeeded by wars, and this
particular clash was no exception. The great German war-lord prepared,
and so did the United States prepare.

The war-cloud hovered dark and ominous. The stage was set for a
world-catastrophe, for in all the world were hard times, labor
troubles, perishing middle classes, armies of unemployed, clashes of
economic interests in the world-market, and mutterings and rumblings of
the socialist revolution.[4]

 [4] For a long time these mutterings and rumblings had been heard. As
 far back as 1906 A.D., Lord Avebury, an Englishman, uttered the
 following in the House of Lords: _The unrest in Europe, the spread of
 socialism, and the ominous rise of Anarchism, are warnings to the
 governments and the ruling classes that the condition of the working
 classes in Europe is becoming intolerable, and that if a revolution is
 to be avoided some steps must be taken to increase wages, reduce the
 hours of labor, and lower the prices of the necessaries of life._ The
 _Wall Street Journal_, a stock gamesters publication, in commenting
 upon Lord Aveburys speech, said: _These words were spoken by an
 aristocrat and a member of the most conservative body in all Europe.
 That gives them all the more significance. They contain more valuable
 political economy than is to be found in most of the books. They sound
 a note of warning. Take heed, gentlemen of the war and navy
 departments!_
    At the same time, Sydney Brooks, writing in America, in Harpers
    Weekly, said: _You will not hear the socialists mentioned in
    Washington. Why should you? The politicians are always the last
    people in this country to see what is going on under their noses.
    They will jeer at me when I prophesy, and prophesy with the utmost
    confidence, that at the next presidential election the socialists
    will poll over a million votes._

The Oligarchy wanted the war with Germany. And it wanted the war for a
dozen reasons. In the juggling of events such a war would cause, in the
reshuffling of the international cards and the making of new treaties
and alliances, the Oligarchy had much to gain. And, furthermore, the
war would consume many national surpluses, reduce the armies of
unemployed that menaced all countries, and give the Oligarchy a
breathing space in which to perfect its plans and carry them out. Such
a war would virtually put the Oligarchy in possession of the
world-market. Also, such a war would create a large standing army that
need never be disbanded, while in the minds of the people would be
substituted the issue, America _versus_ Germany, in place of
Socialism _versus_ Oligarchy.

And truly the war would have done all these things had it not been for
the socialists. A secret meeting of the Western leaders was held in our
four tiny rooms in Pell Street. Here was first considered the stand the
socialists were to take. It was not the first time we had put our foot
down upon war,[5] but it was the first time we had done so in the
United States. After our secret meeting we got in touch with the
national organization, and soon our code cables were passing back and
forth across the Atlantic between us and the International Bureau.

 [5] It was at the very beginning of the twentieth century A.D., that
 the international organization of the socialists finally formulated
 their long-maturing policy on war. Epitomized their doctrine was:
 _Why should the workingmen of one country fight with the workingmen
 of another country for the benefit of their capitalist masters?_
    On May 21, 1905 A.D., when war threatened between Austria and
    Italy, the socialists of Italy, Austria, and Hungary held a
    conference at Trieste, and threatened a general strike of the
    workingmen of both countries in case war was declared. This was
    repeated the following year, when the Morocco Affair threatened
    to involve France, Germany, and England.

The German socialists were ready to act with us. There were over five
million of them, many of them in the standing army, and, in addition,
they were on friendly terms with the labor unions. In both countries
the socialists came out in bold declaration against the war and
threatened the general strike. And in the meantime they made
preparation for the general strike. Furthermore, the revolutionary
parties in all countries gave public utterance to the socialist
principle of international peace that must be preserved at all hazards,
even to the extent of revolt and revolution at home.

The general strike was the one great victory we American socialists
won. On the 4th of December the American minister was withdrawn from
the German capital. That night a German fleet made a dash on Honolulu,
sinking three American cruisers and a revenue cutter, and bombarding
the city. Next day both Germany and the United States declared war, and
within an hour the socialists called the general strike in both
countries.

For the first time the German war-lord faced the men of his empire who
made his empire go. Without them he could not run his empire. The
novelty of the situation lay in that their revolt was passive. They did
not fight. They did nothing. And by doing nothing they tied their
war-lords hands. He would have asked for nothing better than an
opportunity to loose his war-dogs on his rebellious proletariat. But
this was denied him. He could not loose his war-dogs. Neither could he
mobilize his army to go forth to war, nor could he punish his
recalcitrant subjects. Not a wheel moved in his empire. Not a train
ran, not a telegraphic message went over the wires, for the
telegraphers and railroad men had ceased work along with the rest of
the population.

And as it was in Germany, so it was in the United States. At last
organized labor had learned its lesson. Beaten decisively on its own
chosen field, it had abandoned that field and come over to the
political field of the socialists; for the general strike was a
political strike. Besides, organized labor had been so badly beaten
that it did not care. It joined in the general strike out of sheer
desperation. The workers threw down their tools and left their tasks by
the millions. Especially notable were the machinists. Their heads were
bloody, their organization had apparently been destroyed, yet out they
came, along with their allies in the metal-working trades.

Even the common laborers and all unorganized labor ceased work. The
strike had tied everything up so that nobody could work. Besides, the
women proved to be the strongest promoters of the strike. They set
their faces against the war. They did not want their men to go forth to
die. Then, also, the idea of the general strike caught the mood of the
people. It struck their sense of humor. The idea was infectious. The
children struck in all the schools, and such teachers as came, went
home again from deserted class rooms. The general strike took the form
of a great national picnic. And the idea of the solidarity of labor, so
evidenced, appealed to the imagination of all. And, finally, there was
no danger to be incurred by the colossal frolic. When everybody was
guilty, how was anybody to be punished?

The United States was paralyzed. No one knew what was happening. There
were no newspapers, no letters, no despatches. Every community was as
completely isolated as though ten thousand miles of primeval wilderness
stretched between it and the rest of the world. For that matter, the
world had ceased to exist. And for a week this state of affairs was
maintained.

In San Francisco we did not know what was happening even across the bay
in Oakland or Berkeley. The effect on ones sensibilities was weird,
depressing. It seemed as though some great cosmic thing lay dead. The
pulse of the land had ceased to beat. Of a truth the nation had died.
There were no wagons rumbling on the streets, no factory whistles, no
hum of electricity in the air, no passing of street cars, no cries of
news-boysnothing but persons who at rare intervals went by like
furtive ghosts, themselves oppressed and made unreal by the silence.

And during that week of silence the Oligarchy was taught its lesson.
And well it learned the lesson. The general strike was a warning. It
should never occur again. The Oligarchy would see to that.

At the end of the week, as had been prearranged, the telegraphers of
Germany and the United States returned to their posts. Through them the
socialist leaders of both countries presented their ultimatum to the
rulers. The war should be called off, or the general strike would
continue. It did not take long to come to an understanding. The war was
declared off, and the populations of both countries returned to their
tasks.

It was this renewal of peace that brought about the alliance between
Germany and the United States. In reality, this was an alliance between
the Emperor and the Oligarchy, for the purpose of meeting their common
foe, the revolutionary proletariat of both countries. And it was this
alliance that the Oligarchy afterward so treacherously broke when the
German socialists rose and drove the war-lord from his throne. It was
the very thing the Oligarchy had played forthe destruction of its
great rival in the world-market. With the German Emperor out of the
way, Germany would have no surplus to sell abroad. By the very nature
of the socialist state, the German population would consume all that it
produced. Of course, it would trade abroad certain things it produced
for things it did not produce; but this would be quite different from
an unconsumable surplus.

Ill wager the Oligarchy finds justification, Ernest said, when its
treachery to the German Emperor became known. As usual, the Oligarchy
will believe it has done right.

And sure enough. The Oligarchys public defence for the act was that it
had done it for the sake of the American people whose interests it was
looking out for. It had flung its hated rival out of the world-market
and enabled us to dispose of our surplus in that market.

And the howling folly of it is that we are so helpless that such
idiots really are managing our interests, was Ernests comment. They
have enabled us to sell more abroad, which means that well be
compelled to consume less at home.




CHAPTER XIV.
THE BEGINNING OF THE END


As early as January, 1913, Ernest saw the true trend of affairs, but he
could not get his brother leaders to see the vision of the Iron Heel
that had arisen in his brain. They were too confident. Events were
rushing too rapidly to culmination. A crisis had come in world affairs.
The American Oligarchy was practically in possession of the
world-market, and scores of countries were flung out of that market
with unconsumable and unsalable surpluses on their hands. For such
countries nothing remained but reorganization. They could not continue
their method of producing surpluses. The capitalistic system, so far as
they were concerned, had hopelessly broken down.

The reorganization of these countries took the form of revolution. It
was a time of confusion and violence. Everywhere institutions and
governments were crashing. Everywhere, with the exception of two or
three countries, the erstwhile capitalist masters fought bitterly for
their possessions. But the governments were taken away from them by the
militant proletariat. At last was being realized Karl Marxs classic:
The knell of private capitalist property sounds. The expropriators are
expropriated. And as fast as capitalistic governments crashed,
cooperative commonwealths arose in their place.

Why does the United States lag behind?; Get busy, you American
revolutionists!; Whats the matter with America?were the messages
sent to us by our successful comrades in other lands. But we could not
keep up. The Oligarchy stood in the way. Its bulk, like that of some
huge monster, blocked our path.

Wait till we take office in the spring, we answered. Then youll
see.

Behind this lay our secret. We had won over the Grangers, and in the
spring a dozen states would pass into their hands by virtue of the
elections of the preceding fall. At once would be instituted a dozen
cooperative commonwealth states. After that, the rest would be easy.

But what if the Grangers fail to get possession? Ernest demanded. And
his comrades called him a calamity howler.

But this failure to get possession was not the chief danger that Ernest
had in mind. What he foresaw was the defection of the great labor
unions and the rise of the castes.

Ghent has taught the oligarchs how to do it, Ernest said. Ill wager
theyve made a text-book out of his Benevolent Feudalism.[1]

 [1] Our Benevolent Feudalism, a book published in 1902 A.D., by W.
 J. Ghent. It has always been insisted that Ghent put the idea of the
 Oligarchy into the minds of the great capitalists. This belief
 persists throughout the literature of the three centuries of the Iron
 Heel, and even in the literature of the first century of the
 Brotherhood of Man. To-day we know better, but our knowledge does not
 overcome the fact that Ghent remains the most abused innocent man in
 all history.

Never shall I forget the night when, after a hot discussion with half a
dozen labor leaders, Ernest turned to me and said quietly: That
settles it. The Iron Heel has won. The end is in sight.

This little conference in our home was unofficial; but Ernest, like the
rest of his comrades, was working for assurances from the labor leaders
that they would call out their men in the next general strike.
OConnor, the president of the Association of Machinists, had been
foremost of the six leaders present in refusing to give such assurance.

You have seen that you were beaten soundly at your old tactics of
strike and boycott, Ernest urged.

OConnor and the others nodded their heads.

And you saw what a general strike would do, Ernest went on. We
stopped the war with Germany. Never was there so fine a display of the
solidarity and the power of labor. Labor can and will rule the world.
If you continue to stand with us, well put an end to the reign of
capitalism. It is your only hope. And what is more, you know it. There
is no other way out. No matter what you do under your old tactics, you
are doomed to defeat, if for no other reason because the masters
control the courts.[2]

 [2] As a sample of the decisions of the courts adverse to labor, the
 following instances are given. In the coal- mining regions the
 employment of children was notorious. In 1905 A.D., labor succeeded in
 getting a law passed in Pennsylvania providing that proof of the age
 of the child and of certain educational qualifications must accompany
 the oath of the parent. This was promptly declared unconstitutional by
 the Luzerne County Court, on the ground that it violated the
 Fourteenth Amendment in that it discriminated between individuals of
 the same classnamely, children above fourteen years of age and
 children below. The state court sustained the decision. The New York
 Court of Special Sessions, in 1905 A.D., declared unconstitutional the
 law prohibiting minors and women from working in factories after nine
 oclock at night, the ground taken being that such a law was class
 legislation. Again, the bakers of that time were terribly overworked.
 The New York Legislature passed a law restricting work in bakeries to
 ten hours a day. In 1906 A.D., the Supreme Court of the United States
 declared this law to be unconstitutional. In part the decision read:
 _There is no reasonable ground for interfering with the liberty of
 persons or the right of free contract by determining the hours of
 labor in the occupation of a baker._

You run ahead too fast, OConnor answered. You dont know all the
ways out. There is another way out. We know what were about. Were
sick of strikes. Theyve got us beaten that way to a frazzle. But I
dont think well ever need to call our men out again.

What is your way out? Ernest demanded bluntly.

OConnor laughed and shook his head. I can tell you this much: Weve
not been asleep. And were not dreaming now.

Theres nothing to be afraid of, or ashamed of, I hope, Ernest
challenged.

I guess we know our business best, was the retort.

Its a dark business, from the way you hide it, Ernest said with
growing anger.

Weve paid for our experience in sweat and blood, and weve earned all
thats coming to us, was the reply. Charity begins at home.

If youre afraid to tell me your way out, Ill tell it to you.
Ernests blood was up. Youre going in for grab-sharing. Youve made
terms with the enemy, thats what youve done. Youve sold out the
cause of labor, of all labor. You are leaving the battle-field like
cowards.

Im not saying anything, OConnor answered sullenly. Only I guess we
know whats best for us a little bit better than you do.

And you dont care a cent for what is best for the rest of labor. You
kick it into the ditch.

Im not saying anything, OConnor replied, except that Im president
of the Machinists Association, and its my business to consider the
interests of the men I represent, thats all.

And then, when the labor leaders had left, Ernest, with the calmness of
defeat, outlined to me the course of events to come.

The socialists used to foretell with joy, he said, the coming of the
day when organized labor, defeated on the industrial field, would come
over on to the political field. Well, the Iron Heel has defeated the
labor unions on the industrial field and driven them over to the
political field; and instead of this being joyful for us, it will be a
source of grief. The Iron Heel learned its lesson. We showed it our
power in the general strike. It has taken steps to prevent another
general strike.

But how? I asked.

Simply by subsidizing the great unions. They wont join in the next
general strike. Therefore it wont be a general strike.

But the Iron Heel cant maintain so costly a programme forever, I
objected.

Oh, it hasnt subsidized all of the unions. Thats not necessary. Here
is what is going to happen. Wages are going to be advanced and hours
shortened in the railroad unions, the iron and steel workers unions,
and the engineer and machinist unions. In these unions more favorable
conditions will continue to prevail. Membership in these unions will
become like seats in Paradise.

Still I dont see, I objected. What is to become of the other
unions? There are far more unions outside of this combination than in
it.

The other unions will be ground out of existenceall of them. For,
dont you see, the railway men, machinists and engineers, iron and
steel workers, do all of the vitally essential work in our machine
civilization. Assured of their faithfulness, the Iron Heel can snap its
fingers at all the rest of labor. Iron, steel, coal, machinery, and
transportation constitute the backbone of the whole industrial fabric.

But coal? I queried. There are nearly a million coal miners.

They are practically unskilled labor. They will not count. Their wages
will go down and their hours will increase. They will be slaves like
all the rest of us, and they will become about the most bestial of all
of us. They will be compelled to work, just as the farmers are
compelled to work now for the masters who robbed them of their land.
And the same with all the other unions outside the combination. Watch
them wobble and go to pieces, and their members become slaves driven to
toil by empty stomachs and the law of the land.

Do you know what will happen to Farley[3] and his strike-breakers?
Ill tell you. Strike-breaking as an occupation will cease. There wont
be any more strikes. In place of strikes will be slave revolts. Farley
and his gang will be promoted to slave-driving. Oh, it wont be called
that; it will be called enforcing the law of the land that compels the
laborers to work. It simply prolongs the fight, this treachery of the
big unions. Heaven only knows now where and when the Revolution will
triumph.

 [3] James Farleya notorious strike-breaker of the period. A man more
 courageous than ethical, and of undeniable ability. He rose high under
 the rule of the Iron Heel and finally was translated into the oligarch
 class. He was assassinated in 1932 by Sarah Jenkins, whose husband,
 thirty years before, had been killed by Farleys strike-breakers.

But with such a powerful combination as the Oligarchy and the big
unions, is there any reason to believe that the Revolution will ever
triumph? I queried. May not the combination endure forever?

He shook his head. One of our generalizations is that every system
founded upon class and caste contains within itself the germs of its
own decay. When a system is founded upon class, how can caste be
prevented? The Iron Heel will not be able to prevent it, and in the end
caste will destroy the Iron Heel. The oligarchs have already developed
caste among themselves; but wait until the favored unions develop
caste. The Iron Heel will use all its power to prevent it, but it will
fail.

In the favored unions are the flower of the American workingmen. They
are strong, efficient men. They have become members of those unions
through competition for place. Every fit workman in the United States
will be possessed by the ambition to become a member of the favored
unions. The Oligarchy will encourage such ambition and the consequent
competition. Thus will the strong men, who might else be
revolutionists, be won away and their strength used to bolster the
Oligarchy.

On the other hand, the labor castes, the members of the favored
unions, will strive to make their organizations into close
corporations. And they will succeed. Membership in the labor castes
will become hereditary. Sons will succeed fathers, and there will be no
inflow of new strength from that eternal reservoir of strength, the
common people. This will mean deterioration of the labor castes, and in
the end they will become weaker and weaker. At the same time, as an
institution, they will become temporarily all-powerful. They will be
like the guards of the palace in old Rome, and there will be palace
revolutions whereby the labor castes will seize the reins of power. And
there will be counter-palace revolutions of the oligarchs, and
sometimes the one, and sometimes the other, will be in power. And
through it all the inevitable caste-weakening will go on, so that in
the end the common people will come into their own.

This foreshadowing of a slow social evolution was made when Ernest was
first depressed by the defection of the great unions. I never agreed
with him in it, and I disagree now, as I write these lines, more
heartily than ever; for even now, though Ernest is gone, we are on the
verge of the revolt that will sweep all oligarchies away. Yet I have
here given Ernests prophecy because it was his prophecy. In spite of
his belief in it, he worked like a giant against it, and he, more than
any man, has made possible the revolt that even now waits the signal to
burst forth.[4]

 [4] Everhards social foresight was remarkable. As clearly as in the
 light of past events, he saw the defection of the favored unions, the
 rise and the slow decay of the labor castes, and the struggle between
 the decaying oligarchs and labor castes for control of the great
 governmental machine.

But if the Oligarchy persists, I asked him that evening, what will
become of the great surpluses that will fall to its share every year?

The surpluses will have to be expended somehow, he answered; and
trust the oligarchs to find a way. Magnificent roads will be built.
There will be great achievements in science, and especially in art.
When the oligarchs have completely mastered the people, they will have
time to spare for other things. They will become worshippers of beauty.
They will become art-lovers. And under their direction and generously
rewarded, will toil the artists. The result will be great art; for no
longer, as up to yesterday, will the artists pander to the bourgeois
taste of the middle class. It will be great art, I tell you, and wonder
cities will arise that will make tawdry and cheap the cities of old
time. And in these cities will the oligarchs dwell and worship
beauty.[5]

 [5] We cannot but marvel at Everhards foresight. Before ever the
 thought of wonder cities like Ardis and Asgard entered the minds of
 the oligarchs, Everhard saw those cities and the inevitable necessity
 for their creation.

Thus will the surplus be constantly expended while labor does the
work. The building of these great works and cities will give a
starvation ration to millions of common laborers, for the enormous bulk
of the surplus will compel an equally enormous expenditure, and the
oligarchs will build for a thousand yearsay, for ten thousand years.
They will build as the Egyptians and the Babylonians never dreamed of
building; and when the oligarchs have passed away, their great roads
and their wonder cities will remain for the brotherhood of labor to
tread upon and dwell within.[6]

 [6] And since that day of prophecy, have passed away the three
 centuries of the Iron Heel and the four centuries of the Brotherhood
 of Man, and to-day we tread the roads and dwell in the cities that the
 oligarchs built. It is true, we are even now building still more
 wonderful wonder cities, but the wonder cities of the oligarchs
 endure, and I write these lines in Ardis, one of the most wonderful of
 them all.

These things the oligarchs will do because they cannot help doing
them. These great works will be the form their expenditure of the
surplus will take, and in the same way that the ruling classes of Egypt
of long ago expended the surplus they robbed from the people by the
building of temples and pyramids. Under the oligarchs will flourish,
not a priest class, but an artist class. And in place of the merchant
class of bourgeoisie will be the labor castes. And beneath will be the
abyss, wherein will fester and starve and rot, and ever renew itself,
the common people, the great bulk of the population. And in the end,
who knows in what day, the common people will rise up out of the abyss;
the labor castes and the Oligarchy will crumble away; and then, at
last, after the travail of the centuries, will it be the day of the
common man. I had thought to see that day; but now I know that I shall
never see it.

He paused and looked at me, and added:

Social evolution is exasperatingly slow, isnt it, sweetheart?

My arms were about him, and his head was on my breast.

Sing me to sleep, he murmured whimsically. I have had a visioning,
and I wish to forget.




CHAPTER XV.
LAST DAYS


It was near the end of January, 1913, that the changed attitude of the
Oligarchy toward the favored unions was made public. The newspapers
published information of an unprecedented rise in wages and shortening
of hours for the railroad employees, the iron and steel workers, and
the engineers and machinists. But the whole truth was not told. The
oligarchs did not dare permit the telling of the whole truth. In
reality, the wages had been raised much higher, and the privileges were
correspondingly greater. All this was secret, but secrets will out.
Members of the favored unions told their wives, and the wives gossiped,
and soon all the labor world knew what had happened.

It was merely the logical development of what in the nineteenth century
had been known as grab-sharing. In the industrial warfare of that time,
profit-sharing had been tried. That is, the capitalists had striven to
placate the workers by interesting them financially in their work. But
profit-sharing, as a system, was ridiculous and impossible.
Profit-sharing could be successful only in isolated cases in the midst
of a system of industrial strife; for if all labor and all capital
shared profits, the same conditions would obtain as did obtain when
there was no profit-sharing.

So, out of the unpractical idea of profit-sharing, arose the practical
idea of grab-sharing. Give us more pay and charge it to the public,
was the slogan of the strong unions.[1] And here and there this selfish
policy worked successfully. In charging it to the public, it was
charged to the great mass of unorganized labor and of weakly organized
labor. These workers actually paid the increased wages of their
stronger brothers who were members of unions that were labor
monopolies. This idea, as I say, was merely carried to its logical
conclusion, on a large scale, by the combination of the oligarchs and
the favored unions.

 [1] All the railroad unions entered into this combination with the
 oligarchs, and it is of interest to note that the first definite
 application of the policy of profit-grabbing was made by a railroad
 union in the nineteenth century A.D., namely, the Brotherhood of
 Locomotive Engineers. P. M. Arthur was for twenty years Grand Chief of
 the Brotherhood. After the strike on the Pennsylvania Railroad in
 1877, he broached a scheme to have the Locomotive Engineers make terms
 with the railroads and to go it alone so far as the rest of the
 labor unions were concerned. This scheme was eminently successful. It
 was as successful as it was selfish, and out of it was coined the word
 arthurization, to denote grab-sharing on the part of labor unions.
 This word arthurization has long puzzled the etymologists, but its
 derivation, I hope, is now made clear.

As soon as the secret of the defection of the favored unions leaked
out, there were rumblings and mutterings in the labor world. Next, the
favored unions withdrew from the international organizations and broke
off all affiliations. Then came trouble and violence. The members of
the favored unions were branded as traitors, and in saloons and
brothels, on the streets and at work, and, in fact, everywhere, they
were assaulted by the comrades they had so treacherously deserted.

Countless heads were broken, and there were many killed. No member of
the favored unions was safe. They gathered together in bands in order
to go to work or to return from work. They walked always in the middle
of the street. On the sidewalk they were liable to have their skulls
crushed by bricks and cobblestones thrown from windows and house-tops.
They were permitted to carry weapons, and the authorities aided them in
every way. Their persecutors were sentenced to long terms in prison,
where they were harshly treated; while no man, not a member of the
favored unions, was permitted to carry weapons. Violation of this law
was made a high misdemeanor and punished accordingly.

Outraged labor continued to wreak vengeance on the traitors. Caste
lines formed automatically. The children of the traitors were
persecuted by the children of the workers who had been betrayed, until
it was impossible for the former to play on the streets or to attend
the public schools. Also, the wives and families of the traitors were
ostracized, while the corner groceryman who sold provisions to them was
boycotted.

As a result, driven back upon themselves from every side, the traitors
and their families became clannish. Finding it impossible to dwell in
safety in the midst of the betrayed proletariat, they moved into new
localities inhabited by themselves alone. In this they were favored by
the oligarchs. Good dwellings, modern and sanitary, were built for
them, surrounded by spacious yards, and separated here and there by
parks and playgrounds. Their children attended schools especially built
for them, and in these schools manual training and applied science were
specialized upon. Thus, and unavoidably, at the very beginning, out of
this segregation arose caste. The members of the favored unions became
the aristocracy of labor. They were set apart from the rest of labor.
They were better housed, better clothed, better fed, better treated.
They were grab-sharing with a vengeance.

In the meantime, the rest of the working class was more harshly
treated. Many little privileges were taken away from it, while its
wages and its standard of living steadily sank down. Incidentally, its
public schools deteriorated, and education slowly ceased to be
compulsory. The increase in the younger generation of children who
could not read nor write was perilous.

The capture of the world-market by the United States had disrupted the
rest of the world. Institutions and governments were everywhere
crashing or transforming. Germany, Italy, France, Australia, and New
Zealand were busy forming cooperative commonwealths. The British Empire
was falling apart. Englands hands were full. In India revolt was in
full swing. The cry in all Asia was, Asia for the Asiatics! And
behind this cry was Japan, ever urging and aiding the yellow and brown
races against the white. And while Japan dreamed of continental empire
and strove to realize the dream, she suppressed her own proletarian
revolution. It was a simple war of the castes, Coolie versus Samurai,
and the coolie socialists were executed by tens of thousands. Forty
thousand were killed in the street-fighting of Tokio and in the futile
assault on the Mikados palace. Kobe was a shambles; the slaughter of
the cotton operatives by machine-guns became classic as the most
terrific execution ever achieved by modern war machines. Most savage of
all was the Japanese Oligarchy that arose. Japan dominated the East,
and took to herself the whole Asiatic portion of the world-market, with
the exception of India.

England managed to crush her own proletarian revolution and to hold on
to India, though she was brought to the verge of exhaustion. Also, she
was compelled to let her great colonies slip away from her. So it was
that the socialists succeeded in making Australia and New Zealand into
cooperative commonwealths. And it was for the same reason that Canada
was lost to the mother country. But Canada crushed her own socialist
revolution, being aided in this by the Iron Heel. At the same time, the
Iron Heel helped Mexico and Cuba to put down revolt. The result was
that the Iron Heel was firmly established in the New World. It had
welded into one compact political mass the whole of North America from
the Panama Canal to the Arctic Ocean.

And England, at the sacrifice of her great colonies, had succeeded only
in retaining India. But this was no more than temporary. The struggle
with Japan and the rest of Asia for India was merely delayed. England
was destined shortly to lose India, while behind that event loomed the
struggle between a united Asia and the world.

And while all the world was torn with conflict, we of the United States
were not placid and peaceful. The defection of the great unions had
prevented our proletarian revolt, but violence was everywhere. In
addition to the labor troubles, and the discontent of the farmers and
of the remnant of the middle class, a religious revival had blazed up.
An offshoot of the Seventh Day Adventists sprang into sudden
prominence, proclaiming the end of the world.

Confusion thrice confounded! Ernest cried. How can we hope for
solidarity with all these cross purposes and conflicts?

And truly the religious revival assumed formidable proportions. The
people, what of their wretchedness, and of their disappointment in all
things earthly, were ripe and eager for a heaven where industrial
tyrants entered no more than camels passed through needle-eyes.
Wild-eyed itinerant preachers swarmed over the land; and despite the
prohibition of the civil authorities, and the persecution for
disobedience, the flames of religious frenzy were fanned by countless
camp-meetings.

It was the last days, they claimed, the beginning of the end of the
world. The four winds had been loosed. God had stirred the nations to
strife. It was a time of visions and miracles, while seers and
prophetesses were legion. The people ceased work by hundreds of
thousands and fled to the mountains, there to await the imminent coming
of God and the rising of the hundred and forty and four thousand to
heaven. But in the meantime God did not come, and they starved to death
in great numbers. In their desperation they ravaged the farms for food,
and the consequent tumult and anarchy in the country districts but
increased the woes of the poor expropriated farmers.

Also, the farms and warehouses were the property of the Iron Heel.
Armies of troops were put into the field, and the fanatics were herded
back at the bayonet point to their tasks in the cities. There they
broke out in ever recurring mobs and riots. Their leaders were executed
for sedition or confined in madhouses. Those who were executed went to
their deaths with all the gladness of martyrs. It was a time of
madness. The unrest spread. In the swamps and deserts and waste places,
from Florida to Alaska, the small groups of Indians that survived were
dancing ghost dances and waiting the coming of a Messiah of their own.

And through it all, with a serenity and certitude that was terrifying,
continued to rise the form of that monster of the ages, the Oligarchy.
With iron hand and iron heel it mastered the surging millions, out of
confusion brought order, out of the very chaos wrought its own
foundation and structure.

Just wait till we get in, the Grangers saidCalvin said it to us in
our Pell Street quarters. Look at the states weve captured. With you
socialists to back us, well make them sing another song when we take
office.

The millions of the discontented and the impoverished are ours, the
socialists said. The Grangers have come over to us, the farmers, the
middle class, and the laborers. The capitalist system will fall to
pieces. In another month we send fifty men to Congress. Two years hence
every office will be ours, from the President down to the local
dog-catcher.

To all of which Ernest would shake his head and say:

How many rifles have you got? Do you know where you can get plenty of
lead? When it comes to powder, chemical mixtures are better than
mechanical mixtures, you take my word.




CHAPTER XVI.
THE END


When it came time for Ernest and me to go to Washington, father did not
accompany us. He had become enamoured of proletarian life. He looked
upon our slum neighborhood as a great sociological laboratory, and he
had embarked upon an apparently endless orgy of investigation. He
chummed with the laborers, and was an intimate in scores of homes.
Also, he worked at odd jobs, and the work was play as well as learned
investigation, for he delighted in it and was always returning home
with copious notes and bubbling over with new adventures. He was the
perfect scientist.

There was no need for his working at all, because Ernest managed to
earn enough from his translating to take care of the three of us. But
father insisted on pursuing his favorite phantom, and a protean phantom
it was, judging from the jobs he worked at. I shall never forget the
evening he brought home his street pedlers outfit of shoe-laces and
suspenders, nor the time I went into the little corner grocery to make
some purchase and had him wait on me. After that I was not surprised
when he tended bar for a week in the saloon across the street. He
worked as a night watchman, hawked potatoes on the street, pasted
labels in a cannery warehouse, was utility man in a paper-box factory,
and water-carrier for a street railway construction gang, and even
joined the Dishwashers Union just before it fell to pieces.

I think the Bishops example, so far as wearing apparel was concerned,
must have fascinated father, for he wore the cheap cotton shirt of the
laborer and the overalls with the narrow strap about the hips. Yet one
habit remained to him from the old life; he always dressed for dinner,
or supper, rather.

I could be happy anywhere with Ernest; and fathers happiness in our
changed circumstances rounded out my own happiness.

When I was a boy, father said, I was very curious. I wanted to know
why things were and how they came to pass. That was why I became a
physicist. The life in me to-day is just as curious as it was in my
boyhood, and its the being curious that makes life worth living.

Sometimes he ventured north of Market Street into the shopping and
theatre district, where he sold papers, ran errands, and opened cabs.
There, one day, closing a cab, he encountered Mr. Wickson. In high glee
father described the incident to us that evening.

Wickson looked at me sharply when I closed the door on him, and
muttered, Well, Ill be damned. Just like that he said it, Well,
Ill be damned. His face turned red and he was so confused that he
forgot to tip me. But he must have recovered himself quickly, for the
cab hadnt gone fifty feet before it turned around and came back. He
leaned out of the door.

Look here, Professor, he said, this is too much. What can I do for
you?

I closed the cab door for you, I answered. According to common
custom you might give me a dime.

Bother that! he snorted. I mean something substantial.

He was certainly seriousa twinge of ossified conscience or something;
and so I considered with grave deliberation for a moment.

His face was quite expectant when I began my answer, but you should
have seen it when I finished.

You might give me back my home, I said, and my stock in the Sierra
Mills.

Father paused.

What did he say? I questioned eagerly.

What could he say? He said nothing. But I said, I hope you are
happy. He looked at me curiously. Tell me, are you happy? I asked.

He ordered the cabman to drive on, and went away swearing horribly.
And he didnt give me the dime, much less the home and stock; so you
see, my dear, your fathers street-arab career is beset with
disappointments.

And so it was that father kept on at our Pell Street quarters, while
Ernest and I went to Washington. Except for the final consummation, the
old order had passed away, and the final consummation was nearer than I
dreamed. Contrary to our expectation, no obstacles were raised to
prevent the socialist Congressmen from taking their seats. Everything
went smoothly, and I laughed at Ernest when he looked upon the very
smoothness as something ominous.

We found our socialist comrades confident, optimistic of their strength
and of the things they would accomplish. A few Grangers who had been
elected to Congress increased our strength, and an elaborate programme
of what was to be done was prepared by the united forces. In all of
which Ernest joined loyally and energetically, though he could not
forbear, now and again, from saying, apropos of nothing in particular,
When it comes to powder, chemical mixtures are better than mechanical
mixtures, you take my word.

The trouble arose first with the Grangers in the various states they
had captured at the last election. There were a dozen of these states,
but the Grangers who had been elected were not permitted to take
office. The incumbents refused to get out. It was very simple. They
merely charged illegality in the elections and wrapped up the whole
situation in the interminable red tape of the law. The Grangers were
powerless. The courts were in the hands of their enemies.

This was the moment of danger. If the cheated Grangers became violent,
all was lost. How we socialists worked to hold them back! There were
days and nights when Ernest never closed his eyes in sleep. The big
leaders of the Grangers saw the peril and were with us to a man. But it
was all of no avail. The Oligarchy wanted violence, and it set its
agents-provocateurs to work. Without discussion, it was the
agents-provocateurs who caused the Peasant Revolt.

In a dozen states the revolt flared up. The expropriated farmers took
forcible possession of the state governments. Of course this was
unconstitutional, and of course the United States put its soldiers into
the field. Everywhere the agents-provocateurs urged the people on.
These emissaries of the Iron Heel disguised themselves as artisans,
farmers, and farm laborers. In Sacramento, the capital of California,
the Grangers had succeeded in maintaining order. Thousands of secret
agents were rushed to the devoted city. In mobs composed wholly of
themselves, they fired and looted buildings and factories. They worked
the people up until they joined them in the pillage. Liquor in large
quantities was distributed among the slum classes further to inflame
their minds. And then, when all was ready, appeared upon the scene the
soldiers of the United States, who were, in reality, the soldiers of
the Iron Heel. Eleven thousand men, women, and children were shot down
on the streets of Sacramento or murdered in their houses. The national
government took possession of the state government, and all was over
for California.

And as with California, so elsewhere. Every Granger state was ravaged
with violence and washed in blood. First, disorder was precipitated by
the secret agents and the Black Hundreds, then the troops were called
out. Rioting and mob-rule reigned throughout the rural districts. Day
and night the smoke of burning farms, warehouses, villages, and cities
filled the sky. Dynamite appeared. Railroad bridges and tunnels were
blown up and trains were wrecked. The poor farmers were shot and hanged
in great numbers. Reprisals were bitter, and many plutocrats and army
officers were murdered. Blood and vengeance were in mens hearts. The
regular troops fought the farmers as savagely as had they been Indians.
And the regular troops had cause. Twenty-eight hundred of them had been
annihilated in a tremendous series of dynamite explosions in Oregon,
and in a similar manner, a number of train loads, at different times
and places, had been destroyed. So it was that the regular troops
fought for their lives as well as did the farmers.

As for the militia, the militia law of 1903 was put into effect, and
the workers of one state were compelled, under pain of death, to shoot
down their comrade-workers in other states. Of course, the militia law
did not work smoothly at first. Many militia officers were murdered,
and many militiamen were executed by drumhead court martial. Ernests
prophecy was strikingly fulfilled in the cases of Mr. Kowalt and Mr.
Asmunsen. Both were eligible for the militia, and both were drafted to
serve in the punitive expedition that was despatched from California
against the farmers of Missouri. Mr. Kowalt and Mr. Asmunsen refused to
serve. They were given short shrift. Drumhead court martial was their
portion, and military execution their end. They were shot with their
backs to the firing squad.

Many young men fled into the mountains to escape serving in the
militia. There they became outlaws, and it was not until more peaceful
times that they received their punishment. It was drastic. The
government issued a proclamation for all law-abiding citizens to come
in from the mountains for a period of three months. When the proclaimed
date arrived, half a million soldiers were sent into the mountainous
districts everywhere. There was no investigation, no trial. Wherever a
man was encountered, he was shot down on the spot. The troops operated
on the basis that no man not an outlaw remained in the mountains. Some
bands, in strong positions, fought gallantly, but in the end every
deserter from the militia met death.

A more immediate lesson, however, was impressed on the minds of the
people by the punishment meted out to the Kansas militia. The great
Kansas Mutiny occurred at the very beginning of military operations
against the Grangers. Six thousand of the militia mutinied. They had
been for several weeks very turbulent and sullen, and for that reason
had been kept in camp. Their open mutiny, however, was without doubt
precipitated by the agents-provocateurs.

On the night of the 22d of April they arose and murdered their
officers, only a small remnant of the latter escaping. This was beyond
the scheme of the Iron Heel, for the agents-provocateurs had done their
work too well. But everything was grist to the Iron Heel. It had
prepared for the outbreak, and the killing of so many officers gave it
justification for what followed. As by magic, forty thousand soldiers
of the regular army surrounded the malcontents. It was a trap. The
wretched militiamen found that their machine-guns had been tampered
with, and that the cartridges from the captured magazines did not fit
their rifles. They hoisted the white flag of surrender, but it was
ignored. There were no survivors. The entire six thousand were
annihilated. Common shell and shrapnel were thrown in upon them from a
distance, and, when, in their desperation, they charged the encircling
lines, they were mowed down by the machine-guns. I talked with an
eye-witness, and he said that the nearest any militiaman approached the
machine-guns was a hundred and fifty yards. The earth was carpeted with
the slain, and a final charge of cavalry, with trampling of horses
hoofs, revolvers, and sabres, crushed the wounded into the ground.

Simultaneously with the destruction of the Grangers came the revolt of
the coal miners. It was the expiring effort of organized labor.
Three-quarters of a million of miners went out on strike. But they were
too widely scattered over the country to advantage from their own
strength. They were segregated in their own districts and beaten into
submission. This was the first great slave-drive. Pocock[1] won his
spurs as a slave-driver and earned the undying hatred of the
proletariat. Countless attempts were made upon his life, but he seemed
to bear a charmed existence. It was he who was responsible for the
introduction of the Russian passport system among the miners, and the
denial of their right of removal from one part of the country to
another.

 [1] Albert Pocock, another of the notorious strike-breakers of earlier
 years, who, to the day of his death, successfully held all the
 coal-miners of the country to their task. He was succeeded by his son,
 Lewis Pocock, and for five generations this remarkable line of
 slave-drivers handled the coal mines. The elder Pocock, known as
 Pocock I., has been described as follows: A long, lean head,
 semicircled by a fringe of brown and gray hair, with big cheek-bones
 and a heavy chin, . . . a pale face, lustreless gray eyes, a metallic
 voice, and a languid manner. He was born of humble parents, and began
 his career as a bartender. He next became a private detective for a
 street railway corporation, and by successive steps developed into a
 professional strikebreaker. Pocock V., the last of the line, was blown
 up in a pump-house by a bomb during a petty revolt of the miners in
 the Indian Territory. This occurred in 2073 A.D.

In the meantime, the socialists held firm. While the Grangers expired
in flame and blood, and organized labor was disrupted, the socialists
held their peace and perfected their secret organization. In vain the
Grangers pleaded with us. We rightly contended that any revolt on our
part was virtually suicide for the whole Revolution. The Iron Heel, at
first dubious about dealing with the entire proletariat at one time,
had found the work easier than it had expected, and would have asked
nothing better than an uprising on our part. But we avoided the issue,
in spite of the fact that agents-provocateurs swarmed in our midst. In
those early days, the agents of the Iron Heel were clumsy in their
methods. They had much to learn and in the meantime our Fighting Groups
weeded them out. It was bitter, bloody work, but we were fighting for
life and for the Revolution, and we had to fight the enemy with its own
weapons. Yet we were fair. No agent of the Iron Heel was executed
without a trial. We may have made mistakes, but if so, very rarely. The
bravest, and the most combative and self-sacrificing of our comrades
went into the Fighting Groups. Once, after ten years had passed, Ernest
made a calculation from figures furnished by the chiefs of the Fighting
Groups, and his conclusion was that the average life of a man or woman
after becoming a member was five years. The comrades of the Fighting
Groups were heroes all, and the peculiar thing about it was that they
were opposed to the taking of life. They violated their own natures,
yet they loved liberty and knew of no sacrifice too great to make for
the Cause.[2]

 [2] These Fighting groups were modelled somewhat after the Fighting
 Organization of the Russian Revolution, and, despite the unceasing
 efforts of the Iron Heel, these groups persisted throughout the three
 centuries of its existence. Composed of men and women actuated by
 lofty purpose and unafraid to die, the Fighting Groups exercised
 tremendous influence and tempered the savage brutality of the rulers.
 Not alone was their work confined to unseen warfare with the secret
 agents of the Oligarchy. The oligarchs themselves were compelled to
 listen to the decrees of the Groups, and often, when they disobeyed,
 were punished by deathand likewise with the subordinates of the
 oligarchs, with the officers of the army and the leaders of the labor
 castes.
    Stern justice was meted out by these organized avengers, but most
    remarkable was their passionless and judicial procedure. There were
    no snap judgments. When a man was captured he was given fair trial
    and opportunity for defence. Of necessity, many men were tried and
    condemned by proxy, as in the case of General Lampton. This
    occurred in 2138 A.D. Possibly the most bloodthirsty and malignant
    of all the mercenaries that ever served the Iron Heel, he was
    informed by the Fighting Groups that they had tried him, found him
    guilty, and condemned him to deathand this, after three warnings
    for him to cease from his ferocious treatment of the proletariat.
    After his condemnation he surrounded himself with a myriad
    protective devices. Years passed, and in vain the Fighting Groups
    strove to execute their decree. Comrade after comrade, men and
    women, failed in their attempts, and were cruelly executed by the
    Oligarchy. It was the case of General Lampton that revived
    crucifixion as a legal method of execution. But in the end the
    condemned man found his executioner in the form of a slender girl
    of seventeen, Madeline Provence, who, to accomplish her purpose,
    served two years in his palace as a seamstress to the household.
    She died in solitary confinement after horrible and prolonged
    torture; but to-day she stands in imperishable bronze in the
    Pantheon of Brotherhood in the wonder city of Serles.
    We, who by personal experience know nothing of bloodshed, must not
    judge harshly the heroes of the Fighting Groups. They gave up their
    lives for humanity, no sacrifice was too great for them to
    accomplish, while inexorable necessity compelled them to bloody
    expression in an age of blood. The Fighting Groups constituted the
    one thorn in the side of the Iron Heel that the Iron Heel could
    never remove. Everhard was the father of this curious army, and its
    accomplishments and successful persistence for three hundred years
    bear witness to the wisdom with which he organized and the solid
    foundation he laid for the succeeding generations to build upon. In
    some respects, despite his great economic and sociological
    contributions, and his work as a general leader in the Revolution,
    his organization of the Fighting Groups must be regarded as his
    greatest achievement.

The task we set ourselves was threefold. First, the weeding out from
our circles of the secret agents of the Oligarchy. Second, the
organizing of the Fighting Groups, and outside of them, of the general
secret organization of the Revolution. And third, the introduction of
our own secret agents into every branch of the Oligarchyinto the labor
castes and especially among the telegraphers and secretaries and
clerks, into the army, the agents-provocateurs, and the slave-drivers.
It was slow work, and perilous, and often were our efforts rewarded
with costly failures.

The Iron Heel had triumphed in open warfare, but we held our own in the
new warfare, strange and awful and subterranean, that we instituted.
All was unseen, much was unguessed; the blind fought the blind; and yet
through it all was order, purpose, control. We permeated the entire
organization of the Iron Heel with our agents, while our own
organization was permeated with the agents of the Iron Heel. It was
warfare dark and devious, replete with intrigue and conspiracy, plot
and counterplot. And behind all, ever menacing, was death, violent and
terrible. Men and women disappeared, our nearest and dearest comrades.
We saw them to-day. To-morrow they were gone; we never saw them again,
and we knew that they had died.

There was no trust, no confidence anywhere. The man who plotted beside
us, for all we knew, might be an agent of the Iron Heel. We mined the
organization of the Iron Heel with our secret agents, and the Iron Heel
countermined with its secret agents inside its own organization. And it
was the same with our organization. And despite the absence of
confidence and trust we were compelled to base our every effort on
confidence and trust. Often were we betrayed. Men were weak. The Iron
Heel could offer money, leisure, the joys and pleasures that waited in
the repose of the wonder cities. We could offer nothing but the
satisfaction of being faithful to a noble ideal. As for the rest, the
wages of those who were loyal were unceasing peril, torture, and death.

Men were weak, I say, and because of their weakness we were compelled
to make the only other reward that was within our power. It was the
reward of death. Out of necessity we had to punish our traitors. For
every man who betrayed us, from one to a dozen faithful avengers were
loosed upon his heels. We might fail to carry out our decrees against
our enemies, such as the Pococks, for instance; but the one thing we
could not afford to fail in was the punishment of our own traitors.
Comrades turned traitor by permission, in order to win to the wonder
cities and there execute our sentences on the real traitors. In fact,
so terrible did we make ourselves, that it became a greater peril to
betray us than to remain loyal to us.

The Revolution took on largely the character of religion. We worshipped
at the shrine of the Revolution, which was the shrine of liberty. It
was the divine flashing through us. Men and women devoted their lives
to the Cause, and new-born babes were sealed to it as of old they had
been sealed to the service of God. We were lovers of Humanity.




CHAPTER XVII.
THE SCARLET LIVERY


With the destruction of the Granger states, the Grangers in Congress
disappeared. They were being tried for high treason, and their places
were taken by the creatures of the Iron Heel. The socialists were in a
pitiful minority, and they knew that their end was near. Congress and
the Senate were empty pretences, farces. Public questions were gravely
debated and passed upon according to the old forms, while in reality
all that was done was to give the stamp of constitutional procedure to
the mandates of the Oligarchy.

Ernest was in the thick of the fight when the end came. It was in the
debate on the bill to assist the unemployed. The hard times of the
preceding year had thrust great masses of the proletariat beneath the
starvation line, and the continued and wide-reaching disorder had but
sunk them deeper. Millions of people were starving, while the oligarchs
and their supporters were surfeiting on the surplus.[1] We called these
wretched people the people of the abyss,[2] and it was to alleviate
their awful suffering that the socialists had introduced the unemployed
bill. But this was not to the fancy of the Iron Heel. In its own way it
was preparing to set these millions to work, but the way was not our
way, wherefore it had issued its orders that our bill should be voted
down. Ernest and his fellows knew that their effort was futile, but
they were tired of the suspense. They wanted something to happen. They
were accomplishing nothing, and the best they hoped for was the putting
of an end to the legislative farce in which they were unwilling
players. They knew not what end would come, but they never anticipated
a more disastrous end than the one that did come.

 [1] The same conditions obtained in the nineteenth century A.D. under
 British rule in India. The natives died of starvation by the million,
 while their rulers robbed them of the fruits of their toil and
 expended it on magnificent pageants and mumbo-jumbo fooleries.
 Perforce, in this enlightened age, we have much to blush for in the
 acts of our ancestors. Our only consolation is philosophic. We must
 accept the capitalistic stage in social evolution as about on a par
 with the earlier monkey stage. The human had to pass through those
 stages in its rise from the mire and slime of low organic life. It was
 inevitable that much of the mire and slime should cling and be not
 easily shaken off.

 [2] _The people of the abyss_this phrase was struck out by the genius
 of H. G. Wells in the late nineteenth century A.D. Wells was a
 sociological seer, sane and normal as well as warm human. Many
 fragments of his work have come down to us, while two of his greatest
 achievements, Anticipations and Mankind in the Making, have come
 down intact. Before the oligarchs, and before Everhard, Wells
 speculated upon the building of the wonder cities, though in his
 writings they are referred to as pleasure cities.

I sat in the gallery that day. We all knew that something terrible was
imminent. It was in the air, and its presence was made visible by the
armed soldiers drawn up in lines in the corridors, and by the officers
grouped in the entrances to the House itself. The Oligarchy was about
to strike. Ernest was speaking. He was describing the sufferings of the
unemployed, as if with the wild idea of in some way touching their
hearts and consciences; but the Republican and Democratic members
sneered and jeered at him, and there was uproar and confusion. Ernest
abruptly changed front.

I know nothing that I may say can influence you, he said. You have
no souls to be influenced. You are spineless, flaccid things. You
pompously call yourselves Republicans and Democrats. There is no
Republican Party. There is no Democratic Party. There are no
Republicans nor Democrats in this House. You are lick-spittlers and
panderers, the creatures of the Plutocracy. You talk verbosely in
antiquated terminology of your love of liberty, and all the while you
wear the scarlet livery of the Iron Heel.

Here the shouting and the cries of Order! order! drowned his voice,
and he stood disdainfully till the din had somewhat subsided. He waved
his hand to include all of them, turned to his own comrades, and said:

Listen to the bellowing of the well-fed beasts.

Pandemonium broke out again. The Speaker rapped for order and glanced
expectantly at the officers in the doorways. There were cries of
Sedition! and a great, rotund New York member began shouting
Anarchist! at Ernest. And Ernest was not pleasant to look at. Every
fighting fibre of him was quivering, and his face was the face of a
fighting animal, withal he was cool and collected.

Remember, he said, in a voice that made itself heard above the din,
that as you show mercy now to the proletariat, some day will that same
proletariat show mercy to you.

The cries of Sedition! and Anarchist! redoubled.

I know that you will not vote for this bill, Ernest went on. You
have received the command from your masters to vote against it. And yet
you call me anarchist. You, who have destroyed the government of the
people, and who shamelessly flaunt your scarlet shame in public places,
call me anarchist. I do not believe in hell-fire and brimstone; but in
moments like this I regret my unbelief. Nay, in moments like this I
almost do believe. Surely there must be a hell, for in no less place
could it be possible for you to receive punishment adequate to your
crimes. So long as you exist, there is a vital need for hell-fire in
the Cosmos.

There was movement in the doorways. Ernest, the Speaker, all the
members turned to see.

Why do you not call your soldiers in, Mr. Speaker, and bid them do
their work? Ernest demanded. They should carry out your plan with
expedition.

There are other plans afoot, was the retort. That is why the
soldiers are present.

Our plans, I suppose, Ernest sneered. Assassination or something
kindred.

But at the word assassination the uproar broke out again. Ernest
could not make himself heard, but he remained on his feet waiting for a
lull. And then it happened. From my place in the gallery I saw nothing
except the flash of the explosion. The roar of it filled my ears and I
saw Ernest reeling and falling in a swirl of smoke, and the soldiers
rushing up all the aisles. His comrades were on their feet, wild with
anger, capable of any violence. But Ernest steadied himself for a
moment, and waved his arms for silence.

It is a plot! his voice rang out in warning to his comrades. Do
nothing, or you will be destroyed.

Then he slowly sank down, and the soldiers reached him. The next moment
soldiers were clearing the galleries and I saw no more.

Though he was my husband, I was not permitted to get to him. When I
announced who I was, I was promptly placed under arrest. And at the
same time were arrested all socialist Congressmen in Washington,
including the unfortunate Simpson, who lay ill with typhoid fever in
his hotel.

The trial was prompt and brief. The men were foredoomed. The wonder was
that Ernest was not executed. This was a blunder on the part of the
Oligarchy, and a costly one. But the Oligarchy was too confident in
those days. It was drunk with success, and little did it dream that
that small handful of heroes had within them the power to rock it to
its foundations. To-morrow, when the Great Revolt breaks out and all
the world resounds with the tramp, tramp of the millions, the Oligarchy
will realize, and too late, how mightily that band of heroes has
grown.[3]

 [3] Avis Everhard took for granted that her narrative would be read in
 her own day, and so omits to mention the outcome of the trial for high
 treason. Many other similar disconcerting omissions will be noticed in
 the Manuscript. Fifty-two socialist Congressmen were tried, and all
 were found guilty. Strange to relate, not one received the death
 sentence. Everhard and eleven others, among whom were Theodore
 Donnelson and Matthew Kent, received life imprisonment. The remaining
 forty received sentences varying from thirty to forty-five years;
 while Arthur Simpson, referred to in the Manuscript as being ill of
 typhoid fever at the time of the explosion, received only fifteen
 years. It is the tradition that he died of starvation in solitary
 confinement, and this harsh treatment is explained as having been
 caused by his uncompromising stubbornness and his fiery and tactless
 hatred for all men that served the despotism. He died in Cabaas in
 Cuba, where three of his comrades were also confined. The fifty- two
 socialist Congressmen were confined in military fortresses scattered
 all over the United States. Thus, Du Bois and Woods were held in Porto
 Rico, while Everhard and Merryweather were placed in Alcatraz, an
 island in San Francisco Bay that had already seen long service as a
 military prison.

As a revolutionist myself, as one on the inside who knew the hopes and
fears and secret plans of the revolutionists, I am fitted to answer, as
very few are, the charge that they were guilty of exploding the bomb in
Congress. And I can say flatly, without qualification or doubt of any
sort, that the socialists, in Congress and out, had no hand in the
affair. Who threw the bomb we do not know, but the one thing we are
absolutely sure of is that we did not throw it.

On the other hand, there is evidence to show that the Iron Heel was
responsible for the act. Of course, we cannot prove this. Our
conclusion is merely presumptive. But here are such facts as we do
know. It had been reported to the Speaker of the House, by
secret-service agents of the government, that the Socialist Congressmen
were about to resort to terroristic tactics, and that they had decided
upon the day when their tactics would go into effect. This day was the
very day of the explosion. Wherefore the Capitol had been packed with
troops in anticipation. Since we knew nothing about the bomb, and since
a bomb actually was exploded, and since the authorities had prepared in
advance for the explosion, it is only fair to conclude that the Iron
Heel did know. Furthermore, we charge that the Iron Heel was guilty of
the outrage, and that the Iron Heel planned and perpetrated the outrage
for the purpose of foisting the guilt on our shoulders and so bringing
about our destruction.

From the Speaker the warning leaked out to all the creatures in the
House that wore the scarlet livery. They knew, while Ernest was
speaking, that some violent act was to be committed. And to do them
justice, they honestly believed that the act was to be committed by the
socialists. At the trial, and still with honest belief, several
testified to having seen Ernest prepare to throw the bomb, and that it
exploded prematurely. Of course they saw nothing of the sort. In the
fevered imagination of fear they thought they saw, that was all.

As Ernest said at the trial: Does it stand to reason, if I were going
to throw a bomb, that I should elect to throw a feeble little squib
like the one that was thrown? There wasnt enough powder in it. It made
a lot of smoke, but hurt no one except me. It exploded right at my
feet, and yet it did not kill me. Believe me, when I get to throwing
bombs, Ill do damage. Therell be more than smoke in my petards.

In return it was argued by the prosecution that the weakness of the
bomb was a blunder on the part of the socialists, just as its premature
explosion, caused by Ernests losing his nerve and dropping it, was a
blunder. And to clinch the argument, there were the several Congressmen
who testified to having seen Ernest fumble and drop the bomb.

As for ourselves, not one of us knew how the bomb was thrown. Ernest
told me that the fraction of an instant before it exploded he both
heard and saw it strike at his feet. He testified to this at the trial,
but no one believed him. Besides, the whole thing, in popular slang,
was cooked up. The Iron Heel had made up its mind to destroy us, and
there was no withstanding it.

There is a saying that truth will out. I have come to doubt that
saying. Nineteen years have elapsed, and despite our untiring efforts,
we have failed to find the man who really did throw the bomb.
Undoubtedly he was some emissary of the Iron Heel, but he has escaped
detection. We have never got the slightest clew to his identity. And
now, at this late date, nothing remains but for the affair to take its
place among the mysteries of history.[4]

 [4] Avis Everhard would have had to live for many generations ere she
 could have seen the clearing up of this particular mystery. A little
 less than a hundred years ago, and a little more than six hundred
 years after her death, the confession of Pervaise was discovered in
 the secret archives of the Vatican. It is perhaps well to tell a
 little something about this obscure document, which, in the main, is
 of interest to the historian only.
    Pervaise was an American, of French descent, who in 1913 A.D., was
    lying in the Tombs Prison, New York City, awaiting trial for
    murder. From his confession we learn that he was not a criminal. He
    was warm-blooded, passionate, emotional. In an insane fit of
    jealousy he killed his wifea very common act in those times.
    Pervaise was mastered by the fear of death, all of which is
    recounted at length in his confession. To escape death he would
    have done anything, and the police agents prepared him by assuring
    him that he could not possibly escape conviction of murder in the
    first degree when his trial came off. In those days, murder in the
    first degree was a capital offense. The guilty man or woman was
    placed in a specially constructed death-chair, and, under the
    supervision of competent physicians, was destroyed by a current of
    electricity. This was called electrocution, and it was very popular
    during that period. Anaesthesia, as a mode of compulsory death, was
    not introduced until later.
    This man, good at heart but with a ferocious animalism close at the
    surface of his being, lying in jail and expectant of nothing less
    than death, was prevailed upon by the agents of the Iron Heel to
    throw the bomb in the House of Representatives. In his confession
    he states explicitly that he was informed that the bomb was to be a
    feeble thing and that no lives would be lost. This is directly in
    line with the fact that the bomb was lightly charged, and that its
    explosion at Everhards feet was not deadly.
    Pervaise was smuggled into one of the galleries ostensibly closed
    for repairs. He was to select the moment for the throwing of the
    bomb, and he naively confesses that in his interest in Everhards
    tirade and the general commotion raised thereby, he nearly forgot
    his mission.
    Not only was he released from prison in reward for his deed, but he
    was granted an income for life. This he did not long enjoy. In 1914
    A.D., in September, he was stricken with rheumatism of the heart
    and lived for three days. It was then that he sent for the Catholic
    priest, Father Peter Durban, and to him made confession. So
    important did it seem to the priest, that he had the confession
    taken down in writing and sworn to. What happened after this we can
    only surmise. The document was certainly important enough to find
    its way to Rome. Powerful influences must have been brought to
    bear, hence its suppression. For centuries no hint of its existence
    reached the world. It was not until in the last century that
    Lorbia, the brilliant Italian scholar, stumbled upon it quite by
    chance during his researches in the Vatican.
    There is to-day no doubt whatever that the Iron Heel was
    responsible for the bomb that exploded in the House of
    Representatives in 1913 A.D. Even though the Pervaise confession
    had never come to light, no reasonable doubt could obtain; for the
    act in question, that sent fifty-two Congressmen to prison, was on
    a par with countless other acts committed by the oligarchs, and,
    before them, by the capitalists.
    There is the classic instance of the ferocious and wanton judicial
    murder of the innocent and so-called Haymarket Anarchists in
    Chicago in the penultimate decade of the nineteenth century A.D. In
    a category by itself is the deliberate burning and destruction of
    capitalist property by the capitalists themselves. For such
    destruction of property innocent men were frequently
    punishedrailroaded in the parlance of the times.
    In the labor troubles of the first decade of the twentieth century
    A.D., between the capitalists and the Western Federation of Miners,
    similar but more bloody tactics were employed. The railroad station
    at Independence was blown up by the agents of the capitalists.
    Thirteen men were killed, and many more were wounded. And then the
    capitalists, controlling the legislative and judicial machinery of
    the state of Colorado, charged the miners with the crime and came
    very near to convicting them. Romaines, one of the tools in this
    affair, like Pervaise, was lying in jail in another state, Kansas,
    awaiting trial, when he was approached by the agents of the
    capitalists. But, unlike Pervaise, the confession of Romaines was
    made public in his own time.
    Then, during this same period, there was the case of Moyer and
    Haywood, two strong, fearless leaders of labor. One was president
    and the other was secretary of the Western Federation of Miners.
    The ex-governor of Idaho had been mysteriously murdered. The crime,
    at the time, was openly charged to the mine owners by the
    socialists and miners. Nevertheless, in violation of the national
    and state constitutions, and by means of conspiracy on the parts of
    the governors of Idaho and Colorado, Moyer and Haywood were
    kidnapped, thrown into jail, and charged with the murder. It was
    this instance that provoked from Eugene V. Debs, national leader of
    the American socialists at the time, the following words: _The
    labor leaders that cannot be bribed nor bullied, must be ambushed
    and murdered. The only crime of Moyer and Haywood is that they have
    been unswervingly true to the working class. The capitalists have
    stolen our country, debauched our politics, defiled our judiciary,
    and ridden over us rough-shod, and now they propose to murder those
    who will not abjectly surrender to their brutal dominion. The
    governors of Colorado and Idaho are but executing the mandates of
    their masters, the Plutocracy. The issue is the Workers versus the
    Plutocracy. If they strike the first violent blow, we will strike
    the last._




CHAPTER XVIII.
IN THE SHADOW OF SONOMA


Of myself, during this period, there is not much to say. For six months
I was kept in prison, though charged with no crime. I was a _suspect_a
word of fear that all revolutionists were soon to come to know. But our
own nascent secret service was beginning to work. By the end of my
second month in prison, one of the jailers made himself known as a
revolutionist in touch with the organization. Several weeks later,
Joseph Parkhurst, the prison doctor who had just been appointed, proved
himself to be a member of one of the Fighting Groups.

Thus, throughout the organization of the Oligarchy, our own
organization, weblike and spidery, was insinuating itself. And so I was
kept in touch with all that was happening in the world without. And
furthermore, every one of our imprisoned leaders was in contact with
brave comrades who masqueraded in the livery of the Iron Heel. Though
Ernest lay in prison three thousand miles away, on the Pacific Coast, I
was in unbroken communication with him, and our letters passed
regularly back and forth.

The leaders, in prison and out, were able to discuss and direct the
campaign. It would have been possible, within a few months, to have
effected the escape of some of them; but since imprisonment proved no
bar to our activities, it was decided to avoid anything premature.
Fifty-two Congressmen were in prison, and fully three hundred more of
our leaders. It was planned that they should be delivered
simultaneously. If part of them escaped, the vigilance of the oligarchs
might be aroused so as to prevent the escape of the remainder. On the
other hand, it was held that a simultaneous jail-delivery all over the
land would have immense psychological influence on the proletariat. It
would show our strength and give confidence.

So it was arranged, when I was released at the end of six months, that
I was to disappear and prepare a secure hiding-place for Ernest. To
disappear was in itself no easy thing. No sooner did I get my freedom
than my footsteps began to be dogged by the spies of the Iron Heel. It
was necessary that they should be thrown off the track, and that I
should win to California. It is laughable, the way this was
accomplished.

Already the passport system, modelled on the Russian, was developing. I
dared not cross the continent in my own character. It was necessary
that I should be completely lost if ever I was to see Ernest again, for
by trailing me after he escaped, he would be caught once more. Again, I
could not disguise myself as a proletarian and travel. There remained
the disguise of a member of the Oligarchy. While the arch-oligarchs
were no more than a handful, there were myriads of lesser ones of the
type, say, of Mr. Wicksonmen, worth a few millions, who were adherents
of the arch-oligarchs. The wives and daughters of these lesser
oligarchs were legion, and it was decided that I should assume the
disguise of such a one. A few years later this would have been
impossible, because the passport system was to become so perfect that
no man, woman, nor child in all the land was unregistered and
unaccounted for in his or her movements.

When the time was ripe, the spies were thrown off my track. An hour
later Avis Everhard was no more. At that time one Felice Van Verdighan,
accompanied by two maids and a lap-dog, with another maid for the
lap-dog,[1] entered a drawing-room on a Pullman,[2] and a few minutes
later was speeding west.

 [1] This ridiculous picture well illustrates the heartless conduct of
 the masters. While people starved, lap-dogs were waited upon by maids.
 This was a serious masquerade on the part of Avis Everhard. Life and
 death and the Cause were in the issue; therefore the picture must be
 accepted as a true picture. It affords a striking commentary of the
 times.

 [2] _Pullman_the designation of the more luxurious railway cars of
 the period and so named from the inventor.

The three maids who accompanied me were revolutionists. Two were
members of the Fighting Groups, and the third, Grace Holbrook, entered
a group the following year, and six months later was executed by the
Iron Heel. She it was who waited upon the dog. Of the other two, Bertha
Stole disappeared twelve years later, while Anna Roylston still lives
and plays an increasingly important part in the Revolution.[3]

 [3] Despite continual and almost inconceivable hazards, Anna Roylston
 lived to the royal age of ninety-one. As the Pococks defied the
 executioners of the Fighting Groups, so she defied the executioners of
 the Iron Heel. She bore a charmed life and prospered amid dangers and
 alarms. She herself was an executioner for the Fighting Groups, and,
 known as the Red Virgin, she became one of the inspired figures of the
 Revolution. When she was an old woman of sixty-nine she shot Bloody
 Halcliffe down in the midst of his armed escort and got away
 unscathed. In the end she died peaceably of old age in a secret refuge
 of the revolutionists in the Ozark mountains.

Without adventure we crossed the United States to California. When the
train stopped at Sixteenth Street Station, in Oakland, we alighted, and
there Felice Van Verdighan, with her two maids, her lap-dog, and her
lap-dogs maid, disappeared forever. The maids, guided by trusty
comrades, were led away. Other comrades took charge of me. Within half
an hour after leaving the train I was on board a small fishing boat and
out on the waters of San Francisco Bay. The winds baffled, and we
drifted aimlessly the greater part of the night. But I saw the lights
of Alcatraz where Ernest lay, and found comfort in the thought of
nearness to him. By dawn, what with the rowing of the fishermen, we
made the Marin Islands. Here we lay in hiding all day, and on the
following night, swept on by a flood tide and a fresh wind, we crossed
San Pablo Bay in two hours and ran up Petaluma Creek.

Here horses were ready and another comrade, and without delay we were
away through the starlight. To the north I could see the loom of Sonoma
Mountain, toward which we rode. We left the old town of Sonoma to the
right and rode up a canyon that lay between outlying buttresses of the
mountain. The wagon-road became a wood-road, the wood-road became a
cow-path, and the cow-path dwindled away and ceased among the upland
pastures. Straight over Sonoma Mountain we rode. It was the safest
route. There was no one to mark our passing.

Dawn caught us on the northern brow, and in the gray light we dropped
down through chaparral into redwood canyons deep and warm with the
breath of passing summer. It was old country to me that I knew and
loved, and soon I became the guide. The hiding-place was mine. I had
selected it. We let down the bars and crossed an upland meadow. Next,
we went over a low, oak-covered ridge and descended into a smaller
meadow. Again we climbed a ridge, this time riding under red-limbed
madronos and manzanitas of deeper red. The first rays of the sun
streamed upon our backs as we climbed. A flight of quail thrummed off
through the thickets. A big jackrabbit crossed our path, leaping
swiftly and silently like a deer. And then a deer, a many-pronged buck,
the sun flashing red-gold from neck and shoulders, cleared the crest of
the ridge before us and was gone.

We followed in his wake a space, then dropped down a zigzag trail that
he disdained into a group of noble redwoods that stood about a pool of
water murky with minerals from the mountain side. I knew every inch of
the way. Once a writer friend of mine had owned the ranch; but he, too,
had become a revolutionist, though more disastrously than I, for he was
already dead and gone, and none knew where nor how. He alone, in the
days he had lived, knew the secret of the hiding-place for which I was
bound. He had bought the ranch for beauty, and paid a round price for
it, much to the disgust of the local farmers. He used to tell with
great glee how they were wont to shake their heads mournfully at the
price, to accomplish ponderously a bit of mental arithmetic, and then
to say, But you cant make six per cent on it.

But he was dead now, nor did the ranch descend to his children. Of all
men, it was now the property of Mr. Wickson, who owned the whole
eastern and northern slopes of Sonoma Mountain, running from the
Spreckels estate to the divide of Bennett Valley. Out of it he had made
a magnificent deer-park, where, over thousands of acres of sweet slopes
and glades and canyons, the deer ran almost in primitive wildness. The
people who had owned the soil had been driven away. A state home for
the feeble-minded had also been demolished to make room for the deer.

To cap it all, Wicksons hunting lodge was a quarter of a mile from my
hiding-place. This, instead of being a danger, was an added security.
We were sheltered under the very gis of one of the minor oligarchs.
Suspicion, by the nature of the situation, was turned aside. The last
place in the world the spies of the Iron Heel would dream of looking
for me, and for Ernest when he joined me, was Wicksons deer-park.

We tied our horses among the redwoods at the pool. From a cache behind
a hollow rotting log my companion brought out a variety of things,a
fifty-pound sack of flour, tinned foods of all sorts, cooking utensils,
blankets, a canvas tarpaulin, books and writing material, a great
bundle of letters, a five-gallon can of kerosene, an oil stove, and,
last and most important, a large coil of stout rope. So large was the
supply of things that a number of trips would be necessary to carry
them to the refuge.

But the refuge was very near. Taking the rope and leading the way, I
passed through a glade of tangled vines and bushes that ran between two
wooded knolls. The glade ended abruptly at the steep bank of a stream.
It was a little stream, rising from springs, and the hottest summer
never dried it up. On every hand were tall wooded knolls, a group of
them, with all the seeming of having been flung there from some
careless Titans hand. There was no bed-rock in them. They rose from
their bases hundreds of feet, and they were composed of red volcanic
earth, the famous wine-soil of Sonoma. Through these the tiny stream
had cut its deep and precipitous channel.

It was quite a scramble down to the stream bed, and, once on the bed,
we went down stream perhaps for a hundred feet. And then we came to the
great hole. There was no warning of the existence of the hole, nor was
it a hole in the common sense of the word. One crawled through
tight-locked briers and branches, and found oneself on the very edge,
peering out and down through a green screen. A couple of hundred feet
in length and width, it was half of that in depth. Possibly because of
some fault that had occurred when the knolls were flung together, and
certainly helped by freakish erosion, the hole had been scooped out in
the course of centuries by the wash of water. Nowhere did the raw earth
appear. All was garmented by vegetation, from tiny maiden-hair and
gold-back ferns to mighty redwood and Douglas spruces. These great
trees even sprang out from the walls of the hole. Some leaned over at
angles as great as forty-five degrees, though the majority towered
straight up from the soft and almost perpendicular earth walls.

It was a perfect hiding-place. No one ever came there, not even the
village boys of Glen Ellen. Had this hole existed in the bed of a
canyon a mile long, or several miles long, it would have been well
known. But this was no canyon. From beginning to end the length of the
stream was no more than five hundred yards. Three hundred yards above
the hole the stream took its rise in a spring at the foot of a flat
meadow. A hundred yards below the hole the stream ran out into open
country, joining the main stream and flowing across rolling and
grass-covered land.

My companion took a turn of the rope around a tree, and with me fast on
the other end lowered away. In no time I was on the bottom. And in but
a short while he had carried all the articles from the cache and
lowered them down to me. He hauled the rope up and hid it, and before
he went away called down to me a cheerful parting.

Before I go on I want to say a word for this comrade, John Carlson, a
humble figure of the Revolution, one of the countless faithful ones in
the ranks. He worked for Wickson, in the stables near the hunting
lodge. In fact, it was on Wicksons horses that we had ridden over
Sonoma Mountain. For nearly twenty years now John Carlson has been
custodian of the refuge. No thought of disloyalty, I am sure, has ever
entered his mind during all that time. To betray his trust would have
been in his mind a thing undreamed. He was phlegmatic, stolid to such a
degree that one could not but wonder how the Revolution had any meaning
to him at all. And yet love of freedom glowed sombrely and steadily in
his dim soul. In ways it was indeed good that he was not flighty and
imaginative. He never lost his head. He could obey orders, and he was
neither curious nor garrulous. Once I asked how it was that he was a
revolutionist.

When I was a young man I was a soldier, was his answer. It was in
Germany. There all young men must be in the army. So I was in the army.
There was another soldier there, a young man, too. His father was what
you call an agitator, and his father was in jail for lese majestywhat
you call speaking the truth about the Emperor. And the young man, the
son, talked with me much about people, and work, and the robbery of the
people by the capitalists. He made me see things in new ways, and I
became a socialist. His talk was very true and good, and I have never
forgotten. When I came to the United States I hunted up the socialists.
I became a member of a sectionthat was in the day of the S. L. P. Then
later, when the split came, I joined the local of the S. P. I was
working in a livery stable in San Francisco then. That was before the
Earthquake. I have paid my dues for twenty-two years. I am yet a
member, and I yet pay my dues, though it is very secret now. I will
always pay my dues, and when the cooperative commonwealth comes, I will
be glad.

Left to myself, I proceeded to cook breakfast on the oil stove and to
prepare my home. Often, in the early morning, or in the evening after
dark, Carlson would steal down to the refuge and work for a couple of
hours. At first my home was the tarpaulin. Later, a small tent was put
up. And still later, when we became assured of the perfect security of
the place, a small house was erected. This house was completely hidden
from any chance eye that might peer down from the edge of the hole. The
lush vegetation of that sheltered spot make a natural shield. Also, the
house was built against the perpendicular wall; and in the wall itself,
shored by strong timbers, well drained and ventilated, we excavated two
small rooms. Oh, believe me, we had many comforts. When Biedenbach, the
German terrorist, hid with us some time later, he installed a
smoke-consuming device that enabled us to sit by crackling wood fires
on winter nights.

And here I must say a word for that gentle-souled terrorist, than whom
there is no comrade in the Revolution more fearfully misunderstood.
Comrade Biedenbach did not betray the Cause. Nor was he executed by the
comrades as is commonly supposed. This canard was circulated by the
creatures of the Oligarchy. Comrade Biedenbach was absent-minded,
forgetful. He was shot by one of our lookouts at the cave-refuge at
Carmel, through failure on his part to remember the secret signals. It
was all a sad mistake. And that he betrayed his Fighting Group is an
absolute lie. No truer, more loyal man ever labored for the Cause.[4]

 [4] Search as we may through all the material of those times that has
 come down to us, we can find no clew to the Biedenbach here referred
 to. No mention is made of him anywhere save in the Everhard
 Manuscript.

For nineteen years now the refuge that I selected had been almost
continuously occupied, and in all that time, with one exception, it has
never been discovered by an outsider. And yet it was only a quarter of
a mile from Wicksons hunting-lodge, and a short mile from the village
of Glen Ellen. I was able, always, to hear the morning and evening
trains arrive and depart, and I used to set my watch by the whistle at
the brickyards.[5]

 [5] If the curious traveller will turn south from Glen Ellen, he will
 find himself on a boulevard that is identical with the old country
 road seven centuries ago. A quarter of a mile from Glen Ellen, after
 the second bridge is passed, to the right will be noticed a barranca
 that runs like a scar across the rolling land toward a group of wooded
 knolls. The barranca is the site of the ancient right of way that in
 the time of private property in land ran across the holding of one
 Chauvet, a French pioneer of California who came from his native
 country in the fabled days of gold. The wooded knolls are the same
 knolls referred to by Avis Everhard.
    The Great Earthquake of 2368 A.D. broke off the side of one of
    these knolls and toppled it into the hole where the Everhards made
    their refuge. Since the finding of the Manuscript excavations have
    been made, and the house, the two cave rooms, and all the
    accumulated rubbish of long occupancy have been brought to light.
    Many valuable relics have been found, among which, curious to
    relate, is the smoke-consuming device of Biedenbachs mentioned in
    the narrative. Students interested in such matters should read the
    brochure of Arnold Bentham soon to be published.
    A mile northwest from the wooded knolls brings one to the site of
    Wake Robin Lodge at the junction of Wild-Water and Sonoma Creeks.
    It may be noticed, in passing, that Wild- Water was originally
    called Graham Creek and was so named on the early local maps. But
    the later name sticks. It was at Wake Robin Lodge that Avis
    Everhard later lived for short periods, when, disguised as an
    agent-provocateur of the Iron Heel, she was enabled to play with
    impunity her part among men and events. The official permission to
    occupy Wake Robin Lodge is still on the records, signed by no less
    a man than Wickson, the minor oligarch of the Manuscript.




CHAPTER XIX.
TRANSFORMATION


You must make yourself over again, Ernest wrote to me. You must
cease to be. You must become another womanand not merely in the
clothes you wear, but inside your skin under the clothes. You must make
yourself over again so that even I would not know youyour voice, your
gestures, your mannerisms, your carriage, your walk, everything.

This command I obeyed. Every day I practised for hours in burying
forever the old Avis Everhard beneath the skin of another woman whom I
may call my other self. It was only by long practice that such results
could be obtained. In the mere detail of voice intonation I practised
almost perpetually till the voice of my new self became fixed,
automatic. It was this automatic assumption of a rle that was
considered imperative. One must become so adept as to deceive oneself.
It was like learning a new language, say the French. At first speech in
French is self-conscious, a matter of the will. The student thinks in
English and then transmutes into French, or reads in French but
transmutes into English before he can understand. Then later, becoming
firmly grounded, automatic, the student reads, writes, and _thinks_ in
French, without any recourse to English at all.

And so with our disguises. It was necessary for us to practise until
our assumed roles became real; until to be our original selves would
require a watchful and strong exercise of will. Of course, at first,
much was mere blundering experiment. We were creating a new art, and we
had much to discover. But the work was going on everywhere; masters in
the art were developing, and a fund of tricks and expedients was being
accumulated. This fund became a sort of text-book that was passed on, a
part of the curriculum, as it were, of the school of Revolution.[1]

 [1] Disguise did become a veritable art during that period. The
 revolutionists maintained schools of acting in all their refuges. They
 scorned accessories, such as wigs and beards, false eyebrows, and such
 aids of the theatrical actors. The game of revolution was a game of
 life and death, and mere accessories were traps. Disguise had to be
 fundamental, intrinsic, part and parcel of ones being, second nature.
 The Red Virgin is reported to have been one of the most adept in the
 art, to which must be ascribed her long and successful career.

It was at this time that my father disappeared. His letters, which had
come to me regularly, ceased. He no longer appeared at our Pell Street
quarters. Our comrades sought him everywhere. Through our secret
service we ransacked every prison in the land. But he was lost as
completely as if the earth had swallowed him up, and to this day no
clew to his end has been discovered.[2]

 [2] Disappearance was one of the horrors of the time. As a motif, in
 song and story, it constantly crops up. It was an inevitable
 concomitant of the subterranean warfare that raged through those three
 centuries. This phenomenon was almost as common in the oligarch class
 and the labor castes, as it was in the ranks of the revolutionists.
 Without warning, without trace, men and women, and even children,
 disappeared and were seen no more, their end shrouded in mystery.

Six lonely months I spent in the refuge, but they were not idle months.
Our organization went on apace, and there were mountains of work always
waiting to be done. Ernest and his fellow-leaders, from their prisons,
decided what should be done; and it remained for us on the outside to
do it. There was the organization of the mouth-to-mouth propaganda; the
organization, with all its ramifications, of our spy system; the
establishment of our secret printing-presses; and the establishment of
our underground railways, which meant the knitting together of all our
myriads of places of refuge, and the formation of new refuges where
links were missing in the chains we ran over all the land.

So I say, the work was never done. At the end of six months my
loneliness was broken by the arrival of two comrades. They were young
girls, brave souls and passionate lovers of liberty: Lora Peterson, who
disappeared in 1922, and Kate Bierce, who later married Du Bois,[3] and
who is still with us with eyes lifted to to-morrows sun, that heralds
in the new age.

 [3] Du Bois, the present librarian of Ardis, is a lineal descendant of
 this revolutionary pair.

The two girls arrived in a flurry of excitement, danger, and sudden
death. In the crew of the fishing boat that conveyed them across San
Pablo Bay was a spy. A creature of the Iron Heel, he had successfully
masqueraded as a revolutionist and penetrated deep into the secrets of
our organization. Without doubt he was on my trail, for we had long
since learned that my disappearance had been cause of deep concern to
the secret service of the Oligarchy. Luckily, as the outcome proved, he
had not divulged his discoveries to any one. He had evidently delayed
reporting, preferring to wait until he had brought things to a
successful conclusion by discovering my hiding-place and capturing me.
His information died with him. Under some pretext, after the girls had
landed at Petaluma Creek and taken to the horses, he managed to get
away from the boat.

Part way up Sonoma Mountain, John Carlson let the girls go on, leading
his horse, while he went back on foot. His suspicions had been aroused.
He captured the spy, and as to what then happened, Carlson gave us a
fair idea.

I fixed him, was Carlsons unimaginative way of describing the
affair. I fixed him, he repeated, while a sombre light burnt in his
eyes, and his huge, toil-distorted hands opened and closed eloquently.
He made no noise. I hid him, and tonight I will go back and bury him
deep.

During that period I used to marvel at my own metamorphosis. At times
it seemed impossible, either that I had ever lived a placid, peaceful
life in a college town, or else that I had become a revolutionist
inured to scenes of violence and death. One or the other could not be.
One was real, the other was a dream, but which was which? Was this
present life of a revolutionist, hiding in a hole, a nightmare? or was
I a revolutionist who had somewhere, somehow, dreamed that in some
former existence I have lived in Berkeley and never known of life more
violent than teas and dances, debating societies, and lecture rooms?
But then I suppose this was a common experience of all of us who had
rallied under the red banner of the brotherhood of man.

I often remembered figures from that other life, and, curiously enough,
they appeared and disappeared, now and again, in my new life. There was
Bishop Morehouse. In vain we searched for him after our organization
had developed. He had been transferred from asylum to asylum. We traced
him from the state hospital for the insane at Napa to the one in
Stockton, and from there to the one in the Santa Clara Valley called
Agnews, and there the trail ceased. There was no record of his death.
In some way he must have escaped. Little did I dream of the awful
manner in which I was to see him once againthe fleeting glimpse of him
in the whirlwind carnage of the Chicago Commune.

Jackson, who had lost his arm in the Sierra Mills and who had been the
cause of my own conversion into a revolutionist, I never saw again; but
we all knew what he did before he died. He never joined the
revolutionists. Embittered by his fate, brooding over his wrongs, he
became an anarchistnot a philosophic anarchist, but a mere animal, mad
with hate and lust for revenge. And well he revenged himself. Evading
the guards, in the nighttime while all were asleep, he blew the
Pertonwaithe palace into atoms. Not a soul escaped, not even the
guards. And in prison, while awaiting trial, he suffocated himself
under his blankets.

Dr. Hammerfield and Dr. Ballingford achieved quite different fates from
that of Jackson. They have been faithful to their salt, and they have
been correspondingly rewarded with ecclesiastical palaces wherein they
dwell at peace with the world. Both are apologists for the Oligarchy.
Both have grown very fat. Dr. Hammerfield, as Ernest once said, has
succeeded in modifying his metaphysics so as to give Gods sanction to
the Iron Heel, and also to include much worship of beauty and to reduce
to an invisible wraith the gaseous vertebrate described by Haeckelthe
difference between Dr. Hammerfield and Dr. Ballingford being that the
latter has made the God of the oligarchs a little more gaseous and a
little less vertebrate.

Peter Donnelly, the scab foreman at the Sierra Mills whom I encountered
while investigating the case of Jackson, was a surprise to all of us.
In 1918 I was present at a meeting of the Frisco Reds. Of all our
Fighting Groups this one was the most formidable, ferocious, and
merciless. It was really not a part of our organization. Its members
were fanatics, madmen. We dared not encourage such a spirit. On the
other hand, though they did not belong to us, we remained on friendly
terms with them. It was a matter of vital importance that brought me
there that night. I, alone in the midst of a score of men, was the only
person unmasked. After the business that brought me there was
transacted, I was led away by one of them. In a dark passage this guide
struck a match, and, holding it close to his face, slipped back his
mask. For a moment I gazed upon the passion-wrought features of Peter
Donnelly. Then the match went out.

I just wanted you to know it was me, he said in the darkness. Dyou
remember Dallas, the superintendent?

I nodded at recollection of the vulpine-faced superintendent of the
Sierra Mills.

Well, I got him first, Donnelly said with pride. Twas after that I
joined the Reds.

But how comes it that you are here? I queried. Your wife and
children?

Dead, he answered. Thats why. No, he went on hastily, tis not
revenge for them. They died easily in their bedssickness, you see, one
time and another. They tied my arms while they lived. And now that
theyre gone, tis revenge for my blasted manhood Im after. I was once
Peter Donnelly, the scab foreman. But to-night Im Number 27 of the
Frisco Reds. Come on now, and Ill get you out of this.

More I heard of him afterward. In his own way he had told the truth
when he said all were dead. But one lived, Timothy, and him his father
considered dead because he had taken service with the Iron Heel in the
Mercenaries.[4] A member of the Frisco Reds pledged himself to twelve
annual executions. The penalty for failure was death. A member who
failed to complete his number committed suicide. These executions were
not haphazard. This group of madmen met frequently and passed wholesale
judgments upon offending members and servitors of the Oligarchy. The
executions were afterward apportioned by lot.

 [4] In addition to the labor castes, there arose another caste, the
 military. A standing army of professional soldiers was created,
 officered by members of the Oligarchy and known as the Mercenaries.
 This institution took the place of the militia, which had proved
 impracticable under the new regime. Outside the regular secret service
 of the Iron Heel, there was further established a secret service of
 the Mercenaries, this latter forming a connecting link between the
 police and the military.

In fact, the business that brought me there the night of my visit was
such a trial. One of our own comrades, who for years had successfully
maintained himself in a clerical position in the local bureau of the
secret service of the Iron Heel, had fallen under the ban of the
Frisco Reds and was being tried. Of course he was not present, and of
course his judges did not know that he was one of our men. My mission
had been to testify to his identity and loyalty. It may be wondered how
we came to know of the affair at all. The explanation is simple. One of
our secret agents was a member of the Frisco Reds. It was necessary
for us to keep an eye on friend as well as foe, and this group of
madmen was not too unimportant to escape our surveillance.

But to return to Peter Donnelly and his son. All went well with
Donnelly until, in the following year, he found among the sheaf of
executions that fell to him the name of Timothy Donnelly. Then it was
that that clannishness, which was his to so extraordinary a degree,
asserted itself. To save his son, he betrayed his comrades. In this he
was partially blocked, but a dozen of the Frisco Reds were executed,
and the group was well-nigh destroyed. In retaliation, the survivors
meted out to Donnelly the death he had earned by his treason.

Nor did Timothy Donnelly long survive. The Frisco Reds pledged
themselves to his execution. Every effort was made by the Oligarchy to
save him. He was transferred from one part of the country to another.
Three of the Reds lost their lives in vain efforts to get him. The
Group was composed only of men. In the end they fell back on a woman,
one of our comrades, and none other than Anna Roylston. Our Inner
Circle forbade her, but she had ever a will of her own and disdained
discipline. Furthermore, she was a genius and lovable, and we could
never discipline her anyway. She is in a class by herself and not
amenable to the ordinary standards of the revolutionists.

Despite our refusal to grant permission to do the deed, she went on
with it. Now Anna Roylston was a fascinating woman. All she had to do
was to beckon a man to her. She broke the hearts of scores of our young
comrades, and scores of others she captured, and by their heart-strings
led into our organization. Yet she steadfastly refused to marry. She
dearly loved children, but she held that a child of her own would claim
her from the Cause, and that it was the Cause to which her life was
devoted.

It was an easy task for Anna Roylston to win Timothy Donnelly. Her
conscience did not trouble her, for at that very time occurred the
_Nashville Massacre_, when the Mercenaries, Donnelly in command,
literally murdered eight hundred weavers of that city. But she did not
kill Donnelly. She turned him over, a prisoner, to the Frisco Reds.
This happened only last year, and now she had been renamed. The
revolutionists everywhere are calling her the Red Virgin.[5]

 [5] It was not until the Second Revolt was crushed, that the Frisco
 Reds flourished again. And for two generations the Group flourished.
 Then an agent of the Iron Heel managed to become a member, penetrated
 all its secrets, and brought about its total annihilation. This
 occurred in 2002 A.D. The members were executed one at a time, at
 intervals of three weeks, and their bodies exposed in the labor-ghetto
 of San Francisco.

Colonel Ingram and Colonel Van Gilbert are two more familiar figures
that I was later to encounter. Colonel Ingram rose high in the
Oligarchy and became Minister to Germany. He was cordially detested by
the proletariat of both countries. It was in Berlin that I met him,
where, as an accredited international spy of the Iron Heel, I was
received by him and afforded much assistance. Incidentally, I may state
that in my dual rle I managed a few important things for the
Revolution.

Colonel Van Gilbert became known as Snarling Van Gilbert. His
important part was played in drafting the new code after the Chicago
Commune. But before that, as trial judge, he had earned sentence of
death by his fiendish malignancy. I was one of those that tried him and
passed sentence upon him. Anna Roylston carried out the execution.

Still another figure arises out of the old lifeJacksons lawyer. Least
of all would I have expected again to meet this man, Joseph Hurd. It
was a strange meeting. Late at night, two years after the Chicago
Commune, Ernest and I arrived together at the Benton Harbor refuge.
This was in Michigan, across the lake from Chicago. We arrived just at
the conclusion of the trial of a spy. Sentence of death had been
passed, and he was being led away. Such was the scene as we came upon
it. The next moment the wretched man had wrenched free from his captors
and flung himself at my feet, his arms clutching me about the knees in
a vicelike grip as he prayed in a frenzy for mercy. As he turned his
agonized face up to me, I recognized him as Joseph Hurd. Of all the
terrible things I have witnessed, never have I been so unnerved as by
this frantic creatures pleading for life. He was mad for life. It was
pitiable. He refused to let go of me, despite the hands of a dozen
comrades. And when at last he was dragged shrieking away, I sank down
fainting upon the floor. It is far easier to see brave men die than to
hear a coward beg for life.[6]

 [6] The Benton Harbor refuge was a catacomb, the entrance of which was
 cunningly contrived by way of a well. It has been maintained in a fair
 state of preservation, and the curious visitor may to-day tread its
 labyrinths to the assembly hall, where, without doubt, occurred the
 scene described by Avis Everhard. Farther on are the cells where the
 prisoners were confined, and the death chamber where the executions
 took place. Beyond is the cemeterylong, winding galleries hewn out of
 the solid rock, with recesses on either hand, wherein, tier above
 tier, lie the revolutionists just as they were laid away by their
 comrades long years agone.




CHAPTER XX.
A LOST OLIGARCH


But in remembering the old life I have run ahead of my story into the
new life. The wholesale jail delivery did not occur until well along
into 1915. Complicated as it was, it was carried through without a
hitch, and as a very creditable achievement it cheered us on in our
work. From Cuba to California, out of scores of jails, military
prisons, and fortresses, in a single night, we delivered fifty-one of
our fifty-two Congressmen, and in addition over three hundred other
leaders. There was not a single instance of miscarriage. Not only did
they escape, but every one of them won to the refuges as planned. The
one comrade Congressman we did not get was Arthur Simpson, and he had
already died in Cabaas after cruel tortures.

The eighteen months that followed was perhaps the happiest of my life
with Ernest. During that time we were never apart. Later, when we went
back into the world, we were separated much. Not more impatiently do I
await the flame of to-morrows revolt than did I that night await the
coming of Ernest. I had not seen him for so long, and the thought of a
possible hitch or error in our plans that would keep him still in his
island prison almost drove me mad. The hours passed like ages. I was
all alone. Biedenbach, and three young men who had been living in the
refuge, were out and over the mountain, heavily armed and prepared for
anything. The refuges all over the land were quite empty, I imagine, of
comrades that night.

Just as the sky paled with the first warning of dawn, I heard the
signal from above and gave the answer. In the darkness I almost
embraced Biedenbach, who came down first; but the next moment I was in
Ernests arms. And in that moment, so complete had been my
transformation, I discovered it was only by an effort of will that I
could be the old Avis Everhard, with the old mannerisms and smiles,
phrases and intonations of voice. It was by strong effort only that I
was able to maintain my old identity; I could not allow myself to
forget for an instant, so automatically imperative had become the new
personality I had created.

Once inside the little cabin, I saw Ernests face in the light. With
the exception of the prison pallor, there was no change in himat
least, not much. He was my same lover-husband and hero. And yet there
was a certain ascetic lengthening of the lines of his face. But he
could well stand it, for it seemed to add a certain nobility of
refinement to the riotous excess of life that had always marked his
features. He might have been a trifle graver than of yore, but the
glint of laughter still was in his eyes. He was twenty pounds lighter,
but in splendid physical condition. He had kept up exercise during the
whole period of confinement, and his muscles were like iron. In truth,
he was in better condition than when he had entered prison. Hours
passed before his head touched pillow and I had soothed him off to
sleep. But there was no sleep for me. I was too happy, and the fatigue
of jail-breaking and riding horseback had not been mine.

While Ernest slept, I changed my dress, arranged my hair differently,
and came back to my new automatic self. Then, when Biedenbach and the
other comrades awoke, with their aid I concocted a little conspiracy.
All was ready, and we were in the cave-room that served for kitchen and
dining room when Ernest opened the door and entered. At that moment
Biedenbach addressed me as Mary, and I turned and answered him. Then I
glanced at Ernest with curious interest, such as any young comrade
might betray on seeing for the first time so noted a hero of the
Revolution. But Ernests glance took me in and questioned impatiently
past and around the room. The next moment I was being introduced to him
as Mary Holmes.

To complete the deception, an extra plate was laid, and when we sat
down to table one chair was not occupied. I could have cried with joy
as I noted Ernests increasing uneasiness and impatience. Finally he
could stand it no longer.

Wheres my wife? he demanded bluntly.

She is still asleep, I answered.

It was the crucial moment. But my voice was a strange voice, and in it
he recognized nothing familiar. The meal went on. I talked a great
deal, and enthusiastically, as a hero-worshipper might talk, and it was
obvious that he was my hero. I rose to a climax of enthusiasm and
worship, and, before he could guess my intention, threw my arms around
his neck and kissed him on the lips. He held me from him at arms
length and stared about in annoyance and perplexity. The four men
greeted him with roars of laughter, and explanations were made. At
first he was sceptical. He scrutinized me keenly and was half
convinced, then shook his head and would not believe. It was not until
I became the old Avis Everhard and whispered secrets in his ear that
none knew but he and Avis Everhard, that he accepted me as his really,
truly wife.

It was later in the day that he took me in his arms, manifesting great
embarrassment and claiming polygamous emotions.

You are my Avis, he said, and you are also some one else. You are
two women, and therefore you are my harem. At any rate, we are safe
now. If the United States becomes too hot for us, why I have qualified
for citizenship in Turkey.[1]

 [1] At that time polygamy was still practised in Turkey.

Life became for me very happy in the refuge. It is true, we worked hard
and for long hours; but we worked together. We had each other for
eighteen precious months, and we were not lonely, for there was always
a coming and going of leaders and comradesstrange voices from the
under-world of intrigue and revolution, bringing stranger tales of
strife and war from all our battle-line. And there was much fun and
delight. We were not mere gloomy conspirators. We toiled hard and
suffered greatly, filled the gaps in our ranks and went on, and through
all the labour and the play and interplay of life and death we found
time to laugh and love. There were artists, scientists, scholars,
musicians, and poets among us; and in that hole in the ground culture
was higher and finer than in the palaces of wonder-cities of the
oligarchs. In truth, many of our comrades toiled at making beautiful
those same palaces and wonder-cities.[2]

 [2] This is not braggadocio on the part of Avis Everhard. The flower
 of the artistic and intellectual world were revolutionists. With the
 exception of a few of the musicians and singers, and of a few of the
 oligarchs, all the great creators of the period whose names have come
 down to us, were revolutionists.

Nor were we confined to the refuge itself. Often at night we rode over
the mountains for exercise, and we rode on Wicksons horses. If only he
knew how many revolutionists his horses have carried! We even went on
picnics to isolated spots we knew, where we remained all day, going
before daylight and returning after dark. Also, we used Wicksons cream
and butter,[3] and Ernest was not above shooting Wicksons quail and
rabbits, and, on occasion, his young bucks.

 [3] Even as late as that period, cream and butter were still crudely
 extracted from cows milk. The laboratory preparation of foods had not
 yet begun.

Indeed, it was a safe refuge. I have said that it was discovered only
once, and this brings me to the clearing up of the mystery of the
disappearance of young Wickson. Now that he is dead, I am free to
speak. There was a nook on the bottom of the great hole where the sun
shone for several hours and which was hidden from above. Here we had
carried many loads of gravel from the creek-bed, so that it was dry and
warm, a pleasant basking place; and here, one afternoon, I was
drowsing, half asleep, over a volume of Mendenhall.[4] I was so
comfortable and secure that even his flaming lyrics failed to stir me.

 [4] In all the extant literature and documents of that period,
 continual reference is made to the poems of Rudolph Mendenhall. By his
 comrades he was called The Flame. He was undoubtedly a great genius;
 yet, beyond weird and haunting fragments of his verse, quoted in the
 writings of others, nothing of his has come down to us. He was
 executed by the Iron Heel in 1928 A.D.

I was aroused by a clod of earth striking at my feet. Then from above,
I heard a sound of scrambling. The next moment a young man, with a
final slide down the crumbling wall, alighted at my feet. It was Philip
Wickson, though I did not know him at the time. He looked at me coolly
and uttered a low whistle of surprise.

Well, he said; and the next moment, cap in hand, he was saying, I
beg your pardon. I did not expect to find any one here.

I was not so cool. I was still a tyro so far as concerned knowing how
to behave in desperate circumstances. Later on, when I was an
international spy, I should have been less clumsy, I am sure. As it
was, I scrambled to my feet and cried out the danger call.

Why did you do that? he asked, looking at me searchingly.

It was evident that he had no suspicion of our presence when making the
descent. I recognized this with relief.

For what purpose do you think I did it? I countered. I was indeed
clumsy in those days.

I dont know, he answered, shaking his head. Unless youve got
friends about. Anyway, youve got some explanations to make. I dont
like the look of it. You are trespassing. This is my fathers land,
and

But at that moment, Biedenbach, ever polite and gentle, said from
behind him in a low voice, Hands up, my young sir.

Young Wickson put his hands up first, then turned to confront
Biedenbach, who held a thirty-thirty automatic rifle on him. Wickson
was imperturbable.

Oh, ho, he said, a nest of revolutionistsand quite a hornets nest
it would seem. Well, you wont abide here long, I can tell you.

Maybe youll abide here long enough to reconsider that statement,
Biedenbach said quietly. And in the meanwhile I must ask you to come
inside with me.

Inside? The young man was genuinely astonished. Have you a catacomb
here? I have heard of such things.

Come and see, Biedenbach answered with his adorable accent.

But it is unlawful, was the protest.

Yes, by your law, the terrorist replied significantly. But by our
law, believe me, it is quite lawful. You must accustom yourself to the
fact that you are in another world than the one of oppression and
brutality in which you have lived.

There is room for argument there, Wickson muttered.

Then stay with us and discuss it.

The young fellow laughed and followed his captor into the house. He was
led into the inner cave-room, and one of the young comrades left to
guard him, while we discussed the situation in the kitchen.

Biedenbach, with tears in his eyes, held that Wickson must die, and was
quite relieved when we outvoted him and his horrible proposition. On
the other hand, we could not dream of allowing the young oligarch to
depart.

Ill tell you what to do, Ernest said. Well keep him and give him
an education.

I bespeak the privilege, then, of enlightening him in jurisprudence,
Biedenbach cried.

And so a decision was laughingly reached. We would keep Philip Wickson
a prisoner and educate him in our ethics and sociology. But in the
meantime there was work to be done. All trace of the young oligarch
must be obliterated. There were the marks he had left when descending
the crumbling wall of the hole. This task fell to Biedenbach, and,
slung on a rope from above, he toiled cunningly for the rest of the day
till no sign remained. Back up the canyon from the lip of the hole all
marks were likewise removed. Then, at twilight, came John Carlson, who
demanded Wicksons shoes.

The young man did not want to give up his shoes, and even offered to
fight for them, till he felt the horseshoers strength in Ernests
hands. Carlson afterward reported several blisters and much grievous
loss of skin due to the smallness of the shoes, but he succeeded in
doing gallant work with them. Back from the lip of the hole, where
ended the young mans obliterated trial, Carlson put on the shoes and
walked away to the left. He walked for miles, around knolls, over
ridges and through canyons, and finally covered the trail in the
running water of a creek-bed. Here he removed the shoes, and, still
hiding trail for a distance, at last put on his own shoes. A week later
Wickson got back his shoes.

That night the hounds were out, and there was little sleep in the
refuge. Next day, time and again, the baying hounds came down the
canyon, plunged off to the left on the trail Carlson had made for them,
and were lost to ear in the farther canyons high up the mountain. And
all the time our men waited in the refuge, weapons in handautomatic
revolvers and rifles, to say nothing of half a dozen infernal machines
of Biedenbachs manufacture. A more surprised party of rescuers could
not be imagined, had they ventured down into our hiding-place.

I have now given the true disappearance of Philip Wickson, one-time
oligarch, and, later, comrade in the Revolution. For we converted him
in the end. His mind was fresh and plastic, and by nature he was very
ethical. Several months later we rode him, on one of his fathers
horses, over Sonoma Mountains to Petaluma Creek and embarked him in a
small fishing-launch. By easy stages we smuggled him along our
underground railway to the Carmel refuge.

There he remained eight months, at the end of which time, for two
reasons, he was loath to leave us. One reason was that he had fallen in
love with Anna Roylston, and the other was that he had become one of
us. It was not until he became convinced of the hopelessness of his
love affair that he acceded to our wishes and went back to his father.
Ostensibly an oligarch until his death, he was in reality one of the
most valuable of our agents. Often and often has the Iron Heel been
dumbfounded by the miscarriage of its plans and operations against us.
If it but knew the number of its own members who are our agents, it
would understand. Young Wickson never wavered in his loyalty to the
Cause. In truth, his very death was incurred by his devotion to duty.
In the great storm of 1927, while attending a meeting of our leaders,
he contracted the pneumonia of which he died.[5]

 [5] The case of this young man was not unusual. Many young men of the
 Oligarchy, impelled by sense of right conduct, or their imaginations
 captured by the glory of the Revolution, ethically or romantically
 devoted their lives to it. In similar way, many sons of the Russian
 nobility played their parts in the earlier and protracted revolution
 in that country.




CHAPTER XXI.
THE ROARING ABYSMAL BEAST


During the long period of our stay in the refuge, we were kept closely
in touch with what was happening in the world without, and we were
learning thoroughly the strength of the Oligarchy with which we were at
war. Out of the flux of transition the new institutions were forming
more definitely and taking on the appearance and attributes of
permanence. The oligarchs had succeeded in devising a governmental
machine, as intricate as it was vast, that workedand this despite all
our efforts to clog and hamper.

This was a surprise to many of the revolutionists. They had not
conceived it possible. Nevertheless the work of the country went on.
The men toiled in the mines and fieldsperforce they were no more than
slaves. As for the vital industries, everything prospered. The members
of the great labor castes were contented and worked on merrily. For the
first time in their lives they knew industrial peace. No more were they
worried by slack times, strike and lockout, and the union label. They
lived in more comfortable homes and in delightful cities of their
owndelightful compared with the slums and ghettos in which they had
formerly dwelt. They had better food to eat, less hours of labor, more
holidays, and a greater amount and variety of interests and pleasures.
And for their less fortunate brothers and sisters, the unfavored
laborers, the driven people of the abyss, they cared nothing. An age of
selfishness was dawning upon mankind. And yet this is not altogether
true. The labor castes were honeycombed by our agentsmen whose eyes
saw, beyond the belly-need, the radiant figure of liberty and
brotherhood.

Another great institution that had taken form and was working smoothly
was the Mercenaries. This body of soldiers had been evolved out of the
old regular army and was now a million strong, to say nothing of the
colonial forces. The Mercenaries constituted a race apart. They dwelt
in cities of their own which were practically self-governed, and they
were granted many privileges. By them a large portion of the perplexing
surplus was consumed. They were losing all touch and sympathy with the
rest of the people, and, in fact, were developing their own class
morality and consciousness. And yet we had thousands of our agents
among them.[1]

 [1] The Mercenaries, in the last days of the Iron Heel, played an
 important rle. They constituted the balance of power in the struggles
 between the labor castes and the oligarchs, and now to one side and
 now to the other, threw their strength according to the play of
 intrigue and conspiracy.

The oligarchs themselves were going through a remarkable and, it must
be confessed, unexpected development. As a class, they disciplined
themselves. Every member had his work to do in the world, and this work
he was compelled to do. There were no more idle-rich young men. Their
strength was used to give united strength to the Oligarchy. They served
as leaders of troops and as lieutenants and captains of industry. They
found careers in applied science, and many of them became great
engineers. They went into the multitudinous divisions of the
government, took service in the colonial possessions, and by tens of
thousands went into the various secret services. They were, I may say,
apprenticed to education, to art, to the church, to science, to
literature; and in those fields they served the important function of
moulding the thought-processes of the nation in the direction of the
perpetuity of the Oligarchy.

They were taught, and later they in turn taught, that what they were
doing was right. They assimilated the aristocratic idea from the moment
they began, as children, to receive impressions of the world. The
aristocratic idea was woven into the making of them until it became
bone of them and flesh of them. They looked upon themselves as
wild-animal trainers, rulers of beasts. From beneath their feet rose
always the subterranean rumbles of revolt. Violent death ever stalked
in their midst; bomb and knife and bullet were looked upon as so many
fangs of the roaring abysmal beast they must dominate if humanity were
to persist. They were the saviours of humanity, and they regarded
themselves as heroic and sacrificing laborers for the highest good.

They, as a class, believed that they alone maintained civilization. It
was their belief that if ever they weakened, the great beast would
ingulf them and everything of beauty and wonder and joy and good in its
cavernous and slime-dripping maw. Without them, anarchy would reign and
humanity would drop backward into the primitive night out of which it
had so painfully emerged. The horrid picture of anarchy was held always
before their childs eyes until they, in turn, obsessed by this
cultivated fear, held the picture of anarchy before the eyes of the
children that followed them. This was the beast to be stamped upon, and
the highest duty of the aristocrat was to stamp upon it. In short, they
alone, by their unremitting toil and sacrifice, stood between weak
humanity and the all-devouring beast; and they believed it, firmly
believed it.

I cannot lay too great stress upon this high ethical righteousness of
the whole oligarch class. This has been the strength of the Iron Heel,
and too many of the comrades have been slow or loath to realize it.
Many of them have ascribed the strength of the Iron Heel to its system
of reward and punishment. This is a mistake. Heaven and hell may be the
prime factors of zeal in the religion of a fanatic; but for the great
majority of the religious, heaven and hell are incidental to right and
wrong. Love of the right, desire for the right, unhappiness with
anything less than the rightin short, right conduct, is the prime
factor of religion. And so with the Oligarchy. Prisons, banishment and
degradation, honors and palaces and wonder-cities, are all incidental.
The great driving force of the oligarchs is the belief that they are
doing right. Never mind the exceptions, and never mind the oppression
and injustice in which the Iron Heel was conceived. All is granted. The
point is that the strength of the Oligarchy today lies in its satisfied
conception of its own righteousness.[2]

 [2] Out of the ethical incoherency and inconsistency of capitalism,
 the oligarchs emerged with a new ethics, coherent and definite, sharp
 and severe as steel, the most absurd and unscientific and at the same
 time the most potent ever possessed by any tyrant class. The oligarchs
 believed their ethics, in spite of the fact that biology and evolution
 gave them the lie; and, because of their faith, for three centuries
 they were able to hold back the mighty tide of human progressa
 spectacle, profound, tremendous, puzzling to the metaphysical
 moralist, and one that to the materialist is the cause of many doubts
 and reconsiderations.

For that matter, the strength of the Revolution, during these frightful
twenty years, has resided in nothing else than the sense of
righteousness. In no other way can be explained our sacrifices and
martyrdoms. For no other reason did Rudolph Mendenhall flame out his
soul for the Cause and sing his wild swan-song that last night of life.
For no other reason did Hurlbert die under torture, refusing to the
last to betray his comrades. For no other reason has Anna Roylston
refused blessed motherhood. For no other reason has John Carlson been
the faithful and unrewarded custodian of the Glen Ellen Refuge. It does
not matter, young or old, man or woman, high or low, genius or clod, go
where one will among the comrades of the Revolution, the motor-force
will be found to be a great and abiding desire for the right.

But I have run away from my narrative. Ernest and I well understood,
before we left the refuge, how the strength of the Iron Heel was
developing. The labor castes, the Mercenaries, and the great hordes of
secret agents and police of various sorts were all pledged to the
Oligarchy. In the main, and ignoring the loss of liberty, they were
better off than they had been. On the other hand, the great helpless
mass of the population, the people of the abyss, was sinking into a
brutish apathy of content with misery. Whenever strong proletarians
asserted their strength in the midst of the mass, they were drawn away
from the mass by the oligarchs and given better conditions by being
made members of the labor castes or of the Mercenaries. Thus discontent
was lulled and the proletariat robbed of its natural leaders.

The condition of the people of the abyss was pitiable. Common school
education, so far as they were concerned, had ceased. They lived like
beasts in great squalid labor-ghettos, festering in misery and
degradation. All their old liberties were gone. They were labor-slaves.
Choice of work was denied them. Likewise was denied them the right to
move from place to place, or the right to bear or possess arms. They
were not land serfs like the farmers. They were machine-serfs and
labor-serfs. When unusual needs arose for them, such as the building of
the great highways and air-lines, of canals, tunnels, subways, and
fortifications, levies were made on the labor-ghettos, and tens of
thousands of serfs, willy-nilly, were transported to the scene of
operations. Great armies of them are toiling now at the building of
Ardis, housed in wretched barracks where family life cannot exist, and
where decency is displaced by dull bestiality. In all truth, there in
the labor-ghettos is the roaring abysmal beast the oligarchs fear so
dreadfullybut it is the beast of their own making. In it they will not
let the ape and tiger die.

And just now the word has gone forth that new levies are being imposed
for the building of Asgard, the projected wonder-city that will far
exceed Ardis when the latter is completed.[3] We of the Revolution will
go on with that great work, but it will not be done by the miserable
serfs. The walls and towers and shafts of that fair city will arise to
the sound of singing, and into its beauty and wonder will be woven, not
sighs and groans, but music and laughter.

 [3] Ardis was completed in 1942 A.D., Asgard was not completed until
 1984 A.D. It was fifty-two years in the building, during which time a
 permanent army of half a million serfs was employed. At times these
 numbers swelled to over a millionwithout any account being taken of
 the hundreds of thousands of the labor castes and the artists.

Ernest was madly impatient to be out in the world and doing, for our
ill-fated First Revolt, that had miscarried in the Chicago Commune, was
ripening fast. Yet he possessed his soul with patience, and during this
time of his torment, when Hadly, who had been brought for the purpose
from Illinois, made him over into another man[4] he revolved great
plans in his head for the organization of the learned proletariat, and
for the maintenance of at least the rudiments of education amongst the
people of the abyssall this of course in the event of the First Revolt
being a failure.

 [4] Among the Revolutionists were many surgeons, and in vivisection
 they attained marvellous proficiency. In Avis Everhards words, they
 could literally make a man over. To them the elimination of scars and
 disfigurements was a trivial detail. They changed the features with
 such microscopic care that no traces were left of their handiwork. The
 nose was a favorite organ to work upon. Skin-grafting and
 hair-transplanting were among their commonest devices. The changes in
 expression they accomplished were wizard-like. Eyes and eyebrows,
 lips, mouths, and ears, were radically altered. By cunning operations
 on tongue, throat, larynx, and nasal cavities a mans whole
 enunciation and manner of speech could be changed. Desperate times
 give need for desperate remedies, and the surgeons of the Revolution
 rose to the need. Among other things, they could increase an adults
 stature by as much as four or five inches and decrease it by one or
 two inches. What they did is to-day a lost art. We have no need for
 it.

It was not until January, 1917, that we left the refuge. All had been
arranged. We took our place at once as agents-provocateurs in the
scheme of the Iron Heel. I was supposed to be Ernests sister. By
oligarchs and comrades on the inside who were high in authority, place
had been made for us, we were in possession of all necessary documents,
and our pasts were accounted for. With help on the inside, this was not
difficult, for in that shadow-world of secret service identity was
nebulous. Like ghosts the agents came and went, obeying commands,
fulfilling duties, following clews, making their reports often to
officers they never saw or cooperating with other agents they had never
seen before and would never see again.




CHAPTER XXII.
THE CHICAGO COMMUNE


As agents-provocateurs, not alone were we able to travel a great deal,
but our very work threw us in contact with the proletariat and with our
comrades, the revolutionists. Thus we were in both camps at the same
time, ostensibly serving the Iron Heel and secretly working with all
our might for the Cause. There were many of us in the various secret
services of the Oligarchy, and despite the shakings-up and
reorganizations the secret services have undergone, they have never
been able to weed all of us out.

Ernest had largely planned the First Revolt, and the date set had been
somewhere early in the spring of 1918. In the fall of 1917 we were not
ready; much remained to be done, and when the Revolt was precipitated,
of course it was doomed to failure. The plot of necessity was
frightfully intricate, and anything premature was sure to destroy it.
This the Iron Heel foresaw and laid its schemes accordingly.

We had planned to strike our first blow at the nervous system of the
Oligarchy. The latter had remembered the general strike, and had
guarded against the defection of the telegraphers by installing
wireless stations, in the control of the Mercenaries. We, in turn, had
countered this move. When the signal was given, from every refuge, all
over the land, and from the cities, and towns, and barracks, devoted
comrades were to go forth and blow up the wireless stations. Thus at
the first shock would the Iron Heel be brought to earth and lie
practically dismembered.

At the same moment, other comrades were to blow up the bridges and
tunnels and disrupt the whole network of railroads. Still further,
other groups of comrades, at the signal, were to seize the officers of
the Mercenaries and the police, as well as all Oligarchs of unusual
ability or who held executive positions. Thus would the leaders of the
enemy be removed from the field of the local battles that would
inevitably be fought all over the land.

Many things were to occur simultaneously when the signal went forth.
The Canadian and Mexican patriots, who were far stronger than the Iron
Heel dreamed, were to duplicate our tactics. Then there were comrades
(these were the women, for the men would be busy elsewhere) who were to
post the proclamations from our secret presses. Those of us in the
higher employ of the Iron Heel were to proceed immediately to make
confusion and anarchy in all our departments. Inside the Mercenaries
were thousands of our comrades. Their work was to blow up the magazines
and to destroy the delicate mechanism of all the war machinery. In the
cities of the Mercenaries and of the labor castes similar programmes of
disruption were to be carried out.

In short, a sudden, colossal, stunning blow was to be struck. Before
the paralyzed Oligarchy could recover itself, its end would have come.
It would have meant terrible times and great loss of life, but no
revolutionist hesitates at such things. Why, we even depended much, in
our plan, on the unorganized people of the abyss. They were to be
loosed on the palaces and cities of the masters. Never mind the
destruction of life and property. Let the abysmal brute roar and the
police and Mercenaries slay. The abysmal brute would roar anyway, and
the police and Mercenaries would slay anyway. It would merely mean that
various dangers to us were harmlessly destroying one another. In the
meantime we would be doing our own work, largely unhampered, and
gaining control of all the machinery of society.

Such was our plan, every detail of which had to be worked out in
secret, and, as the day drew near, communicated to more and more
comrades. This was the danger point, the stretching of the conspiracy.
But that danger-point was never reached. Through its spy-system the
Iron Heel got wind of the Revolt and prepared to teach us another of
its bloody lessons. Chicago was the devoted city selected for the
instruction, and well were we instructed.

Chicago[1] was the ripest of allChicago which of old time was the city
of blood and which was to earn anew its name. There the revolutionary
spirit was strong. Too many bitter strikes had been curbed there in the
days of capitalism for the workers to forget and forgive. Even the
labor castes of the city were alive with revolt. Too many heads had
been broken in the early strikes. Despite their changed and favorable
conditions, their hatred for the master class had not died. This spirit
had infected the Mercenaries, of which three regiments in particular
were ready to come over to us _en masse_.

 [1] Chicago was the industrial inferno of the nineteenth century A.D.
 A curious anecdote has come down to us of John Burns, a great English
 labor leader and one time member of the British Cabinet. In Chicago,
 while on a visit to the United States, he was asked by a newspaper
 reporter for his opinion of that city. Chicago, he answered, is a
 pocket edition of hell. Some time later, as he was going aboard his
 steamer to sail to England, he was approached by another reporter, who
 wanted to know if he had changed his opinion of Chicago. Yes, I
 have, was his reply. My present opinion is that hell is a pocket
 edition of Chicago.

Chicago had always been the storm-centre of the conflict between labor
and capital, a city of street-battles and violent death, with a
class-conscious capitalist organization and a class-conscious workman
organization, where, in the old days, the very school-teachers were
formed into labor unions and affiliated with the hod-carriers and
brick-layers in the American Federation of Labor. And Chicago became
the storm-centre of the premature First Revolt.

The trouble was precipitated by the Iron Heel. It was cleverly done.
The whole population, including the favored labor castes, was given a
course of outrageous treatment. Promises and agreements were broken,
and most drastic punishments visited upon even petty offenders. The
people of the abyss were tormented out of their apathy. In fact, the
Iron Heel was preparing to make the abysmal beast roar. And hand in
hand with this, in all precautionary measures in Chicago, the Iron Heel
was inconceivably careless. Discipline was relaxed among the
Mercenaries that remained, while many regiments had been withdrawn and
sent to various parts of the country.

It did not take long to carry out this programmeonly several weeks. We
of the Revolution caught vague rumors of the state of affairs, but had
nothing definite enough for an understanding. In fact, we thought it
was a spontaneous spirit of revolt that would require careful curbing
on our part, and never dreamed that it was deliberately
manufacturedand it had been manufactured so secretly, from the very
innermost circle of the Iron Heel, that we had got no inkling. The
counter-plot was an able achievement, and ably carried out.

I was in New York when I received the order to proceed immediately to
Chicago. The man who gave me the order was one of the oligarchs, I
could tell that by his speech, though I did not know his name nor see
his face. His instructions were too clear for me to make a mistake.
Plainly I read between the lines that our plot had been discovered,
that we had been countermined. The explosion was ready for the flash of
powder, and countless agents of the Iron Heel, including me, either on
the ground or being sent there, were to supply that flash. I flatter
myself that I maintained my composure under the keen eye of the
oligarch, but my heart was beating madly. I could almost have shrieked
and flown at his throat with my naked hands before his final,
cold-blooded instructions were given.

Once out of his presence, I calculated the time. I had just the moments
to spare, if I were lucky, to get in touch with some local leader
before catching my train. Guarding against being trailed, I made a rush
of it for the Emergency Hospital. Luck was with me, and I gained access
at once to comrade Galvin, the surgeon-in-chief. I started to gasp out
my information, but he stopped me.

I already know, he said quietly, though his Irish eyes were flashing.
I knew what you had come for. I got the word fifteen minutes ago, and
I have already passed it along. Everything shall be done here to keep
the comrades quiet. Chicago is to be sacrificed, but it shall be
Chicago alone.

Have you tried to get word to Chicago? I asked.

He shook his head. No telegraphic communication. Chicago is shut off.
Its going to be hell there.

He paused a moment, and I saw his white hands clinch. Then he burst
out:

By God! I wish I were going to be there!

There is yet a chance to stop it, I said, if nothing happens to the
train and I can get there in time. Or if some of the other
secret-service comrades who have learned the truth can get there in
time.

You on the inside were caught napping this time, he said.

I nodded my head humbly.

It was very secret, I answered. Only the inner chiefs could have
known up to to-day. We havent yet penetrated that far, so we couldnt
escape being kept in the dark. If only Ernest were here. Maybe he is in
Chicago now, and all is well.

Dr. Galvin shook his head. The last news I heard of him was that he
had been sent to Boston or New Haven. This secret service for the enemy
must hamper him a lot, but its better than lying in a refuge.

I started to go, and Galvin wrung my hand.

Keep a stout heart, were his parting words. What if the First Revolt
is lost? There will be a second, and we will be wiser then. Good-by and
good luck. I dont know whether Ill ever see you again. Its going to
be hell there, but Id give ten years of my life for your chance to be
in it.

The Twentieth Century[2] left New York at six in the evening, and was
supposed to arrive at Chicago at seven next morning. But it lost time
that night. We were running behind another train. Among the travellers
in my Pullman was comrade Hartman, like myself in the secret service of
the Iron Heel. He it was who told me of the train that immediately
preceded us. It was an exact duplicate of our train, though it
contained no passengers. The idea was that the empty train should
receive the disaster were an attempt made to blow up the Twentieth
Century. For that matter there were very few people on the trainonly a
bakers dozen in our car.

 [2] This was reputed to be the fastest train in the world then. It was
 quite a famous train.

There must be some big men on board, Hartman concluded. I noticed a
private car on the rear.

Night had fallen when we made our first change of engine, and I walked
down the platform for a breath of fresh air and to see what I could
see. Through the windows of the private car I caught a glimpse of three
men whom I recognized. Hartman was right. One of the men was General
Altendorff; and the other two were Mason and Vanderbold, the brains of
the inner circle of the Oligarchys secret service.

It was a quiet moonlight night, but I tossed restlessly and could not
sleep. At five in the morning I dressed and abandoned my bed.

I asked the maid in the dressing-room how late the train was, and she
told me two hours. She was a mulatto woman, and I noticed that her face
was haggard, with great circles under the eyes, while the eyes
themselves were wide with some haunting fear.

What is the matter? I asked.

Nothing, miss; I didnt sleep well, I guess, was her reply.

I looked at her closely, and tried her with one of our signals. She
responded, and I made sure of her.

Something terrible is going to happen in Chicago, she said. Theres
that fake[3] train in front of us. That and the troop-trains have made
us late.

 [3] False.

Troop-trains? I queried.

She nodded her head. The line is thick with them. Weve been passing
them all night. And theyre all heading for Chicago. And bringing them
over the air-linethat means business.

Ive a lover in Chicago, she added apologetically. Hes one of us,
and hes in the Mercenaries, and Im afraid for him.

Poor girl. Her lover was in one of the three disloyal regiments.

Hartman and I had breakfast together in the dining car, and I forced
myself to eat. The sky had clouded, and the train rushed on like a
sullen thunderbolt through the gray pall of advancing day. The very
negroes that waited on us knew that something terrible was impending.
Oppression sat heavily upon them; the lightness of their natures had
ebbed out of them; they were slack and absent-minded in their service,
and they whispered gloomily to one another in the far end of the car
next to the kitchen. Hartman was hopeless over the situation.

What can we do? he demanded for the twentieth time, with a helpless
shrug of the shoulders.

He pointed out of the window. See, all is ready. You can depend upon
it that theyre holding them like this, thirty or forty miles outside
the city, on every road.

He had reference to troop-trains on the side-track. The soldiers were
cooking their breakfasts over fires built on the ground beside the
track, and they looked up curiously at us as we thundered past without
slackening our terrific speed.

All was quiet as we entered Chicago. It was evident nothing had
happened yet. In the suburbs the morning papers came on board the
train. There was nothing in them, and yet there was much in them for
those skilled in reading between the lines that it was intended the
ordinary reader should read into the text. The fine hand of the Iron
Heel was apparent in every column. Glimmerings of weakness in the armor
of the Oligarchy were given. Of course, there was nothing definite. It
was intended that the reader should feel his way to these glimmerings.
It was cleverly done. As fiction, those morning papers of October 27th
were masterpieces.

The local news was missing. This in itself was a masterstroke. It
shrouded Chicago in mystery, and it suggested to the average Chicago
reader that the Oligarchy did not dare give the local news. Hints that
were untrue, of course, were given of insubordination all over the
land, crudely disguised with complacent references to punitive measures
to be taken. There were reports of numerous wireless stations that had
been blown up, with heavy rewards offered for the detection of the
perpetrators. Of course no wireless stations had been blown up. Many
similar outrages, that dovetailed with the plot of the revolutionists,
were given. The impression to be made on the minds of the Chicago
comrades was that the general Revolt was beginning, albeit with a
confusing miscarriage in many details. It was impossible for one
uninformed to escape the vague yet certain feeling that all the land
was ripe for the revolt that had already begun to break out.

It was reported that the defection of the Mercenaries in California had
become so serious that half a dozen regiments had been disbanded and
broken, and that their members with their families had been driven from
their own city and on into the labor-ghettos. And the California
Mercenaries were in reality the most faithful of all to their salt! But
how was Chicago, shut off from the rest of the world, to know? Then
there was a ragged telegram describing an outbreak of the populace in
New York City, in which the labor castes were joining, concluding with
the statement (intended to be accepted as a bluff[4]) that the troops
had the situation in hand.

 [4] A lie.

And as the oligarchs had done with the morning papers, so had they done
in a thousand other ways. These we learned afterward, as, for example,
the secret messages of the oligarchs, sent with the express purpose of
leaking to the ears of the revolutionists, that had come over the
wires, now and again, during the first part of the night.

I guess the Iron Heel wont need our services, Hartman remarked,
putting down the paper he had been reading, when the train pulled into
the central depot. They wasted their time sending us here. Their plans
have evidently prospered better than they expected. Hell will break
loose any second now.

He turned and looked down the train as we alighted.

I thought so, he muttered. They dropped that private car when the
papers came aboard.

Hartman was hopelessly depressed. I tried to cheer him up, but he
ignored my effort and suddenly began talking very hurriedly, in a low
voice, as we passed through the station. At first I could not
understand.

I have not been sure, he was saying, and I have told no one. I have
been working on it for weeks, and I cannot make sure. Watch out for
Knowlton. I suspect him. He knows the secrets of a score of our
refuges. He carries the lives of hundreds of us in his hands, and I
think he is a traitor. Its more a feeling on my part than anything
else. But I thought I marked a change in him a short while back. There
is the danger that he has sold us out, or is going to sell us out. I am
almost sure of it. I wouldnt whisper my suspicions to a soul, but,
somehow, I dont think Ill leave Chicago alive. Keep your eye on
Knowlton. Trap him. Find out. I dont know anything more. It is only an
intuition, and so far I have failed to find the slightest clew. We
were just stepping out upon the sidewalk. Remember, Hartman concluded
earnestly. Keep your eyes upon Knowlton.

And Hartman was right. Before a month went by Knowlton paid for his
treason with his life. He was formally executed by the comrades in
Milwaukee.

All was quiet on the streetstoo quiet. Chicago lay dead. There was no
roar and rumble of traffic. There were not even cabs on the streets.
The surface cars and the elevated were not running. Only occasionally,
on the sidewalks, were there stray pedestrians, and these pedestrians
did not loiter. They went their ways with great haste and definiteness,
withal there was a curious indecision in their movements, as though
they expected the buildings to topple over on them or the sidewalks to
sink under their feet or fly up in the air. A few gamins, however, were
around, in their eyes a suppressed eagerness in anticipation of
wonderful and exciting things to happen.

From somewhere, far to the south, the dull sound of an explosion came
to our ears. That was all. Then quiet again, though the gamins had
startled and listened, like young deer, at the sound. The doorways to
all the buildings were closed; the shutters to the shops were up. But
there were many police and watchmen in evidence, and now and again
automobile patrols of the Mercenaries slipped swiftly past.

Hartman and I agreed that it was useless to report ourselves to the
local chiefs of the secret service. Our failure so to report would be
excused, we knew, in the light of subsequent events. So we headed for
the great labor-ghetto on the South Side in the hope of getting in
contact with some of the comrades. Too late! We knew it. But we could
not stand still and do nothing in those ghastly, silent streets. Where
was Ernest? I was wondering. What was happening in the cities of the
labor castes and Mercenaries? In the fortresses?

As if in answer, a great screaming roar went up, dim with distance,
punctuated with detonation after detonation.

Its the fortresses, Hartman said. God pity those three regiments!

At a crossing we noticed, in the direction of the stockyards, a
gigantic pillar of smoke. At the next crossing several similar smoke
pillars were rising skyward in the direction of the West Side. Over the
city of the Mercenaries we saw a great captive war-balloon that burst
even as we looked at it, and fell in flaming wreckage toward the earth.
There was no clew to that tragedy of the air. We could not determine
whether the balloon had been manned by comrades or enemies. A vague
sound came to our ears, like the bubbling of a gigantic caldron a long
way off, and Hartman said it was machine-guns and automatic rifles.

And still we walked in immediate quietude. Nothing was happening where
we were. The police and the automobile patrols went by, and once half a
dozen fire-engines, returning evidently from some conflagration. A
question was called to the fireman by an officer in an automobile, and
we heard one shout in reply: No water! Theyve blown up the mains!

Weve smashed the water supply, Hartman cried excitedly to me. If we
can do all this in a premature, isolated, abortive attempt, what cant
we do in a concerted, ripened effort all over the land?

The automobile containing the officer who had asked the question darted
on. Suddenly there was a deafening roar. The machine, with its human
freight, lifted in an upburst of smoke, and sank down a mass of
wreckage and death.

Hartman was jubilant. Well done! well done! he was repeating, over
and over, in a whisper. The proletariat gets its lesson to-day, but it
gives one, too.

Police were running for the spot. Also, another patrol machine had
halted. As for myself, I was in a daze. The suddenness of it was
stunning. How had it happened? I knew not how, and yet I had been
looking directly at it. So dazed was I for the moment that I was
scarcely aware of the fact that we were being held up by the police. I
abruptly saw that a policeman was in the act of shooting Hartman. But
Hartman was cool and was giving the proper passwords. I saw the
levelled revolver hesitate, then sink down, and heard the disgusted
grunt of the policeman. He was very angry, and was cursing the whole
secret service. It was always in the way, he was averring, while
Hartman was talking back to him and with fitting secret-service pride
explaining to him the clumsiness of the police.

The next moment I knew how it had happened. There was quite a group
about the wreck, and two men were just lifting up the wounded officer
to carry him to the other machine. A panic seized all of them, and they
scattered in every direction, running in blind terror, the wounded
officer, roughly dropped, being left behind. The cursing policeman
alongside of me also ran, and Hartman and I ran, too, we knew not why,
obsessed with the same blind terror to get away from that particular
spot.

Nothing really happened then, but everything was explained. The flying
men were sheepishly coming back, but all the while their eyes were
raised apprehensively to the many-windowed, lofty buildings that
towered like the sheer walls of a canyon on each side of the street.
From one of those countless windows the bomb had been thrown, but which
window? There had been no second bomb, only a fear of one.

Thereafter we looked with speculative comprehension at the windows. Any
of them contained possible death. Each building was a possible
ambuscade. This was warfare in that modern jungle, a great city. Every
street was a canyon, every building a mountain. We had not changed much
from primitive man, despite the war automobiles that were sliding by.

Turning a corner, we came upon a woman. She was lying on the pavement,
in a pool of blood. Hartman bent over and examined her. As for myself,
I turned deathly sick. I was to see many dead that day, but the total
carnage was not to affect me as did this first forlorn body lying there
at my feet abandoned on the pavement. Shot in the breast, was
Hartmans report. Clasped in the hollow of her arm, as a child might be
clasped, was a bundle of printed matter. Even in death she seemed loath
to part with that which had caused her death; for when Hartman had
succeeded in withdrawing the bundle, we found that it consisted of
large printed sheets, the proclamations of the revolutionists.

A comrade, I said.

But Hartman only cursed the Iron Heel, and we passed on. Often we were
halted by the police and patrols, but our passwords enabled us to
proceed. No more bombs fell from the windows, the last pedestrians
seemed to have vanished from the streets, and our immediate quietude
grew more profound; though the gigantic caldron continued to bubble in
the distance, dull roars of explosions came to us from all directions,
and the smoke-pillars were towering more ominously in the heavens.




CHAPTER XXIII.
THE PEOPLE OF THE ABYSS


Suddenly a change came over the face of things. A tingle of excitement
ran along the air. Automobiles fled past, two, three, a dozen, and from
them warnings were shouted to us. One of the machines swerved wildly at
high speed half a block down, and the next moment, already left well
behind it, the pavement was torn into a great hole by a bursting bomb.
We saw the police disappearing down the cross-streets on the run, and
knew that something terrible was coming. We could hear the rising roar
of it.

Our brave comrades are coming, Hartman said.

We could see the front of their column filling the street from gutter
to gutter, as the last war-automobile fled past. The machine stopped
for a moment just abreast of us. A soldier leaped from it, carrying
something carefully in his hands. This, with the same care, he
deposited in the gutter. Then he leaped back to his seat and the
machine dashed on, took the turn at the corner, and was gone from
sight. Hartman ran to the gutter and stooped over the object.

Keep back, he warned me.

I could see he was working rapidly with his hands. When he returned to
me the sweat was heavy on his forehead.

I disconnected it, he said, and just in the nick of time. The
soldier was clumsy. He intended it for our comrades, but he didnt give
it enough time. It would have exploded prematurely. Now it wont
explode at all.

Everything was happening rapidly now. Across the street and half a
block down, high up in a building, I could see heads peering out. I had
just pointed them out to Hartman, when a sheet of flame and smoke ran
along that portion of the face of the building where the heads had
appeared, and the air was shaken by the explosion. In places the stone
facing of the building was torn away, exposing the iron construction
beneath. The next moment similar sheets of flame and smoke smote the
front of the building across the street opposite it. Between the
explosions we could hear the rattle of the automatic pistols and
rifles. For several minutes this mid-air battle continued, then died
out. It was patent that our comrades were in one building, that
Mercenaries were in the other, and that they were fighting across the
street. But we could not tell which was whichwhich building contained
our comrades and which the Mercenaries.

By this time the column on the street was almost on us. As the front of
it passed under the warring buildings, both went into action againone
building dropping bombs into the street, being attacked from across the
street, and in return replying to that attack. Thus we learned which
building was held by our comrades, and they did good work, saving those
in the street from the bombs of the enemy.

Hartman gripped my arm and dragged me into a wide entrance.

Theyre not our comrades, he shouted in my ear.

The inner doors to the entrance were locked and bolted. We could not
escape. The next moment the front of the column went by. It was not a
column, but a mob, an awful river that filled the street, the people of
the abyss, mad with drink and wrong, up at last and roaring for the
blood of their masters. I had seen the people of the abyss before, gone
through its ghettos, and thought I knew it; but I found that I was now
looking on it for the first time. Dumb apathy had vanished. It was now
dynamica fascinating spectacle of dread. It surged past my vision in
concrete waves of wrath, snarling and growling, carnivorous, drunk with
whiskey from pillaged warehouses, drunk with hatred, drunk with lust
for bloodmen, women, and children, in rags and tatters, dim ferocious
intelligences with all the godlike blotted from their features and all
the fiendlike stamped in, apes and tigers, anaemic consumptives and
great hairy beasts of burden, wan faces from which vampire society had
sucked the juice of life, bloated forms swollen with physical grossness
and corruption, withered hags and deaths-heads bearded like
patriarchs, festering youth and festering age, faces of fiends,
crooked, twisted, misshapen monsters blasted with the ravages of
disease and all the horrors of chronic innutritionthe refuse and the
scum of life, a raging, screaming, screeching, demoniacal horde.

And why not? The people of the abyss had nothing to lose but the misery
and pain of living. And to gain?nothing, save one final, awful glut of
vengeance. And as I looked the thought came to me that in that rushing
stream of human lava were men, comrades and heroes, whose mission had
been to rouse the abysmal beast and to keep the enemy occupied in
coping with it.

And now a strange thing happened to me. A transformation came over me.
The fear of death, for myself and for others, left me. I was strangely
exalted, another being in another life. Nothing mattered. The Cause for
this one time was lost, but the Cause would be here to-morrow, the same
Cause, ever fresh and ever burning. And thereafter, in the orgy of
horror that raged through the succeeding hours, I was able to take a
calm interest. Death meant nothing, life meant nothing. I was an
interested spectator of events, and, sometimes swept on by the rush,
was myself a curious participant. For my mind had leaped to a star-cool
altitude and grasped a passionless transvaluation of values. Had it not
done this, I know that I should have died.

Half a mile of the mob had swept by when we were discovered. A woman in
fantastic rags, with cheeks cavernously hollow and with narrow black
eyes like burning gimlets, caught a glimpse of Hartman and me. She let
out a shrill shriek and bore in upon us. A section of the mob tore
itself loose and surged in after her. I can see her now, as I write
these lines, a leap in advance, her gray hair flying in thin tangled
strings, the blood dripping down her forehead from some wound in the
scalp, in her right hand a hatchet, her left hand, lean and wrinkled, a
yellow talon, gripping the air convulsively. Hartman sprang in front of
me. This was no time for explanations. We were well dressed, and that
was enough. His fist shot out, striking the woman between her burning
eyes. The impact of the blow drove her backward, but she struck the
wall of her on-coming fellows and bounced forward again, dazed and
helpless, the brandished hatchet falling feebly on Hartmans shoulder.

The next moment I knew not what was happening. I was overborne by the
crowd. The confined space was filled with shrieks and yells and curses.
Blows were falling on me. Hands were ripping and tearing at my flesh
and garments. I felt that I was being torn to pieces. I was being borne
down, suffocated. Some strong hand gripped my shoulder in the thick of
the press and was dragging fiercely at me. Between pain and pressure I
fainted. Hartman never came out of that entrance. He had shielded me
and received the first brunt of the attack. This had saved me, for the
jam had quickly become too dense for anything more than the mad
gripping and tearing of hands.

I came to in the midst of wild movement. All about me was the same
movement. I had been caught up in a monstrous flood that was sweeping
me I knew not whither. Fresh air was on my cheek and biting sweetly in
my lungs. Faint and dizzy, I was vaguely aware of a strong arm around
my body under the arms, and half-lifting me and dragging me along.
Feebly my own limbs were helping me. In front of me I could see the
moving back of a mans coat. It had been slit from top to bottom along
the centre seam, and it pulsed rhythmically, the slit opening and
closing regularly with every leap of the wearer. This phenomenon
fascinated me for a time, while my senses were coming back to me. Next
I became aware of stinging cheeks and nose, and could feel blood
dripping on my face. My hat was gone. My hair was down and flying, and
from the stinging of the scalp I managed to recollect a hand in the
press of the entrance that had torn at my hair. My chest and arms were
bruised and aching in a score of places.

My brain grew clearer, and I turned as I ran and looked at the man who
was holding me up. He it was who had dragged me out and saved me. He
noticed my movement.

Its all right! he shouted hoarsely. I knew you on the instant.

I failed to recognize him, but before I could speak I trod upon
something that was alive and that squirmed under my foot. I was swept
on by those behind and could not look down and see, and yet I knew that
it was a woman who had fallen and who was being trampled into the
pavement by thousands of successive feet.

Its all right, he repeated. Im Garthwaite.

He was bearded and gaunt and dirty, but I succeeded in remembering him
as the stalwart youth that had spent several months in our Glen Ellen
refuge three years before. He passed me the signals of the Iron Heels
secret service, in token that he, too, was in its employ.

Ill get you out of this as soon as I can get a chance, he assured
me. But watch your footing. On your life dont stumble and go down.

All things happened abruptly on that day, and with an abruptness that
was sickening the mob checked itself. I came in violent collision with
a large woman in front of me (the man with the split coat had
vanished), while those behind collided against me. A devilish
pandemonium reigned,shrieks, curses, and cries of death, while above
all rose the churning rattle of machine-guns and the put-a-put,
put-a-put of rifles. At first I could make out nothing. People were
falling about me right and left. The woman in front doubled up and went
down, her hands on her abdomen in a frenzied clutch. A man was
quivering against my legs in a death-struggle.

It came to me that we were at the head of the column. Half a mile of it
had disappearedwhere or how I never learned. To this day I do not know
what became of that half-mile of humanitywhether it was blotted out by
some frightful bolt of war, whether it was scattered and destroyed
piecemeal, or whether it escaped. But there we were, at the head of the
column instead of in its middle, and we were being swept out of life by
a torrent of shrieking lead.

As soon as death had thinned the jam, Garthwaite, still grasping my
arm, led a rush of survivors into the wide entrance of an office
building. Here, at the rear, against the doors, we were pressed by a
panting, gasping mass of creatures. For some time we remained in this
position without a change in the situation.

I did it beautifully, Garthwaite was lamenting to me. Ran you right
into a trap. We had a gamblers chance in the street, but in here there
is no chance at all. Its all over but the shouting. Vive la
Revolution!

Then, what he expected, began. The Mercenaries were killing without
quarter. At first, the surge back upon us was crushing, but as the
killing continued the pressure was eased. The dead and dying went down
and made room. Garthwaite put his mouth to my ear and shouted, but in
the frightful din I could not catch what he said. He did not wait. He
seized me and threw me down. Next he dragged a dying woman over on top
of me, and, with much squeezing and shoving, crawled in beside me and
partly over me. A mound of dead and dying began to pile up over us, and
over this mound, pawing and moaning, crept those that still survived.
But these, too, soon ceased, and a semi-silence settled down, broken by
groans and sobs and sounds of strangulation.

I should have been crushed had it not been for Garthwaite. As it was,
it seemed inconceivable that I could bear the weight I did and live.
And yet, outside of pain, the only feeling I possessed was one of
curiosity. How was it going to end? What would death be like? Thus did
I receive my red baptism in that Chicago shambles. Prior to that, death
to me had been a theory; but ever afterward death has been a simple
fact that does not matter, it is so easy.

But the Mercenaries were not content with what they had done. They
invaded the entrance, killing the wounded and searching out the unhurt
that, like ourselves, were playing dead. I remember one man they
dragged out of a heap, who pleaded abjectly until a revolver shot cut
him short. Then there was a woman who charged from a heap, snarling and
shooting. She fired six shots before they got her, though what damage
she did we could not know. We could follow these tragedies only by the
sound. Every little while flurries like this occurred, each flurry
culminating in the revolver shot that put an end to it. In the
intervals we could hear the soldiers talking and swearing as they
rummaged among the carcasses, urged on by their officers to hurry up.

At last they went to work on our heap, and we could feel the pressure
diminish as they dragged away the dead and wounded. Garthwaite began
uttering aloud the signals. At first he was not heard. Then he raised
his voice.

Listen to that, we heard a soldier say. And next the sharp voice of
an officer. Hold on there! Careful as you go!

Oh, that first breath of air as we were dragged out! Garthwaite did the
talking at first, but I was compelled to undergo a brief examination to
prove service with the Iron Heel.

Agents-provocateurs all right, was the officers conclusion. He was a
beardless young fellow, a cadet, evidently, of some great oligarch
family.

Its a hell of a job, Garthwaite grumbled. Im going to try and
resign and get into the army. You fellows have a snap.

Youve earned it, was the young officers answer. Ive got some
pull, and Ill see if it can be managed. I can tell them how I found
you.

He took Garthwaites name and number, then turned to me.

And you?

Oh, Im going to be married, I answered lightly, and then Ill be
out of it all.

And so we talked, while the killing of the wounded went on. It is all a
dream, now, as I look back on it; but at the time it was the most
natural thing in the world. Garthwaite and the young officer fell into
an animated conversation over the difference between so-called modern
warfare and the present street-fighting and sky-scraper fighting that
was taking place all over the city. I followed them intently, fixing up
my hair at the same time and pinning together my torn skirts. And all
the time the killing of the wounded went on. Sometimes the revolver
shots drowned the voices of Garthwaite and the officer, and they were
compelled to repeat what they had been saying.

I lived through three days of the Chicago Commune, and the vastness of
it and of the slaughter may be imagined when I say that in all that
time I saw practically nothing outside the killing of the people of the
abyss and the mid-air fighting between sky-scrapers. I really saw
nothing of the heroic work done by the comrades. I could hear the
explosions of their mines and bombs, and see the smoke of their
conflagrations, and that was all. The mid-air part of one great deed I
saw, however, and that was the balloon attacks made by our comrades on
the fortresses. That was on the second day. The three disloyal
regiments had been destroyed in the fortresses to the last man. The
fortresses were crowded with Mercenaries, the wind blew in the right
direction, and up went our balloons from one of the office buildings in
the city.

Now Biedenbach, after he left Glen Ellen, had invented a most powerful
explosiveexpedite he called it. This was the weapon the balloons
used. They were only hot-air balloons, clumsily and hastily made, but
they did the work. I saw it all from the top of an office building. The
first balloon missed the fortresses completely and disappeared into the
country; but we learned about it afterward. Burton and OSullivan were
in it. As they were descending they swept across a railroad directly
over a troop-train that was heading at full speed for Chicago. They
dropped their whole supply of expedite upon the locomotive. The
resulting wreck tied the line up for days. And the best of it was that,
released from the weight of expedite, the balloon shot up into the air
and did not come down for half a dozen miles, both heroes escaping
unharmed.

The second balloon was a failure. Its flight was lame. It floated too
low and was shot full of holes before it could reach the fortresses.
Herford and Guinness were in it, and they were blown to pieces along
with the field into which they fell. Biedenbach was in despairwe heard
all about it afterwardand he went up alone in the third balloon. He,
too, made a low flight, but he was in luck, for they failed seriously
to puncture his balloon. I can see it now as I did then, from the lofty
top of the buildingthat inflated bag drifting along the air, and that
tiny speck of a man clinging on beneath. I could not see the fortress,
but those on the roof with me said he was directly over it. I did not
see the expedite fall when he cut it loose. But I did see the balloon
suddenly leap up into the sky. An appreciable time after that the great
column of the explosion towered in the air, and after that, in turn, I
heard the roar of it. Biedenbach the gentle had destroyed a fortress.
Two other balloons followed at the same time. One was blown to pieces
in the air, the expedite exploding, and the shock of it disrupted the
second balloon, which fell prettily into the remaining fortress. It
couldnt have been better planned, though the two comrades in it
sacrificed their lives.

But to return to the people of the abyss. My experiences were confined
to them. They raged and slaughtered and destroyed all over the city
proper, and were in turn destroyed; but never once did they succeed in
reaching the city of the oligarchs over on the west side. The oligarchs
had protected themselves well. No matter what destruction was wreaked
in the heart of the city, they, and their womenkind and children, were
to escape hurt. I am told that their children played in the parks
during those terrible days and that their favorite game was an
imitation of their elders stamping upon the proletariat.

But the Mercenaries found it no easy task to cope with the people of
the abyss and at the same time fight with the comrades. Chicago was
true to her traditions, and though a generation of revolutionists was
wiped out, it took along with it pretty close to a generation of its
enemies. Of course, the Iron Heel kept the figures secret, but, at a
very conservative estimate, at least one hundred and thirty thousand
Mercenaries were slain. But the comrades had no chance. Instead of the
whole country being hand in hand in revolt, they were all alone, and
the total strength of the Oligarchy could have been directed against
them if necessary. As it was, hour after hour, day after day, in
endless train-loads, by hundreds of thousands, the Mercenaries were
hurled into Chicago.

And there were so many of the people of the abyss! Tiring of the
slaughter, a great herding movement was begun by the soldiers, the
intent of which was to drive the street mobs, like cattle, into Lake
Michigan. It was at the beginning of this movement that Garthwaite and
I had encountered the young officer. This herding movement was
practically a failure, thanks to the splendid work of the comrades.
Instead of the great host the Mercenaries had hoped to gather together,
they succeeded in driving no more than forty thousand of the wretches
into the lake. Time and again, when a mob of them was well in hand and
being driven along the streets to the water, the comrades would create
a diversion, and the mob would escape through the consequent hole torn
in the encircling net.

Garthwaite and I saw an example of this shortly after meeting with the
young officer. The mob of which we had been a part, and which had been
put in retreat, was prevented from escaping to the south and east by
strong bodies of troops. The troops we had fallen in with had held it
back on the west. The only outlet was north, and north it went toward
the lake, driven on from east and west and south by machine-gun fire
and automatics. Whether it divined that it was being driven toward the
lake, or whether it was merely a blind squirm of the monster, I do not
know; but at any rate the mob took a cross street to the west, turned
down the next street, and came back upon its track, heading south
toward the great ghetto.

Garthwaite and I at that time were trying to make our way westward to
get out of the territory of street-fighting, and we were caught right
in the thick of it again. As we came to the corner we saw the howling
mob bearing down upon us. Garthwaite seized my arm and we were just
starting to run, when he dragged me back from in front of the wheels of
half a dozen war automobiles, equipped with machine-guns, that were
rushing for the spot. Behind them came the soldiers with their
automatic rifles. By the time they took position, the mob was upon
them, and it looked as though they would be overwhelmed before they
could get into action.

Here and there a soldier was discharging his rifle, but this scattered
fire had no effect in checking the mob. On it came, bellowing with
brute rage. It seemed the machine-guns could not get started. The
automobiles on which they were mounted blocked the street, compelling
the soldiers to find positions in, between, and on the sidewalks. More
and more soldiers were arriving, and in the jam we were unable to get
away. Garthwaite held me by the arm, and we pressed close against the
front of a building.

The mob was no more than twenty-five feet away when the machine-guns
opened up; but before that flaming sheet of death nothing could live.
The mob came on, but it could not advance. It piled up in a heap, a
mound, a huge and growing wave of dead and dying. Those behind urged
on, and the column, from gutter to gutter, telescoped upon itself.
Wounded creatures, men and women, were vomited over the top of that
awful wave and fell squirming down the face of it till they threshed
about under the automobiles and against the legs of the soldiers. The
latter bayoneted the struggling wretches, though one I saw who gained
his feet and flew at a soldiers throat with his teeth. Together they
went down, soldier and slave, into the welter.

The firing ceased. The work was done. The mob had been stopped in its
wild attempt to break through. Orders were being given to clear the
wheels of the war-machines. They could not advance over that wave of
dead, and the idea was to run them down the cross street. The soldiers
were dragging the bodies away from the wheels when it happened. We
learned afterward how it happened. A block distant a hundred of our
comrades had been holding a building. Across roofs and through
buildings they made their way, till they found themselves looking down
upon the close-packed soldiers. Then it was counter-massacre.

Without warning, a shower of bombs fell from the top of the building.
The automobiles were blown to fragments, along with many soldiers. We,
with the survivors, swept back in mad retreat. Half a block down
another building opened fire on us. As the soldiers had carpeted the
street with dead slaves, so, in turn, did they themselves become
carpet. Garthwaite and I bore charmed lives. As we had done before, so
again we sought shelter in an entrance. But he was not to be caught
napping this time. As the roar of the bombs died away, he began peering
out.

The mobs coming back! he called to me. Weve got to get out of
this!

We fled, hand in hand, down the bloody pavement, slipping and sliding,
and making for the corner. Down the cross street we could see a few
soldiers still running. Nothing was happening to them. The way was
clear. So we paused a moment and looked back. The mob came on slowly.
It was busy arming itself with the rifles of the slain and killing the
wounded. We saw the end of the young officer who had rescued us. He
painfully lifted himself on his elbow and turned loose with his
automatic pistol.

There goes my chance of promotion, Garthwaite laughed, as a woman
bore down on the wounded man, brandishing a butchers cleaver. Come
on. Its the wrong direction, but well get out somehow.

And we fled eastward through the quiet streets, prepared at every cross
street for anything to happen. To the south a monster conflagration was
filling the sky, and we knew that the great ghetto was burning. At last
I sank down on the sidewalk. I was exhausted and could go no farther. I
was bruised and sore and aching in every limb; yet I could not escape
smiling at Garthwaite, who was rolling a cigarette and saying:

I know Im making a mess of rescuing you, but I cant get head nor
tail of the situation. Its all a mess. Every time we try to break out,
something happens and were turned back. Were only a couple of blocks
now from where I got you out of that entrance. Friend and foe are all
mixed up. Its chaos. You cant tell who is in those darned buildings.
Try to find out, and you get a bomb on your head. Try to go peaceably
on your way, and you run into a mob and are killed by machine-guns, or
you run into the Mercenaries and are killed by your own comrades from a
roof. And on the top of it all the mob comes along and kills you, too.

He shook his head dolefully, lighted his cigarette, and sat down beside
me.

And Im that hungry, he added, I could eat cobblestones.

The next moment he was on his feet again and out in the street prying
up a cobblestone. He came back with it and assaulted the window of a
store behind us.

Its ground floor and no good, he explained as he helped me through
the hole he had made; but its the best we can do. You get a nap and
Ill reconnoitre. Ill finish this rescue all right, but I want time,
time, lots of itand something to eat.

It was a harness store we found ourselves in, and he fixed me up a
couch of horse blankets in the private office well to the rear. To add
to my wretchedness a splitting headache was coming on, and I was only
too glad to close my eyes and try to sleep.

Ill be back, were his parting words. I dont hope to get an auto,
but Ill surely bring some grub,[1] anyway.

 [1] Food.

And that was the last I saw of Garthwaite for three years. Instead of
coming back, he was carried away to a hospital with a bullet through
his lungs and another through the fleshy part of his neck.




CHAPTER XXIV.
NIGHTMARE


I had not closed my eyes the night before on the Twentieth Century, and
what of that and of my exhaustion I slept soundly. When I first awoke,
it was night. Garthwaite had not returned. I had lost my watch and had
no idea of the time. As I lay with my eyes closed, I heard the same
dull sound of distant explosions. The inferno was still raging. I crept
through the store to the front. The reflection from the sky of vast
conflagrations made the street almost as light as day. One could have
read the finest print with ease. From several blocks away came the
crackle of small hand-bombs and the churning of machine-guns, and from
a long way off came a long series of heavy explosions. I crept back to
my horse blankets and slept again.

When next I awoke, a sickly yellow light was filtering in on me. It was
dawn of the second day. I crept to the front of the store. A smoke
pall, shot through with lurid gleams, filled the sky. Down the opposite
side of the street tottered a wretched slave. One hand he held tightly
against his side, and behind him he left a bloody trail. His eyes roved
everywhere, and they were filled with apprehension and dread. Once he
looked straight across at me, and in his face was all the dumb pathos
of the wounded and hunted animal. He saw me, but there was no kinship
between us, and with him, at least, no sympathy of understanding; for
he cowered perceptibly and dragged himself on. He could expect no aid
in all Gods world. He was a helot in the great hunt of helots that the
masters were making. All he could hope for, all he sought, was some
hole to crawl away in and hide like any animal. The sharp clang of a
passing ambulance at the corner gave him a start. Ambulances were not
for such as he. With a groan of pain he threw himself into a doorway. A
minute later he was out again and desperately hobbling on.

I went back to my horse blankets and waited an hour for Garthwaite. My
headache had not gone away. On the contrary, it was increasing. It was
by an effort of will only that I was able to open my eyes and look at
objects. And with the opening of my eyes and the looking came
intolerable torment. Also, a great pulse was beating in my brain. Weak
and reeling, I went out through the broken window and down the street,
seeking to escape, instinctively and gropingly, from the awful
shambles. And thereafter I lived nightmare. My memory of what happened
in the succeeding hours is the memory one would have of nightmare. Many
events are focussed sharply on my brain, but between these indelible
pictures I retain are intervals of unconsciousness. What occurred in
those intervals I know not, and never shall know.

I remember stumbling at the corner over the legs of a man. It was the
poor hunted wretch that had dragged himself past my hiding-place. How
distinctly do I remember his poor, pitiful, gnarled hands as he lay
there on the pavementhands that were more hoof and claw than hands,
all twisted and distorted by the toil of all his days, with on the
palms a horny growth of callous a half inch thick. And as I picked
myself up and started on, I looked into the face of the thing and saw
that it still lived; for the eyes, dimly intelligent, were looking at
me and seeing me.

After that came a kindly blank. I knew nothing, saw nothing, merely
tottered on in my quest for safety. My next nightmare vision was a
quiet street of the dead. I came upon it abruptly, as a wanderer in the
country would come upon a flowing stream. Only this stream I gazed upon
did not flow. It was congealed in death. From pavement to pavement, and
covering the sidewalks, it lay there, spread out quite evenly, with
only here and there a lump or mound of bodies to break the surface.
Poor driven people of the abyss, hunted helotsthey lay there as the
rabbits in California after a drive.[1] Up the street and down I
looked. There was no movement, no sound. The quiet buildings looked
down upon the scene from their many windows. And once, and once only, I
saw an arm that moved in that dead stream. I swear I saw it move, with
a strange writhing gesture of agony, and with it lifted a head, gory
with nameless horror, that gibbered at me and then lay down again and
moved no more.

 [1] In those days, so sparsely populated was the land that wild
 animals often became pests. In California the custom of rabbit-driving
 obtained. On a given day all the farmers in a locality would assemble
 and sweep across the country in converging lines, driving the rabbits
 by scores of thousands into a prepared enclosure, where they were
 clubbed to death by men and boys.

I remember another street, with quiet buildings on either side, and the
panic that smote me into consciousness as again I saw the people of the
abyss, but this time in a stream that flowed and came on. And then I
saw there was nothing to fear. The stream moved slowly, while from it
arose groans and lamentations, cursings, babblings of senility,
hysteria, and insanity; for these were the very young and the very old,
the feeble and the sick, the helpless and the hopeless, all the
wreckage of the ghetto. The burning of the great ghetto on the South
Side had driven them forth into the inferno of the street-fighting, and
whither they wended and whatever became of them I did not know and
never learned.[2]

 [2] It was long a question of debate, whether the burning of the South
 Side ghetto was accidental, or whether it was done by the Mercenaries;
 but it is definitely settled now that the ghetto was fired by the
 Mercenaries under orders from their chiefs.

I have faint memories of breaking a window and hiding in some shop to
escape a street mob that was pursued by soldiers. Also, a bomb burst
near me, once, in some still street, where, look as I would, up and
down, I could see no human being. But my next sharp recollection begins
with the crack of a rifle and an abrupt becoming aware that I am being
fired at by a soldier in an automobile. The shot missed, and the next
moment I was screaming and motioning the signals. My memory of riding
in the automobile is very hazy, though this ride, in turn, is broken by
one vivid picture. The crack of the rifle of the soldier sitting beside
me made me open my eyes, and I saw George Milford, whom I had known in
the Pell Street days, sinking slowly down to the sidewalk. Even as he
sank the soldier fired again, and Milford doubled in, then flung his
body out, and fell sprawling. The soldier chuckled, and the automobile
sped on.

The next I knew after that I was awakened out of a sound sleep by a man
who walked up and down close beside me. His face was drawn and
strained, and the sweat rolled down his nose from his forehead. One
hand was clutched tightly against his chest by the other hand, and
blood dripped down upon the floor as he walked. He wore the uniform of
the Mercenaries. From without, as through thick walls, came the muffled
roar of bursting bombs. I was in some building that was locked in
combat with some other building.

A surgeon came in to dress the wounded soldier, and I learned that it
was two in the afternoon. My headache was no better, and the surgeon
paused from his work long enough to give me a powerful drug that would
depress the heart and bring relief. I slept again, and the next I knew
I was on top of the building. The immediate fighting had ceased, and I
was watching the balloon attack on the fortresses. Some one had an arm
around me and I was leaning close against him. It came to me quite as a
matter of course that this was Ernest, and I found myself wondering how
he had got his hair and eyebrows so badly singed.

It was by the merest chance that we had found each other in that
terrible city. He had had no idea that I had left New York, and, coming
through the room where I lay asleep, could not at first believe that it
was I. Little more I saw of the Chicago Commune. After watching the
balloon attack, Ernest took me down into the heart of the building,
where I slept the afternoon out and the night. The third day we spent
in the building, and on the fourth, Ernest having got permission and an
automobile from the authorities, we left Chicago.

My headache was gone, but, body and soul, I was very tired. I lay back
against Ernest in the automobile, and with apathetic eyes watched the
soldiers trying to get the machine out of the city. Fighting was still
going on, but only in isolated localities. Here and there whole
districts were still in possession of the comrades, but such districts
were surrounded and guarded by heavy bodies of troops. In a hundred
segregated traps were the comrades thus held while the work of
subjugating them went on. Subjugation meant death, for no quarter was
given, and they fought heroically to the last man.[3]

 [3] Numbers of the buildings held out over a week, while one held out
 eleven days. Each building had to be stormed like a fort, and the
 Mercenaries fought their way upward floor by floor. It was deadly
 fighting. Quarter was neither given nor taken, and in the fighting the
 revolutionists had the advantage of being above. While the
 revolutionists were wiped out, the loss was not one-sided. The proud
 Chicago proletariat lived up to its ancient boast. For as many of
 itself as were killed, it killed that many of the enemy.

Whenever we approached such localities, the guards turned us back and
sent us around. Once, the only way past two strong positions of the
comrades was through a burnt section that lay between. From either side
we could hear the rattle and roar of war, while the automobile picked
its way through smoking ruins and tottering walls. Often the streets
were blocked by mountains of debris that compelled us to go around. We
were in a labyrinth of ruin, and our progress was slow.

The stockyards (ghetto, plant, and everything) were smouldering ruins.
Far off to the right a wide smoke haze dimmed the sky,the town of
Pullman, the soldier chauffeur told us, or what had been the town of
Pullman, for it was utterly destroyed. He had driven the machine out
there, with despatches, on the afternoon of the third day. Some of the
heaviest fighting had occurred there, he said, many of the streets
being rendered impassable by the heaps of the dead.

Swinging around the shattered walls of a building, in the stockyards
district, the automobile was stopped by a wave of dead. It was for all
the world like a wave tossed up by the sea. It was patent to us what
had happened. As the mob charged past the corner, it had been swept, at
right angles and point-blank range, by the machine-guns drawn up on the
cross street. But disaster had come to the soldiers. A chance bomb must
have exploded among them, for the mob, checked until its dead and dying
formed the wave, had white-capped and flung forward its foam of living,
fighting slaves. Soldiers and slaves lay together, torn and mangled,
around and over the wreckage of the automobiles and guns.

Ernest sprang out. A familiar pair of shoulders in a cotton shirt and a
familiar fringe of white hair had caught his eye. I did not watch him,
and it was not until he was back beside me and we were speeding on that
he said:

It was Bishop Morehouse.

Soon we were in the green country, and I took one last glance back at
the smoke-filled sky. Faint and far came the low thud of an explosion.
Then I turned my face against Ernests breast and wept softly for the
Cause that was lost. Ernests arm about me was eloquent with love.

For this time lost, dear heart, he said, but not forever. We have
learned. To-morrow the Cause will rise again, strong with wisdom and
discipline.

The automobile drew up at a railroad station. Here we would catch a
train to New York. As we waited on the platform, three trains thundered
past, bound west to Chicago. They were crowded with ragged, unskilled
laborers, people of the abyss.

Slave-levies for the rebuilding of Chicago, Ernest said. You see,
the Chicago slaves are all killed.




CHAPTER XXV.
THE TERRORISTS


It was not until Ernest and I were back in New York, and after weeks
had elapsed, that we were able to comprehend thoroughly the full sweep
of the disaster that had befallen the Cause. The situation was bitter
and bloody. In many places, scattered over the country, slave revolts
and massacres had occurred. The roll of the martyrs increased mightily.
Countless executions took place everywhere. The mountains and waste
regions were filled with outlaws and refugees who were being hunted
down mercilessly. Our own refuges were packed with comrades who had
prices on their heads. Through information furnished by its spies,
scores of our refuges were raided by the soldiers of the Iron Heel.

Many of the comrades were disheartened, and they retaliated with
terroristic tactics. The set-back to their hopes made them despairing
and desperate. Many terrorist organizations unaffiliated with us sprang
into existence and caused us much trouble.[1] These misguided people
sacrificed their own lives wantonly, very often made our own plans go
astray, and retarded our organization.

 [1] The annals of this short-lived era of despair make bloody reading.
 Revenge was the ruling motive, and the members of the terroristic
 organizations were careless of their own lives and hopeless about the
 future. The Danites, taking their name from the avenging angels of the
 Mormon mythology, sprang up in the mountains of the Great West and
 spread over the Pacific Coast from Panama to Alaska. The Valkyries
 were women. They were the most terrible of all. No woman was eligible
 for membership who had not lost near relatives at the hands of the
 Oligarchy. They were guilty of torturing their prisoners to death.
 Another famous organization of women was The Widows of War. A
 companion organization to the Valkyries was the Berserkers. These men
 placed no value whatever upon their own lives, and it was they who
 totally destroyed the great Mercenary city of Bellona along with its
 population of over a hundred thousand souls. The Bedlamites and the
 Helldamites were twin slave organizations, while a new religious sect
 that did not flourish long was called The Wrath of God. Among others,
 to show the whimsicality of their deadly seriousness, may be mentioned
 the following: The Bleeding Hearts, Sons of the Morning, the Morning
 Stars, The Flamingoes, The Triple Triangles, The Three Bars, The
 Rubonics, The Vindicators, The Comanches, and the Erebusites.

And through it all moved the Iron Heel, impassive and deliberate,
shaking up the whole fabric of the social structure in its search for
the comrades, combing out the Mercenaries, the labor castes, and all
its secret services, punishing without mercy and without malice,
suffering in silence all retaliations that were made upon it, and
filling the gaps in its fighting line as fast as they appeared. And
hand in hand with this, Ernest and the other leaders were hard at work
reorganizing the forces of the Revolution. The magnitude of the task
may be understood when it is taken into.[2]

 [2] This is the end of the Everhard Manuscript. It breaks off abruptly
 in the middle of a sentence. She must have received warning of the
 coming of the Mercenaries, for she had time safely to hide the
 Manuscript before she fled or was captured. It is to be regretted that
 she did not live to complete her narrative, for then, undoubtedly,
 would have been cleared away the mystery that has shrouded for seven
 centuries the execution of Ernest Everhard.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRON HEEL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Scarlet Plague
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Scarlet Plague

Author: Jack London

Illustrator: Gordon Grant

Release date: June 29, 2007 [eBook #21970]
                Most recently updated: March 28, 2023

Language: English

Credits: David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCARLET PLAGUE ***




THE SCARLET PLAGUE

By Jack London


Illustrated By Gordon Grant

1915




THE SCARLET PLAGUE




I


The way led along upon what had once been the embankment of a railroad.
But no train had run upon it for many years. The forest on either side
swelled up the slopes of the embankment and crested across it in a green
wave of trees and bushes. The trail was as narrow as a man's body, and
was no more than a wild-animal runway. Occasionally, a piece of rusty
iron, showing through the forest-mould, advertised that the rail and the
ties still remained. In one place, a ten-inch tree, bursting through at
a connection, had lifted the end of a rail clearly into view. The tie
had evidently followed the rail, held to it by the spike long enough
for its bed to be filled with gravel and rotten leaves, so that now the
crumbling, rotten timber thrust itself up at a curious slant. Old as the
road was, it was manifest that it had been of the mono-rail type.

An old man and a boy travelled along this runway. They moved slowly, for
the old man was very old, a touch of palsy made his movements tremulous,
and he leaned heavily upon his staff. A rude skull-cap of goat-skin
protected his head from the sun. From beneath this fell a scant fringe
of stained and dirty-white hair. A visor, ingeniously made from a large
leaf, shielded his eyes, and from under this he peered at the way of
his feet on the trail. His beard, which should have been snow-white
but which showed the same weather-wear and camp-stain as his hair,
fell nearly to his waist in a great tangled mass. About his chest and
shoulders hung a single, mangy garment of goat-skin. His arms and legs,
withered and skinny, betokened extreme age, as well as did their sunburn
and scars and scratches betoken long years of exposure to the elements.

The boy, who led the way, checking the eagerness of his muscles to
the slow progress of the elder, likewise wore a single garment--a
ragged-edged piece of bear-skin, with a hole in the middle through which
he had thrust his head. He could not have been more than twelve years
old. Tucked coquettishly over one ear was the freshly severed tail of a
pig. In one hand he carried a medium-sized bow and an arrow.

On his back was a quiverful of arrows. From a sheath hanging about his
neck on a thong, projected the battered handle of a hunting knife. He
was as brown as a berry, and walked softly, with almost a catlike tread.
In marked contrast with his sunburned skin were his eyes--blue, deep
blue, but keen and sharp as a pair of gimlets. They seemed to bore into
aft about him in a way that was habitual. As he went along he smelled
things, as well, his distended, quivering nostrils carrying to his brain
an endless series of messages from the outside world. Also, his hearing
was acute, and had been so trained that it operated automatically.
Without conscious effort, he heard all the slight sounds in the apparent
quiet--heard, and differentiated, and classified these sounds--whether
they were of the wind rustling the leaves, of the humming of bees and
gnats, of the distant rumble of the sea that drifted to him only in
lulls, or of the gopher, just under his foot, shoving a pouchful of
earth into the entrance of his hole.

Suddenly he became alertly tense. Sound, sight, and odor had given him
a simultaneous warning. His hand went back to the old man, touching
him, and the pair stood still. Ahead, at one side of the top of the
embankment, arose a crackling sound, and the boy's gaze was fixed on the
tops of the agitated bushes. Then a large bear, a grizzly, crashed into
view, and likewise stopped abruptly, at sight of the humans. He did not
like them, and growled querulously. Slowly the boy fitted the arrow to
the bow, and slowly he pulled the bowstring taut. But he never removed
his eyes from the bear.

[Illustration: Slowly he pulled the bowstring taut 020]

The old man peered from under his green leaf at the danger, and stood as
quietly as the boy. For a few seconds this mutual scrutinizing went
on; then, the bear betraying a growing irritability, the boy, with a
movement of his head, indicated that the old man must step aside from
the trail and go down the embankment. The boy followed, going backward,
still holding the bow taut and ready. They waited till a crashing among
the bushes from the opposite side of the embankment told them the bear
had gone on. The boy grinned as he led back to the trail.

A big un, Granser, he chuckled.

The old man shook his head.

They get thicker every day, he complained in a thin, undependable
falsetto. Who'd have thought I'd live to see the time when a man would
be afraid of his life on the way to the Cliff House. When I was a boy,
Edwin, men and women and little babies used to come out here from San
Francisco by tens of thousands on a nice day. And there weren't any
bears then. No, sir. They used to pay money to look at them in cages,
they were that rare.

What is money, Granser?

Before the old man could answer, the boy recollected and triumphantly
shoved his hand into a pouch under his bear-skin and pulled forth a
battered and tarnished silver dollar. The old man's eyes glistened, as
he held the coin close to them.

I can't see, he muttered. You look and see if you can make out the
date, Edwin.

The boy laughed.

You're a great Granser, he cried delightedly, always making believe
them little marks mean something.

The old man manifested an accustomed chagrin as he brought the coin back
again close to his own eyes.

2012, he shrilled, and then fell to cackling grotesquely. That was
the year Morgan the Fifth was appointed President of the United States
by the Board of Magnates. It must have been one of the last coins
minted, for the Scarlet Death came in 2013. Lord! Lord!--think of it!
Sixty years ago, and I am the only person alive to-day that lived in
those times. Where did you find it, Edwin?

The boy, who had been regarding him with the tolerant curiousness one
accords to the prattlings of the feeble-minded, answered promptly.

I got it off of Hoo-Hoo. He found it when we was herdin' goats down
near San Jos last spring. Hoo-Hoo said it was _money_. Ain't you
hungry, Granser?

The ancient caught his staff in a tighter grip and urged along the
trail, his old eyes shining greedily.

I hope Hare-Lip 's found a crab... or two, he mumbled. They're good
eating, crabs, mighty good eating when you've no more teeth and you've
got grandsons that love their old grandsire and make a point of catching
crabs for him. When I was a boy--

But Edwin, suddenly stopped by what he saw, was drawing the bowstring
on a fitted arrow. He had paused on the brink of a crevasse in the
embankment. An ancient culvert had here washed out, and the stream, no
longer confined, had cut a passage through the fill. On the opposite
side, the end of a rail projected and overhung. It showed rustily
through the creeping vines which overran it. Beyond, crouching by a
bush, a rabbit looked across at him in trembling hesitancy. Fully fifty
feet was the distance, but the arrow flashed true; and the transfixed
rabbit, crying out in sudden fright and hurt, struggled painfully away
into the brush. The boy himself was a flash of brown skin and flying fur
as he bounded down the steep wall of the gap and up the other side.
His lean muscles were springs of steel that released into graceful
and efficient action. A hundred feet beyond, in a tangle of bushes,
he overtook the wounded creature, knocked its head on a convenient
tree-trunk, and turned it over to Granser to carry.

[Illustration: Rabbit is good, very good 026]

Rabbit is good, very good, the ancient quavered, but when it comes to
a toothsome delicacy I prefer crab. When I was a boy--

Why do you say so much that ain't got no sense? Edwin impatiently
interrupted the other's threatened garrulousness.

The boy did not exactly utter these words, but something that remotely
resembled them and that was more guttural and explosive and economical
of qualifying phrases. His speech showed distant kinship with that of
the old man, and the latter's speech was approximately an English that
had gone through a bath of corrupt usage.

What I want to know, Edwin continued, is why you call crab 'toothsome
delicacy'? Crab is crab, ain't it? No one I never heard calls it such
funny things.

The old man sighed but did not answer, and they moved on in silence.
The surf grew suddenly louder, as they emerged from the forest upon a
stretch of sand dunes bordering the sea. A few goats were browsing among
the sandy hillocks, and a skin-clad boy, aided by a wolfish-looking
dog that was only faintly reminiscent of a collie, was watching them.
Mingled with the roar of the surf was a continuous, deep-throated
barking or bellowing, which came from a cluster of jagged rocks a
hundred yards out from shore. Here huge sea-lions hauled themselves
up to lie in the sun or battle with one another. In the immediate
foreground arose the smoke of a fire, tended by a third savage-looking
boy. Crouched near him were several wolfish dogs similar to the one that
guarded the goats.

The old man accelerated his pace, sniffing eagerly as he neared the
fire.

Mussels! he muttered ecstatically. Mussels! And ain't that a crab,
Hoo-Hoo? Ain't that a crab? My, my, you boys are good to your old
grandsire.

Hoo-Hoo, who was apparently of the same age as Edwin, grinned.

All you want, Granser. I got four.

The old man's palsied eagerness was pitiful. Sitting down in the sand as
quickly as his stiff limbs would let him, he poked a large rock-mussel
from out of the coals. The heat had forced its shells apart, and
the meat, salmon-colored, was thoroughly cooked. Between thumb and
forefinger, in trembling haste, he caught the morsel and carried it
to his mouth. But it was too hot, and the next moment was violently
ejected. The old man spluttered with the pain, and tears ran out of his
eyes and down his cheeks.

The boys were true savages, possessing only the cruel humor of the
savage. To them the incident was excruciatingly funny, and they burst
into loud laughter. Hoo-Hoo danced up and down, while Edwin rolled
gleefully on the ground. The boy with the goats came running to join in
the fun.

Set 'em to cool, Edwin, set 'em to cool, the old man besought, in the
midst of his grief, making no attempt to wipe away the tears that
still flowed from his eyes. And cool a crab, Edwin, too. You know your
grandsire likes crabs.

From the coals arose a great sizzling, which proceeded from the many
mussels bursting open their shells and exuding their moisture. They were
large shellfish, running from three to six inches in length. The boys
raked them out with sticks and placed them on a large piece of driftwood
to cool.

When I was a boy, we did not laugh at our elders; we respected them.

The boys took no notice, and Granser continued to babble an incoherent
flow of complaint and censure. But this time he was more careful, and
did not burn his mouth. All began to eat, using nothing but their hands
and making loud mouth-noises and lip-smackings. The third boy, who was
called Hare-Lip, slyly deposited a pinch of sand on a mussel the ancient
was carrying to his mouth; and when the grit of it bit into the old
fellow's mucous membrane and gums, the laughter was again uproarious. He
was unaware that a joke had been played on him, and spluttered and spat
until Edwin, relenting, gave him a gourd of fresh water with which to
wash out his mouth.

Where's them crabs, Hoo-Hoo? Edwin demanded. Granser's set upon
having a snack.

Again Granser's eyes burned with greediness as a large crab was handed
to him. It was a shell with legs and all complete, but the meat had long
since departed. With shaky fingers and babblings of anticipation, the
old man broke off a leg and found it filled with emptiness.

The crabs, Hoo-Hoo? he wailed. The crabs?

I was fooling Granser. They ain't no crabs! I never found one.

The boys were overwhelmed with delight at sight of the tears of senile
disappointment that dribbled down the old man's cheeks. Then, unnoticed,
Hoo-Hoo replaced the empty shell with a fresh-cooked crab. Already
dismembered, from the cracked legs the white meat sent forth a small
cloud of savory steam. This attracted the old man's nostrils, and he
looked down in amazement.

[Illustration: This attracted the old man's nostrils 033]

The change of his mood to one of joy was immediate. He snuffled and
muttered and mumbled, making almost a croon of delight, as he began
to eat. Of this the boys took little notice, for it was an accustomed
spectacle. Nor did they notice his occasional exclamations and
utterances of phrases which meant nothing to them, as, for instance,
when he smacked his lips and champed his gums while muttering:
Mayonnaise! Just think--mayonnaise! And it's sixty years since the last
was ever made! Two generations and never a smell of it! Why, in those
days it was served in every restaurant with crab.

When he could eat no more, the old man sighed, wiped his hands on his
naked legs, and gazed out over the sea. With the content of a full
stomach, he waxed reminiscent.

To think of it! I've seen this beach alive with men, women, and
children on a pleasant Sunday. And there weren't any bears to eat them
up, either. And right up there on the cliff was a big restaurant where
you could get anything you wanted to eat. Four million people lived in
San Francisco then. And now, in the whole city and county there aren't
forty all told. And out there on the sea were ships and ships always to
be seen, going in for the Golden Gate or coming out. And airships in the
air--dirigibles and flying machines. They could travel two hundred miles
an hour. The mail contracts with the New York and San Francisco Limited
demanded that for the minimum. There was a chap, a Frenchman, I forget
his name, who succeeded in making three hundred; but the thing was
risky, too risky for conservative persons. But he was on the right clew,
and he would have managed it if it hadn't been for the Great Plague.
When I was a boy, there were men alive who remembered the coming of the
first aeroplanes, and now I have lived to see the last of them, and that
sixty years ago.

The old man babbled on, unheeded by the boys, who were long accustomed
to his garrulousness, and whose vocabularies, besides, lacked the
greater portion of the words he used. It was noticeable that in these
rambling soliloquies his English seemed to recrudesce into better
construction and phraseology. But when he talked directly with the boys
it lapsed, largely, into their own uncouth and simpler forms.

But there weren't many crabs in those days, the old man wandered on.
They were fished out, and they were great delicacies. The open season
was only a month long, too. And now crabs are accessible the whole year
around. Think of it--catching all the crabs you want, any time you want,
in the surf of the Cliff House beach!

A sudden commotion among the goats brought the boys to their feet. The
dogs about the fire rushed to join their snarling fellow who guarded the
goats, while the goats themselves stampeded in the direction of their
human protectors. A half dozen forms, lean and gray, glided about on the
sand hillocks and faced the bristling dogs. Edwin arched an arrow that
fell short. But Hare-Lip, with a sling such as David carried into battle
against Goliath, hurled a stone through the air that whistled from the
speed of its flight. It fell squarely among the wolves and caused them
to slink away toward the dark depths of the eucalyptus forest.

[Illustration: With a sling such as David carried 036]

The boys laughed and lay down again in the sand, while Granser sighed
ponderously. He had eaten too much, and, with hands clasped on his
paunch, the fingers interlaced, he resumed his maunderings.

'The fleeting systems lapse like foam,' he mumbled what was evidently
a quotation. That's it--foam, and fleeting. All man's toil upon the
planet was just so much foam. He domesticated the serviceable animals,
destroyed the hostile ones, and cleared the land of its wild vegetation.
And then he passed, and the flood of primordial life rolled back again,
sweeping his handiwork away--the weeds and the forest inundated his
fields, the beasts of prey swept over his flocks, and now there are
wolves on the Cliff House beach. He was appalled by the thought. Where
four million people disported themselves, the wild wolves roam to-day,
and the savage progeny of our loins, with prehistoric weapons, defend
themselves against the fanged despoilers. Think of it! And all because
of the Scarlet Death--

The adjective had caught Hare-Lip's ear.

He's always saying that, he said to Edwin. What is _scarlet?_

'The scarlet of the maples can shake me like the cry of bugles going
by,' the old man quoted.

It's red, Edwin answered the question. And you don't know it because
you come from the Chauffeur Tribe. They never did know nothing, none of
them. Scarlet is red--I know that.

Red is red, ain't it? Hare-Lip grumbled. Then what's the good of
gettin' cocky and calling it scarlet?

Granser, what for do you always say so much what nobody knows? he
asked. Scarlet ain't anything, but red is red. Why don't you say red,
then?

Red is not the right word, was the reply. The plague was scarlet.
The whole face and body turned scarlet in an hour's time. Don't I
know? Didn't I see enough of it? And I am telling you it was scarlet
because--well, because it _was_ scarlet. There is no other word for it.

Red is good enough for me, Hare-Lip muttered obstinately. My dad
calls red red, and he ought to know. He says everybody died of the Red
Death.

Your dad is a common fellow, descended from a common fellow, Granser
retorted heatedly. Don't I know the beginnings of the Chauffeurs? Your
grandsire was a chauffeur, a servant, and without education. He worked
for other persons. But your grandmother was of good stock, only the
children did not take after her. Don't I remember when I first met them,
catching fish at Lake Temescal?

What is _education?_ Edwin asked.

Calling red scarlet, Hare-Lip sneered, then returned to the attack on
Granser. My dad told me, an' he got it from his dad afore he croaked,
that your wife was a Santa Rosan, an' that she was sure no account. He
said she was a _hash-slinger_ before the Red Death, though I don't know
what a _hash-slinger_ is. You can tell me, Edwin.

But Edwin shook his head in token of ignorance.

It is true, she was a waitress, Granser acknowledged. But she was a
good woman, and your mother was her daughter. Women were very scarce in
the days after the Plague. She was the only wife I could find, even if
she was a _hash-slinger_, as your father calls it. But it is not nice to
talk about our progenitors that way.

Dad says that the wife of the first Chauffeur was a _lady_--

What's a _lady?_ Hoo-Hoo demanded.

A _lady_ 's a Chauffeur squaw, was the quick reply of Hare-Lip.

The first Chauffeur was Bill, a common fellow, as I said before, the
old man expounded; but his wife was a lady, a great lady. Before the
Scarlet Death she was the wife of Van Worden. He was President of the
Board of Industrial Magnates, and was one of the dozen men who
ruled America. He was worth one billion, eight hundred millions of
dollars--coins like you have there in your pouch, Edwin. And then came
the Scarlet Death, and his wife became the wife of Bill, the first
Chauffeur. He used to beat her, too. I have seen it myself.

Hoo-Hoo, lying on his stomach and idly digging his toes in the sand,
cried out and investigated, first, his toe-nail, and next, the small
hole he had dug. The other two boys joined him, excavating the sand
rapidly with their hands till there lay three skeletons exposed. Two
were of adults, the third being that of a part-grown child. The old man
trudged along on the ground and peered at the find.

Plague victims, he announced. That's the way they died everywhere
in the last days. This must have been a family, running away from the
contagion and perishing here on the Cliff House beach. They--what are
you doing, Edwin?

This question was asked in sudden dismay, as Edwin, using the back of
his hunting knife, began to knock out the teeth from the jaws of one of
the skulls.

Going to string 'em, was the response.

The three boys were now hard at it; and quite a knocking and hammering
arose, in which Granser babbled on unnoticed.

You are true savages. Already has begun the custom of wearing human
teeth. In another generation you will be perforating your noses and
ears and wearing ornaments of bone and shell. I know. The human race
is doomed to sink back farther and farther into the primitive night
ere again it begins its bloody climb upward to civilization. When we
increase and feel the lack of room, we will proceed to kill one another.
And then I suppose you will wear human scalp-locks at your waist, as
well--as you, Edwin, who are the gentlest of my grandsons, have already
begun with that vile pigtail. Throw it away, Edwin, boy; throw it away.

What a gabble the old geezer makes, Hare-Lip remarked, when, the teeth
all extracted, they began an attempt at equal division.

They were very quick and abrupt in their actions, and their speech, in
moments of hot discussion over the allotment of the choicer teeth, was
truly a gabble. They spoke in monosyllables and short jerky sentences
that was more a gibberish than a language. And yet, through it ran hints
of grammatical construction, and appeared vestiges of the conjugation
of some superior culture. Even the speech of Granser was so corrupt that
were it put down literally it would be almost so much nonsense to the
reader. This, however, was when he talked with the boys.

When he got into the full swing of babbling to himself, it slowly purged
itself into pure English. The sentences grew longer and were enunciated
with a rhythm and ease that was reminiscent of the lecture platform.

Tell us about the Red Death, Granser, Hare-Lip demanded, when the
teeth affair had been satisfactorily concluded.

The Scarlet Death, Edwin corrected.

An' don't work all that funny lingo on us, Hare-Lip went on. Talk
sensible, Granser, like a Santa Rosan ought to talk. Other Santa Rosans
don't talk like you.




II


The old man showed pleasure in being thus called upon. He cleared his
throat and began.

Twenty or thirty years ago my story was in great demand. But in these
days nobody seems interested--

There you go! Hare-Lip cried hotly. Cut out the funny stuff and talk
sensible. What's _interested?_ You talk like a baby that don't know
how.

Let him alone, Edwin urged, or he'll get mad and won't talk at all.
Skip the funny places. We'll catch on to some of what he tells us.

Let her go, Granser, Hoo-Hoo encouraged; for the old man was already
maundering about the disrespect for elders and the reversion to cruelty
of all humans that fell from high culture to primitive conditions.

The tale began.

There were very many people in the world in those days. San Francisco
alone held four millions--

What is millions? Edwin interrupted.

Granser looked at him kindly.

I know you cannot count beyond ten, so I will tell you. Hold up your
two hands. On both of them you have altogether ten fingers and thumbs.
Very well. I now take this grain of sand--you hold it, Hoo-Hoo. He
dropped the grain of sand into the lad's palm and went on. Now that
grain of sand stands for the ten fingers of Edwin. I add another grain.
That's ten more fingers. And I add another, and another, and another,
until I have added as many grains as Edwin has fingers and thumbs. That
makes what I call one hundred. Remember that word--one hundred. Now I
put this pebble in Hare-Lip's hand. It stands for ten grains of sand, or
ten tens of fingers, or one hundred fingers. I put in ten pebbles. They
stand for a thousand fingers. I take a mussel-shell, and it stands for
ten pebbles, or one hundred grains of sand, or one thousand fingers....
 And so on, laboriously, and with much reiteration, he strove to build
up in their minds a crude conception of numbers. As the quantities
increased, he had the boys holding different magnitudes in each of
their hands. For still higher sums, he laid the symbols on the log of
driftwood; and for symbols he was hard put, being compelled to use the
teeth from the skulls for millions, and the crab-shells for billions.
It was here that he stopped, for the boys were showing signs of becoming
tired.

There were four million people in San Francisco--four teeth.

The boys' eyes ranged along from the teeth and from hand to hand, down
through the pebbles and sand-grains to Edwin's fingers. And back again
they ranged along the ascending series in the effort to grasp such
inconceivable numbers.

That was a lot of folks, Granser, Edwin at last hazarded.

Like sand on the beach here, like sand on the beach, each grain of sand
a man, or woman, or child. Yes, my boy, all those people lived right
here in San Francisco. And at one time or another all those people
came out on this very beach--more people than there are grains of sand.
More--more--more. And San Francisco was a noble city. And across the
bay--where we camped last year, even more people lived, clear from Point
Richmond, on the level ground and on the hills, all the way around to
San Leandro--one great city of seven million people.--Seven teeth...
there, that's it, seven millions.

Again the boys' eyes ranged up and down from Edwin's fingers to the
teeth on the log.

The world was full of people. The census of 2010 gave eight billions
for the whole world--eight crab-shells, yes, eight billions. It was not
like to-day. Mankind knew a great deal more about getting food. And the
more food there was, the more people there were. In the year 1800, there
were one hundred and seventy millions in Europe alone. One hundred years
later--a grain of sand, Hoo-Hoo--one hundred years later, at 1900, there
were five hundred millions in Europe--five grains of sand, Hoo-Hoo, and
this one tooth. This shows how easy was the getting of food, and how men
increased. And in the year 2000 there were fifteen hundred millions
in Europe. And it was the same all over the rest of the world. Eight
crab-shells there, yes, eight billion people were alive on the earth
when the Scarlet Death began.

I was a young man when the Plague came--twenty-seven years old; and I
lived on the other side of San Francisco Bay, in Berkeley. You remember
those great stone houses, Edwin, when we came down the hills from Contra
Costa? That was where I lived, in those stone houses. I was a professor
of English literature.

[Illustration: I was a professor of English literature 054]

Much of this was over the heads of the boys, but they strove to
comprehend dimly this tale of the past.

What was them stone houses for? Hare-Lip queried.

You remember when your dad taught you to swim? The boy nodded.
Well, in the University of California--that is the name we had for
the houses--we taught young men and women how to think, just as I have
taught you now, by sand and pebbles and shells, to know how many people
lived in those days. There was very much to teach. The young men and
women we taught were called students. We had large rooms in which we
taught. I talked to them, forty or fifty at a time, just as I am talking
to you now. I told them about the books other men had written before
their time, and even, sometimes, in their time--

Was that all you did?--just talk, talk, talk? Hoo-Hoo demanded. Who
hunted your meat for you? and milked the goats? and caught the fish?

A sensible question, Hoo-Hoo, a sensible question. As I have told you,
in those days food-getting was easy. We were very wise. A few men got
the food for many men. The other men did other things. As you say, I
talked. I talked all the time, and for this food was given me--much
food, fine food, beautiful food, food that I have not tasted in sixty
years and shall never taste again. I sometimes think the most wonderful
achievement of our tremendous civilization was food--its inconceivable
abundance, its infinite variety, its marvellous delicacy. O my
grandsons, life was life in those days, when we had such wonderful
things to eat.

This was beyond the boys, and they let it slip by, words and thoughts,
as a mere senile wandering in the narrative.

Our food-getters were called _freemen_. This was a joke. We of the
ruling classes owned all the land, all the machines, everything. These
food-getters were our slaves. We took almost all the food they got, and
left them a little so that they might eat, and work, and get us more
food--

I'd have gone into the forest and got food for myself, Hare-Lip
announced; and if any man tried to take it away from me, I'd have
killed him.

The old man laughed.

Did I not tell you that we of the ruling class owned all the land, all
the forest, everything? Any food-getter who would not get food for us,
him we punished or compelled to starve to death. And very few did that.
They preferred to get food for us, and make clothes for us, and prepare
and administer to us a thousand--a mussel-shell, Hoo-Hoo--a thousand
satisfactions and delights. And I was Professor Smith in those
days--Professor James Howard Smith. And my lecture courses were very
popular--that is, very many of the young men and women liked to hear me
talk about the books other men had written.

And I was very happy, and I had beautiful things to eat. And my hands
were soft, because I did no work with them, and my body was clean
all over and dressed in the softest garments--

He surveyed his mangy goat-skin with disgust.

We did not wear such things in those days. Even the slaves had better
garments. And we were most clean. We washed our faces and hands often
every day. You boys never wash unless you fall into the water or go
swimming.

Neither do you Granzer, Hoo-Hoo retorted.

I know, I know, I am a filthy old man, but times have changed. Nobody
washes these days, there are no conveniences. It is sixty years since I
have seen a piece of soap.

[Illustration: Sixty years since I have seen a piece of soap. 059]

You do not know what soap is, and I shall not tell you, for I am telling
the story of the Scarlet Death. You know what sickness is. We called
it a disease. Very many of the diseases came from what we called germs.
Remember that word--germs. A germ is a very small thing. It is like a
woodtick, such as you find on the dogs in the spring of the year when
they run in the forest. Only the germ is very small. It is so small that
you cannot see it--

Hoo-Hoo began to laugh.

You're a queer un, Granser, talking about things you can't see. If you
can't see 'em, how do you know they are? That's what I want to know. How
do you know anything you can't see?

A good question, a very good question, Hoo-Hoo. But we did see--some of
them. We had what we called microscopes and ultramicroscopes, and we put
them to our eyes and looked through them, so that we saw things larger
than they really were, and many things we could not see without the
microscopes at all. Our best ultramicroscopes could make a germ look
forty thousand times larger. A mussel-shell is a thousand fingers like
Edwin's. Take forty mussel-shells, and by as many times larger was the
germ when we looked at it through a microscope. And after that, we
had other ways, by using what we called moving pictures, of making the
forty-thousand-times germ many, many thousand times larger still. And
thus we saw all these things which our eyes of themselves could not see.
Take a grain of sand. Break it into ten pieces. Take one piece and break
it into ten. Break one of those pieces into ten, and one of those into
ten, and one of those into ten, and one of those into ten, and do it all
day, and maybe, by sunset, you will have a piece as small as one of the
germs. The boys were openly incredulous. Hare-Lip sniffed and sneered
and Hoo-Hoo snickered, until Edwin nudged them to be silent.

The woodtick sucks the blood of the dog, but the germ, being so very
small, goes right into the blood of the body, and there it has
many children. In those days there would be as many as a billion--a
crab-shell, please--as many as that crab-shell in one man's body. We
called germs micro-organisms. When a few million, or a billion, of them
were in a man, in all the blood of a man, he was sick. These germs were
a disease. There were many different kinds of them--more different kinds
than there are grains of sand on this beach. We knew only a few of the
kinds. The micro-organic world was an invisible world, a world we could
not see, and we knew very little about it. Yet we did know something.
There was the _bacillus anthracis_; there was the _micrococcus_; there
was the _Bacterium termo_, and the _Bacterium lactis_--that's what
turns the goat milk sour even to this day, Hare-Lip; and there were
_Schizomycetes_ without end. And there were many others....

Here the old man launched into a disquisition on germs and their
natures, using words and phrases of such extraordinary length and
meaninglessness, that the boys grinned at one another and looked out
over the deserted ocean till they forgot the old man was babbling on.

But the Scarlet Death, Granser, Edwin at last suggested.

Granser recollected himself, and with a start tore himself away from the
rostrum of the lecture-hall, where, to another world audience, he
had been expounding the latest theory, sixty years gone, of germs and
germ-diseases.

Yes, yes, Edwin; I had forgotten. Sometimes the memory of the past is
very strong upon me, and I forget that I am a dirty old man, clad in
goat-skin, wandering with my savage grandsons who are goatherds in
the primeval wilderness. 'The fleeting systems lapse like foam,' and so
lapsed our glorious, colossal civilization. I am Granser, a tired old
man. I belong to the tribe of Santa Rosans. I married into that tribe.
My sons and daughters married into the Chauffeurs, the Sacramen-tos, and
the Palo-Altos. You, Hare-Lip, are of the Chauffeurs. You, Edwin, are
of the Sacramentos. And you, Hoo-Hoo, are of the Palo-Altos. Your tribe
takes its name from a town that was near the seat of another great
institution of learning. It was called Stanford University. Yes, I
remember now. It is perfectly clear. I was telling you of the Scarlet
Death. Where was I in my story?

You was telling about germs, the things you can't see but which make
men sick, Edwin prompted.

Yes, that's where I was. A man did not notice at first when only a few
of these germs got into his body. But each germ broke in half and became
two germs, and they kept doing this very rapidly so that in a short time
there were many millions of them in the body. Then the man was sick. He
had a disease, and the disease was named after the kind of a germ that
was in him. It might be measles, it might be influenza, it might be
yellow fever; it might be any of thousands and thousands of kinds of
diseases.

Now this is the strange thing about these germs. There were always new
ones coming to live in men's bodies. Long and long and long ago, when
there were only a few men in the world, there were few diseases. But
as men increased and lived closely together in great cities and
civilizations, new diseases arose, new kinds of germs entered their
bodies. Thus were countless millions and billions of human beings
killed. And the more thickly men packed together, the more terrible were
the new diseases that came to be. Long before my time, in the middle
ages, there was the Black Plague that swept across Europe. It swept
across Europe many times. There was tuberculosis, that entered into men
wherever they were thickly packed. A hundred years before my time there
was the bubonic plague. And in Africa was the sleeping sickness. The
bacteriologists fought all these sicknesses and destroyed them, just as
you boys fight the wolves away from your goats, or squash the mosquitoes
that light on you. The bacteriologists--

But, Granser, what is a what-you-call-it? Edwin interrupted.

You, Edwin, are a goatherd. Your task is to watch the goats. You know a
great deal about goats. A bacteriologist watches germs. That's his
task, and he knows a great deal about them. So, as I was saying, the
bacteriologists fought with the germs and destroyed them--sometimes.
There was leprosy, a horrible disease. A hundred years before I was
born, the bacteriologists discovered the germ of leprosy. They knew all
about it. They made pictures of it. I have seen those pictures. But
they never found a way to kill it. But in 1984, there was the Pantoblast
Plague, a disease that broke out in a country called Brazil and that
killed millions of people. But the bacteriologists found it out, and
found the way to kill it, so that the Pantoblast Plague went no farther.
They made what they called a serum, which they put into a man's body and
which killed the pantoblast germs without killing the man. And in 1910,
there was Pellagra, and also the hookworm. These were easily killed
by the bacteriologists. But in 1947 there arose a new disease that had
never been seen before. It got into the bodies of babies of only ten
months old or less, and it made them unable to move their hands and
feet, or to eat, or anything; and the bacteriologists were eleven years
in discovering how to kill that particular germ and save the babies.

In spite of all these diseases, and of all the new ones that continued
to arise, there were more and more men in the world. This was because it
was easy to get food. The easier it was to get food, the more men
there were; the more men there were, the more thickly were they packed
together on the earth; and the more thickly they were packed, the more
new kinds of germs became diseases. There were warnings. Soldervetzsky,
as early as 1929, told the bacteriologists that they had no guaranty
against some new disease, a thousand times more deadly than any they
knew, arising and killing by the hundreds of millions and even by the
billion. You see, the micro-organic world remained a mystery to the end.
They knew there was such a world, and that from time to time armies of
new germs emerged from it to kill men.

And that was all they knew about it. For all they knew, in that
invisible micro-organic world there might be as many different kinds of
germs as there are grains of sand on this beach. And also, in that same
invisible world it might well be that new kinds of germs came to be.
It might be there that life originated--the 'abysmal fecundity,'
Soldervetzsky called it, applying the words of other men who had written
before him....

It was at this point that Hare-Lip rose to his feet, an expression of
huge contempt on his face.

[Illustration: Granser, you make me sick with your gabble 071]

Granser, he announced, you make me sick with your gabble. Why don't
you tell about the Red Death? If you ain't going to, say so, an' we'll
start back for camp.

The old man looked at him and silently began to cry. The weak tears of
age rolled down his cheeks and all the feebleness of his eighty-seven
years showed in his grief-stricken countenance.

Sit down, Edwin counselled soothingly. Granser's all right. He's just
gettin' to the Scarlet Death, ain't you, Granser? He's just goin' to
tell us about it right now. Sit down, Hare-Lip. Go ahead, Granser.




III


The old man wiped the tears away on his grimy knuckles and took up the
tale in a tremulous, piping voice that soon strengthened as he got the
swing of the narrative.

It was in the summer of 2013 that the Plague came. I was twenty-seven
years old, and well do I remember it. Wireless despatches--

Hare-Lip spat loudly his disgust, and Granser hastened to make amends.

We talked through the air in those days, thousands and thousands of
miles. And the word came of a strange disease that had broken out in
New York. There were seventeen millions of people living then in that
noblest city of America. Nobody thought anything about the news. It was
only a small thing. There had been only a few deaths. It seemed, though,
that they had died very quickly, and that one of the first signs of
the disease was the turning red of the face and all the body. Within
twenty-four hours came the report of the first case in Chicago. And on
the same day, it was made public that London, the greatest city in the
world, next to Chicago, had been secretly fighting the plague for two
weeks and censoring the news despatches--that is, not permitting the
word to go forth to the rest of the world that London had the plague.

It looked serious, but we in California, like everywhere else, were
not alarmed. We were sure that the bacteriologists would find a way to
overcome this new germ, just as they had overcome other germs in the
past. But the trouble was the astonishing quickness with which this germ
destroyed human beings, and the fact that it inevitably killed any
human body it entered. No one ever recovered. There was the old Asiatic
cholera, when you might eat dinner with a well man in the evening, and
the next morning, if you got up early enough, you would see him being
hauled by your window in the death-cart. But this new plague was quicker
than that--much quicker.

[Illustration: But this new plague was quicker 078]

From the moment of the first signs of it, a man would be dead in an
hour. Some lasted for several hours. Many died within ten or fifteen
minutes of the appearance of the first signs.

The heart began to beat faster and the heat of the body to increase.
Then came the scarlet rash, spreading like wildfire over the face and
body. Most persons never noticed the increase in heat and heart-beat,
and the first they knew was when the scarlet rash came out. Usually,
they had convulsions at the time of the appearance of the rash. But
these convulsions did not last long and were not very severe. If one
lived through them, he became perfectly quiet, and only did he feel a
numbness swiftly creeping up his body from the feet. The heels became
numb first, then the legs, and hips, and when the numbness reached
as high as his heart he died. They did not rave or sleep. Their minds
always remained cool and calm up to the moment their heart numbed and
stopped. And another strange thing was the rapidity of decomposition. No
sooner was a person dead than the body seemed to fall to pieces, to
fly apart, to melt away even as you looked at it. That was one of the
reasons the plague spread so rapidly. All the billions of germs in a
corpse were so immediately released.

And it was because of all this that the bacteriologists had so little
chance in fighting the germs. They were killed in their laboratories
even as they studied the germ of the Scarlet Death. They were heroes.
As fast as they perished, others stepped forth and took their places.
It was in London that they first isolated it. The news was telegraphed
everywhere. Trask was the name of the man who succeeded in this, but
within thirty hours he was dead. Then came the struggle in all the
laboratories to find something that would kill the plague germs. All
drugs failed. You see, the problem was to get a drug, or serum, that
would kill the germs in the body and not kill the body. They tried to
fight it with other germs, to put into the body of a sick man germs that
were the enemies of the plague germs--

And you can't see these germ-things, Granser, Hare-Lip objected, and
here you gabble, gabble, gabble about them as if they was anything,
when they're nothing at all. Anything you can't see, ain't, that's what.
Fighting things that ain't with things that ain't! They must have
been all fools in them days. That's why they croaked. I ain't goin' to
believe in such rot, I tell you that.

Granser promptly began to weep, while Edwin hotly took up his defence.

Look here, Hare-Lip, you believe in lots of things you can't see.

Hare-Lip shook his head.

You believe in dead men walking about. You never seen one dead man walk
about.

I tell you I seen 'em, last winter, when I was wolf-hunting with dad.

Well, you always spit when you cross running water, Edwin challenged.

That's to keep off bad luck, was Hare-Lip's defence.

You believe in bad luck?

Sure.

An' you ain't never seen bad luck, Edwin concluded triumphantly.
You're just as bad as Granser and his germs. You believe in what you
don't see. Go on, Granser.

Hare-Lip, crushed by this metaphysical defeat, remained silent, and
the old man went on. Often and often, though this narrative must not be
clogged by the details, was Granser's tale interrupted while the boys
squabbled among themselves. Also, among themselves they kept up a
constant, low-voiced exchange of explanation and conjecture, as they
strove to follow the old man into his unknown and vanished world.

The Scarlet Death broke out in San Francisco. The first death came on
a Monday morning. By Thursday they were dying like flies in Oakland
and San Francisco. They died everywhere--in their beds, at their
work, walking along the street. It was on Tuesday that I saw my first
death--Miss Collbran, one of my students, sitting right there before my
eyes, in my lecture-room. I noticed her face while I was talking. It had
suddenly turned scarlet. I ceased speaking and could only look at her,
for the first fear of the plague was already on all of us and we knew
that it had come. The young women screamed and ran out of the room. So
did the young men run out, all but two. Miss Collbran's convulsions were
very mild and lasted less than a minute. One of the young men fetched
her a glass of water. She drank only a little of it, and cried out:

'My feet! All sensation has left them.'

After a minute she said, 'I have no feet. I am unaware that I have any
feet. And my knees are cold. I can scarcely feel that I have knees.'

She lay on the floor, a bundle of notebooks under her head. And we
could do nothing. The coldness and the numbness crept up past her hips
to her heart, and when it reached her heart she was dead. In fifteen
minutes, by the clock--I timed it--she was dead, there, in my own
classroom, dead. And she was a very beautiful, strong, healthy young
woman. And from the first sign of the plague to her death only fifteen
minutes elapsed. That will show you how swift was the Scarlet Death.

Yet in those few minutes I remained with the dying woman in my
classroom, the alarm had spread over the university; and the students,
by thousands, all of them, had deserted the lecture-room and
laboratories. When I emerged, on my way to make report to the President
of the Faculty, I found the university deserted. Across the campus were
several stragglers hurrying for their homes. Two of them were running.

President Hoag, I found in his office, all alone, looking very old and
very gray, with a multitude of wrinkles in his face that I had never
seen before. At the sight of me, he pulled himself to his feet and
tottered away to the inner office, banging the door after him and
locking it. You see, he knew I had been exposed, and he was afraid.
He shouted to me through the door to go away. I shall never forget
my feelings as I walked down the silent corridors and out across that
deserted campus. I was not afraid. I had been exposed, and I looked
upon myself as already dead. It was not that, but a feeling of awful
depression that impressed me. Everything had stopped. It was like the
end of the world to me--my world. I had been born within sight and sound
of the university. It had been my predestined career. My father had been
a professor there before me, and his father before him. For a century
and a half had this university, like a splendid machine, been running
steadily on. And now, in an instant, it had stopped. It was like seeing
the sacred flame die down on some thrice-sacred altar. I was shocked,
unutterably shocked.

When I arrived home, my housekeeper screamed as I entered, and fled
away. And when I rang, I found the housemaid had likewise fled. I
investigated. In the kitchen I found the cook on the point of departure.
But she screamed, too, and in her haste dropped a suitcase of her
personal belongings and ran out of the house and across the grounds,
still screaming. I can hear her scream to this day. You see, we did not
act in this way when ordinary diseases smote us. We were always calm
over such things, and sent for the doctors and nurses who knew just
what to do. But this was different. It struck so suddenly, and killed so
swiftly, and never missed a stroke. When the scarlet rash appeared on a
person's face, that person was marked by death. There was never a known
case of a recovery.

I was alone in my big house. As I have told you often before, in those
days we could talk with one another over wires or through the air. The
telephone bell rang, and I found my brother talking to me. He told me
that he was not coming home for fear of catching the plague from me, and
that he had taken our two sisters to stop at Professor Bacon's home. He
advised me to remain where I was, and wait to find out whether or not I
had caught the plague.

[Illustration: The telephone bell rang 088]

To all of this I agreed, staying in my house and for the first time in
my life attempting to cook. And the plague did not come out on me. By
means of the telephone I could talk with whomsoever I pleased and get
the news. Also, there were the newspapers, and I ordered all of them to
be thrown up to my door so that I could know what was happening with the
rest of the world.

New York City and Chicago were in chaos. And what happened with them
was happening in all the large cities. A third of the New York police
were dead. Their chief was also dead, likewise the mayor. All law and
order had ceased. The bodies were lying in the streets un-buried. All
railroads and vessels carrying food and such things into the great
city had ceased runnings and mobs of the hungry poor were pillaging
the stores and warehouses. Murder and robbery and drunkenness were
everywhere. Already the people had fled from the city by millions--at
first the rich, in their private motor-cars and dirigibles, and then the
great mass of the population, on foot, carrying the plague with them,
themselves starving and pillaging the farmers and all the towns and
villages on the way.

[Illustration: Fled from the city by millions 092]

The man who sent this news, the wireless operator, was alone with his
instrument on the top of a lofty building. The people remaining in the
city--he estimated them at several hundred thousand--had gone mad from
fear and drink, and on all sides of him great fires were raging. He was
a hero, that man who staid by his post--an obscure newspaperman, most
likely.

For twenty-four hours, he said, no transatlantic airships had arrived,
and no more messages were coming from England. He did state, though,
that a message from Berlin--that's in Germany--announced that Hoffmeyer,
a bacteriologist of the Metchnikoff School, had discovered the serum for
the plague. That was the last word, to this day, that we of America
ever received from Europe. If Hoffmeyer discovered the serum, it was too
late, or otherwise, long ere this, explorers from Europe would have
come looking for us. We can only conclude that what happened in America
happened in Europe, and that, at the best, some several score may have
survived the Scarlet Death on that whole continent.

For one day longer the despatches continued to come from New York.
Then they, too, ceased. The man who had sent them, perched in his lofty
building, had either died of the plague or been consumed in the great
conflagrations he had described as raging around him. And what had
occurred in New York had been duplicated in all the other cities. It was
the same in San Francisco, and Oakland, and Berkeley. By Thursday the
people were dying so rapidly that their corpses could not be handled,
and dead bodies lay everywhere. Thursday night the panic outrush for
the country began. Imagine, my grandsons, people, thicker than the
salmon-run you have seen on the Sacramento river, pouring out of the
cities by millions, madly over the country, in vain attempt to escape
the ubiquitous death. You see, they carried the germs with them. Even
the airships of the rich, fleeing for mountain and desert fastnesses,
carried the germs.

Hundreds of these airships escaped to Hawaii, and not only did they
bring the plague with them, but they found the plague already there
before them. This we learned, by the despatches, until all order in San
Francisco vanished, and there were no operators left at their posts to
receive or send. It was amazing, astounding, this loss of communication
with the world. It was exactly as if the world had ceased, been blotted
out. For sixty years that world has no longer existed for me. I know
there must be such places as New York, Europe, Asia, and Africa; but not
one word has been heard of them--not in sixty years. With the coming of
the Scarlet Death the world fell apart, absolutely, irretrievably. Ten
thousand years of culture and civilization passed in the twinkling of an
eye, 'lapsed like foam.'

I was telling about the airships of the rich. They carried the plague
with them and no matter where they fled, they died. I never encountered
but one survivor of any of them--Mungerson. He was afterwards a Santa
Rosan, and he married my eldest daughter. He came into the tribe eight
years after the plague. He was then nineteen years old, and he was
compelled to wait twelve years more before he could marry. You see,
there were no unmarried women, and some of the older daughters of the
Santa Rosans were already bespoken. So he was forced to wait until
my Mary had grown to sixteen years. It was his son, Gimp-Leg, who was
killed last year by the mountain lion.

Mungerson was eleven years old at the time of the plague. His father
was one of the Industrial Magnates, a very wealthy, powerful man. It was
on his airship, the Condor, that they were fleeing, with all the family,
for the wilds of British Columbia, which is far to the north of here.
But there was some accident, and they were wrecked near Mount Shasta.
You have heard of that mountain. It is far to the north. The plague
broke out amongst them, and this boy of eleven was the only survivor.
For eight years he was alone, wandering over a deserted land and looking
vainly for his own kind. And at last, travelling south, he picked up
with us, the Santa Rosans.

But I am ahead of my story. When the great exodus from the cities
around San Francisco Bay began, and while the telephones were still
working, I talked with my brother. I told him this flight from the
cities was insanity, that there were no symptoms of the plague in
me, and that the thing for us to do was to isolate ourselves and our
relatives in some safe place. We decided on the Chemistry Building, at
the university, and we planned to lay in a supply of provisions, and by
force of arms to prevent any other persons from forcing their presence
upon us after we had retired to our refuge.

All this being arranged, my brother begged me to stay in my own
house for at least twenty-four hours more, on the chance of the plague
developing in me. To this I agreed, and he promised to come for me next
day. We talked on over the details of the provisioning and the defending
of the Chemistry Building until the telephone died. It died in the midst
of our conversation. That evening there were no electric lights, and
I was alone in my house in the darkness. No more newspapers were being
printed, so I had no knowledge of what was taking place outside.

[Illustration: I heard sounds of rioting and of pistol shots 098]

I heard sounds of rioting and of pistol shots, and from my windows I
could see the glare of the sky of some conflagration in the direction
of Oakland. It was a night of terror. I did not sleep a wink. A man--why
and how I do not know--was killed on the sidewalk in front of the house.
I heard the rapid reports of an automatic pistol, and a few minutes
later the wounded wretch crawled up to my door, moaning and crying out
for help. Arming myself with two automatics, I went to him. By the light
of a match I ascertained that while he was dying of the bullet wounds,
at the same time the plague was on him. I fled indoors, whence I heard
him moan and cry out for half an hour longer.

In the morning, my brother came to me. I had gathered into a handbag
what things of value I purposed taking, but when I saw his face I knew
that he would never accompany me to the Chemistry Building. The plague
was on him. He intended shaking my hand, but I went back hurriedly
before him.

'Look at yourself in the mirror,' I commanded.

[Illustration: Look at yourself in the mirror 100]

He did so, and at sight of his scarlet face, the color deepening as he
looked at it, he sank down nervelessly in a chair.

'My God!' he said. 'I've got it. Don't come near me. I am a dead man.'

Then the convulsions seized him. He was two hours in dying, and he
was conscious to the last, complaining about the coldness and loss of
sensation in his feet, his calves, his thighs, until at last it was his
heart and he was dead.

That was the way the Scarlet Death slew. I caught up my handbag and
fled. The sights in the streets were terrible. One stumbled on bodies
everywhere. Some were not yet dead. And even as you looked, you saw men
sink down with the death fastened upon them. There were numerous fires
burning in Berkeley, while Oakland and San Francisco were apparently
being swept by vast conflagrations. The smoke of the burning filled the
heavens, so that the midday was as a gloomy twilight, and, in the shifts
of wind, sometimes the sun shone through dimly, a dull red orb. Truly,
my grandsons, it was like the last days of the end of the world.

There were numerous stalled motor cars, showing that the gasoline and
the engine supplies of the garages had given out. I remember one such
car. A man and a woman lay back dead in the seats, and on the pavement
near it were two more women and a child. Strange and terrible sights
there were on every hand. People slipped by silently, furtively, like
ghosts--white-faced women carrying infants in their arms; fathers
leading children by the hand; singly, and in couples, and in
families--all fleeing out of the city of death. Some carried supplies
of food, others blankets and valuables, and there were many who carried
nothing.

There was a grocery store--a place where food was sold. The man to whom
it belonged--I knew him well--a quiet, sober, but stupid and obstinate
fellow, was defending it. The windows and doors had been broken in, but
he, inside, hiding behind a counter, was discharging his pistol at a
number of men on the sidewalk who were breaking in. In the entrance were
several bodies--of men, I decided, whom he had killed earlier in the
day. Even as I looked on from a distance, I saw one of the robbers break
the windows of the adjoining store, a place where shoes were sold,
and deliberately set fire to it. I did not go to the groceryman's
assistance. The time for such acts had already passed. Civilization was
crumbling, and it was each for himself.




IV


I went away hastily, down a cross-street, and at the first corner I saw
another tragedy. Two men of the working class had caught a man and a
woman with two children, and were robbing them. I knew the man by sight,
though I had never been introduced to him. He was a poet whose verses I
had long admired. Yet I did not go to his help, for at the moment I came
upon the scene there was a pistol shot, and I saw him sinking to the
ground. The woman screamed, and she was felled with a fist-blow by one
of the brutes. I cried out threateningly, whereupon they discharged
their pistols at me and I ran away around the corner. Here I was blocked
by an advancing conflagration. The buildings on both sides were burning,
and the street was filled with smoke and flame. From somewhere in that
murk came a woman's voice calling shrilly for help. But I did not go to
her. A man's heart turned to iron amid such scenes, and one heard all
too many appeals for help.

Returning to the corner, I found the two robbers were gone. The poet
and his wife lay dead on the pavement. It was a shocking sight. The two
children had vanished--whither I could not tell. And I knew, now, why
it was that the fleeing persons I encountered slipped along so furtively
and with such white faces. In the midst of our civilization, down in our
slums and labor-ghettos, we had bred a race of barbarians, of savages;
and now, in the time of our calamity, they turned upon us like the wild
beasts they were and destroyed us. And they destroyed themselves as
well.

[Illustration: Now in the time of calamity they turned on us 108]

They inflamed themselves with strong drink and committed a thousand
atrocities, quarreling and killing one another in the general madness.
One group of workingmen I saw, of the better sort, who had banded
together, and, with their women and children in their midst, the sick
and aged in litters and being carried, and with a number of horses
pulling a truck-load of provisions, they were fighting their way out
of the city. They made a fine spectacle as they came down the street
through the drifting smoke, though they nearly shot me when I first
appeared in their path. As they went by, one of their leaders shouted
out to me in apologetic explanation. He said they were killing the
robbers and looters on sight, and that they had thus banded together as
the only-means by which to escape the prowlers.

It was here that I saw for the first time what I was soon to see so
often. One of the marching men had suddenly shown the unmistakable mark
of the plague. Immediately those about him drew away, and he, without
a remonstrance, stepped out of his place to let them pass on. A woman,
most probably his wife, attempted to follow him. She was leading a
little boy by the hand. But the husband commanded her sternly to go on,
while others laid hands on her and restrained her from following him.
This I saw, and I saw the man also, with his scarlet blaze of face, step
into a doorway on the opposite side of the street. I heard the report of
his pistol, and saw him sink lifeless to the ground.

After being turned aside twice again by advancing fires, I succeeded in
getting through to the university. On the edge of the campus I came
upon a party of university folk who were going in the direction of the
Chemistry Building. They were all family men, and their families were
with them, including the nurses and the servants. Professor Badminton
greeted me, I had difficulty in recognizing him. Somewhere he had gone
through flames, and his beard was singed off. About his head was a
bloody bandage, and his clothes were filthy.

[Illustration: He told me he had been Cruelly Beaten 112]

He told me he had prowlers, and that his brother had been killed the
previous night, in the defence of their dwelling.

Midway across the campus, he pointed suddenly to Mrs. Swinton's face.
The unmistakable scarlet was there. Immediately all the other women set
up a screaming and began to run away from her. Her two children were
with a nurse, and these also ran with the women. But her husband, Doctor
Swinton, remained with her.

'Go on, Smith,' he told me. 'Keep an eye on the children. As for me,
I shall stay with my wife. I know she is as already dead, but I can't
leave her. Afterwards, if I escape, I shall come to the Chemistry
Building, and do you watch for me and let me in.'

I left him bending over his wife and soothing her last moments, while
I ran to overtake the party. We were the last to be admitted to the
Chemistry Building. After that, with our automatic rifles we maintained
our isolation. By our plans, we had arranged for a company of sixty to
be in this refuge. Instead, every one of the number originally planned
had added relatives and friends and whole families until there were over
four hundred souls. But the Chemistry Building was large, and, standing
by itself, was in no danger of being burned by the great fires that
raged everywhere in the city.

A large quantity of provisions had been gathered, and a food committee
took charge of it, issuing rations daily to the various families and
groups that arranged themselves into messes. A number of committees were
appointed, and we developed a very efficient organization. I was on the
committee of defence, though for the first day no prowlers came near. We
could see them in the distance, however, and by the smoke of their fires
knew that several camps of them were occupying the far edge of the
campus. Drunkenness was rife, and often we heard them singing ribald
songs or insanely shouting. While the world crashed to ruin about them
and all the air was filled with the smoke of its burning, these low
creatures gave rein to their bestiality and fought and drank and died.
And after all, what did it matter? Everybody died anyway, the good and
the bad, the efficients and the weaklings, those that loved to live and
those that scorned to live. They passed. Everything passed.

When twenty-four hours had gone by and no signs of the plague were
apparent, we congratulated ourselves and set about digging a well. You
have seen the great iron pipes which in those days carried water to all
the city-dwellers. We feared that the fires in the city would burst the
pipes and empty the reservoirs. So we tore up the cement floor of the
central court of the Chemistry Building and dug a well. There were many
young men, undergraduates, with us, and we worked night and day on the
well. And our fears were confirmed. Three hours before we reached water,
the pipes went dry.

A second twenty-four hours passed, and still the plague did not
appear among us. We thought we were saved. But we did not know what I
afterwards decided to be true, namely, that the period of the incubation
of the plague germs in a human's body was a matter of a number of days.
It slew so swiftly when once it manifested itself, that we were led to
believe that the period of incubation was equally swift. So, when two
days had left us unscathed, we were elated with the idea that we were
free of the contagion.

But the third day disillusioned us. I can never forget the night
preceding it. I had charge of the night guards from eight to twelve,
and from the roof of the building I watched the passing of all man's
glorious works. So terrible were the local conflagrations that all the
sky was lighted up. One could read the finest print in the red glare.
All the world seemed wrapped in flames. San Francisco spouted smoke and
fire from a score of vast conflagrations that were like so many active
volcanoes. Oakland, San Leandro, Haywards--all were burning; and to the
northward, clear to Point Richmond, other fires were at work. It was an
awe-inspiring spectacle. Civilization, my grandsons, civilization was
passing in a sheet of flame and a breath of death. At ten o'clock that
night, the great powder magazines at Point Pinole exploded in rapid
succession. So terrific were the concussions that the strong building
rocked as in an earthquake, while every pane of glass was broken. It was
then that I left the roof and went down the long corridors, from room to
room, quieting the alarmed women and telling them what had happened.

An hour later, at a window on the ground floor, I heard pandemonium
break out in the camps of the prowlers. There were cries and screams,
and shots from many pistols. As we afterward conjectured, this fight had
been precipitated by an attempt on the part of those that were well
to drive out those that were sick. At any rate, a number of the
plague-stricken prowlers escaped across the campus and drifted against
our doors. We warned them back, but they cursed us and discharged a
fusillade from their pistols. Professor Merryweather, at one of the
windows, was instantly killed, the bullet striking him squarely between
the eyes. We opened fire in turn, and all the prowlers fled away with
the exception of three. One was a woman. The plague was on them and they
were reckless. Like foul fiends, there in the red glare from the skies,
with faces blazing, they continued to curse us and fire at us. One of
the men I shot with my own hand. After that the other man and the woman,
still cursing us, lay down under our windows, where we were compelled to
watch them die of the plague.

The situation was critical. The explosions of the powder magazines
had broken all the windows of the Chemistry Building, so that we were
exposed to the germs from the corpses. The sanitary committee was called
upon to act, and it responded nobly. Two men were required to go out and
remove the corpses, and this meant the probable sacrifice of their own
lives, for, having performed the task, they were not to be permitted to
reenter the building. One of the professors, who was a bachelor, and
one of the undergraduates volunteered. They bade good-bye to us and
went forth. They were heroes. They gave up their lives that four hundred
others might live. After they had performed their work, they stood for
a moment, at a distance, looking at us wistfully. Then they waved their
hands in farewell and went away slowly across the campus toward the
burning city.

And yet it was all useless. The next morning the first one of us was
smitten with the plague--a little nurse-girl in the family of Professor
Stout. It was no time for weak-kneed, sentimental policies. On the
chance that she might be the only one, we thrust her forth from the
building and commanded her to be gone.

[Illustration: We thrust her forth from the building 121]

She went away slowly across the campus, wringing her hands and crying
pitifully. We felt like brutes, but what were we to do? There were four
hundred of us, and individuals had to be sacrificed.

In one of the laboratories three families had domiciled themselves, and
that afternoon we found among them no less than four corpses and seven
cases of the plague in all its different stages.

Then it was that the horror began. Leaving the dead lie, we forced the
living ones to segregate themselves in another room. The plague began to
break out among the rest of us, and as fast as the symptoms appeared, we
sent the stricken ones to these segregated rooms. We compelled them to
walk there by themselves, so as to avoid laying hands on them. It was
heartrending. But still the plague raged among us, and room after
room was filled with the dead and dying. And so we who were yet clean
retreated to the next floor and to the next, before this sea of the
dead, that, room by room and floor by floor, inundated the building.

The place became a charnel house, and in the middle of the night
the survivors fled forth, taking nothing with them except arms and
ammunition and a heavy store of tinned foods. We camped on the opposite
side of the campus from the prowlers, and, while some stood guard,
others of us volunteered to scout into the city in quest of horses,
motor cars, carts, and wagons, or anything that would carry our
provisions and enable us to emulate the banded workingmen I had seen
fighting their way out to the open country.

I was one of these scouts; and Doctor Hoyle, remembering that his motor
car had been left behind in his home garage, told me to look for it. We
scouted in pairs, and Dombey, a young undergraduate, accompanied me. We
had to cross half a mile of the residence portion of the city to get
to Doctor Hoyle's home. Here the buildings stood apart, in the midst of
trees and grassy lawns, and here the fires had played freaks, burning
whole blocks, skipping blocks and often skipping a single house in a
block. And here, too, the prowlers were still at their work. We carried
our automatic pistols openly in our hands, and looked desperate enough,
forsooth, to keep them from attacking us. But at Doctor Hoyle's house
the thing happened. Untouched by fire, even as we came to it the smoke
of flames burst forth.

The miscreant who had set fire to it staggered down the steps and out
along the driveway. Sticking out of his coat pockets were bottles of
whiskey, and he was very drunk. My first impulse was to shoot him, and
I have never ceased regretting that I did not. Staggering and maundering
to himself, with bloodshot eyes, and a raw and bleeding slash down one
side of his bewhiskered face, he was altogether the most nauseating
specimen of degradation and filth I had ever encountered. I did not
shoot him, and he leaned against a tree on the lawn to let us go by.
It was the most absolute, wanton act. Just as we were opposite him,
he suddenly drew a pistol and shot Dombey through the head. The next
instant I shot him. But it was too late. Dombey expired without a groan,
immediately. I doubt if he even knew what had happened to him.

Leaving the two corpses, I hurried on past the burning house to the
garage, and there found Doctor Hoyle's motor car. The tanks were filled
with gasoline, and it was ready for use. And it was in this car that I
threaded the streets of the ruined city and came back to the survivors
on the campus. The other scouts returned, but none had been so
fortunate. Professor Fairmead had found a Shetland pony, but the poor
creature, tied in a stable and abandoned for days, was so weak from want
of food and water that it could carry no burden at all. Some of the men
were for turning it loose, but I insisted that we should lead it along
with us, so that, if we got out of food, we would have it to eat.

There were forty-seven of us when we started, many being women and
children. The President of the Faculty, an old man to begin with, and
now hopelessly broken by the awful happenings of the past week, rode
in the motor car with several young children and the aged mother of
Professor Fairmead. Wathope, a young professor of English, who had a
grievous bullet-wound in his leg, drove the car. The rest of us walked,
Professor Fairmead leading the pony.

It was what should have been a bright summer day, but the smoke from
the burning world filled the sky, through which the sun shone murkily,
a dull and lifeless orb, blood-red and ominous. But we had grown
accustomed to that blood-red sun. With the smoke it was different. It
bit into our nostrils and eyes, and there was not one of us whose eyes
were not bloodshot. We directed our course to the southeast through the
endless miles of suburban residences, travelling along where the first
swells of low hills rose from the flat of the central city. It was by
this way, only, that we could expect to gain the country.

Our progress was painfully slow. The women and children could not walk
fast. They did not dream of walking, my grandsons, in the way all people
walk to-day. In truth, none of us knew how to walk. It was not until
after the plague that I learned really to walk. So it was that the pace
of the slowest was the pace of all, for we dared not separate on account
of the prowlers. There were not so many now of these human beasts of
prey. The plague had already well diminished their numbers, but enough
still lived to be a constant menace to us. Many of the beautiful
residences were untouched by fire, yet smoking ruins were everywhere.
The prowlers, too, seemed to have got over their insensate desire to
burn, and it was more rarely that we saw houses freshly on fire.

Several of us scouted among the private garages in search of motor cars
and gasoline. But in this we were unsuccessful. The first great flights
from the cities had swept all such utilities away. Calgan, a fine young
man, was lost in this work. He was shot by prowlers while crossing a
lawn. Yet this was our only casualty, though, once, a drunken brute
deliberately opened fire on all of us. Luckily, he fired wildly, and we
shot him before he had done any hurt.

At Fruitvale, still in the heart of the magnificent residence section
of the city, the plague again smote us. Professor Fairmead was the
victim. Making signs to us that his mother was not to know, he turned
aside into the grounds of a beautiful mansion. He sat down forlornly on
the steps of the front veranda, and I, having lingered, waved him a last
farewell. That night, several miles beyond Fruitvale and still in the
city, we made camp. And that night we shifted camp twice to get away
from our dead. In the morning there were thirty of us. I shall never
forget the President of the Faculty. During the morning's march his
wife, who was walking, betrayed the fatal symptoms, and when she
drew aside to let us go on, he insisted on leaving the motor car and
remaining with her. There was quite a discussion about this, but in the
end we gave in. It was just as well, for we knew not which ones of us,
if any, might ultimately escape.

That night, the second of our march, we camped beyond Haywards in the
first stretches of country. And in the morning there were eleven of us
that lived. Also, during the night, Wathope, the professor with the
wounded leg, deserted us in the motor car. He took with him his sister
and his mother and most of our tinned provisions. It was that day, in
the afternoon, while resting by the wayside, that I saw the last airship
I shall ever see. The smoke was much thinner here in the country, and I
first sighted the ship drifting and veering helplessly at an elevation
of two thousand feet. What had happened I could not conjecture, but even
as we looked we saw her bow dip down lower and lower. Then the bulkheads
of the various gas-chambers must have burst, for, quite perpendicular,
she fell like a plummet to the earth.

[Illustration: She fell like a plummet to the earth 132]

And from that day to this I have not seen another airship. Often and
often, during the next few years, I scanned the sky for them, hoping
against hope that somewhere in the world civilization had survived. But
it was not to be. What happened with us in California must have happened
with everybody everywhere.

Another day, and at Niles there were three of us. Beyond Niles, in the
middle of the highway, we found Wathope. The motor car had broken down,
and there, on the rugs which they had spread on the ground, lay the
bodies of his sister, his mother, and himself.

Wearied by the unusual exercise of continual walking, that night I
slept heavily. In the morning I was alone in the world. Canfield and
Parsons, my last companions, were dead of the plague. Of the four
hundred that sought shelter in the Chemistry Building, and of the
forty-seven that began the march, I alone remained--I and the Shetland
pony. Why this should be so there is no explaining. I did not catch the
plague, that is all. I was immune. I was merely the one lucky man in
a million--just as every survivor was one in a million, or, rather, in
several millions, for the proportion was at least that.




V


For two days I sheltered in a pleasant grove where there had been no
deaths. In those two days, while badly depressed and believing that my
turn would come at any moment, nevertheless I rested and recuperated. So
did the pony. And on the third day, putting what small store of tinned
provisions I possessed on the pony's back, I started on across a very
lonely land. Not a live man, woman, or child, did I encounter, though
the dead were everywhere. Food, however, was abundant. The land then
was not as it is now. It was all cleared of trees and brush, and it was
cultivated. The food for millions of mouths was growing, ripening, and
going to waste. From the fields and orchards I gathered vegetables,
fruits, and berries. Around the deserted farmhouses I got eggs and
caught chickens. And frequently I found supplies of tinned provisions in
the store-rooms.

A strange thing was what was taking place with all the domestic
animals. Everywhere they were going wild and preying on one another. The
chickens and ducks were the first to be destroyed, while the pigs were
the first to go wild, followed by the cats. Nor were the dogs long in
adapting themselves to the changed conditions. There was a veritable
plague of dogs. They devoured the corpses, barked and howled during the
nights, and in the daytime slunk about in the distance. As the time went
by, I noticed a change in their behavior. At first they were apart from
one another, very suspicious and very prone to fight. But after a not
very long while they began to come together and run in packs. The dog,
you see, always was a social animal, and this was true before ever he
came to be domesticated by man. In the last days of the world before the
plague, there were many many very different kinds of dogs--dogs without
hair and dogs with warm fur, dogs so small that they would make scarcely
a mouthful for other dogs that were as large as mountain lions. Well,
all the small dogs, and the weak types, were killed by their fellows.
Also, the very large ones were not adapted for the wild life and bred
out. As a result, the many different kinds of dogs disappeared, and
there remained, running in packs, the medium-sized wolfish dogs that you
know to-day.

But the cats don't run in packs, Granser, Hoo-Hoo objected.

The cat was never a social animal. As one writer in the nineteenth
century said, the cat walks by himself. He always walked by himself,
from before the time he was tamed by man, down through the long ages of
domestication, to to-day when once more he is wild.

The horses also went wild, and all the fine breeds we had degenerated
into the small mustang horse you know to-day. The cows likewise went
wild, as did the pigeons and the sheep. And that a few of the chickens
survived you know yourself. But the wild chicken of to-day is quite a
different thing from the chickens we had in those days.

But I must go on with my story. I travelled through a deserted land. As
the time went by I began to yearn more and more for human beings. But I
never found one, and I grew lonelier and lonelier. I crossed Livermore
Valley and the mountains between it and the great valley of the San
Joaquin. You have never seen that valley, but it is very large and it is
the home of the wild horse. There are great droves there, thousands and
tens of thousands. I revisited it thirty years after, so I know. You
think there are lots of wild horses down here in the coast valleys, but
they are as nothing compared with those of the San Joaquin. Strange to
say, the cows, when they went wild, went back into the lower mountains.
Evidently they were better able to protect themselves there.

In the country districts the ghouls and prowlers had been less in
evidence, for I found many villages and towns untouched by fire. But
they were filled by the pestilential dead, and I passed by without
exploring them. It was near Lathrop that, out of my loneliness, I picked
up a pair of collie dogs that were so newly free that they were urgently
willing to return to their allegiance to man. These collies accompanied
me for many years, and the strains of them are in those very dogs there
that you boys have to-day. But in sixty years the collie strain has
worked out. These brutes are more like domesticated wolves than anything
else.

Hare-Lip rose to his feet, glanced to see that the goats were safe,
and looked at the sun's position in the afternoon sky, advertising
impatience at the prolixity of the old man's tale. Urged to hurry by
Edwin, Granser went on.

There is little more to tell. With my two dogs and my pony, and riding
a horse I had managed to capture, I crossed the San Joaquin and went on
to a wonderful valley in the Sierras called Yosemite. In the great hotel
there I found a prodigious supply of tinned provisions. The pasture was
abundant, as was the game, and the river that ran through the valley was
full of trout. I remained there three years in an utter loneliness that
none but a man who has once been highly civilized can understand. Then
I could stand it no more. I felt that I was going crazy. Like the dog,
I was a social animal and I needed my kind. I reasoned that since I had
survived the plague, there was a possibility that others had survived.
Also, I reasoned that after three years the plague germs must all be
gone and the land be clean again.

[Illustration: With my horse and dogs and pony, I set out 144]

With my horse and dogs and pony, I set out. Again I crossed the San
Joaquin Valley, the mountains beyond, and came down into Livermore
Valley. The change in those three years was amazing. All the land had
been splendidly tilled, and now I could scarcely recognize it, 'such was
the sea of rank vegetation that had overrun the agricultural handiwork
of man. You see, the wheat, the vegetables, and orchard trees had always
been cared for and nursed by man, so that they were soft and tender. The
weeds and wild bushes and such things, on the contrary, had always been
fought by man, so that they were tough and resistant. As a result, when
the hand of man was removed, the wild vegetation smothered and destroyed
practically all the domesticated vegetation. The coyotes were greatly
increased, and it was at this time that I first encountered wolves,
straying in twos and threes and small packs down from the regions where
they had always persisted.

It was at Lake Temescal, not far from the one-time city of Oakland,
that I came upon the first live human beings. Oh, my grandsons, how can
I describe to you my emotion, when, astride my horse and dropping down
the hillside to the lake, I saw the smoke of a campfire rising through
the trees. Almost did my heart stop beating. I felt that I was going
crazy. Then I heard the cry of a babe--a human babe. And dogs barked,
and my dogs answered. I did not know but what I was the one human alive
in the whole world. It could not be true that here were others--smoke,
and the cry of a babe.

Emerging on the lake, there, before my eyes, not a hundred yards away,
I saw a man, a large man. He was standing on an outjutting rock and
fishing. I was overcome. I stopped my horse. I tried to call out but
could not. I waved my hand. It seemed to me that the man looked at me,
but he did not appear to wave. Then I laid my head on my arms there
in the saddle. I was afraid to look again, for I knew it was an
hallucination, and I knew that if I looked the man would be gone. And so
precious was the hallucination, that I wanted it to persist yet a little
while. I knew, too, that as long as I did not look it would persist.

Thus I remained, until I heard my dogs snarling, and a man's voice.
What do you think the voice said? I will tell you. It said: '_Where in
hell did you come from??_'

Those were the words, the exact words. That was what your other
grandfather said to me, Hare-Lip, when he greeted me there on the shore
of Lake Temescal fifty-seven years ago. And they were the most ineffable
words I have ever heard. I opened my eyes, and there he stood before me,
a large, dark, hairy man, heavy-jawed, slant-browed, fierce-eyed. How I
got off my horse I do not know. But it seemed that the next I knew I was
clasping his hand with both of mine and crying. I would have embraced
him, but he was ever a narrow-minded, suspicious man, and he drew away
from me. Yet did I cling to his hand and cry.

Granser's voice faltered and broke at the recollection, and the weak
tears streamed down his cheeks while the boys looked on and giggled.

Yet did I cry, he continued, and desire to embrace him, though the
Chauffeur was a brute, a perfect brute--the most abhorrent man I have
ever known. His name was... strange, how I have forgotten his name.
Everybody called him Chauffeur--it was the name of his occupation, and
it stuck. That is how, to this day, the tribe he founded is called the
Chauffeur Tribe.

[Illustration: Everybody called him Chauffeur 149]

He was a violent, unjust man. Why the plague germs spared him I can
never understand. It would seem, in spite of our old metaphysical
notions about absolute justice, that there is no justice in the
universe. Why did he live?--an iniquitous, moral monster, a blot on the
face of nature, a cruel, relentless, bestial cheat as well. All he
could talk about was motor cars, machinery, gasoline, and garages--and
especially, and with huge delight, of his mean pilferings and sordid
swindlings of the persons who had employed him in the days before the
coming of the plague. And yet he was spared, while hundreds of millions,
yea, billions, of better men were destroyed.

[Illustration: Vesta the one woman 150]

I went on with him to his camp, and there I saw her, Vesta, the one
woman. It was glorious and... pitiful. There she was, Vesta Van Warden,
the young wife of John Van Warden, clad in rags, with marred and scarred
and toil-calloused hands, bending over the campfire and doing scullion
work--she, Vesta, who had been born to the purple of the greatest
baronage of wealth the world had ever known. John Van Warden, her
husband, worth one billion, eight hundred millions and President of the
Board of Industrial Magnates, had been the ruler of America. Also,
sitting on the International Board of Control, he had been one of the
seven men who ruled the world. And she herself had come of equally noble
stock. Her father, Philip Saxon, had been President of the Board of
Industrial Magnates up to the time of his death. This office was in
process of becoming hereditary, and had Philip Saxon had a son that son
would have succeeded him. But his only child was Vesta, the perfect
flower of generations of the highest culture this planet has ever
produced. It was not until the engagement between Vesta and Van Warden
took place, that Saxon indicated the latter as his successor. It was, I
am sure, a political marriage. I have reason to believe that Vesta never
really loved her husband in the mad passionate way of which the poets
used to sing. It was more like the marriages that obtained among crowned
heads in the days before they were displaced by the Magnates.

[Illustration: There she was, boiling fish-chowder 153]

And there she was, boiling fish-chowder in a soot-covered pot, her
glorious eyes inflamed by the acrid smoke of the open fire. Hers was a
sad story. She was the one survivor in a million, as I had been, as
the Chauffeur had been. On a crowning eminence of the Alameda Hills,
overlooking San Francisco Bay, Van Warden had built a vast summer
palace. It was surrounded by a park of a thousand acres. When the
plague broke out, Van Warden sent her there. Armed guards patrolled the
boundaries of the park, and nothing entered in the way of provisions or
even mail matter that was not first fumigated. And yet did the plague
enter, killing the guards at their posts, the servants at their tasks,
sweeping away the whole army of retainers--or, at least, all of them who
did not flee to die elsewhere. So it was that Vesta found herself the
sole living person in the palace that had become a charnel house.

Now the Chauffeur had been one of the servants that ran away.
Returning, two months afterward, he discovered Vesta in a little summer
pavilion where there had been no deaths and where she had established
herself. He was a brute. She was afraid, and she ran away and hid among
the trees. That night, on foot, she fled into the mountains--she, whose
tender feet and delicate body had never known the bruise of stones nor
the scratch of briars. He followed, and that night he caught her. He
struck her. Do you understand? He beat her with those terrible fists of
his and made her his slave. It was she who had to gather the firewood,
build the fires, cook, and do all the degrading camp-labor--she, who had
never performed a menial act in her life. These things he compelled her
to do, while he, a proper savage, elected to lie around camp and look
on. He did nothing, absolutely nothing, except on occasion to hunt meat
or catch fish.

Good for Chauffeur, Hare-Lip commented in an undertone to the other
boys. I remember him before he died. He was a corker. But he did
things, and he made things go. You know, Dad married his daughter, an'
you ought to see the way he knocked the spots outa Dad. The Chauffeur
was a son-of-a-gun. He made us kids stand around. Even when he was
croaking he reached out for me, once, an' laid my head open with that
long stick he kept always beside him.

Hare-Lip rubbed his bullet head reminiscently, and the boys returned to
the old man, who was maundering ecstatically about Vesta, the squaw of
the founder of the Chauffeur Tribe.

And so I say to you that you cannot understand the awfulness of the
situation. The Chauffeur was a servant, understand, a servant. And he
cringed, with bowed head, to such as she. She was a lord of life, both
by birth and by marriage. The destinies of millions, such as he, she
carried in the hollow of her pink-white hand. And, in the days before
the plague, the slightest contact with such as he would have been
pollution. Oh, I have seen it. Once, I remember, there was Mrs. Goldwin,
wife of one of the great magnates. It was on a landing stage, just
as she was embarking in her private dirigible, that she dropped her
parasol. A servant picked it up and made the mistake of handing it to
her--to her, one of the greatest royal ladies of the land! She shrank
back, as though he were a leper, and indicated her secretary to receive
it. Also, she ordered her secretary to ascertain the creature's name and
to see that he was immediately discharged from service. And such a woman
was Vesta Van Warden. And her the Chauffeur beat and made his slave.

[Illustration: And her the Chauffeur beat and made his slave 158]

--Bill--that was it; Bill, the Chauffeur. That was his name. He was
a wretched, primitive man, wholly devoid of the finer instincts and
chivalrous promptings of a cultured soul. No, there is no absolute
justice, for to him fell that wonder of womanhood, Vesta Van Warden. The
grievous-ness of this you will never understand, my grandsons; for
you are yourselves primitive little savages, unaware of aught else but
savagery. Why should Vesta not have been mine? I was a man of culture
and refinement, a professor in a great university. Even so, in the time
before the plague, such was her exalted position, she would not have
deigned to know that I existed. Mark, then, the abysmal degradation
to which she fell at the hands of the Chauffeur. Nothing less than the
destruction of all mankind had made it possible that I should know her,
look in her eyes, converse with her, touch her hand--ay, and love her
and know that her feelings toward me were very kindly. I have reason to
believe that she, even she, would have loved me, there being no other
man in the world except the Chauffeur. Why, when it destroyed eight
billions of souls, did not the plague destroy just one more man, and
that man the Chauffeur?

Once, when the Chauffeur was away fishing, she begged me to kill him.
With tears in her eyes she begged me to kill him. But he was a strong
and violent man, and I was afraid. Afterwards, I talked with him. I
offered him my horse, my pony, my dogs, all that I possessed, if he
would give Vesta to me. And he grinned in my face and shook his head. He
was very insulting. He said that in the old days he had been a servant,
had been dirt under the feet of men like me and of women like Vesta, and
that now he had the greatest lady in the land to be servant to him and
cook his food and nurse his brats. 'You had your day before the plague,'
he said; 'but this is my day, and a damned good day it is. I wouldn't
trade back to the old times for anything.' Such words he spoke, but they
are not his words. He was a vulgar, low-minded man, and vile oaths fell
continually from his lips.

Also, he told me that if he caught me making eyes at his woman he'd
wring my neck and give her a beating as well. What was I to do? I was
afraid. He was a brute. That first night, when I discovered the camp,
Vesta and I had great talk about the things of our vanished world. We
talked of art, and books, and poetry; and the Chauffeur listened and
grinned and sneered. He was bored and angered by our way of speech which
he did not comprehend, and finally he spoke up and said: 'And this is
Vesta Van Warden, one-time wife of Van Warden the Magnate--a high and
stuck-up beauty, who is now my squaw. Eh, Professor Smith, times is
changed, times is changed. Here, you, woman, take off my moccasins,
and lively about it. I want Professor Smith to see how well I have you
trained.'

I saw her clench her teeth, and the flame of revolt rise in her face.
He drew back his gnarled fist to strike, and I was afraid, and sick at
heart. I could do nothing to prevail against him. So I got up to go,
and not be witness to such indignity. But the Chauffeur laughed and
threatened me with a beating if I did not stay and behold. And I sat
there, perforce, by the campfire on the shore of Lake Temescal, and
saw Vesta, Vesta Van Warden, kneel and remove the moccasins of that
grinning, hairy, apelike human brute.

--Oh, you do not understand, my grandsons. You have never known
anything else, and you do not understand.

'Halter-broke and bridle-wise,' the Chauffeur gloated, while she
performed that dreadful, menial task. 'A trifle balky at times,
Professor, a trifle balky; but a clout alongside the jaw makes her as
meek and gentle as a lamb.'

And another time he said: 'We've got to start all over and replenish
the earth and multiply. You're handicapped, Professor. You ain't got no
wife, and we're up against a regular Garden-of-Eden proposition. But I
ain't proud. I'll tell you what, Professor.' He pointed at their little
infant, barely a year old. 'There's your wife, though you'll have to
wait till she grows up. It's rich, ain't it? We're all equals here, and
I'm the biggest toad in the splash. But I ain't stuck up--not I. I do
you the honor, Professor Smith, the very great honor of betrothing to
you my and Vesta Van Warden's daughter. Ain't it cussed bad that Van
Warden ain't here to see?'




VI


I lived three weeks of infinite torment there in the Chauffeur's camp.
And then, one day, tiring of me, or of what to him was my bad effect
on Vesta, he told me that the year before, wandering through the Contra
Costa Hills to the Straits of Carquinez, across the Straits he had seen
a smoke. This meant that there were still other human beings, and that
for three weeks he had kept this inestimably precious information from
me. I departed at once, with my dogs and horses, and journeyed across
the Contra Costa Hills to the Straits. I saw no smoke on the other side,
but at Port Costa discovered a small steel barge on which I was able to
embark my animals. Old canvas which I found served me for a sail, and
a southerly breeze fanned me across the Straits and up to the ruins
of Vallejo. Here, on the outskirts of the city, I found evidences of a
recently occupied camp.

[Illustration: Found evidences of a recently occupied camp 169]

Many clam-shells showed me why these humans had come to the shores of
the Bay. This was the Santa Rosa Tribe, and I followed its track along
the old railroad right of way across the salt marshes to Sonoma Valley.
Here, at the old brickyard at Glen Ellen, I came upon the camp. There
were eighteen souls all told. Two were old men, one of whom was Jones, a
banker. The other was Harrison, a retired pawnbroker, who had taken for
wife the matron of the State Hospital for the Insane at Napa. Of all the
persons of the city of Napa, and of all the other towns and villages
in that rich and populous valley, she had been the only survivor. Next,
there were the three young men--Cardiff and Hale, who had been farmers,
and Wainwright, a common day-laborer. All three had found wives. To
Hale, a crude, illiterate farmer, had fallen Isadore, the greatest
prize, next to Vesta, of the women who came through the plague. She was
one of the world's most noted singers, and the plague had caught her at
San Francisco. She has talked with me for hours at a time, telling me of
her adventures, until, at last, rescued by Hale in the Mendocino Forest
Reserve, there had remained nothing for her to do but become his wife.
But Hale was a good fellow, in spite of his illiteracy. He had a keen
sense of justice and right-dealing, and she was far happier with him
than was Vesta with the Chauffeur.

The wives of Cardiff and Wainwright were ordinary women, accustomed
to toil with strong constitutions--just the type for the wild new life
which they were compelled to live. In addition were two adult idiots
from the feeble-minded home at Eldredge, and five or six young children
and infants born after the formation of the Santa Rosa Tribe. Also,
there was Bertha. She was a good woman, Hare-Lip, in spite of the sneers
of your father. Her I took for wife. She was the mother of your father,
Edwin, and of yours, Hoo-Hoo. And it was our daughter, Vera, who married
your father, Hare-Lip--your father, Sandow, who was the oldest son of
Vesta Van Warden and the Chauffeur.

And so it was that I became the nineteenth member of the Santa Rosa
Tribe. There were only two outsiders added after me. One was Mungerson,
descended from the Magnates, who wandered alone in the wilds of Northern
California for eight years before he came south and joined us. He it was
who waited twelve years more before he married my daughter, Mary. The
other was Johnson, the man who founded the Utah Tribe. That was where he
came from, Utah, a country that lies very far away from here, across the
great deserts, to the east. It was not until twenty-seven years after
the plague that Johnson reached California. In all that Utah region he
reported but three survivors, himself one, and all men. For many years
these three men lived and hunted together, until, at last, desperate,
fearing that with them the human race would perish utterly from the
planet, they headed westward on the possibility of finding women
survivors in California. Johnson alone came through the great desert,
where his two companions died. He was forty-six years old when he joined
us, and he married the fourth daughter of Isadore and Hale, and his
eldest son married your aunt, Hare-Lip, who was the third daughter of
Vesta and the Chauffeur. Johnson was a strong man, with a will of his
own. And it was because of this that he seceded from the Santa Rosans
and formed the Utah Tribe at San Jos. It is a small tribe--there are
only nine in it; but, though he is dead, such was his influence and the
strength of his breed, that it will grow into a strong tribe and play a
leading part in the recivilization of the planet.

There are only two other tribes that we know of--the Los Angelitos
and the Carmelitos. The latter started from one man and woman. He was
called Lopez, and he was descended from the ancient Mexicans and was
very black. He was a cowherd in the ranges beyond Carmel, and his wife
was a maidservant in the great Del Monte Hotel. It was seven years
before we first got in touch with the Los Angelitos. They have a
good country down there, but it is too warm. I estimate the present
population of the world at between three hundred and fifty and four
hundred--provided, of course, that there are no scattered little tribes
elsewhere in the world. If there be such, we have not heard from them.
Since Johnson crossed the desert from Utah, no word nor sign has come
from the East or anywhere else. The great world which I knew in my
boyhood and early manhood is gone. It has ceased to be. I am the last
man who was alive in the days of the plague and who knows the wonders of
that far-off time. We, who mastered the planet--its earth, and sea, and
sky--and who were as very gods, now live in primitive savagery along the
water courses of this California country.

But we are increasing rapidly--your sister, Hare-Lip, already has four
children. We are increasing rapidly and making ready for a new climb
toward civilization. In time, pressure of population will compel us
to spread out, and a hundred generations from now we may expect our
descendants to start across the Sierras, oozing slowly along, generation
by generation, over the great continent to the colonization of the
East--a new Aryan drift around the world.

But it will be slow, very slow; we have so far to climb. We fell so
hopelessly far. If only one physicist or one chemist had survived!
But it was not to be, and we have forgotten everything. The Chauffeur
started working in iron. He made the forge which we use to this day.
But he was a lazy man, and when he died he took with him all he knew
of metals and machinery. What was I to know of such things? I was a
classical scholar, not a chemist.. The other men who survived were not
educated. Only two things did the Chauffeur accomplish--the brewing
of strong drink and the growing of tobacco. It was while he was drunk,
once, that he killed Vesta. I firmly believe that he killed Vesta in a
fit of drunken cruelty though he always maintained that she fell into
the lake and was drowned.

And, my grandsons, let me warn you against the medicine-men. They call
themselves _doctors_, travestying what was once a noble profession, but
in reality they are medicine-men, devil-devil men, and they make for
superstition and darkness. They are cheats and liars. But so debased and
degraded are we, that we believe their lies. They, too, will increase
in numbers as we increase, and they will strive to rule us. Yet are
they liars and charlatans. Look at young Cross-Eyes, posing as a
doctor, selling charms against sickness, giving good hunting,
exchanging promises of fair weather for good meat and skins, sending the
death-stick, performing a thousand abominations. Yet I say to you,
that when he says he can do these things, he lies. I, Professor Smith,
Professor James Howard Smith, say that he lies. I have told him so to
his teeth. Why has he not sent me the death-stick? Because he knows that
with me it is without avail. But you, Hare-Lip, so deeply are you
sunk in black superstition that did you awake this night and find the
death-stick beside you, you would surely die. And you would die, not
because of any virtues in the stick, but because you are a savage with
the dark and clouded mind of a savage.

The doctors must be destroyed, and all that was lost must be discovered
over again. Wherefore, earnestly, I repeat unto you certain things which
you must remember and tell to your children after you. You must tell
them that when water is made hot by fire, there resides in it a
wonderful thing called steam, which is stronger than ten thousand men
and which can do all man's work for him. There are other very useful
things. In the lightning flash resides a similarly strong servant of
man, which was of old his slave and which some day will be his slave
again.

[Illustration: I have stored many books in a cave 179]

Quite a different thing is the alphabet. It is what enables me to
know the meaning of fine markings, whereas you boys know only rude
picture-writing. In that dry cave on Telegraph Hill, where you see me
often go when the tribe is down by the sea, I have stored many books.
In them is great wisdom. Also, with them, I have placed a key to the
alphabet, so that one who knows picture-writing may also know print.
Some day men will read again; and then, if no accident has befallen my
cave, they will know that Professor James Howard Smith once lived and
saved for them the knowledge of the ancients.

There is another little device that men inevitably will rediscover. It
is called gunpowder. It was what enabled us to kill surely and at long
distances. Certain things which are found in the ground, when combined
in the right proportions, will make this gunpowder. What these things
are, I have forgotten, or else I never knew. But I wish I did know. Then
would I make powder, and then would I certainly kill Cross-Eyes and rid
the land of superstition--

After I am man-grown I am going to give Cross-Eyes all the goats,
and meat, and skins I can get, so that he'll teach me to be a doctor,
 Hoo-Hoo asserted. And when I know, I'll make everybody else sit up and
take notice. They'll get down in the dirt to me, you bet.

The old man nodded his head solemnly, and murmured:

Strange it is to hear the vestiges and remnants of the complicated
Aryan speech falling from the lips of a filthy little skin-clad savage.
All the world is topsy-turvy. And it has been topsy-turvy ever since the
plague.

You won't make me sit up, Hare-Lip boasted to the would-be
medicine-man. If I paid you for a sending of the death-stick and it
didn't work, I'd bust in your head--understand, you Hoo-Hoo, you?

I'm going to get Granser to remember this here gunpowder stuff, Edwin
said softly, and then I'll have you all on the run. You, Hare-Lip, will
do my fighting for me and get my meat for me, and you, Hoo-Hoo, will
send the death-stick for me and make everybody afraid. And if I catch
Hare-Lip trying to bust your head, Hoo-Hoo, I'll fix him with that same
gunpowder. Granser ain't such a fool as you think, and I'm going to
listen to him and some day I'll be boss over the whole bunch of you.

The old man shook his head sadly, and said:

The gunpowder will come. Nothing can stop it--the same old story over
and over. Man will increase, and men will fight. The gunpowder will
enable men to kill millions of men, and in this way only, by fire and
blood, will a new civilization, in some remote day, be evolved. And of
what profit will it be? Just as the old civilization passed, so will the
new. It may take fifty thousand years to build, but it will pass. All
things pass. Only remain cosmic force and matter, ever in flux, ever
acting and reacting and realizing the eternal types--the priest, the
soldier, and the king. Out of the mouths of babes comes the wisdom of
all the ages. Some will fight, some will rule, some will pray; and all
the rest will toil and suffer sore while on their bleeding carcasses
is reared again, and yet again, without end, the amazing beauty and
surpassing wonder of the civilized state. It were just as well that I
destroyed those cave-stored books--whether they remain or perish, all
their old truths will be discovered, their old lies lived and handed
down. What is the profit--

Hare-Lip leaped to his feet, giving a quick glance at the pasturing
goats and the afternoon sun.

Gee! he muttered to Edwin, The old geezer gets more long-winded every
day. Let's pull for camp.

While the other two, aided by the dogs, assembled the goats and started
them for the trail through the forest, Edwin stayed by the old man and
guided him in the same direction. When they reached the old right of
way, Edwin stopped suddenly and looked back. Hare-Lip and Hoo-Hoo and
the dogs and the goats passed on. Edwin was looking at a small herd of
wild horses which had come down on the hard sand. There were at least
twenty of them, young colts and yearlings and mares, led by a beautiful
stallion which stood in the foam at the edge of the surf, with arched
neck and bright wild eyes, sniffing the salt air from off the sea.

What is it? Granser queried.

Horses, was the answer. First time I ever seen 'em on the beach. It's
the mountain lions getting thicker and thicker and driving 'em down.

The low sun shot red shafts of light, fan-shaped, up from a
cloud-tumbled horizon. And close at hand, in the white waste of
shore-lashed waters, the sea-lions, bellowing their old primeval chant,
hauled up out of the sea on the black rocks and fought and loved.

Come on, Granser, Edwin prompted. And old man and boy, skin-clad and
barbaric, turned and went along the right of way into the forest in the
wake of the goats.

THE END






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCARLET PLAGUE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.










