2 FREUD 

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Wit and its relation to the unconscious
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Wit and its relation to the unconscious

Author: Sigmund Freud

Translator: A. A. Brill

Release date: April 20, 2025 [eBook #75915]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Moffat, Yard and Company, 1916

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WIT AND ITS RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS ***





                WIT AND ITS RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS


                                    BY

                    PROFESSOR DR. SIGMUND FREUD, LL.D.

             Authorized English Edition, with Introduction by
                         A. A. BRILL, PH.B., M.D.

 Lecturer in Psychoanalysis and Abnormal Psychology, New York University;
        former Chief of Clinic of Psychiatry, Columbia University

[Illustration: [Logo]]

                                NEW YORK
                        MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY
                                  1916




                          Copyright, 1916, BY
                        MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY
                                NEW YORK


                         _All Rights Reserved_




                          TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE


In 1908 when it was agreed between Professor Freud and myself that I
should be his translator, it was decided to render into English first
the following five works: _Selected Papers on Hysteria and
Psychoneuroses_,[1] _Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex_,[2] _The
Interpretation of Dreams_,[3] _Psychopathology of Everyday Life_,[4] and
the present volume. These works were selected because they represent the
various stages of development of Professor Freud’s Psychoanalysis,[5]
and also because it was thought that they contain the material which one
must master before one is able to judge correctly the author’s theories
or apply them in practice. This undertaking, which was fraught with many
linguistic and other difficulties, has finally been accomplished with
the edition of the present volume, and it is therefore with a sense of
great satisfaction that the translator’s preface to this work is
written. But although the original task is finished the translator’s
work is only beginning. Psychoanalysis has made enormous strides. On the
foundation laid by Professor Freud there developed a literature rich in
ideas and content which has revolutionized the science of nervous and
mental diseases, and has thrown much light on the subject of dreams,
sex, mythology,[6] the history of civilization and racial psychology,[7]
philology,[8] æsthetics,[9] child psychology and pedagogics,[10]
philology,[11] and mysticism and occultism. With the _Interpretation of
Dreams_ and _Psychopathology of Everyday Life_, Professor Freud has
definitely bridged the gulf between normal and abnormal mental states by
demonstrating that dreams and faulty acts like some forms of forgetting,
slips of the tongue, slips of reading, writing, etc., are closely allied
to psychopathological states and represent the prototypes of such
abnormal mental conditions as neurotic symptoms, hallucinations, and
deliria. He also shows that all these productions are senseful and
purposive, and that their strange and peculiar appearance is due to
distortions produced by various psychic processes. These views are
confirmed in the present volume, where it is demonstrated that wit,
which belongs to æsthetics, is subject to the same laws, shows the same
mechanism, and serves the same tendencies as the other psychic
productions. With his wonted profundity and ingenuity the author adds
the solution of wit to those of the neuroses, dreams, and
psychopathological acts.

I take great pleasure in tendering my thanks to Mr. Horatio Winslow, who
has read the manuscript and has given me valuable suggestions in the
choice of expressions and in the selection of substitutes for those
witticisms that could not be translated.

                                                            A. A. BRILL.


  _May, 1916._




                                CONTENTS


                          A. ANALYSIS OF WIT
   CHAPTER                                                      PAGE
        I. INTRODUCTION                                            3
       II. THE TECHNIQUE OF WIT                                   15
      III. THE TENDENCIES OF WIT                                 127

                          B. SYNTHESIS OF WIT
       IV. THE PLEASURE MECHANISM AND THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF WIT   177
        V. THE MOTIVES OF WIT AND WIT AS A SOCIAL PROCESS        214

                          C. THEORIES OF WIT
       VI. THE RELATION OF WIT TO DREAMS AND TO THE UNCONSCIOUS  249
      VII. WIT AND THE VARIOUS FORMS OF THE COMIC                288




                              A. ANALYSIS




                WIT AND ITS RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS




                                   I
                              INTRODUCTION


Whoever has had occasion to examine that part of the literature of
æsthetics and psychology dealing with the nature and affinities of wit,
will, no doubt, concede that our philosophical inquiries have not
awarded to wit the important rôle that it plays in our mental life. One
can recount only a small number of thinkers who have penetrated at all
deeply into the problems of wit. To be sure, among the authors on wit
one finds the illustrious names of the poet Jean Paul (Fr. Richter), and
of the philosophers Th. Vischer, Kuno Fischer, and Th. Lipps. But even
these writers put the subject of wit in the background while their chief
interest centers around the more comprehensive and more alluring
problems of the comic.

In the main this literature gives the impression that it is altogether
impractical to study wit except when treated as a part of the comic.


             _Presentation of the Subject by Other Authors_

According to Th. Lipps (_Komik und Humor_, 1898[12]) wit is “essentially
the subjective side of the comic; i.e., it is that part of the comic
which we ourselves create, which colors our conduct as such, and to
which our relation is that of Superior Subject, never of Object,
certainly not Voluntary Object” (p. 80). The following comment might
also be added:—In general we designate as wit “every conscious and
clever evocation of the comic, whether the comic element lies in the
viewpoint or in the situation itself” (p. 78).

K. Fischer explains the relation between wit and the comic by the aid of
caricature, which, according to his exposition, comes midway between the
two (_Über den Witz_, 1889). The subject of the comic is the hideous
element in any of its manifestations. “Where it is concealed it must be
disclosed in the light of the comic view; where it is not at all or but
slightly noticeable it must be rendered conspicuous and elucidated in
such a manner that it becomes clear and intelligible. Thus arises
caricature” (p. 45). “Our entire psychic world, the intellectual realm
of our thoughts and conceptions, does not reveal itself to us on
superficial consideration. It cannot be visualized directly either
figuratively or intuitively, moreover it contains inhibitions, weak
points, disfigurements, and an abundance of ludicrous and comical
contrasts. In order to bring it out and to make it accessible to
æsthetic examination, a force is necessary which is capable not only of
depicting objects directly, but also of reflecting upon these
conceptions and elucidating them—namely, a force capable of clarifying
thought. This force is nothing but judgment. The judgment which produces
the comic contrast is wit. In caricature wit has played its part
unnoticed, but only in judgment does it attain its own individual form
and the free domain of its evolution.”

As can be seen Lipps assigns the determining factor which classifies wit
as part of the comic, to the activity or to the active behavior of the
subject, whereas K. Fischer characterizes wit by its relation to its
object, in which characterization he accentuates the hidden hideous
element in the realm of thought. One cannot put to test the cogency of
these definitions of wit; one can, in fact, hardly understand them
unless one studies the text from which they were taken. One is thus
forced to work his way through the author’s descriptions of the comic in
order to learn anything about wit. From other passages, however, one
discovers that the same authors attribute to wit essential
characteristics of general validity in which they disregard its relation
to the comic.

K. Fischer’s characterization of wit which seems to be most satisfactory
to this author runs as follows: “Wit is a _playful_ judgment” (p. 51).
For an elucidation of this expression we are referred to the analogy:
“How æsthetic freedom consists in the playful contemplation of objects”
(p. 50). In another place (p. 20) the æsthetic attitude towards an
object is characterized by the condition that we expect nothing from
this object—especially no gratification of our serious needs—but that we
content ourselves with the pleasure of contemplating the same. In
contrast to labor the æsthetic attitude is _playful_. “It may be that
from æsthetic freedom there also results a kind of judgment, freed from
the conventional restrictions and rule of conduct, which, in view of its
genesis, I will call the _playful_ judgment. This conception contains
the first condition and possibly the entire formula for the solution of
our problem. ‘Freedom begets wit and wit begets freedom,’ says Jean
Paul. Wit is nothing but a free play of ideas” (p. 24).

Since time immemorial a favorite definition of wit has been the ability
to discover similarities in dissimilarities, i.e., to find hidden
similarities. Jean Paul has jocosely expressed this idea by saying that
“wit is the disguised priest who unites every couple.” Th. Vischer adds
the postscript: “He likes best to unite those couples whose marriage the
relatives refuse to sanction.” Vischer refutes this, however, by
remarking that in some witticisms there is no question of comparison or
the discovery of similarities. Hence with very little deviation from
Jean Paul’s definition he defines wit as the skill to combine with
surprising quickness many ideas, which through inner content and
connections are foreign to one another. K. Fischer then calls attention
to the fact that in a large number of these witty judgments one does not
find similarities, but contrasts; and Lipps further remarks that these
definitions refer to the wit that the humorist possesses and not to the
wit that he produces.

Other viewpoints, in some measure connected with one another, which have
been mentioned in defining and describing wit are: “the _contrast of
ideas_,” “_sense in nonsense_,” and “_confusion and clearness_.”

Definitions like those of Kraepelin lay stress upon the contrast of
ideas. Wit is “the voluntary combination or linking of two ideas which
in some way are contrasted with each other, usually through the medium
of speech association.” For a critic like Lipps it would not be
difficult to reveal the utter inadequacy of this formula, but he himself
does not exclude the element of contrast—he merely assigns it elsewhere.
“The contrast remains, but is not formed in a manner to show the ideas
connected with the words, rather it shows the contrast or contradiction
in the meaning and lack of meaning of the words” (p. 87). Examples show
the better understanding of the latter. “A contrast arises first through
the fact that we adjudge a meaning to its words which after all we
cannot ascribe to them.”

In the further development of this last condition the antithesis of
“sense in nonsense” becomes obvious. “What we accept one moment as
senseful we later perceive as perfect nonsense. Thereby arises, in this
case, the operation of the comic element” (p. 85). “A saying appears
witty when we ascribe to it a meaning through psychological necessity
and, while so doing, retract it. It may thus have many meanings. We lend
a meaning to an expression knowing that logically it does not belong to
it. We find in it a truth, however, which later we fail to find because
it is foreign to our laws of experience or usual modes of thinking. We
endow it with a logical or practical inference which transcends its true
content, only to contradict this inference as soon as we finally grasp
the nature of the expression itself. The psychological process evoked in
us by the witty expression which gives rise to the sense of the comic
depends in every case on the immediate transition from the borrowed
feeling of truth and conviction to the impression or consciousness of
relative nullity.”

As impressive as this exposition sounds one cannot refrain from
questioning whether the contrast between the senseful and senseless upon
which the comic depends does not also contribute to the definition of
wit in so far as it is distinguished from the comic. Also the factor of
“confusion and clearness” leads one deeply into the problem of the
relation of wit to the comic. Kant, speaking of the comic element in
general, states that one of its remarkable attributes is the fact that
it can delude us for a moment only. Heymans (_Zeitschr. f. Psychologie_,
XI, 1896) explains how the mechanism of wit is produced through the
succession of confusion and clearness. He illustrates his meaning by an
excellent witticism from Heine, who causes one of his figures, the poor
lottery agent, Hirsch-Hyacinth, to boast that the great Baron Rothschild
treated him as an equal or quite FAMILLIONAIRE. Here the word which acts
as the carrier of the witticism appears in the first place simply as a
faulty word-formation, as something incomprehensible, inconceivable, and
enigmatic. It is for these reasons that it is confusing. The comic
element results from the solution of the enigma and from the
understanding of the word. Lipps adds that the first stage of
enlightenment, showing that the confusing word means this or that, is
followed by a second stage in which one perceives that this nonsensical
word has first deluded us and then given us the true meaning. Only this
second enlightenment, the realization that it is all due to a word that
is meaningless in ordinary usage—this reduction to nothingness produces
the comic effect (p. 95).

Whether or not either the one or the other of these two conceptions may
seem more clear we are brought nearer to a definite insight through the
discussion of the processes of confusion and enlightenment. If the comic
effect of Heine’s _famillionaire_ depends upon the solution of the
seemingly senseless word, then the wit would have to be attributed to
the formation of this word and to the character of the word so formed.

In addition to the associations of the viewpoints just discussed there
is another characteristic of wit which is recognized as peculiar to it
by all authors. “Brevity alone is the body and soul of wit,” declares
Jean Paul (_Vorschule der Aesthetik_, I, 45), and modifies it with a
speech of the old tongue-wagger, Polonius, from Shakespeare’s _Hamlet_
(Act II, Scene 2):

           “Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
           And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
           I will be brief.”

Lipps’s description (p. 90) of the brevity of wit is also significant.
He states that wit says what it does say, not always in few, but always
in too few words; that is: “It expresses itself in words that will not
stand the test of strict logic or of the ordinary mode of thought and
expression. In fine it can express itself by leaving the thing unsaid.”

That “wit must unearth something hidden and concealed”—to quote K.
Fischer (p. 51)—we have already been taught from the grouping of wit
with caricature. I re-emphasize this determinant because it also has
more to do with the nature of wit than with its relation to the comic.

I am well aware that the foregoing scanty quotations from the works of
the authors on wit cannot do justice to the excellence of these works.
In view of the difficulties that confront one in reproducing clearly
such complicated and such delicately shaded streams of thought I cannot
spare inquiring minds the trouble of searching for the desired
information in the original sources. However, I do not know whether they
will return fully satisfied. For the criteria and attributes of wit
mentioned by these authors, such as—activity, the relation of the
content of wit to our thoughts, the character of the playful judgment,
the union of dissimilarities, contrasting ideas, “sense in nonsense,”
the succession of confusion and clearness, the sudden emergence of the
hidden, and the peculiar brevity of wit, seem to us, at first glance, so
very pertinent and so easily demonstrable by examples that we cannot
succumb to the danger of underestimating the value of such ideas. But
they are only disjointed fragments which we should like to see welded
into an organic whole. In the end they contribute no more to the
knowledge of wit than a number of anecdotes teach us of the true
characteristics of a personality whose biography interests us. We do not
at all understand the connection that is supposed to exist between the
individual conditions; for instance, what the brevity of wit may have to
do with that side of wit exhibited in the playful judgment; besides we
do not know whether wit must satisfy all or only some of these
conditions in order to form real wit; which of them may be replaced and
which ones are indispensable. We should also like a grouping and
classification of wit in respect to its essential attributes. The
classification as given by the authors is based, on the one hand, on the
technical means, and on the other hand, on the utilization of wit in
speech (sound-wit, play on words, the wit of caricature,
characterization wit, and witty repartee).

Accordingly we should not find ourselves in a dilemma when it comes to
pointing out goals for a further effort to explain wit. In order to look
forward to success we must either introduce new viewpoints into the
work, or try to penetrate further by concentrating our attention or by
broadening the scope of our interest. We can prescribe for ourselves the
task of at least not permitting any lack along the latter lines. To be
sure, it is rather remarkable how few examples of recognized witticisms
suffice the authors for their investigations and how each one accepts
the ones used by his predecessors. We need not shirk the responsibility
of analyzing the same examples which have already served the classical
authors, but we contemplate new material besides to lay a broader
foundation for our deductions. It is quite natural that we should select
such examples of wit as objects for our investigation as have produced
the deepest impression upon our own lives and which have caused us the
greatest amount of laughter.

Some may inquire whether the subject of wit is worthy of such effort. In
my opinion there is no doubt about it, for even if I disregard the
personal motives to be revealed during the development of this theme
(the motives which drove me to gain an insight into the problem of wit),
I can refer to the fact that there is an intimate connection between all
psychic occurrences; a connection which promises to furnish a
psychological insight into a sphere which, although remote, will
nevertheless be of considerable value to the other spheres. One may also
be reminded what a peculiar, overwhelmingly fascinating charm wit offers
in our society. A new joke operates almost as an event of universal
interest. It is passed on from one person to another just like the news
of the latest conquest. Even prominent men who consider it worth while
relating how they attained fame, what cities and countries they have
seen, and with what celebrated persons they have consorted, do not
disdain to dwell in their autobiographies upon this and that excellent
joke which they have heard.[13]




                                   II
                          THE TECHNIQUE OF WIT


We follow the beckoning of chance and take up as our first example of
wit one which has already come to our notice in the previous chapter.

In that part of the _Reisebilder_ entitled “Die Bäder von Lucca,” Heine
introduces the precious character, Hirsch-Hyacinth, the Hamburg lottery
agent and curer of corns, who, boasting to the poet of his relationship
with the rich Baron Rothschild, ends thus: “And as true as I pray that
the Lord may grant me all good things I sat next to Solomon Rothschild,
who treated me just as if I were his equal, quite _famillionaire_.”

It is by means of this excellent and very funny example that Heymans and
Lipps have illustrated the origin of the comic effect of wit from the
succession of “confusion and clearness.” However, we shall pass over
this question and put to ourselves the following inquiry: What is it
that causes the speech of Hirsch-Hyacinth to become witty? It can be
only one of two things; either it is the thought expressed in the
sentence which carries in itself the character of the witticism; or the
witticism adheres to the mode of expression which clothes the thought.
On whichever side the nature of the wit may lie, there we shall follow
it farther and endeavor to elucidate it.

In general a thought may be expressed in different forms of speech—that
is, in different words—which may repeat it in its original accuracy. In
the speech of Hirsch-Hyacinth we have before us a definite form of
thought expressed which seems to us especially peculiar and not very
readily comprehensible. Let us attempt to express as exactly as is
possible the same thought in other words. Lipps, indeed, has already
done this and has thus, to some degree, elucidated the meaning of the
poet. He says (p. 87), “We understand that Heine wishes to say that the
reception was on a familiar basis, that is, that it was of the friendly
sort.” We change nothing in the sense when we assume a different
interpretation which perhaps fits better into the speech of
Hirsch-Hyacinth: “Rothschild treated me quite as his equal, in a very
_familiar_ way; that is, as far as this can be done by a _millionaire_.”
We would only add, “The condescension of a rich man always carries
something embarrassing for the one experiencing it.”[14]

Whether we shall remain content with this or with another equivalent
formulation of the thought, we can see that the question which we have
put to ourselves is already answered. The character of the wit in this
example does not adhere to the thought. It is a correct and ingenious
remark that Heine puts into the mouth of Hirsch-Hyacinth—a remark of
indubitable bitterness, as is easily understood in the case of the poor
man confronted with so much wealth; but we should not care to call it
witty. Now if any one who cannot forget the poet’s meaning in the
interpretation should insist that the thought in itself is also witty,
we can refer him to the definite fact that the witty character is lost
in the interpretation. It is true that Hirsch-Hyacinth’s speech made us
laugh loudly, but though Lipps’s or our own accurate rendering may
please us and cause us to reflect, yet it cannot make us laugh.

But if the witty character of our example does not belong to the
thought, then it must be sought for in the form of expression in the
wording. We have only to study the peculiarity of this mode of
expression to realize what one may term word- or form-technique. Also we
may discover the things that are intimately related to the very nature
of wit, since the character as well as the effect of wit disappears when
one set of expressions is changed for others. At all events we are in
full accord with our authors when we put so much value upon the verbal
form of the wit. Thus K. Fischer (p. 72) says: “It is, in the first
place, the naked form which is responsible for the perception of wit,
and one is reminded of a saying of Jean Paul’s which affirms and proves
this nature of wit in the same expression. ‘Thus the mere position
conquers, be it that of warriors or of sentences.’”


                       _Formation of Mixed Words_

Now wherein lies the “technique” of this wit? What has occurred to the
thought, in our own conception, that it became changed into wit and
caused us to laugh heartily? The comparison of our conception with the
text of the poet teaches us that two processes took place. In the first
place there occurred an important abbreviation. In order to express
fully the thought contained in the witticism we had to append to the
words “Rothschild treated me just as an equal, on a familiar basis,” an
additional sentence which in its briefest form reads: i.e., so far as a
millionaire can do this. Even then we feel the necessity of an
additional explanatory sentence.[15] The poet expresses it in terser
terms as follows: “Rothschild treated me just like an equal, quite
_famillionaire_.” The entire restriction, which the second sentence
imposes on the first thus verifying the familiar treatment, has been
lost in the jest. But it has not been so entirely lost as not to leave a
substitute from which it can be reconstructed. A second change has also
taken place. The word “familiar” in the witless expression of the
thought has been transformed into “_famillionaire_” in the text of the
wit, and there is no doubt that the witty character and ludicrous effect
of the joke depends directly upon this word-formation. The newly formed
word is identical in its first part with the word “familiar” of the
first sentence, and its terminal syllables correspond to the word
“millionaire” of the second sentence. In this manner it puts us in a
position to conjecture the second sentence which was omitted in the text
of the wit. It may be described as a composite of two constituents
“familiar” and “millionaire,” and one is tempted to depict its origin
from the two words graphically.

                             FAMIL I  A R
                               MILLIONAIRE
                             —————————————
                             FAMILLIONAIRE

The process, then, which has carried the thought into the witticism can
be represented in the following manner, which, although at first rather
fantastic, nevertheless furnishes exactly the actual existing result:
“Rothschild treated me quite familiarly, i.e., as well as a millionaire
can do that sort of thing.”

Now imagine that a compressing force is acting upon these sentences and
assume that for some reason or other the second sentence is of lesser
resistance. It is accordingly forced toward the vanishing point, but its
important component, the word “millionaire,” which strives against the
compressing power, is pushed, as it were, into the first sentence and
becomes fused with the very similar element, the word “familiar” of this
sentence. It is just this possibility, provided by chance to save the
essential part of the second sentence, which favors the disappearance of
the other less important components. The jest then takes shape in this
manner: “Rothschild treated me in a very

                       famillionaire way.”
                              /    (mili) (aire)

Apart from such a compressing force, which is really unknown to us, we
may describe the origin of the wit-formation, that is, the technique of
the wit in this case, as a _condensation with substitutive formation_.
In our example the substitutive formation consists in the formation of a
mixed word. This fused word “famillionaire,” incomprehensible in itself
but instantly understood in its context and recognized as senseful, is
now the carrier of the mirth-provoking stimulus of the jest, whose
mechanism, to be sure, is in no way clearer to us through the discovery
of the technique. To what extent can a linguistic process of
condensation with substitutive formation produce pleasure through a
fused word and force us to laugh? We make note of the fact that this is
a different problem, the treatment of which we can postpone until we
shall find access to it later. For the present we shall continue to busy
ourselves with the technique of wit.

Our expectation that the technique of wit cannot be considered an
indifferent factor in the examination of the nature of wit prompts us to
inquire next whether there are other examples of wit formed like Heine’s
“famillionaire.” Not many of these exist, but enough to constitute a
small group which may be characterized as the blend-word formations or
fusions. Heine himself has produced a second witticism from the word
“millionaire” by copying himself, as it were, when he speaks of a
“millionarr” (_Ideen_, Chap. XIV). This is a visible condensation of
“millionaire” and “narr” (fool) and, like the first example, expresses a
suppressed by-thought. Other examples of a similar nature are as
follows.

During the war between Turkey and the Balkan States, in 1912, _Punch_
depicted the part played by Rumania by representing the latter as a
highwayman holding up the members of the Balkan alliance. The picture
was entitled: _Kleptorumania_. Here the word is a fusion of Kleptomania
and Rumania and may be represented as follows:

                               KLEPTOMANIA
                                   RUMANIA
                             —————————————
                             KLEPTORUMANIA

A naughty jest of Europe has rebaptized a former potentate, Leopold,
into _Cleopold_ because of his relation to a lady surnamed Cleo. This is
a clear form of condensation which by the addition of a single letter
forever vividly preserves a scandalous allusion.

In an excellent chapter on this same theme Brill gives the following
example.[16]

“De Quincey once remarked that old persons are apt to fall into
‘anecdotage.’” The word _Anecdotage_, though in itself incomprehensible,
can be readily analyzed to show its original full sense; and on analysis
we find that it is made up of two words, _anecdote_ and _dotage_. That
is, instead of saying that old persons are apt to fall into dotage and
that old persons are fond of telling anecdotes, De Quincey fuses the two
words into a neologism, _anecdotage_, and thus simultaneously expresses
both ideas. The technique, therefore, lies in the fusion of the two
words. Such a fusion of words is called condensation. Condensation is a
substitutive formation, i.e., instead of _anecdote_ and _dotage_ we have
_anecdotage_.

“In a short story which I have recently read, one of the characters, a
‘sport,’ speaks of the Christmas season as the _alcoholidays_. By
reduction it can be easily seen that we have here a compound word, a
combination of _alcohol_ and _holidays_ which can be graphically
represented as follows:

                              alcoHOL
                                  HOLidays
                              ————————————
                              ALCOHOLIDAYS

“Here the condensation expresses the idea that holidays are conducive to
alcoholic indulgence. In other words, we have here a fused word, which,
though strange in appearance, can be easily understood in its proper
context. The witticism may be described as a condensation with
substitution.

“The same mechanism is found in the following: A dramatic critic,
summarizing three paragraphs to the effect that most plays now produced
in New York City are violently emotional and hysterical, remarks:
‘Thespis has taken up his home in Dramatteawan.’ The last word is a
condensation of _drama_ and _Matteawan_. The substitution not only
expressed the critic’s idea that most of the plays at present produced
in New York are violent, emotional and hysterical, that is insane, but
it also contains a clever allusion to the nature of the problem
presented by most of these plays. Matteawan is a state hospital for
criminal insane. Most of the plays are not only insane, but also
criminal since they treat of murders, divorces, robberies, scandals,
etc.”

When Flaubert published his famous romance _Salammbo_, which treats of
life in ancient Carthage, it was scoffingly referred to by Sainte-Beuve
as _Carthaginoiserie_ on account of its tedious detailed descriptions.

                            Carthaginoiserie
                                 chinoiserie

During a conversation with a lady I unintentionally furnished the
material for a jest. I spoke to her about the great merits of an
investigator whom I considered unjustly ignored. She remarked, “But the
man really deserves a monument.” “Perhaps he will get one some day,” I
answered, “but at the moment his success is very limited.” “Monument”
and “moment” are contrasts. The lady then united these contrasts and
said: “Well, let us wish him a _monumentary_ success.”

If at this stage the reader should become displeased with a viewpoint
which threatens to destroy his pleasure in wit without explaining the
source of this pleasure I must beg him to be patient for a while,
because we are now confronted with the technique of wit, the examination
of which promises many revelations if only we enter into it far enough.
Besides the analysis of the examples thus far cited, which show simply a
process of condensation, there are others in which the changed
expressions manifest themselves in other ways.


           _Condensation with Modification and Substitution_

The following witticisms of Mr. N. will serve as illustrations.

“I was driving with him tête-à-bête.” Nothing is simpler than the
reduction of this jest. Evidently it can only mean: I was driving
tête-à-tête with Mr. X. and X. is a stupid ass (beast).

Neither of these two sentences is witty nor is there any wit if one
combines them into this one: “I was out driving tête-à-tête with that
stupid ass (beast).” The wit appears when the words “stupid ass” are
omitted and when, as a substitute for them, the first “t” of the second
“tête” is changed to “b.” This slight modification brings back to
expression the suppressed “bête.” The technique of this group of
witticisms may be described as “condensation with a slight
modification.” And it would seem that the more insignificant the
substitutive modification, the better is the wit.

Quite similar, although not without its complications, is the technique
of another form of witticism. During a discussion about a person in whom
there was something to praise and much to criticise, N. remarked: “Yes,
vanity is one of his four heels of Achilles.”[17] This modification
consists in the fact that instead of the one vulnerable heel which was
attributed to Achilles we have here four heels. Four heels means four
feet and that number is only found on animals. The two thoughts
condensed in the witticism are as follows: Except for his vanity he is
an admirable fellow; still I do not care for him, for he is more of an
animal than a human being.[18]

A similar but simpler joke I heard _statu nascendi_ in a family circle.
One of two brothers who were attending college was an excellent scholar
while the other was only an average student. It so happened that the
model boy had a setback in school. The mother discussed this matter and
expressed her fear lest this event be the beginning of a lasting
deterioration. The boy who until then had been overshadowed by his
brother willingly grasped this opportunity to remark: “Yes, Carl is
going backward on all-fours.”

Here the modification consists in a small addition as an assurance that
in his judgment his brother is going backward. This modification
represents and takes the place of a passionate plea for his own cause
which may be expressed as follows: After all, you must not think that he
is so much cleverer than I am simply because he has more success in
school. He is really a stupid ass, i.e., much more stupid than I am.

A good illustration of condensation with slight modification is
furnished by a well-known witty jest of Mr. N., who remarked about a
character in public life that he had a “_great future behind him_.” The
butt of this joke was a young man whose ancestry, rearing, and personal
qualities seemed to destine him for the leadership of a great party and
the attainment of political power at its head. But times changed, the
party became politically incompetent, and it could readily be foreseen
that the man who was predestined to become its leader would come to
nothing. The briefest reduction of the meaning by which one could
replace this joke would be: The man has had a great future before him,
but that is now past. Instead of “has had” and the appended afterthought
there is a small change in the main sentence in which “before” is
replaced by its opposite “behind.”[19]

Mr. N. made use of almost the same modification in the case of the
nobleman who was appointed minister of agriculture for no other reason
than that he was interested in agriculture. Public opinion had an
opportunity to find out that he was the most incompetent man who had
ever been intrusted with this office. When, however, he had relinquished
his portfolio and had withdrawn to his agricultural pursuits Mr. N. said
of him: “_Like Cincinnatus of Old he has returned to his place in front
of the plough._”

That Roman, who was likewise called to his office from his farm,
returned to his place behind the plough. In those days, just as in the
present time, in front of the plough walked—the ox.

We could easily increase these examples by many others, but I am of the
opinion that we are in need of no more cases in order to grasp
thoroughly the character of the technique of this second
group—condensation with modification. If we now compare the second group
with the first, the technique of which consisted in condensation with a
mixed word-formation, we readily see that the differences are not vital
and that the lines of demarcation are indistinct. The mixed
word-formation, like the modification, became subordinated to the idea
of substitutive formation, and if we desire we can also describe the
mixed word-formation as a modification of the parent word through the
second elements.

We may make our first pause here and ask ourselves with what known
factor in the literature of wit our first result, either in whole or in
part, coincides. It obviously agrees with the factor of brevity which
Jean Paul calls the soul of wit (_supra_, p. 11). But brevity alone is
not wit or every laconism would be witty. The brevity of wit must be of
a special kind. We recall that Lipps has attempted to describe more
fully the peculiarity of the brevity of wit (_v. s._, p. 11). Here our
investigation started and demonstrated that the brevity of wit is often
the result of a special process which has left a second trace—the
substitutive formation—in the wording of the wit. By applying the
process of reduction, which aims to cause a retrogression in the
peculiar process of condensation, we find also that wit depends only
upon the verbal expression which was produced by the process of
condensation. Naturally our entire interest now centers upon this
peculiar and hitherto almost neglected mechanism. Furthermore, we cannot
yet comprehend how it can give origin to all that is valuable in wit;
namely, the resultant pleasure.


                        _Condensation in Dreams_

Have processes similar to those here described as the technique of wit
already been noted in another sphere of our psychic life? To be sure, in
one apparently remote sphere. In 1900 I published a book which, as
indicated by its title (_The Interpretation of Dreams_[20]), makes the
attempt to explain the riddle of the dream and to trace the dream to
normal psychic operations. I had occasion to contrast there the manifest
and often peculiar dream-content with the latent but altogether real
thoughts of the dream from which it originated, and I took up the
investigation of the processes which make the dream from the latent
dream-thought. I also investigated the psychological forces which
participated in this transposition. The sum of the transforming
processes I designated as the dream-work and, as a part of this
dream-work, I described the process of condensation. This process has a
striking similarity to the technique of wit and, like the latter, it
leads to abbreviations and brings about substitutive formations of like
character.

From recollections of his own dreams the reader will be familiar with
the compositions of persons and objects that appear in them; indeed, the
dream makes similar compositions of words which can then be reduced by
analysis (e.g., Autodidasker—Autodidakt and Lasker[21]). On other
occasions and even much more frequently, the condensation work of the
dream produces no compositions, but pictures which closely resemble an
object or person up to a certain addition or variation which comes from
another source, like the modifications in the witticisms of Mr. N. We
cannot doubt that in this case, as in the other, we deal with a similar
psychic process which is recognizable by identical results. Such a
far-reaching analogy between wit-technique and dream-work will surely
arouse our interest in the former and stimulate our expectation of
finding some explanation of wit from a comparison with the dream. We
forbear, however, to enter upon this work by bearing in mind that we
have investigated the technique of wit in only a very small number of
witty jests, so that we cannot be certain that the analogy, the workings
of which we wish to explore, will hold good. Hence we turn away from the
comparison with the dream and again take up the technique of wit,
leaving, however, at this place of our investigation a visible thread,
as it were, which later we shall take up again.


                     _Wit Formed by Word-division_

The next point we shall discuss is whether the process of condensation
with substitutive formation is demonstrable in all witticisms so that it
may be designated as a universal character of the technique of wit. I
recall a joke which has clung to my mind through certain peculiar
circumstances. One of the great teachers of my youth, whom we considered
unable to appreciate a joke—he had never told us a single joke of his
own—came into the Institute laughing. With an unwonted readiness he
explained the cause of his good humor. “I have read an excellent joke,”
he said. “_A young man who claimed to be a relative of the great J. J.
Rousseau, and who bore his name, was introduced into a Parisian
drawing-room. It should be added that he was decidedly red-headed. He
behaved in such an awkward manner that the hostess ventured this
criticism to the gentleman who had introduced him—‘Vous m’avez fait
connaître un jeune homme roux et sot, mais non pas un Rousseau.’_”

At this point our teacher started to laugh again. According to the
nomenclature of our authors this is sound-wit and a poor kind at that,
since it plays with a proper name.

But what is the technique of this wit? It is quite clear that the
character which we had perhaps hoped to demonstrate universally leaves
us in the lurch in the first new example. Here there is no omission and
scarcely an abbreviation. In the witticism the lady expresses almost
everything that we can ascribe to the thoughts. “You have made me look
forward to meeting a relative of J. J. Rousseau. I expected that he was
perhaps even mentally related to him. Imagine my surprise to find this
red-haired foolish boy, a _roux et sot_.” To be sure, I was able to add
and insert something, but this attempt at reduction does not annul the
wit. It remains fixed and attached to the sound similarity of

                               Rousseau.
                               ————————
                               roux sot

This proves that condensation with substitution plays no part in the
production of this witticism.

With what else do we have to deal? New attempts at reduction taught me
that the joke will persistently continue until the name Rousseau is
replaced by another. If, e.g., I substitute the name Racine for it I
find that although the lady’s criticism is just as feasible as before it
immediately loses every trace of wit. Now I know where I can look for
the technique of this joke although I still hesitate to formulate it. I
shall make the following attempt: The technique of the witticism lies in
the fact that one and the same word—the name—is used in a twofold
application, once as a whole and once divided into its syllables like a
charade.

I can mention a few examples of identical technique. A witticism of this
sort was utilized by an Italian lady to avenge a tactless remark made to
her by the first Napoleon. Pointing to her compatriots at a court ball
he said: “_Tutti gli Italian danzano si male_” (all Italians dance so
badly). To which she quickly replied: _“Non tutti, ma buona parte”_ (Not
all, but a great many)—

                            Buona parte.[22]
                            ————————————
                            Buonaparte.

Brill reports still another example in which the wit depends on the
twofold application of a name: “_Hood once remarked that he had to be a
lively Hood for a livelihood._”[23]

At one time when Antigone was produced in Berlin a critic found that the
presentation entirely lacked the character of antiquity. The wits of
Berlin incorporated this criticism in the following manner: “_Antique?
Oh, nay_” (Th. Vischer and K. Fischer).


              _Manifold Application of the Same Material_

In these examples, which will suffice for this species of wit, the
technique is the same. A name is made use of twice; first, as a whole,
and then divided into its syllables—and in their divided state the
syllables yield a different meaning.[24] The manifold application of the
same word, once as a whole and then as the component syllables into
which it divides itself, was the first case that came to our attention
in which technique deviated from that of condensation. Upon brief
reflection, however, we must divine from the abundance of examples that
come to us that the newly discovered technique can hardly be limited to
this single means. Obviously there are any number of hitherto unobserved
possibilities for one to utilize the same word or the same material of
words in manifold application _in one sentence_. May not all these
possibilities furnish technical means for wit? It would seem so, judging
by the following examples.

“_Two witty statesmen, X and Y, met at a dinner. X, acting as
toastmaster, introduced Y as follows: ‘My friend, Y, is a very wonderful
man. All you have to do is to open his mouth, put in a dinner, and a
speech appears, etc.’ Responding to the speaker, Y said: ‘My friend, the
toastmaster, told you what a wonderful man I am, that all you have to do
is to open my mouth, put in a dinner, and a speech appears. Now let me
tell you what a wonderful man he is. All you have to do is open
anybody’s mouth, put in his speech, and the dinner appears.’_”[25]

In examples of this sort, one can use the same material of words and
simply change slightly their order. The slighter the change, the more
one gets the impression that different sense was expressed with the same
words, the better is the technical means of wit. And how simple are the
means of its production! “_Put in a dinner and a speech appears—put in a
speech and a dinner appears._” This is really nothing but an exchange of
places of these two phrases whereby what was said of Y becomes
differentiated from what is said of X. To be sure, this is not the whole
technique of the joke.[26]

Great latitude is afforded the technique of wit if one so extends the
“_manifold application of the same material_” that the word—or the
words—upon which the wit depends may be used first unchanged and then
with a slight modification. An example is another joke of Mr. N. He
heard a gentleman, who himself was born a Jew, utter a malicious
statement about Jewish character. “Mr. Councilor,” said he, “I am
familiar with your _antesemitism_, but your _antisemitism_ is new to
me.”

Here only one single letter is changed, the modification of which could
hardly be noticed in careless pronunciation. This example reminds one of
the other modification jokes of Mr. N., but it differs from them in
lacking the condensation. Everything that was to be said has been told
in the joke. “I know that you yourself were formerly a Jew, therefore I
am surprised that you should rail against the Jew.”

An excellent example of such wit modification is also the familiar
exclamation: “_Traduttore—Traditore_.”[27]

The similarity between the two words, almost approaching identity,
results in a very impressive representation of the inevitability by
which a translator becomes a transgressor—in the eyes of the author.

The manifoldness of slight modifications possible in these jokes is so
great that none is quite similar to the other. Here is a joke which is
supposed to have arisen at an examination for the degree of law. The
candidate was translating a passage from the Corpus juris, “_Labeo
ait_.” “‘I fall (fail),’ says he,” volunteered the candidate. “‘You fall
(fail),’ says I,” replied the examiner and the examination ended.
Whoever mistakes the name of the celebrated Jurist for a word to which
he attaches a false meaning certainly deserves nothing better. But the
technique of the witticism lies in the fact that the examiner used
almost the same words in punishing the applicant which the latter used
to prove his ignorance. Besides, the joke is an example of repartee
whose technique, as we shall see, is closely allied to the one just
mentioned.

Words are plastic and may be moulded into almost any shape. There are
some words which have lost their true original meaning in certain usages
which they still enjoy in other applications. In one of Lichtenberg’s
jokes just those conditions have been sought for in which the nuances of
the wordings have removed their basic meaning.

_“How goes it?” asked the blind of the lame one. “As you see,” replied
the lame one to the blind._

Language is replete with words which taken in one sense are full of
meaning and in another are colorless. There may be two different
derivatives from the same root, one of which may develop into a word
with a full meaning while the other may become a colorless suffix or
prefix, and yet both may have the same sound. The similarity of sound
between a word having full meaning and one whose meaning is colorless
may also be accidental. In both cases the technique of wit can make use
of such relationship of the speech material. The following examples
illustrate some of these points.

“_Do you call a man kind who remits nothing to his family while away?_”
asked an actor. “_Call that kindness?_” “_Yes, unremitting kindness_,”
was the reply of Douglas Jerrold. The wit here depends on the first
syllable _un_ of the word _unremitting_. Un is usually a prefix denoting
“not,” but by adding it to “remitting” a new relationship is
unexpectedly established which changes the meaning of the context. “_An
undertaker is one who always carries out what he undertakes._” The
striking character upon which the wit here depends is the manifold
application of the words _undertaker_ and _carry out_. Undertaker
commonly denotes one who manages funerals. Only when taken in this sense
and using the words _carry out_ literally is the sentence witty. The wit
lies in the manifold application of the same words.


                   _Double Meaning and Play on Words_

If we delve more deeply into the variety of “manifold application” of
the same word we suddenly notice that we are confronted with forms of
“double meaning” or “plays on words” which have been known a long time
and which are universally acknowledged as belonging to the technique of
wit. Then why have we bothered our brains about discovering something
new when we could just as well have gleaned it from the most superficial
treatise on wit? We can say in self-defense only that we are presenting
another side of the same phenomena of verbal expressions. What the
authors call the “playful” character of wit we treat from the point of
view of “manifold application.”

Further examples of manifold application which may also be designated
under a new and third group, the class of double meaning, may be divided
into subdivisions. These, to be sure, are not essentially differentiated
from one another any more than the whole third group from the second. In
the first place we have:

(a) Cases of double meaning of a name and its verbal significance: e.g.,
“_Discharge thyself of our company, Pistol_” (_Henry IV_, Act II). “_For
Suffolk’s duke may he suffocate_” (_Henry IV_, Act I). Heine says,
“_Here in Hamburg rules not the rascally Macbeth, but Banko_ (Banquo).”

In those cases where the unchanged name cannot be used,—one might say
“misused,”—one can get a double meaning by means of familiar slight
modifications: “_Why have the French rejected Lohengrin?_” was a
question asked some time ago. The answer was, “_On Elsa’s_ (Alsace)
_account._”

(b) Cases where a double meaning is obtained by using a word which has
both a verbal and metaphoric sense furnish an abundant source for the
technique of wit. A medical colleague, who was well known for his wit,
once said to Arthur Schnitzler, the writer: “_I am not at all surprised
that you became a great poet. Your father had already held up the mirror
to his contemporaries._” The mirror used by the father of the writer,
the famous Dr. Schnitzler, was the laryngoscope. According to the
well-known quotation from _Hamlet_ (Act III, Scene 2), the object of the
play as well as the writer who creates it is to “hold, as’t were, the
mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own
image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure.”

(c) Cases of actual double meaning or play on words—the ideal case, as
it were, of manifold application. Here no violence is done to the word.
It is not torn into syllables. It need not undergo any modifications. It
need not exchange its own particular sphere, say as a proper name, for
another. Thanks to certain circumstances it can express two meanings
just as it stands in the structure of the sentence. Many examples are at
our disposal.

One of the first royal acts of the last Napoleon was, as is well known,
the confiscation of the estates belonging to the House of Orleans.
“_C’est le premier vol de l’aigle_” was an excellent play on words
current at that time. “Vol” means both flight and theft. Louis XV wished
to test the wit of one of his courtiers whose talent in that direction
he had heard about. He seized his first opportunity to command the
cavalier to concoct a joke at his (the king’s) expense. He wanted to be
the “subject” of the witticism. The courtier answered him with the
clever _bonmot_, “_Le roi n’est pas sujet._” “Subject” also means
“vassal.” (Taken from K. Fischer.)

_A physician, leaving the sick-bed of a wife, whose husband accompanied
him, exclaimed doubtfully: “I do not like her looks.” “I have not liked
her looks for a long time,” was the quick rejoinder of the husband._ The
physician, of course, referred to the condition of the wife, but he
expressed his apprehension about the patient in such words as to afford
the husband the means of utilizing them to assert his conjugal aversion.
Concerning a satirical comedy Heine remarked: “_This satire would not
have been so biting had the author of it had more to bite._” This jest
is a better example of metaphoric and common double meaning than of real
play upon words, but at present we are not concerned about such strict
lines of demarcation. _Charles Matthews, the elder, one of England’s
greatest actors, was asked what he was going to do with his son_ (the
young man was destined for architecture). “_Why_,” answered the
comedian, “_he is going to draw houses like his father_.” _Foote once
asked a man why he forever sang one tune. “Because it haunts me,”
replied the man. “No wonder,” said Foote, “you are continually murdering
it.”_ Said the Dyspeptic Philosopher: “_One swallow doesn’t make a
summer, nor quench the thirst._”

_A gentleman had shown much ingenuity in evading a notorious borrower
whom he had sent away many times with the request to call when he was
“in.” One day, however, the borrower eluded the servant at the door and
cornered his victim._

_“Ah,” said the host, seeing there was no way out of it, “at last I am
in.”_

_“No,” returned the borrower in anticipation, “at last I am in and you
are out.”_

Heine said in the _Harzreise_: “_I cannot recall at the moment the names
of all the students, and among the professors there are some who have no
name as yet._”

Dr. Johnson said of the University of St. Andrews in Scotland, which was
poor in purse, but prolific in the distribution of its degrees: “_Let it
persevere in its present plan and it may become rich_ by degrees.” Here
the wit depends more on the manifold application than on the play on
words.

The keen-witted writer, Horatio Winslow, sums up the only too-familiar
history of some American families as follows:


                   A TALE OF TWO AMERICAN GENERATIONS

                               _Gold Mine
                               Gold Spoon
                               Gold Cure_

The last couplet, gold cure, refers to the familiar cure for alcoholism.
This wit is an excellent example of unification—everything is, as it
were, of gold. The manifold meanings of the adjective which do not very
strikingly contrast with one another make possible this “manifold
application.”


                              _Ambiguity_

Another play on words will facilitate the transition to a new
subdivision of the technique of double meaning. The witty colleague who
was responsible for the joke mentioned on page 42 is likewise
responsible for this joke, current during the trial of Dreyfus:

“_This girl reminds me of Dreyfus. The army does not believe in her
innocence._”

The word innocence, whose double meaning furnishes the basis of the
witticism, has in one connection the customary meaning which is the
opposite of guilt or transgression, while in the other connection it has
a sexual sense, the opposite of which is sexual experience. There are
very many such examples of double meaning and in each one the point of
the joke refers especially to a sexual sense. The group could be
designated as “ambiguous.” _A good example to illustrate this is the
story told of a wealthy but elderly gentleman who showed his devotion to
a young actress by many lavish gifts. Being a respectable girl she took
the first opportunity to discourage his attentions by telling him that
her heart was already given to another man. “I never aspired as high as
that,” was his polite answer._

If one compares this example of double-meaning-with-ambiguity with other
examples one cannot help noticing a difference which is not altogether
inconsequential to the technique. In the joke about “innocence” one
meaning of the word is just as good for our understanding of it as the
other. One can really not decide whether the sexual or non-sexual
significance of the word is more applicable and more familiar. But it is
different with the other example mentioned. Here the final sense of the
words, “I never aspired as high as that,” is by far more obtrusive and
covers and conceals, as it were, the sexual sense which could easily
escape the unsuspecting person. In sharp contrast to this let us examine
another example of double meaning in which there is no attempt made to
veil its sexual significance—e.g., Heine’s characterization of a
complaisant lady: “_She could pass (abschlagen) nothing except her
water._” It sounds like an obscene joke and the wit in it is scarcely
noticed.[28] But the peculiarity that both senses of the double meaning
are not equally manifested can occur also in witticisms without sexual
reference providing that one sense is more common or that it is
preferred on account of its connection with the other parts of the
sentence (e.g., _c’est le premier vol de l’aigle_). All these examples I
propose to call double meaning with allusion.

We have by this time become familiar with such a large number of
different techniques of wit that I am afraid we may lose sight of them.
Let us, therefore, attempt to make a summary.

    I. CONDENSATION

   (a) with mixed word-formation.

   (b) with modification.

   II. THE APPLICATION OF THE SAME MATERIAL

   (c) The whole and the part.

   (d) Change of order.

   (e) Slight modification.

   (f) The same words used in their full or colorless sense.

  III. DOUBLE MEANING

   (g) Name and verbal significance.

   (h) Metaphorical and verbal meaning.

   (i) True double meaning (play on words).

   (j) Ambiguous meaning.

   (k) Double meaning with allusion.

This variety causes confusion. It might vex us because we have devoted
so much time to the consideration of the technical means of wit, and the
stress laid on the forms might possibly arouse our suspicions that we
are overvaluing their importance so far as the knowledge of the nature
of wit is concerned. But this conjecture is met by the one irrefutable
fact: namely, that each time the wit disappears as soon as we remove the
effect that was brought to expression by these techniques. We are thus
directed to search for the unity in this variety. It must be possible to
bring all these techniques under one head. As we have remarked before,
it is not difficult to unite the second and third groups, for the double
meaning, the play on words, is nothing but the ideal case of utilizing
the same material. The latter is here apparently the more comprehensive
conception. The examples of dividing, changing the order of the same
material, manifold application with slight modifications (c, d, e)—all
these could, without difficulty, be subordinated under the conception of
double meaning. But what community exists between the technique of the
first group—condensation with substitutive formation—and the two other
groups—manifold application of the same material?


                       _The Tendency to Economy_

It seems to me that this agreement is very simple and clear. The
application of the same material is only a special case of condensation
and the play on words is nothing but a condensation without substitutive
formation. Condensation thus remains as the chief category. A
compressing or—to be more exact—an economic tendency controls all these
techniques. As Prince Hamlet says: “Thrift, Horatio, thrift.” It seems
to be all a matter of economy.

Let us examine this economy in individual cases. “_C’est le premier vol
de l’aigle._” That is, the first flight of the eagle. Certainly, but it
is a depredatious flight. Luckily for the gist of this joke “vol”
signifies flight as well as depredation. Has nothing been condensed and
economized by this? Certainly, the entire second thought, and it was
dropped without any substitution. The double sense of the word “vol”
makes such substitution superfluous, or what is just as correct: The
word “vol” contains the substitution for the repressed thought without
the necessity of supplementing or varying the first sentence. Therein
consists the benefit of the double meaning.

Another example: _Gold mine_,—_gold spoon_, the enormous economy of
expression the single word “gold” produces. It really tells the history
of two generations in the life of some American families. The father
made his fortune through hard toiling in the gold fields during the
early pioneer days. The son was born with a golden spoon in his mouth;
having been brought up as the son of a wealthy man, he becomes a chronic
alcoholic and has to take the gold cure.

Thus there is no doubt that the condensation in these examples produces
economy and we shall demonstrate that the same is true in all cases.
Where is the economy in such jokes as “_Rousseau_—_roux et sot_,” or
“_Antigone_—_antique-oh-nay_” in which we first failed to find the prime
factors in causing us to establish the technique of the manifold
application of the same material? In these cases condensation will
naturally not cover the ground, but when we exchange it for the broader
conception of “economy” we find no difficulty. What we save in such
examples as those just given is quite obvious. We save ourselves the
trouble of making a criticism, of forming a judgment. Both are contained
in the names. The same is true in the “_livelihood_” example and the
others thus far analyzed. Where one does not save much is in the example
of “_I am in and you are out_,” at least the wording of a new answer is
saved. The wording of the address, “_I am in_,” serves also for the
answer. It is little, but in this little lies the wit. The manifold
application of the same words in addressing and answering surely comes
under the heading of economy. Note how Hamlet sums up the quick
succession of the death of his father and the marriage of his mother:

                           “the funeral baked meats
             Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.”

But before we accept the “tendency to economize” as the universal
character of wit and ask whence it originates, what it signifies, and
how it gives origin to the resultant pleasure, we shall concede a doubt
which may justly be considered. It may be true that every technique of
wit shows the tendency to economize in expression, but the relationship
is not reversible. Not every economy in expression or every brevity is
witty on that account. We once raised this question when we still hoped
to demonstrate the condensation process in every witticism and at that
we justly objected by remarking that a laconism is not necessarily wit.
Hence it must be a peculiar form of brevity and economy upon which the
character of the wit depends, and just as long as we are ignorant of
this peculiarity the discovery of the common element in the technique of
wit will bring us no nearer a solution. Besides, we have the courage to
acknowledge that the economies caused by the technique of wit do not
impress us as very much. They remind one of the manner in which many a
housewife economizes when she spends time and money to reach a distant
market because the vegetables can there be had a cent cheaper. What does
wit save by means of its technique? Instead of putting together a few
new words, which, for the most part, could have been accomplished
without any effort, it goes to the trouble of searching for the word
which comprises both ideas. Indeed, it must often at first transform the
expression of one of the ideas into an unusual form until it furnishes
an associative connection with the second thought. Would it not have
been simpler, easier, and really more economical to express both
thoughts as they happen to come even if no agreement in expression
results? Is not the economy in verbal expression more than abrogated
through the expenditure of intellectual work? And who economized through
it, whom does it benefit? We can temporarily circumvent these doubts by
leaving them unsolved until later on. Are we really familiar enough with
all the forms of techniques of wit? It will surely be safer to gather
new examples and submit them to analysis.


                                 _Puns_

Indeed, we have not yet given consideration to one of the largest groups
into which the techniques of wit may be divided. In this we have perhaps
been influenced by the low estimate in which this form of wit is held.
It embraces those jokes which are commonly called “puns.” These are
generally counted as the lowest form of wit, perhaps because they are
“cheapest” and can be formed with the least effort. They really make the
least demands on the technique of expression just as the actual play on
words makes the most. Whereas in the latter both meanings find
expression in the identical word, and hence usually in a word used only
once, in the pun it is enough if two words for both meanings resemble
each other through some slight similarity in structure, in rhythmic
consonance, in the community of several vowels, or in some other similar
manner. The following examples illustrate these points:

“We are now fallen into that critical age wherein _censores_ liberorum
are become _censores librorum_: _Lectores_, _Lictores_.”

Professor Cromwell says that Rome in exchanging her religion changed
_Jupiter_ to _Jew Peter_.

_It is related that some students wishing to play a trick on Agassiz,
the great naturalist, constructed an insect made up of parts taken from
different bugs and sent it to him with the question, “What kind of a bug
is this?” His answer was “Humbug.”_

Puns are especially fond of modifying one of the vowels of the word;
e.g., Hevesi (_Almanaccando, Reisen in Italien_, p. 87) says of an
Italian poet who was hostile to the German emperor, but who was,
nevertheless, forced to sing his praises in his hexameters, “_Since he
could not exterminate the Cæsars he at least annihilated the cæsuras_.”

From the multitude of puns which are at our disposal it may be of
special interest to us to quote a really poor example for which Heine
(_Book Le Grand_, Chapter V) is responsible. _After parading for a long
time before his lady as an “Indian Prince” the suitor suddenly lays
aside his mask and confesses, “Madam, I have lied to you. I have never
been in Calcutta any more than that Calcutta roast which I relished
yesterday for lunch.”_ Obviously the fault of this witticism lies in the
fact that both words are not merely similar, but identical. The bird
which served as a roast for his lunch is called so because it comes
from, or at least is supposed to come from, the same city of Calcutta.

K. Fischer has given much attention to this form of wit and insists upon
making a sharp distinction between it and the “play on words” (p. 78).
“A pun,” he says, “is a bad play on words, for it does not play with the
word as a word, but merely as a sound.” The play on words, however,
“transfers itself from the sound of the word into the word itself.” On
the other hand, he also classifies such jokes as “famillionaire,
Antigone (Antique-Oh-nay),” etc., with sound-wit. I see no necessity to
follow him in this. In the plays on words, also, the word serves us only
as a sound to which this or that meaning attaches itself. Here also
usage of language makes no distinction, and when it treats “puns” with
disdain but the play on words with a certain respect it seems that these
estimations are determined by others as technical viewpoints. One should
bear in mind the forms of wit which are referred to as puns. There are
persons who have the ability, when they are in a high-spirited mood, to
reply with a pun for a long time to every sentence addressed to them.
Brill[29] relates that at a gathering some one spoke disparagingly of a
certain drama and wound up by saying, _“It was so poor that the first
act had to be rewritten.” “And now it is rerotten,” added the punster of
the gathering._

At all events we can already infer from the controversies about the line
of demarcation between puns and play on words that the former cannot aid
us in finding an entirely new technique of wit. Even if no claims are
made for the pun that it utilizes the manifold application of the same
material, the accent, nevertheless, falls upon the rediscovering of the
familiar and upon the agreement between both words forming the pun. Thus
the latter is only a subspecies of the group which reaches its height in
the real play on words.


                            _Displacements_

There are some witticisms, however, whose techniques baffle almost every
attempt to classify them under any of the groups so far investigated.
_It is related that while Heine and the poet Soulié were once chatting
together in a Parisian drawing-room, there entered one of those
Parisians whom one usually compared to Midas, but not alone on account
of their money. He was soon surrounded by a crowd which treated him with
the greatest deference. “Look over there,” said Soulié to Heine, “and
see how the nineteenth century is worshipping the Golden Calf.” Heine
cast one glance upon the object of adoration and replied, as if
correcting his friend: “Oh, he must be older than that”_ (K. Fischer, p.
82).

Wherein lies the technique of this excellent witticism? According to K.
Fischer it lies in the play on words. Thus, for example, he says, “the
words ‘Golden Calf’ may signify Mammon as well as idol-worship,—in the
first case the gold is paramount; in the second case it is the animal
picture. It may likewise serve to designate in a rather uncomplimentary
way one who has very much money and very little brains.” If we apply the
test and take away the expression “Golden Calf” we naturally also
abrogate the wit. We then cause Soulié to say, “Just see how the people
are thronging about that blockhead only because he is rich.” To be sure,
this is no longer witty. Nor would Heine’s answer be possible under
these circumstances. But let us remember that it is not at all a matter
of Soulié’s witty comparison, but of Heine’s retort, which is surely
much more witty. We have then no right to disturb the phrase “the golden
calf” which remains as a basis for Heine’s words and the reduction can
only be applied to the latter. If we dilate upon the words, “Oh, he must
be older than that,” we can only proceed as follows:

“Oh, he is no longer a calf; he is already a full-grown ox.” Heme’s wit
is therefore based on the fact that he no longer took the “golden calf”
metaphorically, but personally by referring it to the moneyed individual
himself. If this double meaning is not already contained in the opinion
of Soulié!

Let us see. We believe that we can state that this reduction has not
altogether destroyed Heine’s joke, but, on the contrary, it has left its
essential element untouched. It reads as if Soulié were now saying,
“Just see how the nineteenth century is worshipping the golden calf,”
and as if Heine were retorting, “Oh, he is no longer a calf. He is
already an ox.” And even in this reduced form it is still a witticism.
However, another reduction of Heine’s words is not possible.

It is a pity that this excellent example contains such complicated
technical conditions. And as it cannot aid us toward enlightenment we
shall leave it to search for another in which we imagine we can perceive
a relationship with the former one.

It is a “bath” joke treating of the dread which some Jews are said to
have for bathing. We demand no patent of nobility for our examples nor
do we make inquiries about their origin. The only qualifications we
require are that they should make us laugh and serve our theoretical
interest. It is to be remarked that both these demands are satisfied
best by Jewish jokes.

_Two Jews meet near a bathing establishment. “Have you taken a bath?”
asked one. “How is that?” replies the other. “Is one missing?”_

When one laughs very heartily about a joke he is not in the best mood to
investigate its technique. It is for this reason that some difficulties
are experienced in delving into their analyses. “That is a comic
misunderstanding” is the thought that comes to us. Yes, but how about
the technique of this joke? Obviously the technique lies in the double
meaning of the word _take_. In the first case the word is used in a
colorless idiomatic sense, while in the second it is the verb in its
full meaning. It is, therefore, a case where the same word is taken now
in the “full” and now in the “empty” sense (Group II, f). And if we
replace the expression “take a bath” by the simpler equivalent “bathed”
the wit disappears. The answer is no longer fitting. The joke,
therefore, lies in the expression “take a bath.”

This is quite correct, yet it seems that in this case, also, the
reduction was applied in the wrong place, for the joke does not lie in
the question, but in the answer, or rather in the counter question: “How
is that? Is there one missing?” Provided the same is not destroyed the
answer cannot be robbed of its wit by any dilation or variation. We also
get the impression that in the answer of the second Jew the overlooking
of the bath is more significant than the misconception of the word
“take.” However, here, too, things do not look quite clear and we will,
therefore, look for a third example.

Once more we shall resort to a Jewish joke in which, however, the Jewish
element is incidental only. Its essence is universally human. It is true
that this example, too, contains undesirable complications, but luckily
they are not of the kind so far which have kept us from seeing clearly.

_In his distress a needy man borrowed twenty-five dollars from a wealthy
acquaintance. The same day he was discovered by his creditor in a
restaurant eating a dish of salmon with mayonnaise. The creditor
reproached him in these words: “You borrow money from me and then order
salmon with mayonnaise. Is that what you needed the money for?” “I don’t
understand you,” responded the debtor, “when I have no money I can’t eat
salmon with mayonnaise. When I have money I mustn’t eat it. Well then,
when shall I ever eat salmon with mayonnaise?”_

Here we no longer discover any double meaning. Even the repetition of
the words “salmon with mayonnaise” cannot contain the technique of the
witticism, as it is not the “manifold application of the same material,”
but an actual, identical repetition required by the context. We may be
temporarily nonplussed in this analysis, and, as a pretext, we may wish
to dispute the character of the wit in the anecdote which causes us to
laugh. What else worthy of notice can be said about the answer of the
poor man? It may be supposed that the striking thing about it is its
logical character, but, as a matter of fact, the answer is illogical.
The debtor endeavors to justify himself for spending the borrowed money
on luxuries and asks, with some semblance of right, when he is to be
allowed to eat salmon. But this is not at all the correct answer. The
creditor does not blame him for eating salmon on the day that he
borrowed the money, but reminds him that in his condition he has no
right to think of such luxuries at all. The poor _bon vivant_ disregards
this only possible meaning of the reproach, centers his answer about
another point, and acts as if he did not understand the reproach.

Is it possible that the technique of this joke lies in this deviation of
the answer from the sense of reproach? A similar changing of the
viewpoint—displacement of the psychic accent—may perhaps also be
demonstrated in the two previous examples which we felt were related to
this one. This can be successfully shown and solves the technique of
these examples. Soulié calls Heine’s attention to the fact that society
worships the “golden calf” in the nineteenth century just as the Jewish
nation once did in the desert. To this an answer from Heine like the
following would seem fit: “Yes, that is human nature. Centuries have
changed nothing in it;” or he might have remarked something equally
apposite. But Heine deviates in his manner from the instigated thought.
Indeed, he does not answer at all. He makes use of the double meaning
found in the phrase “golden calf” to go off at a tangent. He seizes upon
one of the components of the phrase, namely, “the calf,” and answers as
if Soulié’s speech placed the emphasis on it—“Oh, he is no longer a
calf, etc.”[30]

The deviation is much more evident in the bath joke. This example
requires a graphic representation. The first Jew asks, “Have you taken a
_bath_?” The emphasis lies upon the bath element. The second answers as
if the query were: “Have you _taken_ a bath?” The displacement would
have been impossible if the question had been: “Have you bathed?” The
witless answer would have been: “Bathed? What do you mean? I don’t know
what that means.” However, the technique of the wit lies in the
displacement of the emphasis from “to bathe” to “to take.”[31]

Let us return to the example “salmon with mayonnaise,” which is the
purest of its kind. What is new in it will direct us into various paths.
In the first place we have to give the mechanism of this newly
discovered technique. I propose to designate it as having _displacement_
for its most essential element. The deviation of the trend of thought
consists in displacing the psychic accent to another than the original
theme. It is then incumbent upon us to find out the relationship of the
technique of displacement to the expression of the witticism. Our
example (salmon with mayonnaise) shows us that the displacement
technique is absolutely independent of the verbal expression. It does
not depend upon words, but upon the mental trend, and to abrogate it we
are not helped by substitution so long as the sense of the answer is
adhered to. The reduction is possible only when we change the mental
trend and permit the gastronomist to answer directly to the reproach
which he eluded in the conception of the joke. The reduced conception
will then be: “What I like I cannot deny myself, and it is all the same
to me where I get the money for it. Here you have my explanation as to
why I happen to be eating salmon with mayonnaise to-day just after you
have loaned me some money.” But that would not be witticism but a
_cynicism_. It will be instructive to compare this joke with one which
is closely allied to it in meaning.

_A man who was addicted to drink supported himself in a small city by
giving lessons. His vice gradually became known and he lost most of his
pupils in consequence. A friend of his took it upon himself to admonish
him to reform. “Look here,” he said, “you could have the best scholars
in town if you would give up drinking. Why not do it?” “What are you
talking about?” was the indignant reply. “I am giving lessons in order
to be able to drink. Shall I give up drinking in order to obtain
scholars?”_

This joke, too, carries the stamp of logic which we have noted in the
case of “salmon with mayonnaise,” but it is no longer displacement-wit.
The answer is a direct one. The cynicism, which is veiled there, is
openly admitted here, “For me drink is the most important thing.” The
technique of this witticism is really very poor and cannot explain its
effect. It lies merely in the change in order of the same material, or
to be more exact, in the reversal of the means-and-end relationship
between drink and giving lessons or getting scholars. As I gave no
greater emphasis in the reduction to this factor of the expression the
witticism is somewhat blurred; it may be expressed as follows: “What a
senseless demand to make. For me, drink is the most important thing and
not the scholars. Giving lessons is only a means towards more drink.”
The wit is really dependent upon the expression.

In the bath wit, the dependence of the witticism upon the wording “have
you taken a bath” is unmistakable and a change in the wording nullifies
the joke. The technique in this case is quite complicated. It is a
combination of double meaning (sub-group f) and displacement. The
wording of the question admits a double meaning. The joke arises from
the fact that the answer is given not in the sense expected by the
questioner, but has a different subordinate sense. By making the
displacement retrogressive we are accordingly in position to find a
reduction which leaves the double meaning in the expression and still
does away with the wit.

_“Have you taken a bath?” “Taken what? A bath? What is that?”_ But that
is no longer a witticism. It is simply either a spiteful or playful
exaggeration.

In Heme’s joke about the “golden calf” the double meaning plays a quite
similar part. It makes it possible for the answer to deviate from the
instigated stream of thought—a thing which happens in the joke about
“salmon and mayonnaise”—without any such dependence upon the wording. In
the reduction Soulié’s speech and Heine’s answer would be as follows:
“It reminds one very much of the worship of the golden calf when one
sees the people throng around that man simply because he is rich.”
Heine’s answer would be: “That he is made so much of on account of his
wealth is not the worst part. You do not emphasize enough the fact that
his ignorance is forgiven on account of his wealth.” Thus, while the
double meaning would be retained the displacement-wit would be
eliminated.

Here we may be prepared for the objection which might be raised, namely,
that we are seeking to tear asunder these delicate differentiations
which really belong together. Does not every double meaning furnish
occasion for displacement and for a deviation of the stream of thought
from one sense to another? And shall we agree that a “double meaning”
and “displacement” should be designated as representatives of two
entirely different types of wit? It is true that a relation between
double meaning and displacement actually exists, but it has nothing to
do with our differentiation of the techniques of wit. In cases of double
meaning the wit contains nothing but a word capable of several
interpretations which allows the hearer to find the transition from one
thought to another, and which with a little forcing may be compared to a
displacement. In the cases of displacement-wit, however, the witticism
itself contains a stream of thought in which the displacement is brought
about. Here the displacement belongs to the work which is necessary for
its understanding. Should this differentiation not be clear to us we can
make use of the reduction method, which is an unfailing way for tangible
demonstration. We do not deny, however, that there is something in this
objection. It calls our attention to the fact that we cannot confuse the
psychic processes in the formation of wit (the wit-work) with the
psychic processes in the conception of the wit (the understanding-work).
The object of our present investigation will be confined only to the
former.[32]

Are there still other examples of the technique of displacement? They
are not easily found, but the following witticism is a very good
specimen. It also shows a lack of overemphasized logic found in our
former examples.

_A horse-dealer in recommending a saddle horse to his client said: “If
you mount this horse at four o’clock in the morning you will be in
Monticello at six-thirty in the morning.” “What will I do in Monticello
at six-thirty in the morning?” asked the client._

Here the displacement is very striking. The horse-dealer mentions the
early arrival in the small city only with the obvious intention of
proving the efficiency of the horse. The client disregards the capacity
of the animal, about which he evidently has no more doubts, and takes up
only the data of the example selected for the test. The reduction of
this joke is comparatively simple.

More difficulties are encountered by another example, the technique of
which is very obscure. It can be solved, however, through the
application of double meaning with displacement. The joke relates the
subterfuge employed by a “schadchen” (Jewish marriage broker). It
belongs to a class which will claim more of our attention later.

_The “schadchen” had assured the suitor that the father of the girl was
no longer living. After the engagement had been announced the news
leaked out that the father was still living and serving a sentence in
prison. The suitor reproached the agent for deceiving him. “Well,” said
the latter, “what did I tell you? Do you call that living?”_

The double meaning lies in the word “living,” and the displacement
consists in the fact that the “schadchen” avoids the common meaning of
the word, which is a contrast to “death,” and uses it in the colloquial
sense: “You don’t call that living.” In doing this he explains his
former utterance as a double meaning, although this manifold application
is here quite out of place. Thus far the technique resembles that of the
“golden calf” and the “bath” jokes. Here, however, another factor comes
into consideration which disturbs the understanding of the technique
through its obtrusiveness. One might say that this joke is a
“characterization-wit.” It endeavors to illustrate by example the
marriage agent’s characteristic admixture of mendacious impudence and
repartee. We shall learn that this is only the “show-side” of the façade
of the witticism, that is, its sense. Its object serves a different
purpose. We shall also defer our attempt at reduction.[33]

After these complicated examples, which are not at all easy to analyze,
it will be gratifying to find a perfectly pure and transparent example
of “displacement-wit.” _A beggar implored the help of a wealthy baron
for a trip to Ostend, where he asserted the physicians had ordered him
to take sea baths for his health. “Very well, I shall assist you,” said
the rich baron, “but is it absolutely necessary for you to go to Ostend,
which is the most expensive of all watering-places?” “Sir,” was the
reproving reply, “nothing is too expensive for my health.”_ Certainly
that is a proper attitude, but hardly proper for the supplicant. The
answer is given from the viewpoint of a rich man. The beggar acts as if
it were his own money that he was willing to sacrifice for his health,
as if money and health concerned the _same_ person.


                    _Nonsense as a Technical Means_

Let us take up again in this connection the instructive example of
“salmon with mayonnaise.” It also presents to us a side in which we
noticed a striking display of logical work and we have learned from
analyzing it that this logic concealed an error of thought, namely, a
displacement of the stream of thought. Henceforth, even if only by way
of contrast association, we shall be reminded of other jokes which, on
the contrary, present clearly something contradictory, something
nonsensical, or foolish. We shall be curious to discover wherein the
technique of the witticism lies. I shall first present the strongest and
at the same time the purest example of the entire group. Once more it is
a Jewish joke.

_Ike was serving in the artillery corps. He was seemingly an intelligent
lad, but he was unwieldy and had no interest in the service. One of his
superiors, who was kindly disposed toward him, drew him aside and said
to him: “Ike, you are out of place among us. I would advise you to buy a
cannon and make yourself independent.”_

The advice, which makes us laugh heartily, is obvious nonsense. There
are no cannon to be bought and an individual cannot possibly make
himself independent as a fighting force or establish himself, as it
were. One cannot remain one minute in doubt but that this advice is not
pure nonsense, but witty nonsense and an excellent joke. By what means
does the nonsense become a witticism?

We need not meditate very long. From the discussions of the authors in
the Introduction we can guess that sense lurks in such witty nonsense,
and that this sense in nonsense transforms nonsense into wit. In our
example the sense is easily found. The officer who gives the
artilleryman, Ike, the nonsensical advice pretends to be stupid in order
to show Ike how stupidly he is acting. He imitates Ike as if to say, “I
will now give you some advice which is exactly as stupid as you are.” He
enters into Ike’s stupidity and makes him conscious of it by making it
the basis of a proposition which must meet with Ike’s wishes, for if Ike
owned a cannon and took up the art of warfare on his own account, of
what advantage would his intelligence and ambition be to him? How would
he take care of the cannon and acquaint himself with its mechanism in
order to meet the competition of other possessors of cannon?

I am breaking off the analysis of this example to show the same sense in
nonsense in a shorter and simpler, though less glaring case of
nonsense-wit.

“_Never to be born would be best for mortal man._” “_But_,” added the
sages of the _Fliegende Blätter_, “_hardly one man in a hundred thousand
has this luck_.”

The modern appendix to the ancient philosophical saying is pure
nonsense, and becomes still more stupid through the addition of the
seemingly careful “hardly.” But this appendix in attaching itself to the
first sentence incontestably and correctly limits it. It can thus open
our eyes to the fact that that piece of wisdom so reverently scanned, is
neither more nor less than sheer nonsense. He who is not born of woman
is not mortal; for him there exists no “good” and no “best.” The
nonsense of the joke, therefore, serves here to expose and present
another bit of nonsense as in the case of the artilleryman. Here I can
add a third example which, owing to its context, scarcely deserves a
detailed description. It serves, however, to illustrate the use of
nonsense in wit in order to represent another element of nonsense.

_A man about to go upon a journey intrusted his daughter to his friend,
begging him to watch over her chastity during his absence. When he
returned some months later he found that she was pregnant. Naturally he
reproached his friend. The latter alleged that he could not explain this
unfortunate occurrence. “Where has she been sleeping?” the father
finally asked. “In the same room with my son,” replied the friend. “How
is it that you allowed her to sleep in the same room with your son after
I had begged you so earnestly to take good care of her?” remonstrated
the father. “Well,” explained the friend, “there was a screen between
them. There was your daughter’s bed and over there was my son’s bed and
between them stood the screen.” “And suppose he went behind the screen?
What then?” asked the parent. “Well, in that case,” rejoined the friend
thoughtfully, “it might be possible.”_

In this joke—aside from the other qualities of this poor witticism—we
can easily get the reduction. Obviously, it would read like this: “You
have no right to reproach me. How could you be so foolish as to leave
your daughter in a house where she must live in the constant
companionship of a young man? As if it were possible for a stranger to
be responsible for the chastity of a maiden under such circumstances!”
The seeming stupidity of the friend here also serves as a reflection of
the stupidity of the father. By means of the reduction we have
eliminated the nonsense contained in the witticism as well as the
witticism itself. We have not gotten rid of the “nonsense” element
itself, as it finds another place in the context of the sentence after
it has been reduced to its true meaning.

We can now also attempt the reduction of the joke about the cannon. The
officer might have said: “I know, Ike, that you are an intelligent
business man, but I must tell you that you are very stupid if you do not
realize that one cannot act in the army as one does in business, where
each one is out for himself and competes with the other. Military
service demands subordination and co-operation.”

The technique of the nonsense-witticisms hitherto discussed really
consists in advancing something apparently absurd or nonsensical which,
however, discloses a sense serving to illustrate and represent some
other actual absurdity and nonsense.

Has the employment of contradiction in the technique of wit always this
meaning? Here is another example which answers this affirmatively. On an
occasion when Phocion’s speech was applauded he turned to his friends
and asked: “_Did I say something foolish?_”

This question seems paradoxical, but we immediately comprehend its
meaning. “What have I said that has pleased this stupid crowd? I ought
really to be ashamed of the applause, for if it appealed to these fools,
it could not have been very clever after all.”

Other examples teach us that absurdity is used very often in the
technique of wit without serving at all the purpose of uncovering
another piece of nonsense.

_A well-known university teacher who was wont to spice richly with jokes
his rather dry specialty was once congratulated upon the birth of his
youngest son, who was bestowed upon him at a rather advanced age. “Yes,”
said he to the well-wishers, “it is remarkable what mortal hands can
accomplish.”_ This reply seems especially meaningless and out of place,
for children are called the blessings of God to distinguish them from
creations of mortal hands. But it soon dawns upon us that this answer
has a meaning and an obscene one at that. The point in question is not
that the happy father wishes to appear stupid in order to make something
else or some other persons appear stupid. The seemingly senseless answer
causes us astonishment. It puzzles us, as the authors would have it. We
have seen that the authors deduce the entire mechanism of such jokes
from the change of the succession of “clearness and confusion.” We shall
try to form an opinion about this later. Here we content ourselves by
remarking that the technique of this witticism consists in advancing
such confusing and senseless elements.

An especially peculiar place among the nonsense-jokes is assumed by this
joke of Lichtenberg.

“_He was surprised that the two holes were cut in the pelts of cats just
where their eyes were located._” It is certainly foolish to be surprised
about something that is obvious in itself, something which is really the
explanation of an identity. It reminds one of a seriously intended
utterance of Michelet (_The Woman_) which, as I remember it, runs as
follows: “_How beautifully everything is arranged by nature. As soon as
the child comes into the world it finds a mother who is ready to care
for it._” This utterance of Michelet is really silly, but the one of
Lichtenberg is a witticism, which makes use of the absurdity for some
purpose. There is something behind it. What? At present that is
something we cannot discuss.


                      _Sophistic Faulty Thinking_

We have learned from two groups of examples that the wit-work makes use
of deviations from normal thought, namely, _displacement_ and
_absurdity_, as technical means of presenting witty expressions. It is
only just to expect that other faulty thinking may find a similar
application. Indeed, a few examples of this sort can be cited.

_A gentleman entered a shop and ordered a fancy cake, which, however, he
soon returned, asking for some liqueur in its stead. He drank the
liqueur, and was about to leave without paying for it. The shopkeeper
held him back. “What do you want of me?” he asked. “Please pay for the
liqueur,” said the shopkeeper. “But I have given you the fancy cake for
it.” “Yes, but you have not paid for that either.” “Well, neither have I
eaten it.”_

This little story also bears the semblance of logic which we already
know as the suitable façade for faulty thinking. The error, obviously,
lies in the fact that the cunning customer establishes a connection
between the return of the fancy cake and its exchange for the liqueur, a
connection which really does not exist. The state of affairs may be
divided into two processes which as far as the shopkeeper is concerned
are independent of each other. He first took the fancy cake and returned
it, so that he owes nothing for it. He then took the liqueur, for which
he owes money. One might say that the customer uses the relation “for
it” in a double sense, or, to speak more correctly, by means of a double
sense he forms a relation which does not hold in reality.[34]

The opportunity now presents itself for making a not unimportant
confession. We are here busying ourselves with an investigation of
technique of wit by means of examples, and we ought to be sure that the
examples which we have selected are really true witticisms. The facts
are, however, that in a series of cases we fall into doubt as to whether
or not the example in question may be called a joke. We have no
criterion at our disposal before investigation itself furnishes one.
Usage of language is unreliable and is itself in need of examination for
its authority. To decide the question we can rely on nothing else but a
certain “feeling,” which we may interpret by saying that in our judgment
the decision follows certain criteria which are not yet accessible to
our knowledge. We shall naturally not appeal to this “feeling” for
substantial proof. In the case of the last-mentioned example we cannot
help doubting whether we may present it as a witticism, as a sophistical
witticism, or merely as a sophism. The fact is that we do not yet know
wherein the character of wit lies.

On the other hand the following example, which evinces, as it were, the
complementary faulty thinking, is a witticism without any doubt. Again
it is a story of a marriage agent. _The agent is defending the girl he
has proposed against the attacks of her prospective fiancé. “The
mother-in-law does not suit me,” the latter remarks. “She is a crabbed,
foolish person.” “That’s true,” replies the agent, “but you are not
going to marry the mother-in-law, but the daughter.” “Yes, but she is no
longer young, and she is not pretty, either.” “That’s nothing: if she is
not young or pretty you can trust her all the more.” “But she hasn’t
much money.” “Why talk of money? Are you going to marry money? You want
a wife, don’t you?” “But she is a hunchback.” “Well, what of that? Do
you expect her to have no blemishes at all?”_

It is really a question of an ugly girl who is no longer young, who has
a paltry dowry and a repulsive mother, and who is besides equipped with
a pretty bad deformity, relations which are not at all inviting to
matrimony. The marriage agent knows how to present each individual fault
in a manner to cause one to become reconciled to it, and then takes up
the unpardonable hunch back as the one fault which can be excused in any
one. Here again there is the semblance of logic which is characteristic
of sophisms, and which serves to conceal the faulty thinking. It is
apparent that the girl possesses nothing but faults, many of which can
be overlooked, but one that cannot be passed by. The chances for the
marriage become very slim. The agent acts as if he removed each
individual fault by his evasions, forgetting that each leaves behind
some depreciation which is added to the next one. He insists upon
dealing with each factor individually, and refuses to combine them into
a sum total.

A similar omission forms the nucleus of another sophism which causes
much laughter, though one can well question its right to be called a
joke.

_A. had borrowed a copper kettle from B., and upon returning it was sued
by B. because it had a large hole which rendered it unserviceable. His
defense was this_: “_In the first place I never borrowed any kettle from
B., secondly the kettle had a hole in it when I received it from B.,
thirdly the kettle was in perfect condition when I returned it._” Each
separate protest is good by itself, but taken together they exclude each
other. A. treats individually what must be taken as a whole, just as the
marriage agent when he deals with the imperfections of the bride. One
can also say that A. uses “and” where only an “either—or” is possible.

Another sophism greets us in the following marriage agent story. _The
suitor objects because the bride has a short leg and therefore limps.
The agent contradicts him. “You are wrong,” he says. “Suppose you marry
a woman whose legs are sound and straight. What do you gain by it? You
are not sure from day to day that she will not fall down, break a leg,
and then be lame for the rest of her life. Just consider the pain, the
excitement, and the doctor’s bill. But if you marry this one nothing can
happen. Here you have a finished job.”_

Here the semblance of logic is very shallow, for no one will by any
means admit that a “finished misfortune” is to be preferred to a mere
possibility of such. The error in the stream of thought will be seen
more easily in a second example.

_In the temple of Cracow sat the great Rabbi N. praying with his
disciples. Suddenly he emitted a cry and in response to his troubled
disciples said: “The great Rabbi L. died just now in Lemberg.” The
congregation thereupon went into mourning for the deceased. In the
course of the next day travelers from Lemberg were asked how the rabbi
had died, and what had caused his death. They knew nothing about the
event, however, as, they said, they had left him in the best of health.
Finally it was definitely ascertained that the Rabbi of Lemberg had not
died at the hour on which Rabbi N. had felt his death telepathically,
and that he was still living. A stranger seized the opportunity to
banter a pupil of the Cracow rabbi about the episode. “That was a
glorious exhibition that your rabbi made of himself when he saw the
Rabbi of Lemberg die,” he said. “Why, the man is still living!” “No
matter,” replied the pupil. “To look from Cracow to Lemberg was
wonderful anyhow.”_

Here the faulty thinking common to both of the last examples is openly
shown. The value of fanciful ideas is unfairly matched against reality;
possibility is made equivalent to actuality. To look from Cracow to
Lemberg despite the miles between would have been an imposing telepathic
feat had it resulted in some truth, but the disciple gives no heed to
that. It might have been possible that the Rabbi of Lemberg had died at
the moment when the Rabbi of Cracow had proclaimed his death, but the
pupil displaces the accent from the condition under which the teacher’s
act would be remarkable to the unconditional admiration of this act.
“_In magnis rebus voluisse sat est_” is a similar point of view. Just as
in this example reality is sacrificed in favor of possibility, so in the
foregoing example the marriage agent suggests to the suitor that the
possibility of the woman’s becoming lame through an accident is a far
more important consideration to be taken into account; whereas the
question as to whether or not she is lame is put altogether into the
background.


                     _Automatic Errors of Thought_

Another interesting group attaches itself to this one of sophistical
faulty thinking, a group in which the faulty thinking may be designated
as _automatic_. It is perhaps only a stroke of fate that all of the
examples which I shall cite for this new group are again stories
referring to marriage agents.

_The agent brought along an assistant to a conference about a bride.
This assistant was to confirm his assertions. “She is as well made as a
pine tree,” said the agent. “Like a pine tree,” repeated the echo. “She
has eyes which one must appreciate.” “Wonderful eyes,” confirmed the
echo. “She is cultured beyond words. She possesses extraordinary
culture.” “Wonderfully cultured,” repeated the assistant. “However, one
thing is true,” confessed the agent. “She has a slight hunch on her
back.” “And what a hunch!” confirmed the echo._

The other stories are quite analogous to this one, but they are
cleverer.

_On being introduced to his prospective bride the suitor was rather
unpleasantly surprised, and drawing aside the marriage agent he
reproachfully whispered to him: “Why have you brought me here? She is
ugly and old. She squints, has bad teeth, and bleary eyes.” “You can
talk louder,” interrupted the agent. “She is deaf, too.”_

_A prospective bridegroom made his first call on his future bride in
company with the agent, and while in the parlor waiting for the
appearance of the family the agent drew the young man’s attention to a
glass closet containing a handsome silver set. “Just look at these
things,” he said. “You can see how wealthy these people are.” “But is it
not possible that these articles were just borrowed for the occasion,”
inquired the suspicious young man, “so as to give the appearance of
wealth?” “What an idea,” answered the agent protestingly. “Who in the
world would lend them anything?”_

In all three cases one finds the same thing. A person who reacts several
times in succession in the same manner continues in the same manner on
the next occasion where it becomes unsuited and runs contrary to his
intentions. Falling into the automatism of habit he fails to adapt
himself to the demands of the situation. Thus in the first story the
assistant forgot that he was taken along in order to influence the
suitor in favor of the proposed bride, and as he had thus far
accomplished his task by emphasizing through repetition the excellencies
attributed to the lady, he now emphasizes also her timidly conceded
hunch back which he should have belittled.

The marriage agent in the second story is so fascinated by the failings
and infirmities of the bride that he completes the list from his own
knowledge, which it was certainly neither his business nor his intention
to do. Finally in the third story he is so carried away by his zeal to
convince the young man of the family’s wealth that in order to
corroborate his proofs he blurts out something which must upset all his
efforts. Everywhere the automatism triumphs over the appropriate
variation of thought and expression.

That is quite easy to understand, although it must cause confusion when
it is brought to our attention that these three stories could just as
well be termed “comical” as “witty.” Like every act of unmasking and
self-betrayal the discovery of the psychic automatism also belongs to
technique of the comic. We suddenly see ourselves here confronted with
the problem of the relationship of wit to the comic element—a subject
which we endeavored to avoid (see the Introduction). Are these stories
only “comical” and not “witty” also? Does the comic element employ here
the same means as does the wit? And again, of what does the peculiar
character of wit consist?

We must adhere to the fact that the technique of the group of witticisms
examined last consists of nothing else but the establishment of “faulty
thinking.” We are forced to admit, however, that so far the
investigation has led us further into darkness than to illumination.
Nevertheless we do not abandon the hope of arriving at a result by means
of a more thorough knowledge of the technique of wit which may become
the starting-point for further insight.


                             _Unification_

The next examples of wit with which we wish to continue our
investigation do not give us as much work. Their technique reminds us
very much of what we already know. Here is one of Lichtenberg’s jokes.
“_January_,” he says, “_is the month in which one extends good wishes to
his friends, and the rest are months in which the good wishes are not
fulfilled._”

As these witticisms may be called clever rather than strong, we shall
reinforce the impression by examining a few more.

“_Human life is divided into two halves; during the first one looks
forward to the second, and during the second one looks backward to the
first._”

“_Experience consists in experiencing what one does not care to
experience._” (The last two examples were cited by K. Fischer.)

One cannot help being reminded by these examples of a group, treated of
before, which is characterized by the “manifold application of the same
material.” The last example especially will cause us to ask why we have
not inserted it there instead of presenting it here in a new connection.
“Experience” is described through its own terms just as some of the
examples cited above. Neither would I be against this correction.
However, I am of the opinion that the other two cases, which are surely
similar in character, contain a different factor which is more striking
and more important than the manifold application of the same word which
shows nothing here touching upon double meaning. And what is more, I
wish to emphasize that new and unexpected identities are here formed
which show themselves in relations of ideas to one another, in relations
of definitions to each other, or to a common third. I would call this
process _unification_. Obviously it is analogous to condensation by
compression into similar words. Thus the two halves of human life are
described by the inter-relationship discovered between them: during the
first part one longs for the second, and in the second one longs for the
first. To speak more precisely there were two relationships very similar
to each other which were selected for description. The similarity of the
relationship that corresponds to the similarity of the words which, just
for this reason, might recall the manifold application of the same

  material—(looks forward)
            (looks backward).

In Lichtenberg’s joke, January and the months contrasted with it are
characterized again by a modified relationship to a third factor: these
are good wishes which one receives in the first month, but are not
fulfilled during the other months. The differentiation from the manifold
application of the same material which is really related to double
meaning is here quite clear.

A good example of unification-wit needing no explanation is the
following:

_J. B. Rousseau, the French poet, wrote an ode to posterity (à la
postérité). Voltaire, thinking that the poor quality of the poem in no
way justified its reaching posterity, wittily remarked, “This poem will
not reach its destination”_ (K. Fischer).

The last example may remind us of the fact that it is essentially
unification which forms the basis of the so-called repartee in wit. For
ready repartee consists in using the defense for aggression and in
“turning the tables” or in “paying with the same coin.” That is, the
repartee consists in establishing an unexpected identity between attack
and counter-attack.

For example, _a baker said to a tavern keeper, one of whose fingers was
festering: “I guess your finger got into your beer.” The tavern keeper
replied: “You are wrong. One of your rolls got under my finger nail”_
(Ueberhorst: _Das Komische_, II, 1900).

While Serenissimus was traveling through his domains he noticed a man in
the crowds who bore a striking resemblance to himself. He beckoned him
to come over and asked: “_Was your mother ever employed in my home?_”
“_No, sire_,” replied the man, “_but my father was._”

While Duke Karl of Würtemberg was riding horseback he met a dyer working
at his trade. “_Can you color my white horse blue?_” “_Yes, sire_,” was
the rejoinder, “_if the animal can stand the boiling!_”

In this excellent repartee, which answers a foolish question with a
condition that is equally impossible, there occurs another technical
factor which would have been omitted if the dyer’s reply had been: “No,
sire, I am afraid that the horse could not stand being boiled.”

Another peculiarly interesting technical means at the disposal of
unification is the addition of the conjunction “and.” Such correlation
signifies a connection which could not be understood otherwise. When
Heine (_Harzreise_) says of the city of Göttingen, “_In general the
inhabitants of Göttingen are divided into students, professors,
Philistines, and cattle_,” we understand this combination exactly in the
sense which he furthermore emphasized by adding: “These four social
groups are distinguished little less than sharply.” Again, when he
speaks about the school where he had to submit “_to so much Latin,
drubbing, and geography_,” he wants to convey by this combination, which
is made very conspicuous by placing the drubbing between the two
studies, that the schoolboy’s conception unmistakably described by the
drubbing should be extended also to Latin and geography.

In Lipps’s book we find among the examples of “witty enumeration”
(Koordination) the following verse, which stands nearest to Heine’s
“students, professors, Philistines, and cattle.”

“_With a fork and with much effort his mother pulled him from a mess._”

“As if effort were an instrument like the fork,” adds Lipps by way of
explanation. But we get the impression that there is nothing witty in
this sentence. To be sure it is very comical, whereas Heine’s
co-ordination is undoubtedly witty. We shall, perhaps, recall these
examples later when we shall no longer be forced to evade the problem of
the relationship between wit and the comic.


                 _Representation Through the Opposite_

We have remarked in the example of the Duke and the dyer that it would
still have been a joke by means of unification had the dyer replied,
“No, I fear that the horse could not stand being boiled.” In
substituting a “yes” for the “no” which rightly belonged there, we meet
a new technical means of wit the application of which we shall study in
other examples.

This joke, which resembles the one we have just cited from K. Fischer,
is somewhat simpler. “_Frederick the Great heard of a Silesian clergyman
who had the reputation of communicating with spirits. He sent for him
and received him with the following question: ‘Can you call up ghosts?’
‘At your pleasure, your majesty,’ replied the clergyman, ‘but they won’t
come.’_” Here it is perfectly obvious that the wit lies in the
substitution of its opposite for the only possible answer, “No.” To
complete this substitution “but” had to be added to “yes,” so that “yes”
plus “but” gives the equivalent for “no.”

This “representation through the opposite,” as we choose to call it,
serves the mechanism of wit in several ways. In the following cases it
appears almost in its pure form:

“_This woman resembles Venus de Milo in many points. Like her she is
extraordinarily old, has no teeth, and has white spots on the yellow
surface of her body_” (Heine).

Here ugliness is depicted by making it agree with the most beautiful. Of
course these agreements consist of attributes expressed in double
meaning or of matters of slight importance. The latter applies to the
second example.

“_The attributes of the greatest men were all united in himself. Like
Alexander his head was tilted to one side: like Cæsar he always had
something in his hair. He could drink coffee like Leibnitz, and once
settled in his armchair he forgot eating and drinking like Newton, and
like him had to be awakened. He wore a wig like Dr. Johnson, and like
Cervantes the fly of his trousers was always open_” (Lichtenberg: _The
Great Mind_).

J. V. Falke’s _Lebenserinnerungen an eine Reise nach Ireland_ (page 271)
furnishes an exceptionally good example of “representation through the
opposite” in which the use of words of a double meaning plays absolutely
no part. The scene is laid in a wax figure museum, like Mme. Tussaud’s.
A lecturer discourses on one figure after another to his audience, which
is composed of old and young people. “_This is the Duke of Wellington
and his horse_,” he says. Whereupon a young girl remarks, “_Which is the
duke and which is the horse?_” “_Just as you like, my pretty child_,” is
the reply. “_You pay your money and you take your choice._”

The reduction of this Irish joke would be: “It is gross impudence on the
part of the museum’s management to offer such an exhibition to the
public. It is impossible to distinguish between the horse and the rider
(playful exaggeration), and it is for this exhibit that one pays one’s
hard-earned money!” The indignant expression is now dramatized and
applied to a trivial occurrence. In the place of the entire audience
there appears one woman and the riding figure becomes individually
determined. It is necessarily the Duke of Wellington, who is so very
popular in Ireland. But the insolence of the museum proprietor or
lecturer who takes money from the public and offers nothing in return is
represented by the opposite, through a speech, in which he extols
himself as a conscientious business man whose fondest desire is to
respect the rights to which the public is entitled through the admission
fee. One then realizes that the technique of this joke is not very
simple. In so far as a way is found to allow the swindler to assert his
scrupulosity it may be said that the joke is a case of “representation
through the opposite.” The fact, however, that he does it on an occasion
where something different is demanded of him, and the fact that he
replies in terms of commercial integrity when he is expected to discuss
the similarity of the figures, shows that it is a case of displacement.
The technique of the joke lies in the combination of both technical
means.


                             _Outdoing wit_

This example is closely allied to another small group which might be
called “outdoing-wit.” Here “yes,” which would be proper in the
reduction, is replaced by “no,” which, owing to its context, is
equivalent to a still stronger “yes.” The same mechanism holds true when
the case is reversed. The contradiction takes the place of an
exaggerated confirmation. An example of this nature is seen in the
following epigram from Lessing.[35]

“_The good Galathee! ’Tis said that she dyes her hair black, yet it was
black when she bought it._”

Lichtenberg’s make-believe mocking defense of philosophy is another
example.

“_There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in your
philosophy_,” Prince Hamlet had disdainfully declared. Lichtenberg well
knew that this condemnation was by no means severe enough, in that it
does not take into account all that can be said against philosophy. He
therefore added the following: “_But there is also much in philosophy
which is found neither in heaven nor on earth._” To be sure, his
assertion supplements what was lacking in Hamlet’s philosophical
utterance, but in doing this he adds another and still greater reproach.

More transparent still, because they show no trace of displacement, are
two Jewish jokes which are, however, of the coarse kind.

_Two Jews were conversing about bathing._ “_I take a bath once a year_,”
said one, “_whether I need one or not_.”

It is clear that this boastful assurance of his cleanliness only betrays
his state of uncleanliness.

_A Jew noticed remnants of food on the beard of another. “I can tell you
what you ate yesterday,” he remarked. “Well, let’s hear it,” said
another. “Beans,” said the first one. “You are wrong,” responded the
other. “I had beans the day before yesterday.”_

The following example is an excellent “outdoing” witticism which can be
traced easily to representation through the opposite.

_The king condescended to pay a visit at a surgical clinic, and found
the professor of surgery engaged in amputating a leg. He watched the
various steps of the operation with interest and expressed his royal
approval with these loud utterances: “Bravo, bravo, Professor.” When the
operation was over the professor approached the king, bowed low, and
asked: “Does your majesty also command the amputation of the other
leg?”_

Whatever the professor may have thought during this royal applause
surely could not have been expressed unchanged. His real thoughts were:
“Judging by this applause he must be under the impression that I am
amputating the poor devil’s diseased leg by order of and for the
pleasure of the king. To be sure, I have other reasons for performing
this operation.” But instead of expressing these thoughts he goes to the
king and says: “I have no other reasons but your majesty’s order for
performing this operation. The applause you accorded me has inspired me
so much that I am only awaiting your majesty’s command to amputate the
other leg also.” He thus succeeded in making himself understood by
expressing the opposite of what he really thought but had to keep to
himself. Such an expression of the opposite represents an incredible
exaggeration or outdoing.

As we gather from these examples, representation through the opposite is
a means frequently and effectively used in the technique of wit. We need
not overlook, however, something else, namely, that this technique is by
no means confined only to wit. When Marc Antony, after his long speech
in the Forum had changed the mood of the mob listening to Cæsar’s
obsequies, at last repeats the words,

                   “For Brutus was an honorable man,”

he well knows that the mob will scream the true meaning of his words at
him, namely,

                “They are traitors: nice honorable men!”

Or when _Simplicissimus_ transcribes a collection of unheard-of
brutalities and cynicisms as expressions of “people with temperaments,”
this, too, is a representation through the opposite. However, this is no
longer designated as wit, but as “irony.” Indeed, the only technique
that is characteristic of irony is representation through the opposite.
Besides, one reads and hears about “ironical wit.” Hence there is no
longer any doubt that technique alone is not capable of characterizing
wit. There must be something else which we have not yet discovered. On
the other hand, however, the fact that the reduction of the technique
destroys the wit still remains uncontradicted. For the present it may be
difficult for us to unite for the explanation of wit the two strong
points which we have already gained.


                         _Indirect Expression_

Since representation through the opposite belongs to the technical means
of wit, we may also expect that wit could make use of its reverse,
namely, the representation through the similar and cognate. Indeed, when
we continue our investigation we find that this forms the technique of a
new and especially extensive group of thought-witticisms. We can
describe the peculiarity of this technique much better if instead of
representation through the “cognate” we use the expression
representation through “relationships and associations.” We shall start
with the last characteristic and illustrate it by an example.


                  _Indirect Expression with Allusion_

It is an American anecdote and runs as follows. _By undertaking a series
of risky schemes, two not very scrupulous business men had succeeded in
amassing an enormous fortune and were now intent on forcing their way
into good society. Among other things they thought it advisable to have
their portraits painted by the most prominent and most expensive
painters in the city, men whose works were considered masterpieces. The
costly pictures were exhibited for the first time at a great evening
gathering, and the hosts themselves led the most prominent connoisseur
and art critic to the wall of the salon on which both portraits were
hanging side by side, in order to elicit from him a favorable criticism.
He examined the portraits for a long time, then shook his head as if he
were missing something. At length he pointed to the bare space between
the pictures, and asked, “And where is the Savior?”_

The meaning of this expression is clear. It is again the expression of
something which cannot be represented directly. In what way does this
“indirect expression” come about? By a series of very obvious
associations and conclusions let us work backwards from the verbal
setting.

The query, “_where is the Savior?_” or “_where is the picture of the
Savior?_” arouses the conjecture that the two pictures have reminded the
speaker of a similar arrangement familiar to him as it is familiar to
us. This arrangement, of which one element is here missing, shows the
figure of the Savior between two other figures. There is only one such
case: Christ hanging between the two thieves. The missing element is
emphasized by the witticism, and the similarity rests in the figures at
the right and left of the Savior, which are not mentioned in the jest.
It can only mean that the pictures hanging in the drawing-room are
likewise those of thieves. This is what the critic wished to, but could
not say, “You are a pair of scoundrels,” or more in detail, “What do I
care about your portraits? You are a pair of scoundrels, that I know.”
And by means of a few associations and conclusive inferences he has said
it in a manner which we designate as “allusion.”

We immediately remember that we have encountered the process of allusion
before. Namely, in double meaning, when one of the two meanings
expressed by the same word stands out very prominently, because being
used much oftener and more commonly, our attention is directed to it
first, whereas the other meaning remains in the background because it is
more remote—such cases we wished to describe as double meaning with
allusion. In an entire series of examples which we have hitherto
examined, we have remarked that their technique is not simple and we
realized that the process of allusion was the factor that complicated
it. For example, see the contradiction-witticism in which the
congratulations on the birth of the youngest child are acknowledged by
the remark that it is remarkable what human hands can accomplish (p.
77).

In the American anecdote we have the process of allusion without the
double meaning, and we find that the character of this process consists
in completing the picture through mental association. It is not
difficult to guess that the utilized association can be of more than one
kind. So as not to be confused by large numbers we shall discuss only
the most pronounced variations, and shall give only a few examples.

The association used in the substitution may be a mere sound, so that
this sub-group may be analogous to word-wit in the pun. However, it is
not similarity in sound of two words, but of whole sentences,
characteristic combinations of words, and similar means.

For example, Lichtenberg coined the saying: “_New baths heal well_,”
which immediately reminds one of the proverb, “_New brooms clean well_,”
whose first and last words, as well as whose whole sentence structure,
is the same as in the first saying. It has undoubtedly arisen in the
witty thinker’s mind as an imitation of the familiar proverb. Thus
Lichtenberg’s saying is an allusion to the latter. By means of this
allusion something is suggested that cannot be frankly said, namely,
that the efficacy of the baths taken as cures is due to other things
beside the thermal springs whose attributes are the same everywhere.

The solution of the technique of another one of Lichtenberg’s jokes is
similar: “_The girl barely twelve modes old._” That sounds something
like the chronological term “_twelve moons_” (i.e., months), and may
originally have been a mistake in writing in the permissible poetical
expression. But there is a good deal of sense in designating the age of
a feminine creature by the changing modes instead of by the changing of
moons.

The connection of similarity may even consist of a single slight
modification. This technique again runs parallel with a word-technique.
Both kinds of witticisms create almost the identical impression, but
they are more easily distinguishable by the processes of the wit-work.

The following is an example of such a word-witticism or pun. The great
singer, Mary Wilt, who was famous not merely on account of the magnitude
of her voice, suffered the mortification of having a title of a play,
dramatized from the well-known novel of Jules Verne, serve as an
allusion to her corpulency. “_The trip around the Wilt_ (world) _in
eighty days_.”

Or: “_Every fathom a queen_,” which is a modification of the familiar
Shakespearian quotation, “_Every inch a king_,” and served as an
allusion to a prominent woman who was unusually big physically. There
would really be no serious objection if one should prefer to classify
this witticism as a substitution for condensation with modification (cf.
tête-à-bête, p. 25).

Discussing the hardships of the medical profession, namely, that
physicians are obliged to read and study constantly because remedies and
drugs once considered efficacious are later rejected as useless, and
that despite the physician’s best efforts the patient often refuses to
pay for the treatment, one of the doctors present remarked: “_Yes, every
drug has its day_,” to which another added, “_But not every Doc gets his
pay_.” These two witty remarks are both modifications with allusion of
the well-known saying, “_Every dog has his day_.” But here, too, the
technique could be described as fusion with modification.

If the modification contents itself with a change in letters, allusions
through modifications are barely distinguishable from condensation with
substitutive formation, as shown in this example: “_Mellingitis_,” _the
allusion to the dangerous disease meningitis, refers to the danger which
the conservative members of a provincial borough in England thought
impended if the socialist candidate Mellon were elected_.

The negative particles make very good allusions at the cost of very
little changing. Heine referred to Spinoza as:

“My fellow _un_believer Spinoza.”

“We, by the _Un_grace of God, Laborers, Bondsmen, Negroes, Serfs,” etc.,
is a manifesto (which Lichtenberg quotes no further) of these
unfortunates who probably have more right to that title than kings and
dukes have to the unmodified one.


                               _Omission_

Finally _omission_, which is comparable to condensation without
substitutive formation, is also a form of allusion. For in every
allusion there is really something omitted, namely, the trend of thought
that leads to the allusion. It is only a question of whether the gap, or
the substitute in the wording of the allusion which partly fills in the
gap, is the more obvious element. Thus we come back through a series of
examples from the very clear cases of omission to those of actual
allusion.

Omission without substitution is found in the following example. There
lived in Vienna a clever and bellicose writer whose sharp invectives had
repeatedly brought him bodily assault at the hands of the persons he
assailed. During a conversation about a new misdeed by one of his
habitual opponents, some one said, “_When X. hears this he will receive
another box on his ear_.” The technique of this wit shows in the first
place the confusion about the apparent contradiction, for it is by no
means clear to us why a box on one’s ear should be the direct result of
having heard something. The contradiction disappears if one fills in the
gap by adding to the remark: “_then he will write such a caustic article
against that person that, etc._” Allusions through omission and
contradiction are thus the technical means of this witticism.

Heine remarked about some one: “_He praises himself so much that pastils
for fumigation are advancing in price._” This omission can easily be
filled in. What has been omitted is replaced by an inference which then
strikes back as an allusion to the same. For self-praise has always
carried an evil odor with it.

Once more we encounter the two Jews in front of the bathing
establishment. “_Another year has passed by already_,” says one with a
sigh.

These examples leave no doubt that the omission is meant as an allusion.

A still more obvious omission is contained in the next example, which is
really a genuine and correct allusion-witticism. Subsequent to an
artists’ banquet in Vienna a joke book was given out in which, among
others, the following most remarkable proverb could be read:

“_A wife is like an umbrella, at worst one may also take a cab._”

An umbrella does not afford enough protection from rain. The words “_at
worst_” can mean only: when it is raining hard. A cab is a public
conveyance. As we have to deal here with the figure of comparison, we
shall put off the detailed investigation of this witticism until later
on.

Heine’s “Bäder von Lucca” contains a veritable wasps’ nest of stinging
allusions which make the most artistic use of this form of wit as
polemics against the Count of Platen. Long before the reader can suspect
their application, a certain theme, which does not lend itself
especially to direct presentation, is preluded by allusions of the most
varied material possible; e.g., in Hirsch-Hyacinth’s twisting of words:
You are too corpulent and I am too lean; you possess too much conceit
and I the more business ability; I am a practicus and you are a
diarrheticus, in fine, “You are altogether my Antipodex”—“Venus
Urinia”—the thick Gudel of Dreckwall in Hamburg, etc. Then the
occurrences of which the poet speaks take a turn in which it merely
seems to show the impolite sportiveness of the poet, but soon it
discloses the symbolic relation to the polemical intention, and in this
way it also reveals itself as allusion. At last the attack against
Platen bursts forth, and now the allusions to the subject of the Count’s
love for men seethe and gush from each one of the sentences which Heine
directs against the talent and the character of his opponent, e.g.:

“Even if the Muses are not well disposed to him, he has at least the
genius of speech in his power, or rather he knows how to violate him;
for he lacks the free love of this genius, besides he must perseveringly
run after this youth, and he knows only how to grasp the outer forms
which, in spite of their beautiful rotundity, never express anything
noble.”

“He has the same experience as the ostrich, which considers itself
sufficiently hidden when it sticks its head into the sand so that only
its backside is visible. Our illustrious bird would have done better if
he had stuck his backside into the sand, and had shown us his head.”

Allusion is perhaps the commonest and most easily employed means of wit,
and is at the basis of most of the short-lived witty productions which
we are wont to weave into our conversation. They cannot bear being
separated from their native soil nor can they exist independently. Once
more we are reminded by the process of allusion of that relationship
which has already begun to confuse our estimation of the technique of
wit. The process of allusion is not witty in itself; there are perfectly
formed allusions which have no claims to this character. Only those
allusions which show a “witty” element are witty, hence the
characteristics of wit, which we have followed even into its technique,
again escape us.

I have sometimes called allusion “indirect expression,” and now
recognize that the different kinds of allusion with representation
through the opposite, as well as the techniques still to be mentioned,
can be united into a single large group for which “indirect
expression” would be the comprehensive name. Hence, _errors of
thought—unification—indirect representation_—are those points of view
under which we can group the techniques of thought-wit which became
known to us.


      _Representation Through the Minute or the Minutest Element_

On continuing the investigation of our material we think we recognize a
new sub-group of indirect representation which though sharply defined
can be illustrated only by few examples. It is that of representation
through a minute or minutest element; solving the problem by bringing
the entire character to full expression through a minute detail.
Correlating this group with the mechanism of allusion is made possible
by looking at the triviality as connected with the thing to be presented
and as a result of it. For example:

_A Jew who was riding in a train had made himself very comfortable; he
had unbuttoned his coat, and had put his feet on the seat, when a
fashionably dressed gentleman came in. The Jew immediately put on his
best behavior and assumed a modest position. The stranger turned over
the pages of a book, did some calculation, and pondered a moment and
suddenly addressed the Jew. “I beg your pardon, how soon will we have
Yom Kippur?” (Day of Atonement). “Oh, oh!” said the Jew, and put his
feet back on the seat before he answered._

It cannot be denied that this representation through something minute is
allied to the tendency of economy which we found to be the final common
element in the investigation of the technique of word-wit.

The following example is much similar.

_The doctor who had been summoned to help the baroness in her
confinement declared that the critical moment had not arrived, and
proposed to the baron that they play a game of cards in the adjoining
room in the meantime. After a while the doleful cry of the baroness
reached the ears of the men. “Ah, mon Dieu, que je souffre!” The husband
jumped up, but the physician stopped him saying, “That’s nothing; let us
play on.” A little while later the woman in labor-pains was heard again:
“My God, my God, what pains!” “Don’t you want to go in, Doctor?” asked
the baron. “By no means, it is not yet time,” answered the doctor. At
last there rang from the adjacent room the unmistakable cry,
“A-a-a-ai-e-e-e-e-e-e-E-E-E!” The physician then threw down the cards
and said, “Now it’s time.”_

How the pain allows the original nature to break through all the strata
of education, and how an important decision is rightly made dependent
upon a seemingly inconsequential utterance—both are shown in this good
joke by the successive changes in the cries of this childbearing lady of
quality.


                              _Comparison_

Another kind of indirect expression of which wit makes use is
_comparison_, which we have not discussed so far because an examination
of comparison touches upon new difficulties, or rather it reveals
difficulties which have made their appearance on other occasions. We
have already admitted that in many of the examples examined we could not
banish all doubts as to whether they should really be counted as witty,
and have recognized in this uncertainty a serious shock to the
principles of our investigation. But in no other material do I feel this
uncertainty greater and nowhere does it occur more frequently than in
the case of comparison-wit. The feeling which usually says to me—and I
dare say to a great many others under the same conditions—this is a
joke, this may be written down as witty before even the hidden and
essential character of the wit has been uncovered—this feeling I lack
most. If at first I experience no hesitation in declaring the comparison
to be a witticism, then the next instant I seem to think that the
pleasure I thus found was of a different quality than that which I am
accustomed to ascribe to a joke. Also the fact that witty comparisons
but seldom can evoke the explosive variety of laughter by which a good
joke proves itself makes it impossible for me to cast aside the existing
doubts, even when I limit myself to the best and most effective
examples.

It is easy to demonstrate that there are some especially good and
effective examples of comparison which in no way give us the impression
of witticisms. A beautiful example of this kind which I have not yet
tired of admiring, and the impression of which still clings to me, I
shall not deny myself the pleasure of citing. It is a comparison with
which Ferd. Lassalle concluded one of his famous pleas (_Die
Wissenschaft und die Arbeiter_): “A man like myself who, as I explained
to you, had devoted his whole life to the motto ‘Die Wissenschaft und
die Arbeiter’ (Science and the Workingman), would receive the same
impression from a condemnation which in the course of events confronts
him _as would the chemist, absorbed in his scientific experiments, from
the cracking of a retort. With a slight knitting of his brow at the
resistance of the material, he would, as soon as the disturbance was
quieted, calmly continue his labor and investigations._”

One finds a rich assortment of pertinent and witty comparisons in the
writings of Lichtenberg (2 B. of the Göttingen edition, 1853). I shall
take the material for our investigation from that source.

“_It is almost impossible to carry the torch of truth through a crowd
without singeing somebody’s beard._” This may seem witty, but on closer
examination one notices that the witty effect does not come from the
comparison itself but from a secondary attribute of the same. For the
expression “the torch of truth” is no new comparison, but one which has
been used for a long time and which has degenerated into a fixed phrase,
as always happens when a comparison has the luck to be absorbed into the
common usage of speech. But whereas we hardly notice the comparison in
the saying, “the torch of truth,” its original full force is restored it
by Lichtenberg, since by building further on the comparison it results
in a deduction. But the taking of blurred expressions in their full
sense is already known to us as a technique of wit; it finds a place
with the Manifold Application of the Same Material (p. 35). It may well
be that the witty impression created by Lichtenberg’s sentence is due
only to its relation to this technique of wit.

The same explanation will undoubtedly hold good for another witty
comparison by the same author.

“_The man was not exactly a shining light, but a great candlestick....
He was a professor of philosophy._”

To call a scholar a shining light, a “_lumen mundi_,” has long ceased to
be an effective comparison, whether it be originally qualified as a
witticism or not. But here the comparison was freshened up and its full
force was restored to it by deducting a modification from it and in this
way setting up a second and new comparison. The way in which the second
comparison came into existence seems to contain the condition of the
witticism and not the two comparisons themselves. This would then be a
case of Identical Wit-Technique as in the example of the torch.

The following comparison seems witty on other but similarly classifiable
grounds: “_I look upon reviews as a kind of children’s disease_ which
more or less attacks new-born books. There are cases on record where the
healthiest died of it, and the puniest have often lived through it. Many
do not get it at all. Attempts have frequently been made to prevent the
disease by means of _amulets of prefaces and dedications, or to color
them up by personal pronunciamentos; but it does not always help_.”

The comparison of reviews with children’s diseases is based in the first
place upon their susceptibility to attack shortly after they have seen
the light of the world. Whether this makes it witty I do not trust
myself to decide. But when the comparison is continued, it is found that
the later fates of the new books may be represented within the scope of
the same or by means of similar comparisons. Such a continuation of a
comparison is undoubtedly witty, but we know already to what technique
it owes its witty flavor; it is a case of _unification_ or the
establishment of an unexpected association. The character of the
unification, however, is not changed by the fact that it consists here
of a relationship with the first comparison.


                      _Doubt in Witty Comparisons_

In a series of other comparisons one is tempted to ascribe an
indisputably existing witty impression to another factor which again in
itself has nothing to do with the nature of the comparison. These are
comparisons which are strikingly grouped, often containing a combination
that sounds absurd, which comes into existence as a result of the
comparison. Most of Lichtenberg’s examples belong to this group.

“It is a pity that one cannot see the _learned bowels_ of the writers,
in order to find out what they have eaten.” “_The learned bowels_” is a
confusing, really absurd attribute which is made clear only by the
comparison. How would it be if the witty impression of this comparison
should be referred entirely and fully to the confusing character of
their composition? This would correspond to one of the means of wit well
known to us, namely, representation through absurdity.

Lichtenberg has used the same comparison of the imbibing of reading and
educational material with the imbibing of physical nourishment.

“He thought highly of _studying in his room_ and was heartily in favor
of _learned stable fodder_.”

The same absurd or at least conspicuous attributes, which as we are
beginning to notice are the real carriers of the wit, mark other
comparisons of the same author.

“_This is the weatherside of my moral constitution, here I can stand
almost anything._”

“Every person has also his _moral backside_ which he does not show
_except under the stress of necessity_ and which he covers as long as
possible with the _pants of good-breeding_.”

The “moral backside” is the peculiar attribute which exists as the
result of a comparison. But this is followed by a continuation of the
comparison with a regular play on words (“necessity”) and a second,
still more unusual combination (“the pants of good-breeding”), which is
possibly witty in itself; for the pants become witty, as it were,
because they are the pants of good-breeding. Therefore it may not take
us by surprise if we get the impression of a very witty comparison; we
are beginning to notice that we show a general tendency in our
estimation to extend a quality to the whole thing when it clings only to
one part of it. Besides, the “pants of good-breeding” remind us of a
similar confusing verse of Heine.

“_Until, at last, the buttons tore from the pants of my patience._”

It is obvious that both of the last comparisons possess a character
which one cannot find in all good, i.e., fitting, comparisons. One might
say that they are in a large manner “debasing,” for they place a thing
of high category, an abstraction (good-breeding, patience), side by side
with a thing of a very concrete nature of a very low kind (pants).
Whether this peculiarity has something to do with wit we shall have to
consider in another connection. Let us attempt to analyze another
example in which the degrading character is exceptionally well defined.
In Nestroy’s farce “_Einen Jux will er sich machen_,” the clerk,
Weinberl, who resolves in his imagination how he will ponder over his
youth when he has some day become a well-established old merchant, says:
“_When in the course of confidential conversation the ice is chopped up
before the warehouse of memory; when the portal of the storehouse of
antiquity is unlocked again; and when the mattings of phantasy are
stocked full with wares of yore._” These are certainly comparisons of
abstractions with very common, concrete things, but the witticism
depends—exclusively or only partially—upon the circumstance that a clerk
makes use of these comparisons which are taken from the sphere of his
daily occupation. But to bring the abstract in relation to the
commonplace with which he is otherwise filled is an act of
_unification_. Let us revert to Lichtenberg’s comparisons.


                        _Peculiar Attributions_

“_The motives for our actions may be arranged like the thirty-two winds,
and their names may be classified in a similar way, e.g.,
Bread-bread-glory or Glory-glory-bread._”

As so often happens in Lichtenberg’s witticisms, in this case, too, the
impression of appropriateness, cleverness, and ingenuity is so marked
that our judgment of the character of the witty element is thereby
misled. If something witty is intermingled in such an utterance with the
excellent sense, we probably are deluded into declaring the whole to be
an exceptional joke. Moreover, I dare say that everything that is really
witty about it results from the strangeness of the peculiar combination
bread-bread-glory. Thus as far as wit is concerned it is representation
through absurdity.

The peculiar combination or absurd attribution can alone be represented
as a product of a comparison.

Lichtenberg says: “_A twice-sleepy woman—a once-sleepy church pew_.”
Behind each one there is a comparison with a bed; in both cases there is
besides the comparison also the technical factor of _allusion_. Once it
is an allusion to the soporific effect of sermons, and the second time
to the inexhaustible theme of sex.

Having found hitherto that a comparison as often as it appears witty
owes this impression to its connection with one of the techniques of wit
known to us, there are nevertheless some other examples which seem to
point to the fact that a comparison as such can also be witty.

This is Lichtenberg’s characteristic remark about certain odes. “They
are in poetry what Jacob Böhm’s immortal writings are in prose—_they are
a kind of picnic in which the author supplies the words, and the readers
the meaning_.”

“When he _philosophizes_, he generally sheds _an agreeable moonlight_
over his topics, which is in the main quite pleasant, but which does not
show any one subject clearly.”

Again, Heine’s description: “_Her face resembled a kodex palimpsestus,
where under the new block-lettered text of a church father peek forth
the half-obliterated verses of an ancient Hellenic erotic poet._”

Or, the continued comparison of a very degrading tendency, in the “Bäder
von Lucca.”

“_The Catholic priest_ is more like a clerk who is employed in a big
business; the church, the big house at the head of which is the Pope,
gives him a definite salary. He works lazily like one who is not working
on his own account, he has many colleagues, and so easily remains
unnoticed in the big business enterprise. He is concerned only in the
credit of the house and still more in its preservation, since he would
be deprived of his means of sustenance in case it went bankrupt. _The
Protestant clergyman_, on the other hand, is his own boss, and carries
on the religious businesses on his own account. He has no wholesale
trade like his Catholic brother-tradesman, but deals merely at retail;
and since he himself must understand it, he cannot be lazy. He must
praise his _articles of faith_ to the people and must disparage the
articles of his competitors. Like a true small trader he stands in his
retail store, full of envy of the industry of all large houses,
particularly the large house in Rome which has so many thousand
bookkeepers and packers on its payroll, and which owns factories in all
four corners of the world.”

In the face of this, as in many other examples, we can no longer dispute
the fact that a comparison may in itself be witty, and that the witty
impression need not necessarily depend on one of the known techniques of
wit. But we are entirely in the dark as to what determines the witty
character of the comparison, since it certainly does not cling to the
similarity as a form of expression of the thought, or to the operation
of the comparison. We can do nothing but include comparison with the
different forms of “indirect representation” which are at the disposal
of the technique of wit, and the problem, which confronted us more
distinctly in the mechanism of comparison than in the means of wit
hitherto treated, must remain unsolved. There must surely be a special
reason why the decision whether something is a witticism or not presents
more difficulties in cases of comparison than in other forms of
expression.

This gap in our understanding, however, offers no ground for complaint
that our first investigation has been unsuccessful. Considering the
intimate connection which we had to be prepared to ascribe to the
different types of wit, it would have been imprudent to expect that we
could fully explain this aspect of the problem before we had cast a
glance over the others. We shall have to take up this problem at another
place.

_Review of the Techniques of Wit_

Are we sure that none of the possible techniques of wit has escaped our
investigation? Not exactly; but by a continued examination of new
material, we can convince ourselves that we have become acquainted with
the most numerous and most important technical means of wit-work—at
least with as much as is necessary for formulating a judgment about the
nature of this psychic process. At present no such judgment exists; on
the other hand, we have come into possession of important indications,
from the direction of which we may expect a further explanation of the
problem. The interesting processes of condensation with substitutive
formation, which we have recognized as the nucleus of the technique of
word-wit, directed our attention to the dream-formation in whose
mechanism the identical psychic processes were discovered. Thither also
we are directed by the technique of the thought-wit, namely
displacement, faulty thinking, absurdity, indirect expression, and
representation through the opposite—each and all are also found in the
technique of dreams. The dream is indebted to displacement for its
strange appearance, which hinders us from recognizing in it the
continuation of our waking thoughts; the dream’s use of absurdity and
contradiction has cost it the dignity of a psychic product, and has
misled the authors to assume that the determinants of dream-formation
are: collapse of mental activity, cessation of criticism, morality, and
logic. Representation through the opposite is so common in dreams that
even the popular but entirely misleading books on dream interpretation
usually put it to good account. Indirect expression, the substitution
for the dream-thought by an allusion, by a trifle or by a symbolism
analogous to comparison, is just exactly what distinguishes the manner
of expression of the dream from our waking thoughts.[36] Such a
far-reaching agreement as found between the means of wit-work and those
of dream-work can scarcely be accidental. To show those agreements in
detail and to trace their motivations will be one of our future tasks.




                                  III
                       THE TENDENCIES OF WIT[37]


Near the end of the preceding chapter as I was writing down Heine’s
comparison of the Catholic priest to an employee of a large business
house, and the comparison of the Protestant divine to an independent
retail dealer, I felt an inhibition which nearly prevented me from using
this comparison. I said to myself that among my readers probably there
would be some who hold in veneration not only religion, but also its
administration and administrators. These readers might take offense at
the comparison and get so wrought up about it that it would take away
all interest in the investigation as to whether the comparison seemed
witty in itself or was witty only through its garnishings. In other
examples, e.g., the one mentioned above concerning the agreeable
moonlight shed by a certain philosophy, there would be no worry that for
some readers it might be a disturbing influence in our investigation.
Even the most religious person would remain in the right mood to form a
judgment about our problem.

It is easy to guess the character of the witticism by the kind of
reaction that wit exerts on the hearer. Sometimes wit is wit for its own
sake and serves no other particular purpose; then again, it places
itself at the service of such a purpose, i.e., it becomes purposive.
Only that form of wit which has such a tendency runs the risk of
ruffling people who do not wish to hear it.

Theo. Vischer called wit without a tendency “_abstract_” wit, I prefer
to call it “_harmless_” wit.

As we have already classified wit according to the material touched by
its technique into word- and thought-wit, it is incumbent upon us to
investigate the relation of this classification to the one just put
forward. Word- and thought-wit on the one hand, and abstract- and
tendency-wit on the other hand, bear no relation of dependence to each
other; they are two entirely independent classifications of witty
productions. Perhaps some one may have gotten the impression that
harmless witticisms are preponderately word-witticisms, whereas the
complicated techniques of thought-witticisms are mostly made to serve
strong tendencies. There are harmless witticisms that operate through
play on words and sound similarity, and just as harmless ones which make
use of all means of thought-wit. Nor is it less easy to prove that
tendency-wit as far as technique is concerned may be merely the wit of
words. Thus, for example, witticisms that “_play_” with proper names
often show an insulting and offending tendency, and yet they, too,
belong to word-wit. Again, the most harmless of all jests are
word-witticisms. Examples of this nature are the popular “shake-up”
rhymes (Schüttelreime) in which the technique is represented through the
manifold application of the same material with a very peculiar
modification:

“Having been forsaken by _Dame Luck_, he degenerated into a _Lame
Duck_.”

Let us hope that no one will deny that the pleasure experienced in this
kind of otherwise unpretentious rhyming is of the same nature as the one
by which we recognize wit.

Good examples of abstract or harmless thought-witticisms abound in
Lichtenberg’s comparisons with which we have already become acquainted.
I add a few more. “_They sent a small Octavo to the University of
Göttingen; and received back in body and soul a quarto_” (a fourth-form
boy).

“_In order to erect this budding well, one must lay above all things a
good foundation, and I know of no firmer than by laying immediately over
every pro-layer a contra-layer._”

“_One man begets the thought, the second acts as its godfather, the
third begets children by it, the fourth visits it on its death-bed, and
the fifth buries it_” (comparison with unification).

“_Not only did he disbelieve in ghosts, but he was not ever afraid of
them._” The witticism in this case lies exclusively in the absurd
representation which puts what is usually considered less important in
the comparative and what is considered more important in the positive
degree. If we divest it of its dress it says: it is much easier to use
our reason and make light of the fear of ghosts than to defend ourselves
against this fear when the occasion presents itself. But this rendering
is no longer witty; it is merely a correct and still too little
respected psychological fact suggesting what Lessing expresses in his
well-known words:

               “Not all are free who mock their chains.”


                      _Harmless and Tendency Wit_

I shall take the opportunity presented here of clearing up what may
still lead to a possible misunderstanding. “Harmless” or “abstract” wit
should in no way convey the same meaning as “shallow” or “poor” wit. It
is meant only to designate the opposite of the “tendency” wit to be
described later. As shown in the aforementioned examples, a harmless
jest, i.e., a witticism without a tendency, can also be very rich in
content and express something worth while. The quality of a witticism,
however, is independent of the wit and represents the quality of the
thought which is here expressed wittily by means of a special
contrivance. To be sure, just as watch-makers are wont to enclose very
good works in valuable cases, so it may likewise happen with wit that
the best witty activities are used to invest the richest thoughts.

Now, if we pay strict attention to the distinction between
thought-content and the witty wording of thought-wit, we arrive at an
insight which may clear up much uncertainty in our judgment of wit. For
it turns out—astonishing as it may seem—that our enjoyment of a
witticism is supplied by the combined impression of content and
wit-activity, and that one of the factors is likely to deceive us about
the extent of the other. It is only the reduction of the witticism that
lays bare to us our mistaken judgment.

The same thing applies to word-wit. When we hear that “_experience
consists simply of experiencing what one wishes he had not
experienced_,” we are puzzled, and believe that we have learnt a new
truth; it takes some time before we recognize in this disguise the
platitude, “adversity is the school of wisdom” (K. Fischer). The
excellent wit-activity which seeks to define “experience” by the almost
exclusive use of the word “experience” deceives us so completely that we
overestimate the content of the sentence. The same thing happens in many
similar cases and also in Lichtenberg’s unification-witticism about
January (p. 89), which expresses nothing but what we already know,
namely, that New Year’s wishes are as seldom realized as other wishes.

We find the contrary true of other witticisms, in which obviously what
is striking and correct in the thought captivates us, so that we call
the saying an excellent witticism, whereas it is only the thought that
is brilliant while the wit-activity is often weak. It is especially true
of Lichtenberg’s wit that the path of the thought is often of more value
than its witty expression, though we unjustly extend the value of the
former to the latter. Thus the remark about the “torch of truth” (p.
115) is hardly a witty comparison, but it is so striking that we are
inclined to lay stress on the sentence as exceptionally witty.

Lichtenberg’s witticisms are above all remarkable for their
thought-content and their certainty of hitting the mark. Goethe has
rightly remarked about this author that his witty and jocose thoughts
positively conceal problems. Or perhaps it may be more correct to say
that they touch upon the solutions of problems. When, for example, he
presents as a witty thought:

“He always read _Agamemnon_ instead of the German word _angenommen_, so
thoroughly had he read Homer” (technically this is absurdity plus sound
similarity of words). Thus he discovered nothing less than the secret of
mistakes in reading.[38] The following joke, whose technique (p. 78)
seemed to us quite unsatisfactory, is of a similar nature.

“_He was surprised that there were two holes cut in the pelts of cats
just where the eyes were located._” The stupidity here exhibited is only
seemingly so; in reality this ingenuous remark conceals the great
problem of teleology in the structure of animals; it is not at all so
self-evident that the eyelid cleft opens just where the cornea is
exposed, until the science of evolution explains to us this coincidence.

Let us bear in mind that a witty sentence gave us a general impression
in which we were unable to distinguish the amount of thought-content
from the amount of wit-work; perhaps even a more significant parallel to
it will be found later.


                 _Pleasure Results from the Technique_

For our theoretical explanation of the nature of wit, harmless wit must
be of greater value to us than tendency-wit and shallow wit more than
profound wit. Harmless and shallow plays on words present to us the
problem of wit in its purest form, because of the good sense therein and
because there is no purposive factor nor underlying philosophy to
confuse the judgment. With such material our understanding can make
further progress.

_At the end of a dinner to which I had been invited, a pastry called
Roulard was served; it was a culinary accomplishment which presupposed a
good deal of skill on the part of the cook. “Is it home-made?” asked one
of the guests. “Oh, yes,” replied the host, “it is a Home-Roulard”_
(Home Rule).

This time we shall not investigate the technique of this witticism, but
shall center our attention upon another, and that one the most important
factor. As I remember, this improvised joke delighted all the guests and
made us laugh. In this case, as in countless others, the feeling of
pleasure of the hearer cannot have originated from any purposive element
nor the thought-content of the wit; so we are forced to connect the
feeling of pleasure with the technique of wit. The technical means of
wit which we have described, such as condensation, displacement,
indirect expression, etc., have therefore the faculty to produce a
feeling of pleasure in the hearer, although we cannot as yet see how
they acquired that faculty. By such easy stages we get the second axiom
for the explanation of wit; the first one (p. 17) states that the
character of wit depends upon the mode of expression. Let us remember
also that the second axiom has really taught us nothing new. It merely
isolates a fact that was already contained in a discovery which we made
before. For we recall that whenever it was possible to reduce the wit by
substituting for its verbal expression another set of words, at the same
time carefully retaining the sense, it not only eliminated the witty
character but also the laughableness (_Lacheffekt_) that constitutes the
pleasure of wit.

At present we cannot go further without first coming to an understanding
with our philosophical authorities.

The philosophers who adjudge wit to be a part of the comic and deal with
the latter itself in the field of æsthetics, characterize the æsthetic
presentation by the following conditions: that we are not thereby
interested in or about the objects, that we do not need these objects to
satisfy our great wants in life, but that we are satisfied with the mere
contemplation of the same, and with the pleasure of the thought itself.
“This pleasure, this mode of conception is purely æsthetical, it depends
entirely on itself, its end is only itself and it fulfills no other end
in life” (K. Fischer, p. 68).

We scarcely venture a contradiction to K. Fischer’s words—perhaps we
merely translate his thoughts into our own mode of expression—when we
insist that the witty activity is, after all, not to be designated as
aimless or purposeless, since it has for its aim the evocation of
pleasure in the hearer. I doubt whether we are able to undertake
anything which has no object in view. When we do not use our psychic
apparatus for the fulfillment of one of our indispensable
gratifications, we let it work for pleasure, and we seek to derive
pleasure from its own activity. I suspect that this is really the
condition which underlies all æsthetic thinking, but I know too little
about æsthetics to be willing to support this theory. About wit,
however, I can assert, on the strength of the two impressions gained
before, that it is an activity whose purpose is to derive pleasure—be it
intellectual or otherwise—from the psychic processes. To be sure, there
are other activities which accomplish the same thing. They may be
differentiated from each by the sphere of psychic activity from which
they wish to derive pleasure, or perhaps by the methods which they use
in accomplishing this. At present we cannot decide this, but we firmly
maintain that at last we have established a connection between the
technique of wit partly controlled by the tendency to economize (p. 53)
and the production of pleasure.

But before we proceed to solve the riddle of how the technical means of
wit-work can produce pleasure in the hearer, we wish to mention that,
for the sake of simplicity and more lucidity, we have altogether put out
of the way all tendency-witticisms. Still we must attempt to explain
what the tendencies of wit are and in what manner wit makes use of these
tendencies.


                       _Hostile and Obscene Wit_

We are taught above all by an observation not to put aside the
tendency-wit when we are investigating the origin of the pleasure in
wit. The pleasurable effect of harmless wit is usually of a moderate
nature; all that it can be expected to produce in the hearer is a
distinct feeling of satisfaction and a slight ripple of laughter; and as
we have shown by fitting examples (p. 132) at least a part of this
effect is due to the thought-content. The sudden irresistible outburst
of laughter evoked by the tendency-wit rarely follows the wit without a
tendency. As the technique may be identical in both, it is fair to
assume that by virtue of its purpose, the tendency-wit has at its
disposal sources of pleasure to which harmless wit has no access.

It is now easy to survey wit-tendencies. Wherever wit is not a means to
its end, i. e., harmless, it puts itself in the service of but two
tendencies which may themselves be united under one viewpoint; it is
either _hostile_ wit serving as an aggression, satire, or defense, or it
is _obscene_ wit serving as a sexual exhibition. Again it is to be
observed that the technical form of wit—be it a word- or
thought-witticism—bears no relation to these two tendencies.

It is a much more complicated matter to show in what way wit serves
these tendencies. In this investigation I wish to present first not the
hostile but the exhibition wit. The latter has indeed very seldom been
deemed worthy of an investigation, as if an aversion had transferred
itself here from the material to the subject; however, we shall not
allow ourselves to be misled thereby, for we shall soon touch upon a
detail in wit which promises to throw light on more than one obscure
point.

We all know what is meant by a “smutty” joke. It is the intentional
bringing into prominence of sexual facts or relations through speech.
However, this definition is no sounder than other definitions. A lecture
on the anatomy of the sexual organs or on the physiology of reproduction
need not, in spite of this definition, have anything in common with an
obscenity. It must be added that the smutty joke is directed toward a
certain person who excites one sexually, and who becomes cognizant of
the speaker’s excitement by listening to the smutty joke, and thereby in
turn becomes sexually excited. Instead of becoming sexually excited the
listener may react with shame and embarrassment, which merely signifies
a reaction against the excitement and indirectly an admission of the
same. The smutty joke was originally directed against the woman and is
comparable to an attempt at seduction. If a man tells or listens to
obscene jokes in male society, the original situation, which cannot be
realized on account of social inhibitions, is thereby also represented.
Whoever laughs at a smutty joke does the same as the spectator who
laughs at a sexual aggression.

The sexual element which is at the basis of the obscene joke comprises
more than that which is peculiar to both sexes, and goes beyond that
which is common to both sexes, it is connected with all these things
that cause shame, and includes the whole domain of the excrementitious.
However, this was the sexual domain of childhood, where the imagination
fancied a cloaca, so to speak, within which the sexual elements were
either badly or not at all differentiated from the excrementitious.[39]
In the whole mental domain of the psychology of the neuroses, the sexual
still includes the excrementitious, and it is understood in the old,
infantile sense.

The smutty joke is like the denudation of a person of the opposite sex
toward whom the joke is directed. Through the utterance of obscene words
the person attacked is forced to picture the parts of the body in
question, or the sexual act, and is shown that the aggressor himself
pictures the same thing. There is no doubt that the original motive of
the smutty joke was the pleasure of seeing the sexual displayed.

It will only help to clarify the subject if here we go back to the
fundamentals. One of the primitive components of our libido is the
desire to see the sexual exposed. Perhaps this itself is a development—a
substitution for the desire to touch which is assumed to be the primary
pleasure. As it often happens, the desire to see has here also replaced
the desire to touch.[40] The libido for looking and touching is found in
every person in two forms, active and passive, or masculine and
feminine; and in accordance with the preponderance of sex
characteristics it develops preponderately in one or the other
direction. In young children one can readily observe the desire to
exhibit themselves nude. If the germ of this desire does not experience
the usual fate of being covered up and repressed, it develops into a
mania for exhibitionism, a familiar perversion among grown-up men. In
women the passive desire to exhibit is almost regularly covered by the
masked reaction of sexual modesty; despite this, however, remnants of
this desire may always be seen in women’s dress. I need only mention how
flexible and variable convention and circumstances make that remaining
portion of exhibitionism still allowed to women.


         _The Transformation of the Obscenity into Obscene Wit_

In the case of men a great part of this striving to exhibit remains as a
part of the libido and serves to initiate the sexual act. If this
striving asserts itself on first meeting the woman it must make use of
speech for two motives. First, in order to make itself known to the
woman; and secondly, because the awakening of the imagination through
speech puts the woman herself in a corresponding excitement and awakens
in her the desire to passive exhibitionism. This speech of courtship is
not yet smutty, but may pass over into the same. Wherever the
yieldingness of the woman manifests itself quickly, smutty speech is
short-lived, for it gives way to the sexual act. It is different if the
rapid yielding of the woman cannot be counted upon, but instead there
appears the defense reaction. In that case the sexually exciting speech
changes into obscene wit as its own end; as the sexual aggression is
inhibited in its progress towards the act, it lingers at the evocation
of the excitement and derives pleasure from the indications of the same
in the woman. In this process the aggression changes its character in
the same way as any libidinous impulse confronted by a hindrance; it
becomes distinctly hostile and cruel, and utilizes the sadistical
components of the sexual impulse against the hindrance.

Thus the unyieldingness of the woman is therefore the next condition for
the development of smutty wit; to be sure, this resistance must be of
the kind to indicate merely a deferment and make it appear that further
efforts will not be in vain. The ideal case of such resistance on the
part of the woman usually results from the simultaneous presence of
another man, a third person, whose presence almost excludes the
immediate yielding of the woman. This third person soon becomes of the
greatest importance for the development of the smutty wit, but next to
him the presence of the woman must be taken account of. Among rural
people or in the ordinary hostelry one can observe that not till the
waitress or the hostess approaches the guests does the obscene wit come
out; in a higher order of society just the opposite happens, here the
presence of a woman puts an end to smutty talk. The men reserve this
kind of conversation, which originally presupposed the presence of
bashful women, until they are alone, “by themselves.” Thus gradually the
spectator, now turned the listener, takes the place of the woman as the
object of the smutty joke, and through such a change the smutty joke
already approaches the character of wit.

Henceforth our attention may be centered upon two factors, first upon
the rôle that the third person—the listener—plays, and secondly, upon
the intrinsic conditions of the smutty joke itself.

Tendency-wit usually requires three persons. Besides the one who makes
the wit there is a second person who is taken as the object of the
hostile or sexual aggression, and a third person in whom the purpose of
the wit to produce pleasure is fulfilled. We shall later on inquire into
the deeper motive of this relationship, for the present we shall adhere
to the fact which states that it is not the maker of the wit who laughs
about it and enjoys its pleasurable effect, but it is the idle listener
who does. The same relationship exists among the three persons connected
with the smutty joke. The process may be described as follows: As soon
as the libidinous impulse of the first person, to satisfy himself
through the woman, is blocked, he immediately develops a hostile
attitude towards this second person and takes the originally intruding
third person as his confederate. Through the obscene speech of the first
person the woman is exposed before the third person, who as a listener
is fascinated by the easy gratification of his own libido.

It is curious that common people so thoroughly enjoy such smutty talk,
and that it is a never-lacking activity of cheerful humor. It is also
worthy of notice that in this complicated process which shows so many
characteristics of tendency-wit, no formal demands, such as characterize
wit, are made upon “smutty wit.” The unveiled nudity affords pleasure to
the first and makes the third person laugh.

Not until we come to the refined and cultured does the formal
determination of wit arise. The obscenity becomes witty and is tolerated
only if it is witty. The technical means of which it mostly makes use is
allusion, i.e., substitution through a trifle, something remotely
related, which the listener reconstructs in his imagination as a
full-fledged and direct obscenity. The greater the disproportion between
what is directly offered in the obscenity and what is necessarily
aroused by it in the mind of the listener, the finer is the witticism
and the higher it may venture in good society. Besides the coarse and
delicate allusions, the witty obscenity also utilizes all other means of
word- and thought-wit, as can be easily demonstrated by examples.


          _The Function of Wit in the Service of the Tendency_

It now becomes comprehensible what wit accomplishes through this service
of its tendency. It makes possible the gratification of a craving (lewd
or hostile) despite a hindrance which stands in the way; it eludes the
hindrance and so derives pleasure from a source that has become
inaccessible on account of the hindrance. The hindrance in the way is
really nothing more than the higher degree of culture and education
which correspondingly increases the inability of the woman to tolerate
the stark sex. The woman thought of as present in the final situation is
still considered present, or her influence acts as a deterrent to the
men even in her absence. One often notices how cultured men are
influenced by the company of girls of a lower station in life to change
witty obscenities to broad smut.

The power which renders it difficult or impossible for the woman, and in
a lesser degree for the man, to enjoy unveiled obscenities we call
“repression,” and we recognize in it the same psychic process which
keeps from consciousness in severe nervous attacks whole complexes of
emotions with their resultant affects, and has shown itself to be the
principal factor in the causation of the so-called psychoneuroses. We
acknowledge to culture and higher civilization an important influence in
the development of repressions, and assume that under these conditions
there has come about a change in our psychic organization which may also
have been brought along as an inherited disposition. In consequence of
it, what was once accepted as pleasureful is now counted unacceptable
and is rejected by means of all the psychic forces. Owing to the
repression brought about by civilization many primary pleasures are now
disapproved by the censor and lost. But the human psyche finds
renunciation very difficult; hence we discover that tendency-wit
furnishes us with a means to make the renunciation retrogressive and
thus to regain what has been lost. When we laugh over a delicately
obscene witticism, we laugh at the identical thing which causes laughter
in the ill-bred man when he hears a coarse, obscene joke; in both cases
the pleasure comes from the same source. The coarse, obscene joke,
however, could not incite us to laughter, because it would cause us
shame or would seem to us disgusting; we can laugh only when wit comes
to our aid.

What we had presumed in the beginning seems to have been confirmed,
namely, that tendency-wit has access to other sources of pleasure than
harmless wit, in which all the pleasure is somehow dependent upon the
technique. We can also reiterate that owing to our feelings we are in no
position to distinguish in tendency-wit what part of the pleasure
originates from the technique and what part from the tendency. _Strictly
speaking, we do not know what we are laughing about._ In all obscene
jokes we succumb to striking mistakes of judgment about the “goodness”
of the joke as far as it depends upon formal conditions; the technique
of these jokes is often very poor while their laughing effect is
enormous.


                 _Invectives Made Possible Through Wit_

We next wish to determine whether the rôle of wit in the service of the
hostile tendency is the same.

Right from the start we meet with similar conditions. Since our
individual childhood and the childhood of human civilization, our
hostile impulses towards our fellow-beings have been subjected to the
same restrictions and the same progressive repressions as our sexual
strivings. We have not yet progressed so far as to love our enemies, or
to extend to them our left cheek after we are smitten on the right.
Furthermore, all moral codes about the subjection of active hatred bear
even to-day the clearest indications that they were originally meant for
a small community of clansmen. As we all may consider ourselves members
of some nation, we permit ourselves for the most part to forget these
restrictions in matters touching a foreign people. But within our own
circles we have nevertheless made progress in the mastery of hostile
emotions. Lichtenberg drastically puts it when he says: “Where nowadays
one says, ‘I beg your pardon,’ formerly one had recourse to a cuff on
the ear.” Violent hostility, no longer tolerated by law, has been
replaced by verbal invectives, and the better understanding of the
concatenation of human emotions robs us, through its consequential
“_Tout comprendre c’est tout pardonner_,” more and more of the capacity
to become angry at our fellowman who is in our way. Having been endowed
with a strong hostile disposition in our childhood, higher personal
civilization teaches us later that it is undignified to use abusive
language; even where combat is still permitted, the number of things
which may be used as means of combat has been markedly restricted.
Society, as the third and dispassionate party in the combat to whose
interest it is to safeguard personal safety, prevents us from expressing
our hostile feelings in action; and hence, as in sexual aggression,
there has developed a new technique of invectives, the aim of which is
to enlist this third person against our enemy. By belittling and
humbling our enemy, by scorning and ridiculing him, we indirectly obtain
the pleasure of his defeat by the laughter of the third person, the
inactive spectator.

We are now prepared for the rôle that wit plays in hostile aggression.
Wit permits us to make our enemy ridiculous through that which we could
not utter loudly or consciously on account of existing hindrances; in
other words, _wit affords us the means of surmounting restrictions and
of opening up otherwise inaccessible pleasure-sources_. Moreover, the
listener will be induced by the gain in pleasure to take our part, even
if he is not altogether convinced,—just as we on other occasions, when
fascinated by harmless witticism, were wont to overestimate the
substance of the sentence wittily expressed. “To prejudice the laughter
in one’s own favor” is a completely pertinent saying in the German
language.

One may recall Mr. N.’s witticism given in the last chapter (p. 28). It
is of an insulting nature, as if the author wished to shout loudly: But
the minister of agriculture is himself an ox! But he, as a man of
culture, could not put his opinion in this form. He therefore appealed
to wit which assured his opinion a reception at the hands of the
listeners which, in spite of its amount of truth, never would have been
received if in an unwitty form. Brill cites an excellent example of a
similar kind: _Wendell Phillips, according to a recent biography by Dr.
Lorenzo Sears, was on one occasion lecturing in Ohio, and while on a
railroad journey going to keep one of his appointments met in the car a
number of clergymen returning from some sort of convention. One of the
ministers, feeling called upon to approach Mr. Phillips, asked him, “Are
you Mr. Phillips?” “I am, sir.” “Are you trying to free the niggers?”
“Yes, sir; I am an abolitionist.” “Well, why do you preach your
doctrines up here? Why don’t you go over into Kentucky?” “Excuse me, are
you a preacher?” “I am, sir.” “Are you trying to save souls from hell?”
“Yes, sir, that’s my business.” “Well, why don’t you go there?”_ The
assailant hurried into the smoker amid a roar of unsanctified laughter.
This anecdote nicely illustrates the tendency-wit in the service of
hostile aggression. The minister’s behavior was offensive and
irritating, yet Wendell Phillips as a man of culture could not defend
himself in the same manner as a common, ill-bred person would have done,
and as his inner feelings must have prompted him to do. The only
alternative under the circumstances would have been to take the affront
in silence, had not wit showed him the way, and enabled him by the
technical means of unification to turn the tables on his assailant. He
not only belittled him and turned him into ridicule, but by his clever
retort, “Well, why don’t you go there?” fascinated the other clergymen,
and thus brought them to his side.

Although the hindrance to the aggression which the wit helped to elude
was in these cases of an inner nature—the æsthetic resistance against
insulting—it may at other times be of a purely outer nature. So it was
in the case when Serenissimus asked the stranger who had a striking
resemblance to himself: “Was your mother ever in my home?” and he
received the ready reply, “No, but my father was.” The stranger would
certainly have felled the imprudent inquirer who dared to make an
ignominious allusion to the memory of his mother; but this imprudent
person was Serenissimus, who may not be felled and not even insulted
unless one wishes to pay for this revenge with his life. The only thing
left was to swallow the insult in silence; but luckily wit pointed out
the way of requiting the insult without personally imperiling one’s
self. It was accomplished simply by treating the allusion with the
technical means of unification and employing it against the aggressor.
The impression of wit is here so thoroughly determined by the tendency
that in view of the witty rejoinder we are inclined to forget that the
aggressor’s inquiry is itself made witty by allusion.


               _Rebellion Against Authority Through Wit_

The prevention of abuse or insulting retorts through outer circumstances
is so often the case that tendency-wit is used with special preference
as a weapon of attack or criticism of superiors who claim to be an
authority. Wit then serves as a resistance against such authority and as
an escape from its pressure. In this factor, too, lies the charm of
caricature, at which we laugh even if it is badly done simply because we
consider its resistance to authority a great merit.

If we keep in mind that tendency-wit is so well adapted as a weapon of
attack upon what is great, dignified, and mighty, that which is shielded
by internal hindrances or external circumstance against direct
disparagement, we are forced to a special conception of certain groups
of witticisms which seem to occupy themselves with inferior and
powerless persons. I am referring to the marriage-agent stories,—with a
few of which we have become familiar in the investigation of the
manifold techniques of thought-wit. In some of these examples, “But she
is deaf, too!” and “Who in the world would ever lend these people
anything!” the agent was derided as a careless and thoughtless person
who becomes comical because the truth escapes his lips automatically, as
it were. But does on the one hand what we have learned about the nature
of tendency-wit, and on the other hand the amount of satisfaction in
these stories, harmonize with the misery of the persons at whom the joke
seems to be pointed? Are these worthy opponents of the wit? Or, is it
not more plausible to suppose that the wit puts the agent in the
foreground only in order to strike at something more important; does it,
as the saying goes, strike the saddle pack, when it is meant for the
mule? This conception can really not be rejected.

The above-mentioned interpretation of the marriage-agent stories admits
of a continuation. It is true that I need not enter into them, that I
can content myself with seeing the farcical in these stories, and can
dispute their witty character. However, such subjective determination of
wit actually exists. We have now become cognizant of it and shall later
on have to investigate it. It means that only that is a witticism which
I wish to consider as such. What may be wit to me, may be only an
amusing story to another. But if a witticism admits of doubt, that can
be due only to the fact that it is possessed of a show-side,—in our
examples it happens to be a façade of the comic,—upon which one may be
satisfied to bestow a single glance while another may attempt to peep
behind. We also suspect that this façade is intended to dazzle the
prying glance which is to say that such stories have something to
conceal.

At all events, if our marriage-agent stories are witticisms at all, they
are all the better witticisms because, thanks to their façade, they are
in a position to conceal not only what they have to say but also that
they have something—forbidden—to say. But the continuation of the
interpretation, which reveals this hidden part and shows that these
stories having a comical façade are tendency-witticisms, would be as
follows: Every one who allows the truth to escape his lips in an
unguarded moment is really pleased to have rid himself of this thought.
This is a correct and far-reaching psychological insight. Without the
inner assent no one would allow himself to be overpowered by the
automatism which here brings the truth to light.[41] The marriage agent
is thus transformed from a ludicrous personage into an object deserving
of pity and sympathy. How blest must be the man, able at last to
unburden himself of the weight of dissimulation, if he immediately
seizes the first opportunity to shout out the last fragment of truth! As
soon as he sees that his case is lost, that the prospective bride does
not suit the young man, he gladly betrays the secret that the girl has
still another blemish which the young man had overlooked, or he makes
use of the chance to present a conclusive argument in detail in order to
express his contempt for the people who employ him: “Who in the world
would ever lend these people anything!” The ludicrousness of the whole
thing now reverts upon the parents,—hardly mentioned in the story,—who
consider such deceptions justified to clutch a man for their daughter;
it also reflects upon the wretched state of the girls who get married
through such contrivances, and upon the want of dignity of the marriage
contracted after such preliminaries. The agent is the right person to
express such criticisms, for he is best acquainted with these abuses;
but he may not raise his voice, because he is a poor man whose
livelihood depends altogether on turning these abuses to his advantage.
But the same conflict is found in the national spirit which has given
rise to these and similar stories; for he is aware that the holiness of
wedlock suffers severely by reference to some of the methods of
marriage-making.

We recall also the observation made during the investigation of
wit-technique, namely, that absurdity in wit frequently stands for
derision and criticism in the thought behind the witticism, wherein the
wit-work follows the dream-work. This state of affairs, we find, is here
once more confirmed. That the derision and criticism are not aimed at
the agent, who appears in the former examples only as the whipping boy
of the joke, is shown by another series in which the agent, on the
contrary, is pictured as a superior person whose dialectics are a match
for any difficulty. They are stories whose façades are logical instead
of comical—they are sophistic thought-witticisms. In one of them (p. 83)
the agent knows how to circumvent the limping of the bride by stating
that in her case it is at least “a finished job”; another woman with
straight limbs would be in constant danger of falling and breaking a
leg, which would be followed by sickness, pains, and doctor’s fees—all
of which can be avoided by marrying the one already limping. Again in
another example (p. 81) the agent is clever enough to refute by good
arguments each of the whole series of the suitor’s objections against
the bride; only to the last, which cannot be glossed over, he rejoins,
“Do you expect her to have no blemishes at all?” as if the other
objections had not left behind an important remnant. It is not difficult
to pick out the weak points of the arguments in both examples, a thing
which we have done during the investigation of the technique. But now
something else interests us. If the agent’s speech is endowed with such
a strong semblance of logic, which on more careful examination proves to
be merely a semblance, then the truth must be lurking in the fact that
the witticism adjudges the agent to be right. The thought does not dare
to admit that he is right in all seriousness, and replaces it by the
semblance which the wit brings forth; but here, as it often happens, the
jest betrays the seriousness of it. We shall not err if we assume that
all stories with logical façades really mean what they assert even if
these assertions are deliberately falsely motivated. Only this use of
sophism for the veiled presentation of the truth endows it with the
character of wit, which is mainly dependent upon tendency. What these
two stories wish to indicate is that the suitor really makes himself
ridiculous when he collects together so sedulously the individual charms
of the bride which are transient after all, and when he forgets at the
same time that he must be prepared to take as his wife a human being
with inevitable faults; whereas, the only virtue which might make
tolerable marriage with the more or less imperfect personality of the
woman,—mutual attachment and willingness for affectionate adaptation,—is
not once mentioned in the whole affair.

Ridicule of the suitor as seen in these examples in which the agent
quite correctly assumes the rôle of superiority, is much more clearly
depicted in other examples. The more pointed the stories, the less
wit-technique they contain; they are, as it were, merely border-line
cases of wit with whose technique they have only the façade-formation in
common. However, in view of the same tendency and the concealment of the
same behind the façade, they obtain the full effect of wit. The poverty
of technical means makes it clear also that many witticisms of that kind
cannot dispense with the comic element of jargon which acts similarly to
wit-technique without great sacrifices.

The following is such a story, which with all the force of tendency-wit
obviates all traces of that technique. _The agent asks: “What are you
looking for in your bride?” The reply is: “She must be pretty, she must
be rich, and she must be cultured.” “Very well,” was the agent’s
rejoinder. “But what you want will make three matches.”_ Here the
reproach is no longer embodied in wit, but is made directly to the man.

In all the preceding examples the veiled aggression was still directed
against persons; in the marriage-agent jokes it is directed against all
the parties involved in the betrothal—the bridegroom, bride, and her
parents. The object of attack by wit may equally well be institutions,
persons, in so far as they may act as agents of these, moral or
religious precepts, or even philosophies of life which enjoy so much
respect that they can be challenged in no other way than under the guise
of a witticism, and one that is veiled by a façade at that. No matter
how few the themes upon which tendency-wit may play, its forms and
investments are manifold. I believe that we shall do well to designate
this species of tendency-wit by a special name. To decide what name will
be appropriate is possible only after analyzing a few examples of this
kind.


                          _The Witty Cynicism_

I recall the two little stories about the impecunious gourmand who was
caught eating “salmon with mayonnaise,” and about the tippling tutor;
these witty stories, which we have learned to regard as sophistical
displacement-wit, I shall continue to analyze. We have learned since
then that when the semblance of logic is attached to the façade of a
story, the actual thought is as follows: The man is right; but on
account of the opposing contradiction, I did not dare to admit the fact
except for one point in which his error is easily demonstrable. The
“point” chosen is the correct compromise between his right and his
wrong; this is really no decision, but bespeaks the conflict within
ourselves. Both stories are simply epicurean. They say, Yes, the man is
right; nothing is greater than pleasure, and it is fairly immaterial in
what manner one procures it. This sounds frightfully immoral, and
perhaps it is, but fundamentally it is nothing more than the “_Carpe
diem_” of the poet who refers to the uncertainty of life and the
bareness of virtuous renunciation. If we are repelled by the idea that
the man in the joke about “salmon with mayonnaise” is in the right, then
it is merely due to the fact that it illustrates the sound sense of the
man in indulging himself—an indulgence which seems to us wholly
unnecessary. In reality each one of us has experienced hours and times
during which he has admitted the justice of this philosophy of life and
has reproached our system of morality for knowing only how to make
claims upon us without reimbursing us. Since we no longer lend credence
to the idea of a hereafter in which all former renunciations are
supposed to be rewarded by gratification—(there are very few pious
persons if one makes renunciation the password of faith)—“_Carpe diem_”
becomes the first admonition. I am quite ready to postpone the
gratification, but how do I know whether I shall still be alive
to-morrow?

                   “Di doman’ non c’e certezza.”[42]

I am quite willing to give up all the paths to gratification interdicted
by society, but am I sure that society will reward me for this
renunciation by opening for me—even after a certain delay—one of the
permitted paths? One can plainly tell what these witticisms whisper,
namely, that the wishes and desires of man have a right to make
themselves perceptible next to our pretentious and inconsiderate
morality. And in our times it has been said in emphatic and striking
terms that this morality is merely the selfish precept of the few rich
and mighty who can gratify their desires at any time without deferment.
As long as the art of healing has not succeeded in safeguarding our
lives, and as long as the social organizations do not do more towards
making conditions more agreeable, just so long cannot the voice within
us which is striving against the demands of morality, be stifled. Every
honest person finally makes this admission—at least to himself. The
decision in this conflict is possible only through the roundabout way of
a new understanding. One must be able to knit one’s life so closely to
that of others, and to form such an intimate identification with others,
that the shortening of one’s own term of life becomes surmountable; one
should not unlawfully fulfill the demands of one’s own needs, but should
leave them unfulfilled, because only the continuance of so many
unfulfilled demands can develop the power to recast the social order.
But not all personal needs allow themselves to be displaced in such a
manner and transferred to others, nor is there a universal and definite
solution of the conflict.

We now know how to designate the witticisms just discussed; they are
cynical witticisms, and what they conceal are cynicisms.

Among the institutions which cynical wit is wont to attack there is none
more important and more completely protected by moral precepts, and yet
more inviting of attack, than the institution of marriage. Most of the
cynical jokes are directed against it. For no demand is more personal
than that made upon sexual freedom, and nowhere has civilization
attempted to exert a more stringent suppression than in the realm of
sexuality. For our purposes a single example suffices: the “Entries in
the Album of Prince Carnival” mentioned on page 108.

“_A wife is like an umbrella, at worst one may always take a cab._”

We have already elucidated the complicated technique of this example; it
is a puzzling and seemingly impossible comparison which however, as we
now see, is not in itself witty; it shows besides an allusion (cab =
public conveyance), and as the strongest technical means it also shows
an omission which serves to make it still more unintelligible. The
comparison may be worked out in the following manner. A man marries in
order to guard himself against the temptations of sensuality, but it
then turns out that after all marriage affords no gratification for one
of stronger needs, just as one takes along an umbrella for protection
against rain only to get wet in spite of it. In both cases one must
search for better protection; in one case one must take a public cab, in
the other women procurable for money. Now the wit has almost entirely
been replaced by cynicism. That marriage is not the organization which
can satisfy a man’s sexuality, one does not dare to say loudly and
frankly unless indeed it be one like Christian v. Ehrenfels,[43] who is
forced to it by the love of truth and the zeal of reform. The strength
of this witticism lies in the fact that it has expressed the thought
even though it had to be done through all sorts of roundabout ways.


                _Cynical Witticisms and Self-criticism_

A particularly favorable case for tendency-wit results if the intended
criticism of the inner resistance is directed against one’s own person,
or, more carefully expressed, against a person in whom one takes
interest, that is, a composite personality such as one’s own people.
This determination of self-criticism may make clear why it is that a
number of the most excellent jokes of which we have shown here many
specimens should have sprung into existence from the soil of Jewish
national life. They are stories which were invented by Jews themselves
and which are directed against Jewish peculiarities. The Jewish jokes
made up by non-Jews are nearly all brutal buffooneries in which the wit
is spared by the fact that the Jew appears as a comic figure to a
stranger. The Jewish jokes which originate with Jews admit this, but
they know their real shortcomings as well as their merits, and the
interest of the person himself in the thing to be criticised produces
the subjective determination of the wit-work which would otherwise be
difficult to bring about. Incidentally I do not know whether one often
finds a people that makes merry so unreservedly over its own
shortcomings.

As an illustration I can point to the story cited on page 112 in which
the Jew in the train immediately abandons all sense of decency of
deportment as soon as he recognizes the new arrival in his coupé as his
coreligionist. We have come to know this joke as an illustration by
means of a detail—representation through a trifle; it is supposed to
represent the democratic mode of thought of the Jew who recognizes no
difference between master and servant, but unfortunately this also
disturbs discipline and co-operation. Another especially interesting
series of jokes presents the relationship between the poor and the rich
Jews: their heroes are the “shnorrer,”[44] and the charitable gentleman
or the baron. _The shnorrer, who was a regular Sunday-dinner guest at a
certain house, appeared one day accompanied by a young stranger, who
prepared to seat himself at the table. “Who is that?” demanded the host.
“He became my son-in-law last week,” was the reply, “and I have agreed
to supply his board for the first year.”_ The tendency of these stories
is always the same, and is most distinctly shown in the following story.
_The shnorrer supplicates the baron for money to visit the bathing
resort Ostend, as the physician has ordered him to take sea baths for
his ailment. The baron remarks that Ostend is an especially expensive
resort, and that a less fashionable place would do just as well. But the
shnorrer rejects that proposition by saying, “Herr Baron, nothing is too
expensive for my health.”_ That is an excellent displacement-witticism
which we could have taken as a model of its kind. The baron is evidently
anxious to save his money, but the shnorrer replies as if the baron’s
money were his own, which he may then consider secondary to his health.
One is forced to laugh at the insolence of the demand, but these jokes
are exceptionally unequipped with a façade to becloud the understanding.
The truth is that the shnorrer who mentally treats the rich man’s money
as his own, really possesses almost the right to this mistake, according
to the sacred codes of the Jews. Naturally the resistance which is
responsible for this joke is directed against the law which even the
pious find very oppressing.

Another story relates _how on the steps of a rich man’s house a shnorrer
met one of his own kind. The latter counseled him to depart, saying, “Do
not go up to-day, the Baron is out of sorts and refuses to give any one
more than a dollar.” “I will go up anyway,” replied the first. “Why in
the world should I make him, a present of a dollar? Is he making me any
presents?”_

This witticism makes use of the technique of absurdity by permitting the
shnorrer to declare that the baron gives him nothing at the same moment
in which he is preparing to beg him for the donation. But the absurdity
is only apparent, for it is almost true that the rich man gives him
nothing, since he is obligated by the mandate to give alms, and strictly
speaking must be thankful that the shnorrer gives him an opportunity to
be charitable. The ordinary, bourgeois conception of alms is at
cross-purposes with the religious one; it openly revolts against the
religious conception in the _story about the baron who, having been
deeply touched by the shnorrer’s tale of woe, rang for his servants and
said: “Throw him out of the house; he is breaking my heart.”_ This
obvious exposition of the tendency again creates a case of border-line
wit. From the no longer witty complaint: “It is really no advantage to
be a rich man among Jews. The foreign misery does not grant one the
pleasure of one’s own fortune,” these last stories are distinguished
only by the illustration of a single situation.

Other stories as the following, which, technically again presenting
border-lines of wit, have their origin in a deeply pessimistic cynicism.
_A patient whose hearing was defective consulted a physician who made
the correct diagnosis, namely, that the patient probably drank too much
whiskey and consequently was becoming deaf. He advised him to desist
from drinking and the patient promised to follow his advice. Some time
thereafter the doctor met him on the street and inquired in a loud voice
about his condition. “Thank you, Doctor,” was the reply, “there is no
necessity for speaking so loudly, I have given up drinking whiskey and
consequently I hear perfectly.” Some time afterwards they met again. The
doctor again inquired into his condition in the usual voice, but noticed
that he did not make himself understood. “It seems to me that you are
deaf again because you have returned to drinking whiskey,” shouted the
doctor in the patient’s ear. “Perhaps you are right,” answered the
latter, “I have taken to drinking again, and I shall tell you why. As
long as I did not drink I could hear, but all that I heard was not as
good as the whiskey.”_ Technically this joke is nothing more than an
illustration. The jargon and the ability of the _raconteur_ must aid the
producing of laughter. But behind it there lies the sad question, “Is
not the man right in his choice?”

It is the manifold hopeless misery of the Jews to which these
pessimistical stories allude, which urged me to add them to
tendency-wit.


                 _Critical and Blasphemous Witticisms_

Other jokes, cynical in a similar sense, and not only stories about
Jews, attack religious dogmas and the belief in God Himself. The story
about the “telepathic look of the rabbi,” whose technique consisted in
the faulty thinking which made phantasy equal to reality, (the
conception of displacement is also tenable) is such a cynical or
critical witticism directed against miracle-workers and also, surely,
against belief in miracles. Heine is reported to have made a directly
blasphemous joke as he lay dying. _When the kindly priest commended him
to God’s mercy and inspired him with the hope that God would forgive him
his sins, he replied: “Bien sûr qu’il me pardonnera; c’est son métier.”_
That is a derogatory comparison; technically its value lies only in the
allusion, for a métier—business or vocation—is plied either by a
craftsman or a physician, and what is more he has only a single métier.
The strength of the wit, however, lies in its tendency. The joke is
intended to mean nothing else, but: Certainly he will forgive me; that
is what he is here for, and for no other purpose have I engaged him
(just as one retains one’s doctor or one’s lawyer). Thus, the helpless
dying man is still conscious of the fact that he has created God for
himself and has clothed Him with the power in order to make use of Him
as occasion arises. The so-called creature makes itself known as the
Creator only a short time before his extinction.


                            _Skeptical Wit_

To the three kinds of tendency-wit discussed so far—exhibitionistic or
obscene wit, aggressive or hostile wit, and cynical wit (critical,
blasphemous)—I desire to add a fourth and the most uncommon of all,
whose character can be elucidated by a good example.

_Two Jews met in a train at a Galician railway station. “Where are you
traveling?” asked one. “To Cracow,” was the reply. “Now see here, what a
liar you are!” said the first one, bristling. “When you say that you are
traveling to Cracow, you really wish me to believe that you are
traveling to Lemberg. Well, but I am sure that you are really traveling
to Cracow, so why lie about it?”_

This precious story, which creates an impression of exaggerated
subtlety, evidently operates by means of the technique of absurdity. The
second Jew has put himself in the way of being called a liar because he
has said that he is traveling to Cracow, which is his real goal!
However, this strong technical means—absurdity—is paired here with
another technique—representation through the opposite, for, according to
the uncontradicted assertion of the first, the second one is lying when
he speaks the truth, and speaks the truth by means of a lie. However,
the more earnest content of this joke is the question of the conditions
of truth; again the joke points to a problem and makes use of the
uncertainty of one of our commonest notions. Does it constitute truth if
one describes things as they are and does not concern himself with the
way the hearers will interpret what one has said? Or is this merely
Jesuitical truth, and does not the real truthfulness consist much more
in having a regard for the hearer and of furnishing him an exact picture
of his own mind? I consider jokes of this type sufficiently different
from the others to assign them a special place. What they attack is not
a person nor an institution, but the certainty of our very knowledge—one
of our speculative gifts. Hence the name “skeptical” witticism will be
the most expressive for them.

In the course of our discussion of the tendencies of wit we have gotten
perhaps many an elucidation and certainly found numerous incentives for
further investigations. But the results of this chapter combine with
those of the preceding chapter to form a difficult problem. If it be
true that the pleasure created by wit is dependent upon the technique on
one hand and upon the tendency on the other hand, under what common
point of view can these two utterly different pleasure-sources of wit he
united?




                              B. SYNTHESIS




                                   IV
          THE PLEASURE MECHANISM AND THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF WIT


We can now definitely assert that we know from what sources the peculiar
pleasure arises furnished us by wit. We know that we can be easily
misled to mistake our sense of satisfaction experienced through the
thought-content of the sentence for the actual pleasure derived from the
wit, on the other hand, the latter itself has two intrinsic sources,
namely, the wit-technique and the wit-tendency. What we now desire to
ascertain is the manner in which pleasure originates from these sources
and the mechanism of this resultant pleasure.

It seems to us that the desired explanation can be more easily
ascertained in tendency-wit than in harmless wit. We shall therefore
commence with the former.

The pleasure in tendency-wit results from the fact that a tendency,
whose gratification would otherwise remain unfulfilled, is actually
gratified. That such gratification is a source of pleasure is
self-evident without further discussion. But the manner in which wit
brings about gratification is connected with special conditions from
which we may perhaps gain further information. Here two cases must be
differentiated. The simpler case is the one in which the gratification
of the tendency is opposed by an external hindrance which is eluded by
the wit. This process we found, for example, in the reply which
Serenissimus received to his query whether the mother of the stranger he
addressed had ever sojourned in his home, and likewise in the question
of the art critic who asked: “And where is the Savior?” when the two
rich rogues showed him their portraits. In one case the tendency serves
to answer one insult with another; in the other case it offers an
affront instead of the demanded expert opinion; in both cases the
tendency was opposed by purely external factors, namely, the powerful
position of the persons who are the targets of the insult. Nevertheless
it may seem strange to us that these and analogous tendency-witticisms
have not the power to produce a strong laughing effect, no matter how
much they may gratify us.

It is different, however, if no external factors but internal hindrances
stand in the way of the direct realization of the tendency, that is, if
an inner feeling opposes the tendency. This condition, according to our
assumption, was present in the aggressive joke of Mr. N. (p. 28) and in
the one of Wendell Phillips, in whom a strong inclination to use
invectives was stifled by a highly developed æsthetic sense. With the
aid of wit the inner resistances in these special cases were overcome
and the inhibition removed. As in the case of external hindrances, the
gratification of the tendency is made possible, and a suppression with
its concomitant “psychic damming” is thus obviated. So far the mechanism
of the development of pleasure would seem to be identical in both cases.

At this place, however, we are inclined to feel that we should enter
more deeply into the differentiation of the psychological situation
between the cases of external and internal hindrance, as we have a faint
notion that the removal of the inner hindrance might possibly result in
a disproportionately higher contribution to pleasure. But I propose that
we rest content here, that we be satisfied for the present with this one
collection of evidence which adheres to what is essential to us. The
only difference between the cases of outer and inner hindrances consists
in the fact that here an already existing inhibition is removed, while
there the formation of a new inhibition is avoided. We hardly resort to
speculation when we assert that a “_psychic expenditure_” is required
for the formation as well as for the retention of a psychic inhibition.
Now if we find that in both cases the use of the tendency-wit produces
pleasure, then it may be assumed _that such resultant pleasure
corresponds to the economy of psychic expenditure_.

Thus we are once more confronted with the principle of _economy_ which
we noticed first in the study of the technique of word-wit. But whereas
the economy we believed to have found at first was in the use of few or
possibly the same words, we can here foresee an economy of psychic
expenditure in general in a far more comprehensive sense, and we think
it possible to come nearer to the nature of wit through a better
determination of the as yet very obscure idea of “psychic expenditure.”

A certain amount of haziness which we could not dissipate during the
study of the pleasure mechanism in tendency-wit we accept as a slight
punishment for attempting to elucidate more complicated problem before
the simpler one, or the tendency-wit before the harmless wit. We observe
that “_economy in the expenditure of inhibitions or suppressions_” seems
to be the secret of the pleasurable effect of tendency-wit, and we now
turn to the mechanism of the pleasure in harmless wit.

While examining appropriate examples of harmless witticisms, in which we
had no fear of false judgment through content or tendency, we were
forced to the conclusion that the techniques of with themselves are
pleasure-sources; now we wish to ascertain whether the pleasure may be
traced to the economy in psychic expenditure. In a group of these
witticisms (plays on words) the technique consisted in directing the
psychic focus upon the sound instead of upon the sense of the word, and
in allowing the (acoustic) word-disguise to take the place of the
meaning accorded to it by its relations to reality. We are really
justified in assuming that great relief is thereby afforded to the
psychic work, and that in the serious use of words we refrain from this
convenient procedure only at the expense of a certain amount of
exertion. We can observe that abnormal mental states, in which the
possibility of concentrating psychic expenditure on one place is
probably restricted, actually allow to come to the foreground word-sound
associations of this kind rather than the significance of the words, and
that such patients react in their speech with “outer” instead of “inner”
associations. Also in children who are still accustomed to treat the
word as an object we notice the inclination to look for the same meaning
in words of the same or of similar sounds, which is a source of great
amusement to adults. If we experience in wit an unmistakable pleasure
because through the use of the same or similar words we reach from one
set of ideas to a distant other one, (as in “Home-Roulard” from the
kitchen to politics), we can justly refer this pleasure to the economy
of psychic expenditure. The pleasure of the wit resulting from such a
“short-circuit” appears greater the more remote and foreign the two
series of ideas which become related through the same word are to each
other, or the greater the economy in thought brought about by the
technical means of wit. We may add that in this case wit makes use of a
means of connection which is rejected by and carefully avoided in
serious thinking.[45]

A second group of technical means of wit—unification, similar sounding
words, manifold application, modification of familiar idioms, allusions
to quotations—all evince one common character, namely, that one always
discovers something familiar where one expects to find something new
instead. To discover the familiar is pleasurable and it is not difficult
to recognize such pleasure as economy-pleasure and to refer it to the
economy of psychic expenditure.

That the discovery of the familiar—“recognition”—causes pleasure seems
to be universally admitted. Groos says:[46] “Recognition is everywhere
bound up with feelings of pleasure where it has not been made too
mechanical, (as perhaps in dressing...). Even the mere quality of
acquaintanceship is easily accompanied by that gentle delight which
Faust experiences when, after an uncanny experience, he steps into his
study.” If the act of recognition is so pleasureful, we may expect that
man merges into the habit of practicing this activity for its own sake,
that is, he experiments playfully with it. In fact, Aristotle recognized
in the joy of rediscovery the basis of artistic pleasure, and it cannot
be denied that this principle must not be overlooked even if it has not
such a far-reaching significance as Aristotle assumes.

Groos then discusses the games, whose character consists of heightening
the pleasure of rediscovery by putting hindrances in its path, or in
other words by raising a “psychic dam” which is removed by the act of
recognition. However, his attempted explanation leaves the assumption
that recognition as such is pleasurable, in that he attributes the
pleasure of recognition connected with these games to the pleasure in
power or to the surmounting of a difficulty. I consider this latter
factor as secondary, and I find no occasion for abandoning the simpler
explanation, that the recognition _per se_, i.e., through the
alleviation of the psychic expenditure, is pleasurable, and that the
games founded upon this pleasure make use of the damming-mechanism
merely in order to intensify their effect.

We know also that the source of pleasure in rhyme, alliteration,
refrain, and other forms of repetition of similar sounding words in
poetry, is due merely to the discovery of the familiar. A “sense of
power” plays no perceptible rôle in these techniques, which show so
marked an agreement with the “manifold application” in wit.

Considering the close connection between recognition and remembering,
the assumption is no longer daring that there exists also a pleasure in
remembering, i.e., that the act of remembering in itself is accompanied
by a feeling of pleasure of a similar origin. Groos seems to have no
objection to such an assumption, but he again deducts the pleasure of
remembering from the “sense of power” in which he seeks—as I believe
unjustly—the principal basis of pleasure in almost all games.


                       _The Factor of Actuality_

The use of another technical expedient of wit, which has not yet been
mentioned, is also dependent upon “the rediscovery of the familiar.” I
refer to the factor of _actuality_ (dealing with actual persons, things,
or events), which in many witticisms provides a prolific source of
pleasure and explains several peculiarities in the life history of wit.
There are witticisms which are entirely free from this condition, and in
a treatise on wit it is incumbent upon us to make use of such examples
almost exclusively. But we must not forget that we laughed perhaps more
heartily over such perennial witticisms than over others; witticisms
whose application now would be difficult, because they would require
long commentaries, and even with that aid the former effect could not be
attained. These latter witticisms contained allusions to persons and
occurrences which were “actual” at the time, which had stimulated
general interest and were endowed with tension. After the cessation of
this interest, after the settlement of these particular affairs, the
witticisms lost a part of their pleasurable effect, and a very
considerable. Thus, for example, the joke which my friendly host made
when he called the dish that was being served a “Home-Roulard,” seems to
me by no means as good now as when the question of Home Rule was a
continuous headline in the political columns of our newspaper. If I now
attempt to express my appreciation of this joke by stating that this one
word led us from the idea of the kitchen to the distant field of
politics, and saved us a long mental detour, I should have been forced
at that time to change this description as follows: “That this word led
us from the idea of the kitchen to the very distant field of politics;
but that our lively interest was all the keener because this question
was constantly absorbing us.” The same thing is true of another joke:
“_This girl reminds me of Dreyfus; the army does not believe in her
innocence_,” which has become blurred in spite of the fact that its
technical means has remained unchanged. The confusion arising from the
comparison with, and the double meaning of, the word “innocence” cannot
do away with the fact that the allusion, which at that time touched upon
a matter pregnant with excitement, now recalls an interest set at rest.
The many irresistible jokes about the present war will sink in our
estimation in a very short time.

A great many witticisms in circulation reach a certain age or rather go
through a course composed of a flourishing season and a mature season,
and then sink into complete oblivion. The need that people feel to draw
pleasure from their mental processes continually creates new witticisms
which are supported by current interests of the day. The vitality of
actual witticisms is not their own, it is borrowed by way of allusion
from those other interests, the expiration of which determines the fate
of the witticism. The factor of actuality which may be added as a
transitory pleasure-source of wit, although it is productive in itself,
cannot be simply put on the same basis as the rediscovery of the
familiar. It is much more a question of a special qualification of the
familiar which must be aided by the quality of freshness and recency and
which has not been affected by forgetfulness. In the formation of the
dream one also finds that there is a special preference for what is
recent, and one cannot refrain from inferring that the association with
what is recent is rewarded or facilitated by a special pleasure premium.

Unification, which is really nothing more than repetition in the sphere
of mental association instead of in material, has been accorded an
especial recognition as a pleasure-source of wit by G. Th. Fechner.[47]
He says: “In my opinion the principle of uniform connection of the
manifold, plays the most important rôle in the field under discussion;
it needs, however, the support of subsidiary determinations in order to
drive across the threshold the pleasure with its peculiar character
which the cases here belonging can furnish.”[48]

In all of these cases of repetition of the same association or of the
same word-material, of refinding the familiar and recent, we surely
cannot be prevented from referring the pleasure thereby experienced to
the economy in psychic expenditure; providing that this viewpoint proves
fertile for the explanation of single facts as well as for bringing to
light new generalities. We are fully conscious of the fact that we have
yet to make clear the manner in which this economy results and also the
meaning of the expression “psychic expenditure.”

The third group of the technique of wit, mostly thought-wit, which
includes false logic, displacement, absurdity, representation through
the opposite, and other varieties, may seem at first sight to present
special features and to be unrelated to the techniques of the discovery
of the familiar, or the replacing of object-associations by
word-associations. But it will not be difficult to demonstrate that this
group, too, shows an economy or facilitation of psychic expenditure.

It is quite obvious that it is easier and more convenient to turn away
from a definite trend of thought than to stick to it; it is easier to
mix up different things than to distinguish them; and it is particularly
easier to travel over modes of reasoning unsanctioned by logic; finally
in connecting words or thoughts it is especially easy to overlook the
fact that such connections should result in sense. All this is
indubitable and this is exactly what is done by the techniques of the
wit in question. It will sound strange, however, to assert that such
processes in the wit-work may produce pleasure, since outside of wit we
can experience only unpleasant feelings of defense against all these
kinds of inferior achievement of our mental activity.


                _Word-pleasure and Pleasure in Nonsense_

The “pleasure in nonsense,” as we may call it for short, is, in the
seriousness of our life, crowded back almost to the vanishing point. To
demonstrate it we must enter into the study of two cases in one of which
it is still visible and in the other becomes visible for the second
time. I refer to the behavior of the learning child and to the behavior
of the adult under unstable toxic influences. When the child learns to
control the vocabulary of its mother tongue it apparently takes great
pleasure in “experimenting playfully” with that material (Groos); it
connects words without regard for their meaning in order to obtain
pleasure from the rhyme and rhythm. Gradually the child is deprived of
this pleasure until only the senseful connection of words is allowed
him. But even in later life there is still a tendency to overstep the
acquired restrictions in the use of words, a tendency which manifests
itself in disfiguring the same by definite appendages, and in changing
their forms by means of certain contrivances (reduplication, trembling
speech) or even by developing an individual language for use in
playing,—efforts which reappear also among the insane of a certain
category.

I believe that whatever the motive which actuated the child when it
began such playings, in its further development the child indulges in
them fully conscious that they are nonsensical and derives pleasure from
this stimulus which is interdicted by reason. It now makes use of play
in order to withdraw from the pressure of critical reason. More
powerful, however, are the restrictions which must develop in education
along the lines of right thinking and in the separation of reality from
fiction, and it is for this reason that the resistance against the
pressures of thinking and reality is far-reaching and persistent; even
the phenomena of phantasy formation come under this point of view. The
power of reason usually grows so strong during the later part of
childhood and during that period of education which extends over the age
of puberty, that the pleasure in “freed nonsense” rarely dares manifest
itself. One fears to utter nonsense; but it seems to me that the
inclination characteristic of boys to act in a contradictory and
inexpedient manner is a direct outcome of this pleasure in nonsense. In
pathological cases one often sees this tendency so accentuated that it
again controls the speeches and answers of the pupils. In the case of
some college students who merged into neuroses I could convince myself
that the unconscious pleasure derived from the nonsense produced by them
is just as much responsible for their mistakes as their actual
ignorance.


                    _Reproduction of Old Liberties_

The student does not give up his demonstrations against the pressures of
thinking and reality whose domination becomes unceasingly intolerant and
unrestricted. A good part of the tendency of students to skylarking is
responsible for this reaction. Man is an “untiring pleasure seeker”—I
can no longer recall which author coined this happy expression—and finds
it extremely difficult to renounce pleasure once experienced. With the
hilarious nonsense of “sprees” (_Bierschwefel_), college cries, and
songs, the student attempts to preserve that pleasure which results from
freedom of thought, a freedom of which he is more and more deprived
through scholastic discipline. Even much later, when as a mature man he
meets with others at scientific congresses and class reunions and feels
himself a student again, he must read at the end of the session the
“_Kneipzeitung_,” or the comic college paper, which distorts the newly
gained knowledge into the nonsensical and thus compensates him for the
newly added mental inhibitions.

The very terms “_Bierschwefel_” and “_Kneipzeitung_” are proof that the
reason which has stifled the pleasure in nonsense has become so powerful
that not even temporarily can it be abandoned without toxic agency. The
change in the state of mind is the most valuable thing that alcohol
offers man, and that is the reason why this “poison” is not equally
indispensable for all people. The hilarious humor, whether due to
endogenous origin or whether produced toxically, weakens the inhibiting
forces among which is reason and thus again makes accessible
pleasure-sources which are burdened by suppression. It is very
instructive to see how the demand made upon wit sinks with the rise in
spirits. The latter actually replace wit, just as wit must make an
effort to replace the mental state in which the otherwise inhibited
pleasure possibilities (pleasure in nonsense among the rest) assert
themselves.

“With little wit and much comfort.”

Under the influence of alcohol the adult again becomes a child who
derives pleasure from the free disposal of his mental stream without
being restricted by the pressure of logic.

We hope we have shown that the technique of absurdity in wit corresponds
to a source of pleasure. We need hardly repeat that this pleasure
results from the economy of psychic expenditure or alleviation from the
pressure of reason.

On reviewing again the wit-technique classified under three headings we
notice that the first and last of these groups—the replacement of
object-association by word-association, and the use of absurdity as a
restorer of old liberties and as a relief from the pressure of
intellectual upbringing—can be taken collectively. Psychic relief may in
a way be compared to economy, which constitutes the technique of the
second group. Alleviation of the already existing psychic expenditure,
and economy in the yet to be offered psychic expenditure, are two
principles from which all techniques of wit and with them all pleasure
in these techniques can be deduced. The two forms of the technique and
the resultant pleasures correspond more or less in general to the
division of wit into word- and thought-witticisms.


                            _Play and Jest_

The preceding discussions have led us unexpectedly to an understanding
of the history of the development of psychogenesis of wit which we shall
now examine still further. We have become acquainted with the successive
steps in wit, the development of which up to tendency-wit will
undoubtedly reveal new relationships between the different characters of
wit. Antedating wit there exists something which we may designate as
“play” or “jest.” Play—we shall retain this name—appears in children
while they are learning how to use words and connect thoughts; this
playing is probably the result of an impulse which urges the child to
exercise its capacities (Groos). During this process it experiences
pleasurable effects which originate from the repetition of similarities,
the rediscovery of the familiar, sound-associations, etc., which may be
explained as an unexpected economy of psychic expenditure. Therefore it
surprises no one that these resulting pleasures urge the child to
practice playing and impel it to continue without regard for the meaning
of words or the connections between sentences. Playing with words and
thoughts, motivated by certain pleasures in economy, would thus be the
first step of wit.

This playing is stopped by the growing strength of a factor which may
well be called criticism or reason. The play is then rejected as
senseless or as directly absurd, and by virtue of reason it becomes
impossible. Only accidentally is it now possible to derive pleasure from
those sources of rediscovery of the familiar, etc., which is explained
by the fact that the maturing person has then merged into a playful mood
which, as in the case of merriment in the child, removes inhibitions. In
this way only is the old pleasure-giving playing made possible, but as
men do not wish to wait for these propitious occasions and also hate to
forego this pleasure, they seek means to make themselves independent of
these pleasant states. The further development of wit is directed by
these two impulses; the one striving to elude reason and the other to
substitute for the adult an infantile state of mind.

This gives rise to the second stage of wit, the _jest_ (_Scherz_). The
object of the jest is to bring about the resultant pleasure of playing
and at the same time appease the protesting reason which strives to
suppress the pleasant feeling. There is but one way to accomplish this.
The senseless combination of words or the absurd linking of thoughts
must make sense after all. The whole process of wit production is
therefore directed towards the discovery of words and thought
constellations which fulfill these conditions. The jest makes use of
almost all the technical means of wit, and usage of language makes no
consequential distinction between jest (_Scherz_) and wit (_Witz_). What
distinguishes the jest from wit is the fact that the pith of the
sentence withdrawn from criticism does not need to be valuable, new, or
even good; it matters only that it can be expressed, even though what it
may say is obsolete, superfluous, and useless. The most conspicuous
factor of the jest is the gratification it affords by making possible
that which reason forbids.

A mere jest is the following of Professor Kästner, who taught physics at
Göttingen in the 16th century, and who was fond of making jokes. Wishing
to enroll a student named Warr in his class, he asked him his age, and
upon receiving the reply that he was thirty years of age he exclaimed:
“Aha, so I have the honor of seeing the thirty years’ War.”[49] When
asked what vocations his sons followed Rokitansky jestingly answered:
“Two are healing and two are howling,” (two physicians and two singers).
The reply was correct and therefore unimpeachable, but it added nothing
to what is contained in the parenthetic expression. There is no doubt
that the answer assumed another form only because of the pleasure which
arises from the unification and assonance of both words.

I believe that we now see our way clear. In estimating the techniques of
wit we were constantly disturbed by the fact that these are not peculiar
to wit alone, and yet the nature of wit seemed to depend upon them,
since their removal by means of reduction nullified the character as
well as the pleasure of wit. Now we become aware that what we have
described as techniques of wit—and which in a certain sense we shall
have to continue to call so—are really the sources from which wit
derives pleasure; nor does it strike us as strange that other processes
draw from the same sources with the same object in view. The technique,
however, which is peculiar to and belongs to wit alone consists in a
process of safeguarding the use of this pleasure-forming means against
the protest of reason which would obviate the pleasure. We can make few
generalizations about this process. The wit-work, as we have already
remarked, expresses itself in the selection of such word-material and
such thought-situations as to permit the old play with words and
thoughts to stand the test of reason; but to accomplish this end the
cleverest use must be made of all the peculiarities of the stock of
words and of all constellations of mental combinations. Later on perhaps
we shall be in a position to characterize the wit-work by a definite
attribute; for the present it must remain unexplained how our wit makes
its advantageous selections. The tendency and capacity of wit to guard
the pleasure-forming word and thought combinations against reason,
already makes itself visible as an essential criterion in jests. From
the beginning its object is to remove inner inhibitions and thereby
render productive those pleasure-sources which have become inaccessible,
and we shall find that it remains true to this characteristic throughout
the course of its entire development.

We are now in a position to prescribe a correct place for the factor
“sense in nonsense,” (see Introduction, page 8), to which the authors
ascribe so much significance in respect to the recognition of wit and
the explanation of the pleasurable effect. The two firmly established
points in the determination of wit—its tendency to carry through the
pleasureful play, and its effort to guard it against the criticism of
reason—make it perfectly clear why the individual witticism, even though
it appear nonsensical from one point of view, must appear full of
meaning or at least acceptable from another. How it accomplishes this is
the business of the wit-work; if it is not successful it is relegated to
the category of “nonsense.” Nor do we find it necessary to deduce the
resultant pleasure of wit from the conflict of feelings which emerge
either directly or by way of “confusion and clearness,” from the
simultaneous sense and nonsense of the wit. There is just as little
necessity for our delving deeper into the question how pleasure can come
from the succession of that part of the wit considered senseless and
from that part recognized as senseful. The psychogenesis of wit has
taught us that the pleasure of wit arises from word-play or from the
liberation of nonsense, and that the sense of wit is meant only to guard
this pleasure against suppression through reason.


                             _Jest and Wit_

Thus the problem of the essential character of wit could almost be
explained by means of the jest. We may follow the development of the
jest until it reaches its height in the tendency-wit. The jest gives
tendency a prior position when it is a question of supplying us with
pleasure, and it is content when its utterance does not appear utterly
senseless or insipid. But if this utterance is substantial and valuable
the jest changes into wit. A thought, which would have been worthy of
our interest even when expressed in the most unpretentious form, is now
invested in a form which must in itself excite our sense of
satisfaction. Such an association we cannot help thinking certainly has
not come into existence unintentionally; we must make effort to divine
the intention at the bottom of the formation of wit. An incidental
observation, made once before, will put us on the right track. We have
already remarked that a good witticism gives us, so to speak, a general
feeling of satisfaction without our being able to decide offhand which
part of the pleasure comes from the witty form and which part from the
excellent thought contained in the context (p. 131). We are deceiving
ourselves constantly about this division; sometimes we overvalue the
quality of the wit on account of our admiration for the thought
contained therein, and then again we overestimate the value of the
thought on account of the pleasure afforded us by the witty investment.
We know not what gives us pleasure nor at what we are laughing. This
uncertainty of our judgment, assuming it to be a fact, may have given
the motive for the formation of wit in the literal sense. The thought
seeks the witty disguise because it thereby recommends itself to our
attention and can thus appear to us more important and valuable than it
really is; but above all because this disguise fascinates and confuses
our reason. We are apt to attribute to the thought the pleasure derived
from the witty form, and we are not inclined to consider improper what
has given us pleasure, and in this way deprive ourselves of a source of
pleasure. For if wit made us laugh it was because it established in us a
mood most unfavorable to reason, which in turn has forced upon us that
state of mind which was once contented with mere playing and which wit
has attempted to replace with all the means at its command. Although we
have already established the fact that such wit is harmless and does not
yet show a tendency, we may not deny that, strictly speaking, it is the
jest alone which shows no tendency; that is, it serves to produce
pleasure only. For wit is really never purposeless even if the thought
contained therein shows no tendency and merely serves a theoretical,
intellectual interest. Wit carries out its purpose in advancing the
thought by magnifying it and by guarding it against reason. Here again
it reveals its original nature in that it sets itself up against an
inhibiting and restrictive power, or against the critical judgment.

The first use of wit, which goes beyond the mere production of pleasure,
points out the road to be followed. Wit is now recognized as a powerful
psychic factor whose weight can decide the issue if it falls into this
or that side of the scale. The great tendencies and impulses of our
psychic life enlist its service for their own purposes. The original
purposeless wit, which began as play, becomes related in a _secondary_
manner to tendencies from which nothing that is formed in psychic life
can escape for any length of time. We already know what it can achieve
in the service of the exhibitionistic, aggressive, cynical, and
sceptical tendencies. In the case of obscene wit, which originated in
the smutty joke, it makes a confederate of the third person who
originally disturbed the sexual situation, by giving him pleasure
through the utterance which causes the woman to be ashamed in his
presence. In the case of the aggressive tendency, wit by the same means
changes the original indifferent hearers into active haters and
scorners, and in this way confronts the enemy with a host of opponents
where formerly there was but one. In the first case it overcomes the
inhibitions of shame and decorum by the pleasure premium which it
offers. In the second case it overthrows the critical judgment which
would otherwise have examined the dispute in question. In the third and
fourth cases where wit is in the service of the cynical and sceptical
tendency, it shatters the respect for institutions and truths in which
the hearer had believed, first by strengthening the argument, and
secondly by resorting to a new method of attack. Where the argument
seeks to draw the hearer’s reason to its side, wit strives to push aside
this reason. There is no doubt that wit has chosen the way which is
psychologically more efficacious.


                  _The Development into Tendency-wit_

What impressed us in reviewing the achievements of tendency-wit was the
effect it produced on the hearer. It is more important, however, to
understand the effect produced by wit on the psychic life of the person
who makes it, or more precisely expressed, on the psychic life of the
person who conceives it. Once before we have expressed the intention,
which we find occasion to repeat here, that we wish to study the psychic
processes of wit in regard to its apportionment between two persons. We
can assume for the present that the psychic process aroused by wit in
the hearer is usually an imitation of the psychic processes of the wit
producer. The outer inhibitions which are to be overcome in the hearer
correspond to the inner inhibitions of the wit producer. In the latter
the expectation of the outer hindrance exists, at least as an inhibiting
idea. The inner hindrance, which is overcome in tendency-wit, is evident
in some single cases; for example, in Mr. N.’s joke (p. 28) we can
assume that it not only enables the hearer to enjoy the pleasure of the
aggression through injuries but it also makes it possible for him to
produce the wit in the first place. Of the different kinds of inner
inhibitions or suppressions one is especially worthy of our interest
because it is the most far-reaching. We designate that form by the term
“repression.” It is characterized by the fact that it excludes from
consciousness certain former emotions and their products. We shall learn
that tendency-wit itself is capable of liberating pleasure from sources
that have undergone repression. If the overcoming of outer hindrances
can be referred, in the manner indicated above, to inner inhibitions and
repressions we may say that tendency-wit proves more clearly than any
other developmental stage of wit that the main character of wit-making
is to set free pleasure by removing inhibitions. It reinforces
tendencies to which it gives its services by bringing them assistance
from repressed emotions; or it puts itself at the disposal of the
repressed tendencies directly.

One may readily concede that these are the functions of tendency-wit,
but one must nevertheless admit that we do not understand in what manner
these functions can succeed in accomplishing their end. The power of
tendency-wit consists in the pleasure which it derives from the sources
of word-plays and liberated nonsense, and if one can judge from the
impressions received from purposeless jests, one cannot possibly
consider the amount of the pleasure so great as to believe that it has
the power to annul deep-rooted inhibitions and repressions. As a matter
of fact we do not deal here with a simple propelling power but rather
with a more complicated mechanism. Instead of covering the long
circuitous route through which I arrived at an understanding of this
relationship, I shall endeavor to demonstrate it by a short synthetic
route.

G. Th. Fechner has established the principle of æsthetic assistance or
enhancement which he explains in the following words: “_From the
unopposed meeting of pleasurable states (Bedingungen) which individually
accomplish little, there results a greater, often much greater resultant
pleasure than is warranted by the sum of the pleasure values of the
separate states, or a greater result than could be accounted for as the
sum of the individual effects; in fact the mere meeting of this kind can
result in a positive pleasure product which overflows the threshold of
pleasure when the factors taken separately are too weak to accomplish
this. The only condition is that in comparison to others they must
produce a greater sense of satisfaction._”[50] I am of the opinion that
the theme of wit does not give us the opportunity to test the
correctness of this principle which is demonstrable in many other
artistic fields. But from wit we have learned something, which at least
comes near this principle, namely, that in a co-operation of many
pleasure-producing factors we are in no position to assign to each one
the resultant part which really belongs to it (see p. 131). But the
situation assumed in the principle of assistance can be varied, and for
these new conditions we can formulate the following combination of
questions which are worthy of a reply. What usually happens if in one
constellation there is a meeting of pleasurable and painful conditions?
Upon what depends the result and the previous intimations of the result?
Tendency-wit particularly shows these possibilities. There is one
feeling or impulse which strives to liberate pleasure from a certain
source and under unrestricted conditions certainly would liberate it,
but there is another impulse which works against this development of
pleasure, that is, which inhibits or suppresses it. The suppressing
stream, as the result shows, must be somewhat stronger than the one
suppressed, which however is by no means destroyed.


                     _The Fore-pleasure Principle_

But now there appears another impulse which strives to set free pleasure
by this identical process, even though from different sources it thus
acts like the suppressed stream. What can be the result in such a case?
An example can make this clearer than this schematization. There is an
impulse to insult a certain person; but this is so strongly opposed by a
feeling of decorum and æsthetic culture that the impulse to insult must
be crushed. If, for example, by virtue of some changed emotional state
the insult should happen to break through, this insulting tendency would
subsequently be painfully perceived. Therefore the insult is omitted.
There is a possibility, however, of making good wit from the words or
thoughts which would have served in the insult; that is, pleasure can be
set free from other sources without being hindered by the same
suppression. But the second development of pleasure would have to be
foregone if the insulting quality of the wit were not allowed to come
out, and as the latter is allowed to come to the surface, it is
connected with the new release of pleasure. Experience with tendency-wit
shows that under such circumstances the suppressed tendency can become
so strengthened by the aid of wit-pleasure as to overcome the otherwise
stronger inhibition. One resorts to insults because wit is thereby made
impossible. But the satisfaction thus obtained is not produced by wit
alone; it is incomparably greater, in fact it is by so much greater than
the pleasure of the wit, that we must assume that the former suppressed
tendency has succeeded in breaking through, perhaps without the need of
an outlet. Under these circumstances tendency-wit causes the most
prolific laughter.

Perhaps the investigation of the determinations of laughter will aid us
in forming a clearer picture of the process of the aid of wit against
suppression. But we see even now that the case of tendency-wit is a
special case of the principle of aid. A possibility of the development
of pleasure enters into a situation in which another pleasure
possibility is so hindered that individually it would not result in
pleasure. The result is a development of pleasure which is greater by
far than the added possibility. The latter acted, as it were, as an
_alluring premium_; with the aid of a small sum of pleasure a very large
and almost inaccessible amount is obtained. I have good grounds for
thinking that this principle corresponds to an arrangement which holds
true in many widely separated spheres of the psychic life, and I
consider it appropriate to designate the pleasure serving to liberate
the large sum of pleasure as _fore-pleasure_ and the principle as the
_principle of fore-pleasure_.


                  _Play-pleasure and Removal-pleasure_

The effect of tendency-wit may now be formulated as follows: It enters
the service of tendencies in order to produce new pleasure by removing
suppressions and repressions. This it does, using wit-pleasure as
fore-pleasure. When we now review its development we may say that wit
has remained true to its nature from beginning to end. It begins as play
in order to obtain pleasure from the free use of words and thoughts. As
soon as the growing reason forbids this senseless play with words and
thoughts, it turns to the jest or joke in order to hold to these sources
of pleasure and in order to be able to gain new pleasure from the
liberation of the absurd. In the rôle of harmless wit it assists the
thoughts and fortifies them against the impugnment of the critical
judgment, whereby it makes use of the principle of intermingling the
pleasure-sources. Finally, it enters into the great struggling
suppressed tendencies in order to remove inner inhibitions in accordance
with the principle of fore-pleasure. Reason, critical judgment, and
suppression, these are the forces which it combats in turn. It firmly
holds on to the original word-pleasure-sources, and beginning with the
stage of the jest opens for itself new pleasure-sources by removing
inhibition. The pleasure which it produces, be it play-pleasure or
removal-pleasure, can at all times be traced to the economy of psychic
expenditure, in so far as such a conception does not contradict the
nature of pleasure, and proves itself productive also in other
fields.[51]




                                   V
             THE MOTIVES OF WIT AND WIT AS A SOCIAL PROCESS


It seems superfluous to speak of the motives of wit, since the purpose
of obtaining pleasure must be recognized as a sufficient motive of the
wit-work. But on the one hand it is not impossible that still other
motives participate in the production of wit, and on the other hand, in
view of certain well-known experiences, the theme of the subjective
determination of wit must be discussed.

Two things above all urge us to it. Though wit-making is an excellent
means of obtaining pleasure from the psychic processes, we know that not
all persons are equally able to make use of it. Wit-making is not at the
disposal of all, in general there are but a few persons to whom one can
point and say that they are witty. Here wit seems to be a special
ability somewhere within the region of the old “psychic faculties,” and
this shows itself in its appearance as fairly independent of the other
faculties such as intelligence, phantasy, memory, etc. A special talent
or psychic determination permitting or favoring wit-making must be
presupposed in all wit-makers.

I am afraid that we shall not get very far in the exploration of this
theme. Only now and then do we succeed in proceeding from the
understanding of a single witticism to the knowledge of the subjective
determinations in the mind of the wit-maker. It is quite accidental that
the example of wit with which we began our investigation of the
wit-technique permits us also to gain some insight into the subjective
determination of the witticism. I am referring to Heine’s witticism, to
which also Heymans and Lipps have paid attention.

“_I was sitting next to Solomon Rothschild and he treated me just as an
equal, quite famillionaire_” (“Bäder von Lucca”).


      _Subjective Determination of the “Famillionaire” Witticism_

Heine put this word in the mouth of a comical person, Hirsch-Hyacinth,
collector, operator and tax appraiser from Hamburg, and valet of the
aristocratic baron, Cristoforo Gumpelino (formerly Gumpel). Evidently
the poet has experienced great pleasure in these productions, for he
allows Hirsch-Hyacinth to talk big and puts in his mouth the most
amusing and most candid utterances; he positively endows him with the
practical wisdom of a Sancho Panza. It is a pity that Heine, as it
seems, had no liking for this dramatic figure and that he drops the
delightful character so soon. From many passages it would seem that the
poet himself is speaking behind the transparent mask of Hirsch-Hyacinth,
and we are quite convinced that this person is nothing but a parody of
the poet himself. Hirsch tells of reasons why he has discarded his
former name and now calls himself Hyacinth. “Besides I have the
advantage,” he continues, “of having an H on my seal already, and
therefore I am in no need of having a new letter engraved.” But Heine
himself resorted to this economy when he changed his surname “Harry” to
“Heinrich” at his baptism. Every one acquainted with the life of the
poet will recall that in Hamburg, where one also meets the personage
Hirsch-Hyacinth, Heine had an uncle of the same name, who played the
greatest rôle in Heine’s life as the wealthy member of the family. The
uncle’s name was likewise Solomon, just like the elderly Rothschild who
treated the impecunious Hirsch on such a famillionaire basis. What seems
to be merely a jest in the mouth of Hirsch-Hyacinth soon reveals a
background of earnest bitterness when we attribute it to the nephew
Harry-Heinrich. For he belonged to the family, nay, more, it was his
earnest wish to marry a daughter of this uncle, but she refused him, and
his uncle always treated him on a somewhat famillionaire basis, as a
poor relative. His rich relatives in Hamburg always dealt with him
condescendingly. I recall the story of one of his old aunts by marriage
who, when she was still young and pretty, sat next to some one at a
family dinner who seemed to her unprepossessing and whom the other
members of the family treated shabbily. She did not feel herself called
upon to be any more condescending towards him. Only many years later did
she discover that the careless and neglected cousin was the poet
Heinrich Heine. We know from many a record how keenly Heine suffered
from these repulses at the hands of his wealthy relatives in his youth
and during later years. The witticism “famillionaire” grew out of the
soil of such a subjective emotional feeling.

One may suspect similar subjective determinations in many other
witticisms of the great scoffers, but I know of no other example by
which one can show this in such a convincing way. It is therefore
hazardous to venture a more definite opinion about the nature of this
personal determination. Furthermore, one is not inclined in the first
place to claim similar complicated conditions for the origin of each and
every witticism. Neither are the witty productions of other celebrated
men better suited to give us the desired insight into the subjective
determination of wit. In fact, one gets the impression that the
subjective determination of wit production is oftentimes not unrelated
to persons suffering from neurotic diseases, when, for example, one
learns that Lichtenberg was a confirmed hypochondriac burdened with all
kinds of eccentricities. The great majority of witticisms, especially
those produced from current happenings, are anonymous; one might be
inquisitive to know what kind of people they are who originate them. The
physician occasionally has an opportunity to make a study of persons
who, if not renowned wits, are recognized in their circle as witty and
as originators of many passable witticisms; he is often surprised to
find such persons showing dissociated personalities and a predisposition
to nervous affections. However, owing to insufficient data, we certainly
cannot maintain that such a psychoneurotic constitution is a regular or
necessary subjective condition for wit-making.

A clearer case is afforded by Jewish witticisms which, as before
mentioned, are made exclusively by Jews themselves, whereas Jewish
stories of different origin rarely rise above the level of the comical
strain or of brutal mockery (p. 166). The determination for the
self-participation here, as in Heine’s joke “famillionaire,” seems to be
due to the fact that the person finds it difficult to express directly
his criticism or aggression and is thus compelled to resort to by-ways.

Other subjective determinations or favorable conditions for wit-making
are less shrouded in darkness. The motive for the production of harmless
wit is usually the ambitious impulse to display one’s spirit or to “show
off.” It is an impulse comparable to the impulse toward sexual
exhibition. The existence of numerous inhibited impulses whose
suppression retains some weakness produces a state favorable for the
production of tendency-wit. Thus certain single components of the sexual
constitution may appear as motives for wit-formation. A whole series of
obscene witticisms lead one to the conclusion that a person who gives
origin to such wit conceals a desire to exhibit. Persons having a
powerful sadistical component in their sexuality, which is more or less
inhibited in life, are most successful with the tendency-wit of
aggression.


                      _The Impulse to Impart Wit_

The second fact which impels one to examine the subjective determination
of wit is the common experience that nobody is satisfied with making wit
for himself. Wit-making is inseparably connected with the desire to
impart it; in fact this impulse is so strong that it is often realized
after overcoming strong objections. In the comic, too, one experiences
pleasure by imparting it to another person; but this is not imperative;
one can enjoy the comic alone when one happens on it. Wit, on the other
hand, must be imparted. Apparently the process of wit-formation does not
end with the conception of wit. There remains something which strives to
complete the mysterious process of wit-formation by imparting it.

We cannot conjecture, in the first place, what may have motivated the
impulse to impart wit. But in wit we notice another peculiarity which
again distinguishes it from the comic. If I encounter the latter I can
laugh heartily over it alone; I am naturally pleased if by imparting it
to some one else I make him laugh too. In the case of wit, however,
which occurs to me or which I have made, I cannot laugh over it in spite
of the unmistakable feeling of pleasure which I experience in the
witticism. It is possible that my need to impart the witticism to
another is in some way connected with the resultant laughter, which is
manifest in the other, but denied to me.

But why do I not laugh over my own joke? And what rôle does the other
person play in it?

Let us consider the last query first. In the comic usually two persons
come into consideration. Besides my own ego there is another person in
whom I find something comic; if objects appear comical to me, it takes
place by means of a sort of personification which is not uncommon in our
notional life. The comic process is satisfied with these two persons,
the ego and the object person; there may also be a third person, but it
is not obligatory. Wit as a play with one’s own words and thoughts at
first dispenses with an object person, but already, upon the first step
of the jest, it demands another person to whom it can impart its result,
if it has succeeded in safeguarding play and nonsense against the
remonstrance of reason. The second person in wit does not, however,
correspond to the object person, but to the third person who is the
other person in the comic. It seems that in the jest the decision as to
whether wit has fulfilled its task is transferred to the other person,
as if the ego were not quite certain of its opinion in the matter. The
harmless wit is also in need of the other person’s support in order to
ascertain whether it has accomplished its purpose. If wit enters the
service of sexual or hostile tendencies, it can be described as a
psychic process among three persons, just as in the comic, with the
exception that there the third person plays a different rôle. The
psychic process of wit is consummated here between the first person—the
ego, and the third person—the stranger, and not, as in the comic,
between the ego and the object person.

Also, in the case of the third person of wit, the wit is confronted with
subjective determinations which can make the goal of the
pleasure-stimulus unattainable. As Shakespeare says in _Love’s Labor’s
Lost_ (Act V, Scene 2):

               “A jest’s prosperity lies in the ear
               Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
               Of him that makes it.”

He whose thoughts run in sober channels is incompetent to declare
whether or not the jest is a good one. He himself must be in a jovial,
or at least indifferent, state of mind in order to become the third
person of the jest. The same hindrance is present in the case of both
harmless and tendency-wit; but in the latter the antagonism to the
tendency which wishes to serve wit, appears as a new hindrance. The
readiness to laugh about an excellent smutty joke cannot manifest itself
if the exposure concerns an honored kinsman of the third person. In an
assemblage of divines and pastors no one would dare to refer to Heine’s
comparison of Catholic and Protestant priests as retail dealers and
employees of a wholesale business. In the presence of my opponent’s
friends the wittiest invectives with which I might assail him would not
be considered witticisms but invectives, and in the minds of my hearers
it would create not pleasure, but indignation. A certain amount of
willingness or a certain indifference, the absence of all factors which
might evoke strong feelings in opposition to the tendency, are absolute
conditions for the participation of the third person in the completion
of the wit-process.


                  _The Third Person of the Witticism_

Wherever such hindrances to the operation of wit fail, we see the
phenomenon which we are now investigating, namely, that the pleasure
which the wit has provided manifests itself more clearly in the third
person than in the originator of the wit. We must be satisfied to use
the expression “more clearly” where we should be inclined to ask whether
the pleasure of the hearer is not more intensive than that of the wit
producer, because we are obviously lacking the means of measuring and
comparing it. We see, however, that the hearer shows his pleasure by
means of explosive laughter after the first person, in most cases with a
serious expression on his face, has related the joke. If I repeat a
witticism which I have heard, I am forced, in order not to spoil its
effect, to conduct myself during its recital exactly like him who made
it. We may now put the question whether from this determination of
laughter over wit we can draw conclusions concerning the psychic process
of wit-formation.

Now it cannot be our intention to take into consideration everything
that has been asserted and printed about the nature of laughter. We are
deterred from this undertaking by the statement which Dugas, one of
Ribot’s pupils, put at the beginning of his book _Psychologie du rire_
(1902). “Il n’est pas de fait plus banal et plus étudié que le rire, il
n’en est pas qui ait eu le don d’exciter davantage la curiosité du
vulgaire et celle des philosophes, il n’ent est pas sur lequel on ait
recueilli plus d’observations et bâti plus de théories, et avec cela il
n’en est pas qui demeure plus inexpliqué, on serait tenté de dire avec
les sceptiques qu’il faut être content de rire et de ne pas chercher à
savoir pourquoi on rit, d’autant que peut-être le réflexion tue le rire,
et qu’il serait alors contradictoire qu’elle en découvrit les causes”
(page 1).

On the other hand, we must make sure to utilize for our purposes a view
of the mechanism of laughter which fits our own realm of thought
excellently. I refer to the attempted explanation of H. Spencer in his
essay entitled _Physiology of Laughter_.[52]

According to Spencer laughter is a phenomenon of discharge of psychic
irritation, and an evidence of the fact that the psychic utilization of
this irritation has suddenly met with a hindrance. The psychological
situation, which discharges itself in laughter, he describes in the
following words: “Laughter naturally results only when consciousness is
unawares transferred from great things to small—only when there is what
we call a descending incongruity.”[53]

In an almost analogous sense the French authors (Dugas) designate
laughter as a “détente,” a manifestation of release of tension, and A.
Bain’s theory, “Laughter a relief from restraint,” seems to me to
approach Spencer’s conceptions nearer than many authors would have us
believe.

However, we experience the desire to modify Spencer’s thought; to give a
more definite meaning to some of the ideas and to change others. We
would say that laughter arises when the sum total of psychic energy,
formerly used for the occupation of certain psychic channels, has become
unutilizable so that it can experience absolute discharge. We know what
criticism such a declaration invites, but for our defense we dare cite a
pertinent quotation from Lipps’s treatise on _Komik und Humor_, an
analysis which throws light on other problems besides the comic and
humor. He says: “In the end individual psychological problems always
lead us fairly deeply into psychology, so that fundamentally no
psychological problem may be considered by itself” (p. 71). The terms
“psychic energy,” “discharge,” and the treatment of psychic energy as a
quantity have become habitual modes of thinking since I began to explain
to myself the fact of psychopathology philosophically. Being of the same
opinion as Lipps I have essayed to represent in my _Interpretation of
Dreams_ the unconscious psychic processes as real entities, and I have
not represented the conscious contents as the “real psychic
activity.”[54] Only when I speak about the “investing energy
(_Besetzung_) of psychic channels,” do I seem to deviate from the
analogies that Lipps uses. The knowledge that I have gained about the
fact that psychic energy can be displaced from one idea to another along
certain association channels, and about the almost indestructible
conservation of the traces of psychic processes, have actually made it
possible for me to attempt such a representation of the unknown. In
order to obviate the possibility of a misunderstanding I must add that I
am making no attempt to proclaim that cells and fibers, or the neuron
system in vogue nowadays, represent these psychic paths, even if such
paths would have to be represented by the organic elements of the
nervous system in a manner which cannot yet be indicated.


                       _Laughter as a Discharge_

Thus, according to our assumption, the conditions for laughter are such
that a sum of psychic energy hitherto employed in the occupation of some
paths may experience free discharge. And since not all laughter, (but
surely the laughter of wit), is a sign of pleasure, we shall be inclined
to refer this pleasure to the release of previously existing static
energy (_Besetzungsenergie_). When we see that the hearer of the
witticism laughs, while the creator of the same cannot, then that must
indicate that in the hearer a sum of damming energy has been released
and discharged, whereas during the wit-formation, either in the release
or in the discharge, inhibitions resulted. One can characterize the
psychic process in the hearer, in the third person of the witticism,
hardly more pointedly than by asserting that he has bought the pleasure
of the witticism with very little expenditure on his part. One might say
that it is presented to him. The words of the witticism which he hears
necessarily produce in him that idea or thought-connection whose
formation in him was also resisted by great inner hindrances. He would
have had to make an effort of his own in order to bring it about
spontaneously like the first person, or he would have had to put forth
at least as much psychic expenditure as to equalize the force of the
suppression or repression of the inhibition. This psychic expenditure he
has saved himself; according to our former discussion (p. 80) we should
say that his pleasure corresponds to this economy. Following our
understanding of the mechanism of laughter we should be more likely to
say that the static energy utilized in the inhibition has now suddenly
become superfluous and neutralized because a forbidden idea came into
existence on the way to auditory perception and is therefore ready to be
discharged through laughter. Essentially both statements amount to the
same thing, for the economized expenditure corresponds exactly to the
now superfluous inhibition. The latter statement is more obvious, for it
permits us to say that the hearer of the witticism laughs with the
amount of psychic energy which was liberated by the suspension of
inhibition energy; that is, he laughs away, as it were, this amount of
psychic energy.


                 _Why the First Person Does Not Laugh_

If the person in whom the witticism is formed cannot laugh, then it
indicates, as we have just remarked, that there is a deviation from the
process in the case of the third person which concerns either the
suspension of the inhibition energy or the discharge possibility of the
same. But the first of the two cases is inconclusive, as we must
presently see. The inhibition energy of the first person must have been
dissipated, for otherwise there would have been no witticism, the
formation of which had to overcome just such a resistance. Otherwise,
too, it would have been impossible for the first person to experience
the wit-pleasure which the removal of the inhibition forced us to
deduce. But there remains a second possibility, namely, that even though
he experienced pleasure the first person cannot laugh, because the
possibility of discharge has been disturbed. In the production of
laughter such discharge is essential; an interruption in the possibility
of discharge might result from the attachment of the freed occupation
energy to some immediate endopsychic possibility. It is well that we
have become cognizant of this possibility; we shall soon pay more
attention to it. But with the wit-maker still another condition leading
to the same result is possible. Perhaps, after all, no appreciable
amount of energy has been liberated, in spite of the successful release
of occupation energy. In the first person of the witticism wit-work
actually takes place which must correspond to a certain amount of fresh
psychic expenditure. Thus the first person contributes the power which
removes the inhibitions and which surely results in a gain of pleasure
for himself; in the case of tendency-wit it is indeed a very big gain,
since the fore-pleasure gained from the wit-work takes upon itself the
further removal of inhibitions. But the expenditure of the wit-work is,
in every case, derived from the gain which is the result of the removal
of inhibitions; it is the same expenditure which escapes from the hearer
of the witticism. To confirm what was said above it may be added that
the witticism loses its laughter effect in the third person as soon as
an expenditure of mental work is exacted of him. The allusions of the
witticism must be striking, and the omissions easily supplemented; with
the awakening of conscious interest in thinking, the effect of the
witticism is regularly made impossible. Here lies the real distinction
between the witticism and the riddle. It may be that the psychic
constellations during wit-work are not at all favorable to the free
discharge of the energy gained. We are not here in a position to gain a
deeper understanding; our inquiry as to why the third person laughs we
have been able to clear up better than the question why the first person
does not laugh.

At any rate, if we have well in mind these views about the conditions of
laughter and about the psychic process in the third person, we have
arrived at a place where we can satisfactorily elucidate an entire
series of peculiarities which are familiar in wit, but which have not
been understood. Before an amount of interlocked energy, capable of
discharge, is to be liberated in the third person, there are several
conditions which must be fulfilled or which at least are desirable. 1.
It must be definitely established that the third person really produces
this expenditure of energy. 2. Care must be taken that when the latter
becomes freed that it should find another psychic use instead of
offering itself to the motor discharge. 3. It can be of advantage only
if the energy to be liberated in the third person is first strengthened
and heightened. Certain processes of wit-work which we can gather
together under the caption of secondary or auxiliary techniques serve
all these purposes.

The first of these conditions determines one of the qualifications of
the third person as hearer of the witticism. He must throughout be so
completely in psychic harmony with the first person that he makes use of
the same inner inhibitions which the wit-work has overcome in the first
person. Whoever is focused on smutty jokes will not be able to derive
pleasure from clever exhibitionistic wit. Mr. N.’s aggressions will not
be understood by uncultured people who are wont to give free rein to
their pleasure gained by insulting others. Every witticism thus demands
its own public, and to laugh over the same witticisms is a proof of
absolute psychic agreement. We have indeed arrived at a point where we
are at liberty to examine even more thoroughly the process in the third
person’s mind. The latter must be able habitually to produce the same
inhibition which the joke has surmounted in the first person, so that,
as soon as he hears the joke, there awakens within him compulsively and
automatically a readiness for this inhibition. This readiness for the
inhibition, which I must conceive as a true expenditure analogous to the
mobilization of an army, is simultaneously recognized as superfluous or
as belated, and is thus immediately discharged in its nascent state
through the channel of laughter.[55]

The second condition for the production of the free discharge, a cutting
off of any other outlets for the liberated energy, seems to me of far
greater importance. It furnishes the theoretical explanation for the
uncertainty of the effect of wit; if the thoughts expressed in the
witticism evoke very exciting ideas in the hearer, (depending on the
agreement or antagonism between the wit’s tendencies and the train of
thought dominating the hearer), the witty process either receives or is
refused attention. Of still greater theoretical interest, however, are a
series of auxiliary wit-techniques which obviously serve the purpose of
diverting the attention of the listeners from the wit-process so as to
allow the latter to proceed automatically. I advisedly use the term
“automatically” rather than “unconsciously” because the latter
designation might prove misleading. It is only a question of keeping the
psychic process from getting more than its share of attention during the
recital of the witticism, and the usefulness of these auxiliary
techniques permits us to assume rightfully that it is just the
occupation of attention which has a large share in the control and in
the fresh utilization of the freed energy of occupation.


                  _The Automatism of the Wit-process_

It seems to be by no means easy to avoid the endopsychic utilization of
energy that has become superfluous, for in our mental processes we are
constantly in the habit of transferring such emotional outputs from one
path to another without losing any of their energy through discharge.
Wit prevents this in the following way. In the first place it strives
for the shortest possible expression in order to expose less points of
attack to the attention. Secondly, it strictly adheres to the condition
that it be easily understood (_v. s._), for as soon as it has recourse
to mental effort or demands a choice between different mental paths, it
imperils the effect not only through the unavoidable mental expenditure,
but also through the awakening of attention. Besides this, wit also
makes use of the artifice of diverting the attention by offering to it
something in the expression of the witticism which fascinates it so that
meanwhile the liberation of inhibition energy and its discharge can take
place undisturbed. The omissions in the wording of wit already carry out
this intention. They impel us to fill in the gaps and in this way they
keep the wit-process free from attention. The technique of the riddle,
as it were, which attracts attention is here pressed into the service of
the wit-work. The façade formations, which we have already discovered in
many groups of tendency-wit, are still more effective (see p. 155). The
syllogistical façades excellently fulfill the purpose of riveting the
attention by an allotted task. While we begin to ponder wherein the
given answer was lacking already we are laughing; our attention has been
surprised, and the discharge of the liberated emotional inhibition has
been effected. The same is true of witticisms possessing a comic façade
in which the comic serves to assist the wit-technique. A comic façade
promotes the effect of wit in more than one way; it makes possible not
only the automatism of the wit-process by riveting the attention, but
also it facilitates the discharge of wit by sending ahead a discharge
from the comic. Here the effect of the comic resembles that of a
fascinating fore-pleasure, and we can thus understand that many
witticisms are able to dispense entirely the fore-pleasures produced by
other means of wit, and make use of only the comic as a fore-pleasure.
Among the true techniques of wit it is especially displacement and
representation through absurdity which, besides other properties, also
develop the deviation of attention so desirable for the automatic
discharge of the wit-process.[56]

We already surmise, and later will be able to see more clearly, that in
this condition of deviation of attention we have disclosed no
unessential characteristic of the psychic process in the hearer of wit.
In conjunction with this, we can understand something more. First, how
it happens that we rarely ever know in a joke why we are laughing,
although by analytical investigation we can determine the cause. This
laughing is the result of an automatic process which was first made
possible by keeping our conscious attention at a distance. Secondly, we
arrive at an understanding of that characteristic of wit as a result of
which wit can exert its full effect on the hearer only when it is new
and when it comes to him as a surprise. This property of wit, which
causes wit to be short-lived and forever urges the production of new
wit, is evidently due to the fact that it is inherent in the surprising
or the unexpected to succeed but once. When we repeat wit the awakened
memory leads the attention to the first hearing. This also explains the
desire to impart wit to others who have not heard it before, for the
impression made by wit on the new hearer replenishes that part of the
pleasure which has been lost by the lack of novelty. And an analogous
motive probably urges the wit producer to impart his wit to others.


                  _Elements Favoring the Wit-process_

As elements favoring the wit-process, even if we can no longer consider
them essentials, I present in the third place three technical aids to
wit-work which are destined to increase the sums of energy to be
discharged and thus enhance the effect of the wit. These technical aids
also very often accentuate the attention directed to the wit, but they
neutralize its influence by simultaneously fascinating it and impeding
its movements. Everything that provokes interest and confusion exerts
its influence in these two directions. This is especially true of the
nonsense and contrast elements, and above all the “contrast of ideas,”
which some authors consider the essential character of wit, but in which
I see only a means to reinforce the effect of wit. All that is confusing
evokes in the hearer that condition of distribution of energy which
Lipps has designated as “psychic damming”; and, doubtless, he has a
right to assume that the force of the “discharge” varies with the
success of the damming process which precedes it. Lipps’s exposition
does not explicitly refer to wit, but to the comic in general, yet it
seems quite probable that the discharge in wit, releasing a gush of
inhibition energy, is brought to its height in a similar manner by means
of the damming.

At length we are aware that the technique of wit is really determined by
two kinds of tendencies, those which make possible the formation of wit
in the first person, and those guaranteeing that the witticism produces
in the third person as much pleasurable effect as possible. The
Janus-like double-facedness of wit, which safeguards its original
resultant pleasure against the impugnment of critical reason, belongs to
the first tendency together with the mechanism of fore-pleasure; the
other complications of technique produced by the conditions discussed in
this chapter concern the third person of the witticism. Thus wit in
itself is a double-tongued villain which serves two masters at the same
time. Everything that aims toward gaining pleasure is calculated by the
witticism to arouse the third person, as if inner, unsurmountable
inhibitions in the first person were in the way of the same. Thus one
gets the full impression of the absolute necessity of this third person
for the completion of the wit-process. But while we have succeeded in
obtaining a good insight concerning the nature of this process in the
third person, we feel that the corresponding process in the first person
is still shrouded in darkness. So far we have not succeeded in answering
the first of our two questions: Why can we not laugh over wit made by
ourselves? and: Why are we urged to impart our own witticisms to others?
We can only suspect that there is an intimate connection between the two
facts yet to be explained, and that we must impart our witticisms to
others for the reason that we ourselves are unable to laugh over them.
From our examinations of the conditions in the third person for pleasure
gaining and pleasure discharging we can draw the conclusion that in the
first person the conditions for discharge are lacking and that those for
gaining pleasure are only incompletely fulfilled. Thus it is not to be
disputed that we enhance our pleasure in that we attain the—to us
impossible—laughter in this roundabout way from the impression of the
person who was stimulated to laughter. Thus we laugh, so to speak, _par
ricochet_, as Dugas expresses it. Laughter belongs to those
manifestations of psychic states which are highly infectious; if I make
some one else laugh by imparting my wit to him, I am really using him as
a tool in order to arouse my own laughter. One can really notice that
the person who at first recites the witticism with a serious mien later
joins the hearer with a moderate amount of laughter. Imparting my
witticisms to others may thus serve several purposes. First, it serves
to give me the objective certainty of the success of the wit-work;
secondly, it serves to enhance my own pleasure through the reaction of
the hearer upon myself; thirdly, in the case of repeating a not original
joke, it serves to remedy the loss of pleasure due to the lack of
novelty.


                     _Economy and Full Expenditure_

At the end of these discussions about the psychic processes of wit, in
so far as they are enacted between two persons, we can glance back to
the factor of economy which impressed us as an important item in the
psychological conception of wit since we offered the first explanation
of wit-technique. Long ago we dismissed the nearest but also the
simplest conception of this economy, where it was a matter of avoiding
psychic expenditure in general by a maximum restriction in the use of
words and by the production of associations of ideas. We had then
already asserted that brevity and laconisms are not witty in themselves.
The brevity of wit is a peculiar one; it has to be a “witty” brevity.
The original pleasure gain produced by playing with words and thoughts
resulted, to be sure, from simple economy in expenditure, but with the
development of play into wit the tendency to economize also had to shift
its goals, for whatever might be saved by the use of the same words or
by avoiding new thought connections would surely be of no account when
compared to the colossal expenditure of our mental activity. We may be
permitted to make a comparison between the psychic economy and a
business enterprise. So long as the latter’s transactions are very
small, good policy demands that expenses be kept low and that the costs
of operation be minimized as much as possible. The economy still follows
the absolute height of the expenditure. Later on when the volume of
business has increased, the importance of the business expenses
dwindles; increases in the expenditure totals matter little so long as
the transactions and returns can be sufficiently increased. Keeping down
running expenses would be parsimonious; in fact, it would mean a direct
loss. Nevertheless it would be equally false to assume that with a very
great expenditure there would be no more room for saving. The manager
inclined to economize would now make an effort to save on particular
things and would feel satisfied if the same establishment, with its
costly upkeep, could reduce its expenses at all, no matter how small the
saving would seem in comparison to the entire expenditure. In quite an
analogous manner the detailed economy in our complicated psychic affairs
remains a source of pleasure, as may be shown by everyday occurrences.
Whoever used to have a gas lamp in his room, but now uses electric
light, will experience for a long time a definite feeling of pleasure
when he presses the electric light button; this pleasure continues as
long as at that moment he remembers the complicated arrangements
necessary to light the gas lamp. Similarly the economy of expenditure in
psychic inhibition brought about by wit—small though it may be in
comparison to the sum total of psychic expenditure—will remain a source
of pleasure for us, because we thereby save a particular expenditure
which we were wont to make and which as before we were ready to make.
That the expenditure is expected and prepared for is a factor which
stands unmistakably in the foreground.

A localized economy, as the one just considered, will not fail to give
us momentary pleasure, but it will not bring about a lasting alleviation
so long as what has been saved here can be utilized in another place.
Only when this disposal into a different path can be avoided, will the
special economy be transformed into a general alleviation of the psychic
expenditures. Thus, with clearer insight into the psychic processes of
wit, we see that the factor of alleviation takes the place of economy.
Obviously the former gives us the greater feeling of pleasure. The
process in the first person of the witticism produces pleasure by
removing inhibitions and by diminishing local expenditure; it does not,
however, seem to come to rest until it succeeds through the intervention
of the third person in attaining general relief through discharge.




                          C. THEORETICAL PART




                                  VI.
          THE RELATION OF WIT TO DREAMS AND TO THE UNCONSCIOUS


At the end of the chapter which dealt with the elucidation of the
technique of wit (p. 125) we asserted that the processes of condensation
with and without substitutive formation, displacement, representation
through absurdity, representation through the opposite, indirect
representation, etc., all of which we found participated in the
formation of wit, evinced a far-reaching agreement with the processes of
“dream-work.” We promised, at that time, first to examine more carefully
these similarities, and secondly, so far as such indications point to
search for what is common to both wit and dreams. The discussion of this
comparison would be much easier for us if we could assume that one of
the subjects to be compared—the “dream-work”—were well known. But we
shall probably do better not to take this assumption for granted. I
received the impression that my book _The Interpretation of Dreams_
created more “confusion” than “enlightenment” among my colleagues, and I
know that the wider reading circles have contented themselves to reduce
the contents of the book to a catchword, “Wish fulfillment”—a term
easily remembered and easily abused.

However, in my continued occupation with the problems considered
therein, for the study of which my practice as a psychotherapeutist
affords me much opportunity, I found nothing that would impel me to
change or improve on my ideas; I can therefore peacefully wait until the
reader’s comprehension has risen to my level, or until an intelligent
critic has pointed out to me the basic faults in my conception. For the
purposes of comparison with wit, I shall briefly review the most
important features of dreams and dream-work.

We know dreams by the recollection which usually seems fragmentary and
which occurs upon awakening. It is then a structure made up mostly of
visual or other sensory impressions, which represents to us a deceptive
picture of an experience, and may be mingled with mental processes (the
“knowledge” in the dream) and emotional manifestations. What we thus
remember as a dream I call “the manifest dream-content.” The latter is
often altogether absurd and confused, at other times it is merely one
part or another that is so affected. But even if it be entirely
coherent, as in the case of some anxiety dreams, it stands out in our
psychic life as something strange, for the origin of which one cannot
account. Until recently the explanation for these peculiarities of the
dream has been sought in the dream itself in that it was considered
roughly speaking an indication of a muddled, dissociated, and “sleepy”
activity of the nervous elements.

As opposed to this view I have shown that the excessively peculiar
“manifest” dream-content can regularly be made comprehensible, and that
it is a disfigured and changed transcription of certain correct psychic
formations which deserve the name of “latent dream-thoughts.” One gains
an understanding of the latter by resolving the manifest dream-content
into its component parts without regard for its apparent meaning, and
then by following up the threads of associations which emanate from each
one of the now isolated elements. These become interwoven and in the end
lead to a structure of thoughts, which is not only entirely accurate,
but also fits easily into the familiar associations of our psychic
processes. During this “analysis” the dream-content loses all of the
peculiarities so strange to us; but if the analysis is to be successful,
we must firmly cast aside the critical objections which incessantly
arise against the reproduction of the individual associations.


                            _The Dream-work_

From the comparison of the remembered manifest dream-content with the
latent dream-thoughts thus discovered there arises the conception of
“dream-work.” The entire sum of the transforming processes which have
changed the latent dream-thought into the manifest dream is called the
dream-work. The astonishment which formerly the dream evoked in us is
now perceived to be due to the dream-work.

The function of the dream-work may be described in the following manner.
A structure of thoughts, mostly very complicated, which has been built
up during the day and not brought to settlement—a day remnant—clings
firmly even during night to the energy which it had assumed—the
underlying center of interest—and thus threatens to disturb sleep. This
day remnant is transformed into a dream by the dream-work and in this
way rendered harmless to sleep. But in order to make possible its
employment by the dream-work, this day remnant must be capable of being
cast into the form of a wish, a condition that is not difficult to
fulfill. The wish emanating from the dream-thoughts forms the first step
and later on the nucleus of the dream. Experience gained from
analyses—not the theory of the dream—teaches us that with children a
fond wish left from the waking state suffices to evoke a dream, which is
coherent and senseful, but almost always short, and easily recognizable
as a “wish fulfillment.” In the case of adults the universally valid
condition for the dream-creating wish seems to be that the latter should
appear foreign to conscious thinking, that is, it should be a repressed
wish, or that it should supply consciousness with reinforcement from
unknown sources. Without the assumption of the unconscious activity in
the sense used above, I should be at a loss to develop further the
theory of dreams and to explain the material gleaned from experience in
dream-analyses. The action of this unconscious wish upon the logical
conscious material of dream-thoughts now results in the dream. The
latter is thereby drawn down into the unconscious, as it were, or to
speak more precisely, it is exposed to a treatment which usually takes
place at the level of unconscious mental activity, and which is
characteristic of this mental level. Only from the results of the
“dream-work” have we thus far learned to know the qualities of this
unconscious mental activity and its differentiation from the
“foreconscious” which is capable of consciousness.


                           _The Unconscious_

A novel and difficult theory that runs counter to our habitual modes of
thinking can hardly gain in lucidity by a condensed exposition. I can
therefore accomplish little more in this discussion than refer the
reader to the detailed treatment of the unconscious in my
_Interpretation of Dreams_, and also to Lipps’s work, which I consider
most important. I am aware that he who is under the spell of a good old
philosophical training, or stands aloof from a so-called philosophical
system, will oppose the assumption of the “unconscious psychic
processes” in Lipps’s sense and in mine and will desire to prove the
impossibility of it preferably by means of definitions of the term
psychic. But definitions are conventional and changeable. I have often
found that persons who dispute the unconscious on the grounds of its
absurdity or impossibility have not received their impressions from
those sources from which I, at least, have found it necessary to draw,
in order to become aware of its existence. These opponents had never
witnessed the effect of a posthypnotic suggestion, and they were
immensely surprised at the evidence I imparted to them gleaned from my
analysis of unhypnotized neurotics. They had never gained the conception
of the unconscious as something which one does not really know, while
cogent proofs force one to supplement this idea by saying that one
understands by the unconscious something capable of consciousness,
something concerning which one has not thought and which is not in the
field of vision of consciousness. Nor had they attempted to convince
themselves of the existence of such unconscious thoughts in their own
psychic life by means of an analysis of one of their own dreams, and
when I attempted this with them, they could perceive their own mental
occurrences only with astonishment and confusion. I have also gotten the
impression that these are essentially affective resistances which stand
in the way of the acceptation of the “unconscious,” and that they are
based on the fact that no one is desirous of becoming acquainted with
his unconscious, and it is most convenient to deny altogether its
possibility.


           _Condensation and Displacement in the Dream-work_

The dream-work, to which I return after this digression, subjects the
thought material uttered in the optative mood to a very peculiar
elaboration. First of all it proceeds from the optative to the
indicative mood; it substitutes “it is” for “would it were!” This “it
is” is destined to become part of an hallucinatory representation which
I have called the “regression” of the dream-work. This regression
represents the path from the mental images to the sensory perceptions of
the same, or if one chooses to speak with reference to the still
unfamiliar—not to be understood anatomically—topic of the psychic
apparatus, it is the region of the thought-formation to the region of
the sensory perception. Along this road which runs in an opposite
direction to the course of development of psychic complications the
dream-thoughts gain in clearness; a plastic situation finally results as
a nucleus of the manifest “dream picture.” In order to arrive at such a
sensory representation the dream-thoughts have had to experience
tangible changes in their expression. But while the thoughts are changed
back into mental images they are subjected to still greater changes,
some of which are easily conceivable as necessary, while others are
surprising. As a necessary secondary result of the regression one
understands that nearly all relationships within the thoughts which have
organized the same are lost to the manifest dream. The dream-work takes
over, as it were, only the raw material of the ideas for representation,
and not the thought-relations which held each other in check; or at
least it reserves the freedom of leaving the latter out of the question.
On the other hand, there is a certain part of the dream-work which
cannot be traced to the regression or to the recasting into mental
images; it is just that part which is significant to us for the analogy
to wit-formation. The material of the dream-thoughts experiences an
extraordinary compression or _condensation_ during the dream-work. The
starting-points of this condensation are those points which are common
to two or more dream-thoughts because they naturally pertain to both or
because they are inevitable consequences of the contents of two or more
dream-thoughts, and since these points do not regularly suffice for a
prolific condensation new artificial and fleeting common points come
into existence, and for this purpose preferably words are used which
combine different meanings in their sounds. The newly framed common
points of condensation enter as representatives of the dream-thoughts
into the manifest dream-content, so that an element of the dream
corresponds to a point of junction or intersection of the
dream-thoughts, and with regard to the latter it must in general be
called “overdetermined.” The process of condensation is that part of the
dream-work which is most easily recognizable; it suffices to compare the
recorded wording of a dream with the written dream-thoughts gained by
means of analysis, in order to get a good impression of the
productiveness of dream condensation.

It is not easy to convince one’s self of the second great change that
takes place in the dream-thoughts through the agency of the dream-work.
I refer to that process which I have called the dream _displacement_. It
manifests itself by the fact that what occupies the center of the
manifest dream and is endowed with vivid sensory intensity has occupied
a peripheral and secondary position in the dream-thoughts, and _vice
versa_. This process causes the dream to appear out of proportion when
compared with the dream-thoughts, and it is because of this displacement
that it seems strange and incomprehensible to the waking state. In order
that such a displacement should occur it must be possible for the
occupation energy to pass uninhibited from important to insignificant
ideas,—a process which in normal conscious thinking can only give the
impression of “faulty thinking.”

Transformation into expressive activity, condensation, and displacement
are the three great functions which we can ascribe to the dream-work. A
fourth, to which too little attention was given in _The Interpretation
of Dreams_, does not come into consideration here for our purpose. In a
consistent elucidation of the ideas dealing with the “topic of the
psychic apparatus” and “regression,” which alone can lend value to these
working hypotheses, an effort would have to be made to determine at what
stages of regression the various transformations of the dream-thoughts
occur. As yet no serious effort has been made in this direction, but at
least we can speak definitely about displacement when we say that it
must arise in the thought material while the latter is in the level of
the unconscious processes. One will probably have to think of
condensation as a process that extends over the entire course up to the
outposts of the perceptive region; but in general it suffices to assume
that there is a simultaneous activity of all the forces which
participate in the formation of dreams. In view of the reserve which one
must naturally exercise in the treatment of such problems, and in
consideration of the inability to discuss here the main objections to
these problems, I should like to trust somewhat to the assertion that
the process of the dream-work which prepares the dream is situated in
the region of the unconscious. Roughly speaking, one can distinguish
three general stages in the formation of the dream; first, the
transference of the conscious day remnants into the unconscious, a
transference in which the conditions of the sleeping state must
co-operate; secondly, the actual dream-work in the unconscious; and
thirdly, the regression of the elaborated dream material to the region
of perception, whereby the dream becomes conscious.

The forces participating in the dream-formation may be recognized as the
following: the wish to sleep; the sum of occupation energy which still
clings to the day remnants after the depression brought about by the
state of sleep; the psychic energy of the unconscious wish forming the
dream; and the opposing force of the “_censor_,” which exercises its
authority in our waking state, and is not entirely abolished during
sleep. The task of dream-formation is, above all, to overcome the
inhibition of the censor, and it is just this task that is fulfilled by
the displacement of the psychic energy within the material of the
dream-thoughts.


                       _The Formula for Wit-work_

Now we recall what caused us to think of the dream while investigating
wit. We found that the character and activity of wit were bound up in
certain forms of expression and technical means, among which the various
forms of condensation, displacement, and indirect representation were
the most conspicuous. But the processes which led to the same
results—condensation, displacement, and indirect expression—we learned
to know as peculiarities of dream-work. Does not this analogy almost
force us to the conclusion that wit-work and dream-work must be
identical at least in one essential point? I believe that the dream-work
lies revealed before us in its most important characters, but in wit we
find obscured just that portion of the psychic processes which we may
compare with the dream-work, namely, the process of wit-formation in the
first person. Shall we not yield to the temptation to construct this
process according to the analogy of dream-formation? Some of the
characteristics of dreams are so foreign to wit that that part of the
dream-work corresponding to them cannot be carried over to the
wit-formation. The regression of the stream of thought to perception
certainly falls away as far as wit is concerned. However, the other two
stages of dream-formation, the sinking of a foreconscious[57] thought
into the unconscious, and the unconscious elaboration, would give us
exactly the result which we might observe in wit if we assumed this
process in wit-formation. Let us decide to assume that this is the
proceeding of wit-formation in the case of the first person. _A
foreconscious thought is left for a moment to unconscious elaboration
and the results are forthwith grasped by the conscious perception._

Before, however, we attempt to prove the details of this assertion we
wish to consider an objection which may jeopardize our assumption. We
start with the fact that the techniques of wit point to the same
processes which become known to us as peculiarities of dream-work. Now
it is an easy matter to say in opposition that we would not have
described the techniques of wit as condensation, displacement, etc., nor
would we have arrived at such a comprehensive agreement in the means of
representation of wit and dreams, if our previous knowledge of
dream-work had not influenced our conception of the technique of wit; so
that at the bottom we find that wit confirms only those tentative
theories which we brought to it from our study of dreams. Such a genesis
of agreement would be no certain guarantee of its stability beyond our
preconceived judgment. No other author has thought of considering
condensation, displacement, and indirect expression as active factors of
wit. This might be a possible objection, but nevertheless it would not
be justified. It might just as well be said that in order to recognize
the real agreement between dreams and wit our ordinary knowledge must be
augmented by a specialized knowledge of dream-work. However, the
decision will really depend only upon the question whether the examining
critic can prove that such a conception of the technique of wit in the
individual examples is forced, and that other nearer and
farther-reaching interpretations have been suppressed in favor of mine;
or whether the critic will have to admit that the tentative theories
derived from the study of dreams can be really confirmed through wit. My
opinion is that we have nothing to fear from such a critic and that our
processes of reduction have confidently pointed out in which forms of
expression we must search for the techniques of wit. That we designated
these techniques by names which previously anticipated the result of the
agreement between the technique of wit and the dream-work was our just
prerogative, and really nothing more than an easily justified
simplification.

There is still another objection which would not be vital, but which
could not be so completely refuted. One might think that the techniques
of wit that fit in so well considering the ends we have in view deserve
recognition, but that they do not represent all possible techniques of
wit or even all those in use. Also that we have selected only the
techniques of wit which were influenced by and would suit the pattern of
the dream-work, whereas others ignored by us would have demonstrated
that such an agreement was not common to all cases. I really do not
trust myself to make the assertion that I have succeeded in explaining
all the current witticisms with reference to their techniques, and I
therefore admit the possibility that my enumeration of wit-techniques
may show many gaps. But I have not purposely excluded from my discussion
any form of technique that was clear to me, and I can affirm that the
most frequent, the most essential, and the most characteristic technical
means of wit have not eluded my attention.


                        _Wit as an Inspiration_

Wit possesses still another character which entirely corresponds to our
conception of the wit-work as originally discovered in our study of
dreams. It is true that it is common to hear one say “I _made_ a joke,”
but one feels that one behaves differently during this process than when
one pronounces a judgment or offers an objection. Wit shows in a most
pronounced manner the character of an involuntary “inspiration” or a
sudden flash of thought. A moment before one cannot tell what kind of
joke one is going to make, though it lacks only the words to clothe it.
One usually experiences something indefinable which I should like most
to compare to an absence, or sudden drop of intellectual tension; then
all of a sudden the witticism appears, usually simultaneously with its
verbal investment. Some of the means of wit are also utilized in the
expression of thought along other lines, as in the cases of comparison
and allusion. I can purposely will to make an allusion. In doing this I
have first in mind (in the inner hearing) the direct expression of my
thought, but as I am inhibited from expressing the same through some
objection from the situation in question, I almost resolve to substitute
the direct expression by a form of indirect expression, and then I utter
it in the form of an allusion. But the allusion that comes into
existence in this manner having been formed under my continuous control
is never witty, no matter how useful it may be. On the other hand, the
witty allusion appears without my having been able to follow up these
preparatory stages in my mind. I do not wish to attribute too much value
to this procedure, it is scarcely decisive, but it does agree well with
our assumption that in wit-formation a stream of thought is dropped for
a moment and suddenly emerges from the unconscious as a witticism.

Witticisms also evince a peculiar behavior along the lines of
association of ideas. Frequently they are not at the disposal of our
memory when we look for them; on the other hand, they often appear
unsolicited and at places in our train of thought where we cannot
understand their presence. Again, these are only minor qualities, but
none the less they point to their unconscious origin.

Let us now collect the properties of wit whose formation can be referred
to the unconscious. Above all there is the peculiar brevity of wit
which, though not an indispensable, is a marked and distinctive
characteristic feature. When we first encountered it we were inclined to
see in it an expression of a tendency to economize, but owing to very
evident objections we ourselves depreciated the value of this
conception. At present we look upon it more as a sign of the unconscious
elaboration which the thought of wit has undergone. The process of
condensation which corresponds to it in dreams we can correlate with no
other factor than with the localization in the unconscious, and we must
assume that the conditions for such condensations which are lacking in
the foreconscious are present in the unconscious mental process.[58] It
is to be expected that in the process of condensation some of the
elements subjected to it become lost, while others which take over their
occupation energy are strengthened by the condensation or are built up
too energetically. The brevity of wit, like the brevity of dreams, would
thus be a necessary concomitant manifestation of the condensation which
occurs in both cases; both times it is a result of the condensation
process. The brevity of wit is indebted also to this origin for its
peculiar character which though not further assignable produces a
striking impression.


                  _The Unconscious and the Infantile_

We have defined above the one result of condensation—the manifold
application of the same material, play upon words, and similarity of
sound—as a localized economy, and have also referred the pleasure
produced by harmless wit to that economy. At a later place we have found
that the original purpose of wit consisted in producing this kind of
pleasure from words, a process which was permitted to the individual
during the stage of playing, but which became banked in during the
course of intellectual development or by rational criticism. Now we have
decided upon the assumption that such condensations as serve the
technique of wit originate automatically and without any particular
purpose during the process of thinking in the unconscious. Have we not
here two different conceptions of the same fact which seem to be
incompatible with each other? I do not think so. To be sure, there are
two different conceptions, and they demand to be brought in unison, but
they do not contradict each other. They are merely somewhat strange to
each other, and as soon as we have established a relationship between
them we shall probably gain in knowledge. That such condensations are
sources of pleasure is in perfect accord with the supposition that they
easily find in the unconscious the conditions necessary for their
origin; on the other hand, we see the motivation for the sinking into
the unconscious in the circumstance that the pleasure-bringing
condensation necessary to wit easily results there. Two other factors
also, which upon first examination seem entirely foreign to each other
and which are brought together quite accidentally, will be recognized on
deeper investigation as intimately connected, and perhaps may be found
to be substantially the same. I am referring to the two assertions that
on the one hand wit could form such pleasure-bringing condensations
during its development in the stage of playing, that is, during the
infancy of reason; and, on the other hand, that it accomplishes the same
function on higher levels by submerging the thought into the
unconscious. For the infantile is the source of the unconscious. The
unconscious mental processes are no others than those which are solely
produced during infancy. The thought which sinks into the unconscious
for the purpose of wit-formation only revisits there the old homestead
of the former playing with words. The thought is put back for a moment
into the infantile state in order to regain in this way childish
pleasure-sources. If, indeed, one were not already acquainted with it
from the investigation of the psychology of the neuroses, wit would
surely impress one with the idea that the peculiar unconscious
elaboration is nothing else but the infantile type of the mental
process. Only it is by no means an easy matter to grasp, in the
unconscious of the adult, this peculiar infantile manner of thinking,
because it is usually corrected, so to say, _statu nascendi_. However,
it is successfully grasped in a series of cases, and then we always
laugh about the “childish stupidity.” In fact every exposure of such an
unconscious fact affects us in a “comical” manner.[59]

It is easier to comprehend the character of these unconscious mental
processes in the utterances of patients suffering from various psychic
disturbances. It is very probable that, following the assumption of old
Griesinger, we would be in a position to understand the deliria of the
insane and to turn them to good account as valuable information, if we
would not make the demands of conscious thinking upon them, but instead
treat them as we do dreams by means of our art of interpretation.[60] In
the dream, too, we were able to show the “return of psychic life to the
embryonal state.”[61]

In discussing the processes of condensation we have entered so deeply
into the signification of the analogy between wit and dreams that we can
here be brief. As we know that displacements in dream-work point to the
influence of the censor of conscious thought, we will consequently be
inclined to assume that an inhibiting force also plays a part in the
formation of wit when we find the process of displacement among the
techniques of wit. We also know that this is commonly the case; the
endeavor of wit to revive the old pleasure in nonsense or the old
pleasure in word-play meets with resistance in every normal state, a
resistance which is exerted by the protest of critical reason, and which
must be overcome in each individual case. But a radical distinction
between wit and dreams is shown in the manner in which the wit-work
solves this difficulty. In the dream-work the solution of this task is
brought about regularly through displacements and through the choice of
ideas which are remote enough from the objectionable ones to secure
passage through the censor; the latter themselves are but offsprings of
those whose psychic energy they have taken upon themselves through full
transference. The displacements are therefore not lacking in any dream
and are far more comprehensive; they not only comprise the deviations
from the trend of thought but also all forms of indirect expression, the
substitution for an important but offensive element of one seemingly
indifferent and harmless to the censor which form very remote allusions
to the first, they include substitution also occurring through symbols,
comparisons, or trifles. It is not to be denied that parts of this
indirect representation really originate in the foreconscious thoughts
of the dream,—as, for example, symbolical representation and
representation through comparisons—because otherwise the thought would
not have reached the state of the foreconscious expression. Such
indirect expressions and allusions, whose reference to the original
thought is easily findable, are really permissible and customary means
of expression even in our conscious thought. The dream-work, however,
exaggerates the application of these means of indirect expression to an
unlimited degree. Under the pressure of the censor any kind of
association becomes good enough for substitution by allusion; the
displacement from one element to any other is permitted. The
substitution of the inner associations (similarity, causal connection,
etc.) by the so-called outer associations (simultaneity, contiguity in
space, assonance) is particularly conspicuous and characteristic of the
dream-work.


       _The Difference between Dream-technique and Wit-technique_

All these means of displacement also occur as techniques of wit, but
when they do occur they usually restrict themselves to those limits
prescribed for their use in conscious thought; in fact they may be
lacking, even though wit must regularly solve a task of inhibition. One
can comprehend this retirement of the process of displacement in
wit-work when one remembers that wit usually has another technique at
its disposal through which it defends itself against inhibitions.
Indeed, we have discovered nothing more characteristic of it than just
this technique. For wit does not have recourse to compromises as does
the dream, nor does it evade the inhibition; it insists upon retaining
the play with words or nonsense unaltered, but thanks to the ambiguity
of words and multiplicity of thought-relations, it restricts itself to
the choice of cases in which this play or nonsense may appear at the
same time admissible (jest) or senseful (wit). Nothing distinguishes wit
from all other psychic formations better than this double-sidedness and
this double-dealing; by emphasizing the “sense in nonsense,” the authors
have approached nearest the understanding of wit, at least from this
angle.

Considering the unexceptional predominance of this peculiar technique in
overcoming inhibitions in wit, one might find it superfluous that wit
should make use of the displacement-technique even in a single case. But
on the one hand certain kinds of this technique remain useful for wit as
objects and sources of pleasure—as, for example, the real displacement
(deviation of the trend of thought) which in fact shares in the nature
of nonsense,—and on the other hand one must not forget that the highest
stage of wit, tendency-wit, must frequently overcome two kinds of
inhibitions which oppose both itself and its tendency (p. 147), and that
allusion and displacements are qualified to facilitate this latter task.

The numerous and unrestricted application of indirect representation, of
displacements, and especially of allusions in the dream-work, has a
result which I mention not because of its own significance but because
it became for me the subjective inducement to occupy myself with the
problem of wit. If a dream analysis is imparted to one unfamiliar with
the subject and unaccustomed to it, and the peculiar ways of allusions
and displacements (objectionable to the waking thoughts but utilized by
the dream-work) are explained, the hearer experiences an uncomfortable
impression; he declares these interpretations to be “witty,” but it
seems obvious to him that these are not successful jokes but forced ones
which run contrary to the rules of wit. This impression can be easily
explained; it is due to the fact that the dream-work operates with the
same means as wit, but in the application of the same the dream exceeds
the bounds which wit restricts. We shall soon learn that in consequence
of the rôle of the third person wit is bound by a certain condition
which does not affect the dream.


                           _Irony—Negativism_

Among those techniques which are common to both wit and dreams
representation through the opposite and the application of absurdity are
especially interesting. The first belongs to the strongly effective
means of wit as shown in the examples of “outdoing wit” (p. 98). The
representation through the opposite, unlike most of the wit-techniques,
is unable to withdraw itself from conscious attention. He who
intentionally tries to make use of wit-work, as in the case of the
“habitual wit,” soon discovers that the easiest way to answer an
assertion with a witticism is to concentrate one’s mind on the opposite
of this assertion and trust to the chance flash of thought to brush
aside the feared objection to this opposite by means of a different
interpretation. Maybe the representation through its opposite is
indebted for such a preference to the fact that it forms the nucleus of
another pleasurable mode of mental expression, for an understanding of
which we do not have to consult the unconscious. I refer to _irony_,
which is very similar to wit and is considered a subspecies of the
comic. The essence of irony consists in imparting the very opposite of
what one intended to express, but it precludes the anticipated
contradiction by indicating through the inflections, concomitant
gestures, and through slight changes in style—if it is done in
writing—that the speaker himself means to convey the opposite of what he
says. Irony is applicable only in cases where the other person is
prepared to hear the reverse of the statement actually made, so that he
cannot fail to be inclined to contradict. As a consequence of this
condition ironic expressions are particularly subject to the danger of
being misunderstood. To the person who uses it, it gives the advantage
of readily avoiding the difficulties to which direct expressions, as,
for example, invectives, are subject. In the hearer it produces comic
pleasure, probably by causing him to make preparations for
contradiction, which are immediately found to be unnecessary. Such a
comparison of wit with a form of the comical that is closely allied to
it might strengthen us in the assumption that the relation of wit to the
unconscious is the peculiarity that also distinguishes it from the
comical.[62]

In dream-work, representation through the opposite has a far more
important part to play than in wit. The dream not only delights in
representing a pair of opposites by means of one and the same composite
image, but in addition it often changes an element from the
dream-thoughts into its opposite, thus causing considerable difficulty
in the work of interpretation. In the case of any element capable of
having an opposite it is impossible to tell whether it is to be taken
negatively or positively in the dream-thoughts.[63]

I must emphasize that as yet this fact has by no means been understood.
Nevertheless, it seems to give indications of an important
characteristic of unconscious thinking which in all probability results
in a process comparable to “judging.” Instead of setting aside judgments
the unconscious forms “repressions.” The repression may correctly be
described as a stage intermediate between the defense reflex and
condemnation.[64]


         _The Unconscious as the Psychic Stage of the Wit-work_

Nonsense, or absurdity, which occurs so often in dreams and which has
made them the object of so much contempt, has never really come into
being as the result of an accidental shuffling of conceptual elements,
but may in every case be proven to have been purposely admitted by the
dream-work. Nonsense and absurdity are intended to express embittered
criticism and scornful contradiction within the dream-thoughts.
Absurdity in the dream-content thus stands for the judgment: “It’s pure
nonsense,” expressed in dream-thoughts. In my work on the Interpretation
of Dreams, I have placed great emphasis on the demonstration of this
fact because I thought that I could in this manner most strikingly
controvert the error expressed by many that the dream is no psychic
phenomenon at all—an error which bars the way to an understanding of the
unconscious. Now we have learnt (in the analysis of certain
tendency-witticisms on p. 73) that nonsense in wit is made to serve the
same purposes of expression. We also know that a nonsensical façade of a
witticism is peculiarly adapted to enhance the psychic expenditure in
the hearer and hence also to increase the amount to be discharged
through laughter. Moreover, we must not forget that nonsense in wit is
an end in itself, since the purpose of reviving the old pleasure in
nonsense is one of the motives of the wit-work. There are other ways to
regain the feeling of nonsense in order to derive pleasure from it;
caricature, exaggeration, parody, and travesty utilize the same and thus
produce “comical nonsense.” If we subject these modes of expression to
an analysis similar to the one used in studying wit, we shall find that
there is no occasion in any of them for resorting to unconscious
processes in our sense for the purpose of getting explanations. We are
now also in a position to understand why the “witty” character may be
added as an embellishment to caricature, exaggeration, and parody; it is
the manifold character of the performance upon the “psychic stage”[65]
that makes this possible.

I am of the opinion that by transferring the wit-work into the system of
the unconscious we have made a distinct gain, since it makes it possible
for us to understand the fact that the various techniques to which wit
admittedly adheres are on the other hand not its exclusive property.
Many doubts, which have arisen in the beginning of our investigation of
these techniques and which we were forced temporarily to leave, can now
be conveniently cleared up. Hence we shall give due consideration to the
doubt which expresses itself by asserting that the undeniable relation
of wit to the unconscious is correct only for certain categories of
tendency-wit, while we are ready to claim this relation for all forms
and all the stages of development of wit. We may not shirk the duty of
testing this objection.

We may assume that we deal with a sure case of wit-formation in the
unconscious when it concerns witticisms that serve unconscious
tendencies, or those strengthened by unconscious tendencies, as, for
example, most “cynical” witticisms. For in such cases the unconscious
tendency draws the foreconscious thought down into the unconscious in
order to remodel it there; a process to which the study of the
psychology of the neuroses has added many analogies with which we are
acquainted. But in the case of tendency-wit of other varieties, namely,
harmless wit and the jest, this power seems to fall away, and the
relation of the wit to the unconscious is an open question.

But now let us consider the case of the witty expression of a thought
that is not without value in itself and that comes to the surface in the
course of the association of mental processes. In order that this
thought may become a witticism, it is of course necessary that it make a
choice among the possible forms of expression in order to find the exact
form that will bring along the gain in word-pleasure. We know from
self-observation that this choice is not made by conscious attention;
but the selection will certainly be better if the occupation energy of
the foreconscious thought is lowered to the unconscious. For in the
unconscious, as we have learnt from the dream-work, the paths of
association emanating from a word are treated on a par with associations
from objects. The occupation energy from the unconscious presents by far
the more favorable conditions for the selection of the expression.
Moreover, we may assume without going farther that the possible
expression which contains the gain in word-pleasure exerts a lowering
effect on the still fluctuating self-command of the foreconscious,
similar to that exerted in the first case by the unconscious tendency.
As an explanation for the simpler case of the jest we may imagine that
an ever watchful intention of attaining the gain in word-pleasure seizes
the opportunity offered in the foreconscious of again drawing the
investing energy down into the unconscious, according to the familiar
scheme.

I earnestly wish that it were possible for me on the one hand to present
one decisive point in my conception of wit more clearly, and on the
other hand to fortify it with compelling arguments. But as a matter of
fact it is not a question here of two failures, but of one and the same
failure. I can give no clearer exposition because I have no further
testimony on behalf of my conception. The latter has developed as the
result of my study of the technique and of comparison with dream-work,
and indeed from this one side only. I now find that the dream-work is
altogether excellently adapted to the peculiarities of wit. This
conception is now concluded; if the conclusion leads us not to a
familiar province, but rather to one that is strange and novel to our
modes of thought, the conclusion is called a “hypothesis,” and the
relation of the hypothesis to the material from which it is drawn is
justly not accepted as “proof.” The hypothesis is admitted as “proved”
only if it can be reached by other ways and if it can be shown to be the
junction point for other associations. But such proof, in view of the
fact that our knowledge of unconscious processes has hardly begun,
cannot be had. Realizing then that we are on soil still virgin, we shall
be content to project from our viewpoint of observation one narrow
slender plank into the unexplored region.

We shall not build a great structure on such a foundation as this. If we
correlate the different stages of wit to the mental dispositions
favorable to them we may say: The _jest_ has its origin in the happy
mood; what seems to be peculiar to it is an inclination to lower the
psychic static energies (_Besetzungen_). The jest already makes use of
all the characteristic techniques of wit and satisfies the fundamental
conditions of the same through the choice of such an assortment of words
or mental associations as will conform not only to the requirements for
the production of pleasure, but also conform to the demands of the
intelligent critic. We shall conclude that the sinking of the mental
energy to the unconscious stage, a process facilitated by the happy
mood, has already taken place in the case of the jest. The mood does
away with this requirement in the case of _harmless_ wit connected with
the expression of a valuable thought; here we must assume a particular
_personal adaptation_ which finds it as easy to come to expression as it
is for the foreconscious thought to sink for a moment into the
unconscious. An ever watchful tendency to renew the original resultant
pleasure of wit exerts thereby a lowering effect upon the still
fluctuating foreconscious expression of the thought. Most people are
probably capable of making jests when in a happy mood; aptitude for
joking independent of the mood is found only in a few persons. Finally,
the most powerful incentive for wit-work is the presence of strong
tendencies which reach back into the unconscious and which indicate a
particular fitness for witty productions; these tendencies might explain
to us why the subjective conditions of wit are so frequently fulfilled
in the case of neurotic persons. Even the most inapt person may become
witty under the influence of strong tendencies.


                  _Differences Between Wit and Dreams_

This last contribution, the explanation of wit-work in the first person,
though still hypothetical, strictly speaking, ends our interest in wit.
There still remains a short comparison of wit to the more familiar dream
and we may expect that, outside of the one agreement already considered,
two such diverse mental activities should show nothing but differences.
The most important difference lies in their social behavior. The dream
is a perfectly asocial psychic product. It has nothing to tell to anyone
else, having originated in an individual as a compromise between
conflicting psychic forces it remains incomprehensible to the person
himself and has therefore altogether no interest for anybody else. Not
only does the dream find it unnecessary to place any value on
intelligibleness, but it must even guard against being understood, as it
would then be destroyed; it can only exist in disguised form. For this
reason the dream may make use freely of the mechanism that controls
unconscious thought processes to the extent of producing undecipherable
disfigurements. Wit, on the other hand, is the most social of all those
psychic functions whose aim is to gain pleasure. It often requires three
persons, and the psychic process which it incites always requires the
participation of at least one other person. It must therefore bind
itself to the condition of intelligibleness; it may employ disfigurement
made practicable in the unconscious through condensation and
displacement, to no greater extent than can be deciphered by the
intelligence of the third person. As for the rest, wit and dreams have
developed in altogether different spheres of the psychic life, and are
to be classed under widely separated categories of the psychological
system. No matter how concealed the dream is still a wish, while wit is
a developed play. Despite its apparent unreality the dream retains its
relation to the great interests of life; it seeks to supply what is
lacking through a regressive detour of hallucinations; and it owes its
existence solely to the strong need for sleep during the night. Wit, on
the other hand, seeks to draw a small amount of pleasure from the free
and unencumbered activities of our psychic apparatus, and later to seize
this pleasure as an incidental gain. It thus _secondarily_ reaches to
important functions relative to the outer world. The dream serves
preponderately to guard from pain while wit serves to acquire pleasure;
in these two aims all our psychic activities meet.




                                  VII
                 WIT AND THE VARIOUS FORMS OF THE COMIC


We have approached the problems of the comic in an unusual manner. It
appeared to us that wit, which is usually regarded as a subspecies of
the comic, offered enough peculiarities to warrant our taking it
directly under consideration, and thus it came about that we avoided
discussing its relation to the more comprehensive category of the comic
as long as it was possible to do so, yet we did not proceed without
picking up on the way some hints that might be valuable for studying the
comic. We found it easy to ascertain that the comic differs from wit in
its social behavior. The comic can be content with only two persons, one
who finds the comical, and one in whom it is found. The third person to
whom the comical may be imparted reinforces the comic process, but adds
nothing new to it. In wit, however, this third person is indispensable
for the completion of the pleasure-bearing process, while the second
person may be omitted, especially when it is not a question of
aggressive wit with a tendency. Wit is made, while the comical is found;
it is found first of all in persons, and only later by transference may
be seen also in objects, situations, and the like. We know, too, in the
case of wit that it is not strange persons, but one’s own mental
processes that contain the sources for the production of pleasure. In
addition we have heard that wit occasionally reopens inaccessible
sources of the comic, and that the comic often serves wit as a façade to
replace the fore-pleasure usually produced by the well-known technique
(p. 236). All of this does not really point to a very simple
relationship between wit and the comic. On the other hand, the problems
of the comic have shown themselves to be so complicated, and have until
now so successfully defied all attempts made by the philosophers to
solve them, that we have not been able to justify the expectation of
mastering it by a sudden stroke, so to speak, even if we approach it
along the paths of wit. Incidentally we came provided with an instrument
for investigating wit that had not yet been made use of by others;
namely, the knowledge of dream-work. We have no similar advantage at our
disposal for comprehending the comic, and we may therefore expect that
we shall learn nothing about the nature of the comic other than that
which we have already become aware of in wit; in so far as wit belongs
to the comic and retains certain features of the same unchanged or
modified in its own nature.


                              _The Naïve_

The species of the comic that is most closely allied to wit is the
_naïve_. Like the comic the naïve is found universally and is not made
like in the case of wit. The naïve cannot be made at all, while in the
case of the pure comic the question of making or evoking the comical may
be taken into account. The naïve must result without our intervention
from the speech and actions of other persons who take the place of the
_second_ person in the comic or in wit. The naïve originates when one
puts himself completely outside of inhibition, because it does not exist
for him; that is, if he seems to overcome it without any effort. What
conditions the function of the naïve is the fact that we are aware that
the person does not possess this inhibition, otherwise we should not
call it naïve but impudent, and instead of laughing we should be
indignant. The effect of the naïve, which is irresistible, seems easy to
understand. An expenditure of that inhibition energy which is commonly
already formed in us suddenly becomes inapplicable when we hear the
naïve and is discharged through laughter; as the removal of the
inhibition is direct, and not the result of an incited operation, there
is no need for a suspension of attention. We behave like the hearer in
wit, to whom the economy of inhibition is given without any effort on
his part.

In view of the understanding about the genesis of inhibitions which we
obtained while tracing the development of play into wit, it will not
surprise us to learn that the naïve is mostly found in children,
although it may also be observed in uneducated adults, whom we look on
as children as far as their intellectual development is concerned. For
the purposes of comparison with wit, naïve speech is naturally better
adapted than naïve actions, for speech and not actions are the usual
forms of expression employed by wit. It is significant, however, that
naïve speeches, such as those of children, can without straining also be
designated as “naïve witticisms.” The points of agreement as well as
demonstration between wit and naïveté will become clear to us upon
consideration of a few examples.[66]

_A little girl of three years was accustomed to hear from her German
nurse the exclamatory word “Gesundheit” (God bless you!; literally, may
you be healthy!) whenever she happened to sneeze. While suffering from a
severe cold during which the profuse coughing and sneezing caused her
considerable pain, she pointed to her chest and said to her father,
“Daddy, Gesundheit hurts.”_

_Another little girl of four years heard her parents refer to a Jewish
acquaintance as a Hebrew, and on later hearing the latter’s wife
referred to as Mrs. X, she corrected her mother, saying, “No, that is
not her name; if her husband is a Hebrew she is a Shebrew.”_

In the first example the wit is produced through the use of a contiguous
association in the form of an abstract thought for the concrete action.
The child so often heard the word “Gesundheit” associated with sneezing
that she took it for the act itself. While the second example may be
designated as word-wit formed by the technique of sound similarity. The
child divided the word Hebrew into He-brew and having been taught the
genders of the personal pronouns, she naturally imagined that if the man
is a He-brew his wife must be a She-brew. Both examples could have
originated as real witticisms upon which we would have unwillingly
bestowed a little mild laughter. But as examples of naïveté they seem
excellent and cause loud laughter. But what is it here that produces the
difference between wit and naïveté? Apparently it is neither the wording
nor the technique, which is the same for both wit and the naïve, but a
factor which at first sight seems remote from both. It is simply a
question whether we assume that the speakers had the intention of making
a witticism or whether we assume that they—the children—wished to draw
an earnest conclusion, a conclusion held in good faith though based on
uncorrected knowledge. Only the latter case is one of naïveté. It is
here that our attention is first called to the mechanism in which the
second person places himself into the psychic process of the person who
produces the wit.

The investigation of a third example will confirm this opinion. A
brother and a sister, the former ten and the latter twelve years old,
produce a play of their own composition before an audience of uncles and
aunts. The scene represents a hut on the seashore. In the first act the
two dramatist-actors, a poor fisherman and his devoted wife, complain
about the hard times and the difficulty of getting a livelihood. The man
decides to sail over the wide ocean in his boat in order to seek wealth
elsewhere, and after a touching farewell the curtain is drawn. The
second act takes place several years later. The fisherman has come home
rich with a big bag of money and tells his wife, whom he finds waiting
in front of the hut, what good luck he has had in the far countries. His
wife interrupts him proudly, saying: “Nor have I been idle in the
meanwhile,” and opens the hut, on whose floor the fisherman sees twelve
large dolls representing children asleep. At this point of the drama the
performers were interrupted by an outburst of laughter on the part of
the audience, a thing which they could not understand. They stared
dumfounded at their dear relatives, who had thus far behaved respectably
and had listened attentively. The explanation of this laughter lies in
the assumption on the part of the audience that the young dramatists
know nothing as yet about the origin of children, and were therefore in
a position to believe that a wife would actually boast of bearing
offspring during the prolonged absence of her husband, and that the
husband would rejoice with her over it. But the results achieved by the
dramatists on the basis of this ignorance may be designated as nonsense
or absurdity.

These examples show that the naïve occupies a position midway between
wit and the comic. As far as wording and contents are concerned, the
naïve speech is identical with wit; it produces a misuse of words, a bit
of nonsense, or an obscenity. But the psychic process of the first
person or producer which, in the case of wit, offered us so much that
was interesting and puzzling, is here entirely absent. The naïve person
imagines that he is using his thoughts and expressions in a simple and
normal manner; he has no other purpose in view, and receives no pleasure
from his naïve production. All the characteristics of the naïve lie in
the conception of the hearer, who corresponds to the third person in the
case of wit. The producing person creates the naïve without any effort.
The complicated technique, which in wit serves to paralyze the
inhibition produced by the critical reason, does not exist here, because
the person does not possess this inhibition, and he can therefore
readily produce the senseless and the obscene without any compromise.
The naïve may be added to the realm of wit if it comes into existence
after the important function of the censor, as observed in the formula
for wit-formation, has been reduced to zero.

If the affective determination of wit consists in the fact that both
persons should be subject to about the same inhibitions or inner
resistances, we may say now that the determination of the naïve consists
in the fact that one person should have inhibitions which the other
lacks. It is the person provided with inhibitions who understands the
naïve, and it is he alone who gains the pleasure produced by the naïve.
We can easily understand that this pleasure is due to the removal of
inhibitions. Since the pleasure of wit is of the same origin—a kernel of
word-pleasure and nonsense-pleasure, and a shell of removal- and
release-pleasure,—the similarity of this connection to the inhibition
thus determines the inner relationship between the naïve and wit. In
both cases pleasure results from the removal of inner inhibitions. But
the psychic process of the recipient person (which in the naïve
regularly corresponds with our ego, whereas in wit we may also put
ourselves in place of the producing person) is by as much more
complicated in the case of the naïve as it is simpler in the producing
person in wit. For one thing, the naïve must produce the same effect
upon the receiving person as wit does, this may be fully confirmed by
our examples, for just as in wit the removal of the censor has been made
possible by the mere effort of hearing the naïve. But only a part of the
pleasure created by the naïve admits of this explanation, in other cases
of naïve utterances, even this portion would be endangered, as, for
example, while listening to naïve obscenities. We would react to a naïve
obscenity with the same indignation felt toward a real obscenity, were
it not for the fact that another factor saves us from this indignation
and at the same time furnishes the more important part of the pleasure
derived from the naïve.

This other factor is the result of the condition mentioned before,
namely, that in order to recognize the naïve we have to be cognizant of
the fact that there are no inner inhibitions in the producing person. It
is only when this is assured that we laugh instead of being indignant.
Hence we take into consideration the psychic state of the producing
person; we imagine ourselves in this same psychic state and endeavor to
understand it by comparing it to our own. This putting ourselves into
the psychic state of the producing person and comparing it with our own
results in an economy of expenditure which we discharge through
laughing.

We might prefer the simpler explanation, namely, that when we reflect
that the person has no inhibition to overcome our indignation becomes
superfluous; the laughing therefore results at the cost of economized
indignation. In order to avoid this conception, which is, in general,
misleading, I shall distinguish more sharply between two cases that I
had treated as one in the above discussion. The naïve, as it appears to
us, may either be in the nature of a witticism, as in our example, or an
obscenity, or of anything generally objectionable; which becomes
especially evident if the naïve is expressed not in speech but in
action. This latter case is really misleading; for it might lead one to
assume that the pleasure originated from the economized and transformed
indignation. The first case is the illuminating one. The naïve speech in
the example “Hebrew” can produce the effect of a light witticism and
give no cause for indignation; it is certainly the more rare, or the
more pure and by far the more instructive case. In so far as we think
that the child took the syllable “he” in “Hebrew” seriously, and without
any additional reason identified it with the masculine personal pronoun,
the increase in pleasure as a result of hearing it has no longer
anything to do with the pleasure of the wit. We shall now consider what
has been said from two viewpoints, first how it came into existence in
the mind of the child, and secondly, how it would occur to us. In
following this comparison we find that the child has discovered an
identity and has overcome barriers which exist in us, and by continuing
still further it may express itself as follows: “If you wish to
understand what you have heard, you may save yourself the expenditure
necessary for holding these barriers in place.” The expenditure which
became freed by this comparison is the source of pleasure in the naïve,
and is discharged through laughter; to be sure, it is the same
expenditure which we would have converted into indignation if our
understanding of the producing person, and in this case the nature of
his utterance, had not precluded it. But if we take the case of the
naïve joke as a model for the second case, viz., the objectionable
naïve, we shall see that here, too, the economy in inhibition may
originate directly from the comparison. That is, it is unnecessary for
us to assume an incipient and then a strangulated indignation, an
indignation corresponding to a different application of the freed
expenditure, against which, in the case of wit, complicated defensive
mechanisms were required.


                _Source of Comic Pleasure in the Naïve_

This comparison and this economy of expenditure that occur as the result
of putting one’s self into the psychic process of the producing person
can have an important bearing on the naïve only if they do not belong to
the naïve alone. As a matter of fact we suspect that this mechanism
which is so completely foreign to wit is a part—perhaps the essential
part—of the psychic process of the comic. This aspect—it is perhaps the
most important aspect of the naïve—thus represents the naïve as a form
of the comic. Whatever is added to the wit-pleasure by the naïve
speeches in our examples is “comical” pleasure. Concerning the latter we
might be inclined to make a general assumption that this pleasure
originates through an economized expenditure by comparing the utterance
of some one else with our own. But since we are here in the presence of
very broad views we shall first conclude our consideration of the naïve.
The naïve would thus be a form of the comic, in so far as its pleasure
originates from the difference in expenditure which results in our
effort to understand the other person; and it resembles wit through the
condition that the expenditure saved by the comparison must be an
inhibition expenditure.[67]

Before concluding we shall rapidly point out a few agreements and
differences between the conceptions at which we have just arrived and
those that have been known for a long time in the psychology of the
comic. The putting one’s self into the psychic process of another and
the desire to understand him is obviously nothing else than the “comic
burrowing” (_komisches Leihen_) which has played a part in the analysis
of the comic ever since the time of Jean Paul; the “comparing” of the
psychic process of another with our own corresponds to a “psychological
contrast,” for which we here at last find a place, after we did not know
what to do with it in wit. But in our explanation of comic pleasure we
take issue with many authors who contend that this pleasure originates
through the fluctuation of our attention to and fro between contrasting
ideas. We are unable to see how such a mechanism could produce pleasure,
and we point to the fact that in the comparing of contrasts there
results a difference in expenditure which, if not used for anything
else, becomes capable of discharge and hence a source of pleasure.[68]

It is with misgiving only that we approach the problem of the comic. It
would be presumptuous to expect from our efforts any decisive
contribution to the solution of this problem after the works of a large
number of excellent thinkers have not resulted in an explanation that is
in every respect satisfactory. As a matter of fact, we intend simply to
follow out into the province of the comic certain observations that have
been found valuable in the study of wit.


                  _Occurrence and Origin of the Comic_

The comical appears primarily as an unintentional discovery in the
social relations of human beings. It is found in persons, that is, in
their movements, shapes, actions, and characteristic traits. In the
beginning it is found probably only in their psychical peculiarities and
later on in their mental qualities, especially in the expression of
these latter. Even animals and inanimate objects become comical as the
result of a widely used method of personification. However, the comical
can be considered apart from the person in whom it is found, if the
conditions under which a person becomes comical can be discerned. Thus
arises the comical situation, and this knowledge enables us to make a
person comical at will by putting him into situations in which the
conditions necessary for the comic are bound up with his actions. The
discovery that it is in our power to make another person comical opens
the way to unsuspected gains in comic pleasure, and forms the foundation
of a highly developed technique. It is also possible to make one’s self
just as comical as others. The means which serve to make a person
comical are transference into comic situations, imitations, disguise,
unmasking, caricature, parody, travesty, and the like. It is quite
evident that these techniques may enter into the service of hostile or
aggressive tendencies. A person may be made comical in order to render
him contemptible or in order to deprive him of his claims to dignity and
authority. But even if such a purpose were regularly at the bottom of
all attempts to make a person comical this need not necessarily be the
meaning of the spontaneous comic.

As a result of this superficial survey of the manifestations of the
comic we can readily see that the comic originates from wide-spread
sources, and that conditions so specialized as those found in the naïve
cannot be expected in the case of the comic. In order to get a clue to
the conditions that are applicable to the comic the selection of the
first example is most important. We will examine first the comic
movement because we remember that the most primitive stage performance,
the pantomime, uses this means to make us laugh. The answer to the
question, Why do we laugh at the actions of clowns? would be that they
appear to us immoderate and inappropriate; that is, we really laugh over
the excessive expenditure of energy. Let us look for the same condition
outside of the manufactured comic, that is, under circumstances where it
may unintentionally be found. The child’s motions do not appear to us
comical, even if it jumps and fidgets, but it is comical to see a little
boy or girl follow with the tongue the movement of his pen-holder when
he is trying to master the art of writing; we see in these additional
motions a superfluous expenditure of energy which under similar
conditions we should save. In the same way we find it comical to see
unnecessary motions or even marked exaggeration of expressive motions in
adults. Among the genuinely comic cases we might mention the motions
made by the bowler after he has released the ball while he is following
its course as though he were still able to control it; all grimaces
which exaggerate the normal expression of the emotions are comical, even
if they are involuntary, as in the case of persons suffering from St.
Vitus’ dance (chorea); the impassioned movements of a modern orchestra
leader will appear comical to every unmusical person, who cannot
understand why they are necessary. Indeed, the comic element found in
bodily shapes and physiognomy is a branch of the comic of motion, in
that they are conceived as though they were the result of motion that
either has been carried too far or is purposeless. Wide exposed eyes, a
crook-shaped nose bent towards the mouth, handle-like ears, a hunch
back, and all similar physical defects probably produce a comical
impression only in so far as the movements that would be necessary to
produce these features are imagined, whereby the nose and other parts of
the body are pictured as more movable than they actually are. It is
certainly comical if some one can “wiggle his ears,” and it would
undoubtedly be a great deal more comical if he could raise and lower his
nose. A large part of the comical impression that animals make upon us
is due to the fact that we perceive in them movements which we cannot
imitate.


                           _Comic of Motion_

But how does it come about that we laugh as soon as we have recognized
that the actions of some one else are immoderate and inappropriate? I
believe that we laugh because we compare the motions observed in others
with those which we ourselves should produce if we were in their place.
The two persons must naturally be compared in accordance with the same
standard, but this standard is my own innervation expenditure connected
with my idea of motion in the one case as well as the other. This
assertion is in need of discussion and amplification.

What we are here putting into juxtaposition is, on the one hand, the
psychic expenditure of a given idea, and on the other hand, the content
of this idea. We maintain that the former is not primarily and
principally independent of the latter—the content of the
idea—particularly because the idea of something great requires a larger
expenditure than the idea of something small. As long as we are
concerned only with the idea of different coarse movements we shall
encounter no difficulties in the theoretical determination of our thesis
or in establishing its proof through observation. It will be shown that
in this case an attribute of the idea actually coincides with an
attribute of the object conceived, although psychology warns us of
confusions of this sort.

I obtain an idea of a definite coarse movement by performing this motion
or by imitating it, and in so doing I set a standard for this motion in
my feelings of innervation.[69]

Now if I perceive a similar more or less coarse motion in some one else,
the surest way to the understanding—to apperception—of the same is to
carry it out imitatively and the comparison will then enable me to
decide in which motion I expended more energy. Such an impulse to
imitate certainly arises on perceiving a movement. But in reality I do
not carry out the imitation any more than I still spell out words simply
because I have learnt to read by means of spelling. Instead of imitating
the movement by my muscles I substitute the idea of the same through my
memory traces of the expenditures necessary for similar motions.
Perceiving, or “thinking,” differs above all from acting or carrying out
things by the fact that it entails a very much smaller displacement of
energy and keeps the main expenditure from being discharged. But how is
the quantitative factor, the more or less big element of the movement
perceived, given expression in the idea? And if the representation of
the quantity is left off from the idea that is composed of qualities,
how am I to differentiate the ideas of different big movements, how am I
to compare them?

Here, physiology shows the way in that it teaches us that even while an
idea is in the process of conception innervations proceed to the
muscles, which naturally represent only a moderate expenditure. It is
now easy to assume that this expenditure of innervation which
accompanies the conception of the idea is utilized to represent the
quantitative factor of the idea, and that when a great motion is
imagined it is greater than it would be in the case of a small one. The
conception of greater motions would thus actually be greater, that is,
it would be a conception accompanied by greater expenditure.


                          _Ideational Mimicry_

Observation shows directly that human beings are in the habit of
expressing the big and small things in their ideation content by means
of a manifold expenditure or by means of a sort of _ideational mimicry_.

When a child or a person of the common people or one belonging to a
certain race imparts or depicts something, one can easily observe that
he is not content to make his ideas intelligible to the hearer through
the choice of correct words alone, but that he also represents the
contents of the same through his expressive motions. Thus he designates
the quantities and intensities of “a high mountain” by raising his hands
over his head, and those of “a little dwarf” by lowering his hand to the
ground. If he broke himself of the habit of depicting with his hands, he
would nevertheless do it with his voice, and if he should also control
his voice, one may be sure that in picturing something big he would
distend his eyes, and describing something little he would press his
eyes together. It is not his own affects that he thus expresses, but it
is really the content of what he imagines.

Shall we now assume that this need for mimicry is first aroused through
the demand for imparting, whereas a good part of this manner of
representation still escapes the attention of the hearer? I rather
believe that this mimicry, though less vivid, exists even if all
imparting is left out of the question, that it comes about when the
person imagines for himself alone, or thinks of something in a graphic
manner; that then such a person, just as in talking, expresses through
his body the idea of big and small which manifests itself at least
through a change of innervation in the facial expressions and sensory
organs. Indeed, I can imagine that the bodily innervation which is
consensual to the content of the idea conceived is the beginning and
origin of mimicry for purposes of communication. For, in order to be in
a position to serve this purpose, it is only necessary to increase it
and make it conspicuous to the other. When I take the view that this
“expression of the ideation content” should be added to the expression
of the emotions, which are known as a physical by-effect of psychic
processes, I am well aware that my observations which refer to the
category of the big and small do not exhaust the subject. I myself could
add still other things, even before reaching to the phenomenon of
tension through which a person physically indicates the accumulation of
his attention and the _niveau_ of abstraction upon which his thoughts
happen to rest. I maintain that this subject is very important, and I
believe that tracing the ideation mimicry in other fields of æsthetics
would be just as useful for the understanding of the comic as it is
here.

To return to the comic movement, I repeat that with the perception of a
certain motion the impulse to conceive it will be given through a
certain expenditure. In the “desire to understand,” in the apperception
of this movement I produce a certain expenditure, and I behave in this
part of the psychic process just as if I put myself in the place of the
person observed. Simultaneously I probably grasp the aim of the motion,
and through former experiences I am able to estimate the amount of
expenditure necessary to attain this aim. I thereby drop out of
consideration the person observed and behave as if I myself wished to
attain the aim of the motion. These two ideational possibilities depend
on a comparison of the motion observed with my own inhibited motion. In
the case of an immoderate or inappropriate movement on the part of the
other, my greater expenditure for understanding becomes inhibited _statu
nascendi_ during the mobilization as it were, it is declared superfluous
and stands free for further use or for discharge through laughing. If
other favorable conditions supervened this would be the nature of the
origin of pleasure in comic movement,—an innervation expenditure which,
when compared with one’s own motion, becomes an inapplicable surplus.


      _Comparison of Two Kinds of Expenditure as Pleasure-sources_

We now note that we must continue our discussion by following two
different paths; first, to determine the conditions for the discharge of
the surplus; secondly, to test whether the other cases of the comic can
be conceived similarly to our conception of comic motion.

We shall turn first to the latter task and after considering comic
movement and action we shall turn to the comic found in the psychic
activities and peculiarities of others.

As an example of this kind we may consider the comical nonsense produced
by ignorant students at examinations; it is more difficult, however, to
give a simple example of the peculiarities. We must not be confused by
the fact that nonsense and foolishness which so often act in a comical
manner are nevertheless not perceived as comical in all cases, just as
the same things which once made us laugh because they seemed comical
later may appear to us contemptible and hateful. This fact, which we
must not forget to take into account, seems only to show that besides
the comparison familiar to us other relations come into consideration
for the comic effect,—conditions which we can investigate in other
connections.

The comic found in the mental and psychic attributes of another person
is apparently again the result of a comparison between him and my own
ego. But it is remarkable that it is a comparison which mostly furnishes
the result opposite to that obtained through comic movement and action.
In the latter case it is comical if the other person assumes a greater
expenditure than I believe to be necessary for me; in the case of
psychic activity it is just the reverse, it is comical if the other
person economizes in expenditure, which I consider indispensable; for
nonsense and foolishness are nothing but inferior activities. In the
first case I laugh because he makes it too difficult for himself, and in
the latter case because he makes it too easy for himself. In the case of
the comic effect it seems to be a question only of the difference
between the two energy expenditures—the one of “feeling one’s self into
something” (_Einfühlung_)—and the other of the ego—and it makes no
difference in whose favor this difference inclines. This peculiarity,
which at first confuses our judgment, disappears, however, when we
consider that it is in accord with our personal development towards a
higher stage of culture, to limit our muscular work and increase our
mental work. By heightening our mental expenditure we produce a
diminution of motion expenditure for the same activity. Our machines
bear witness to this cultural success.[70]

Thus it coincides with a uniform understanding that that person appears
comical to us who puts forth too much expenditure in his psychical
activities and too little in his mental activities; and it cannot be
denied that in both cases our laughing is the expression of a
pleasurably perceived superiority which we adjudge to ourselves in
comparison with him. If the relation in both cases becomes reversed,
that is, if the somatic expenditure of the other is less and the psychic
expenditure greater, then we no longer laugh, but are struck with
amazement and admiration.[71]


                         _Comic of Situation._

The origin of the comic pleasure discussed here, that is, the origin of
such pleasure in a comparison of the other person with one’s own self in
respect to the difference between the identification expenditure
(_Einfühlungsaufwand_) and normal expenditure—is genetically probably
the most important. It is certain, however, that it is not the only one.
We have learned before to disregard any such comparison between the
other person and one’s self, and to obtain the pleasure-bringing
difference from one side only, either from identification, or from the
processes in one’s own ego, proving thereby that the feeling of
superiority bears no essential relations to comic pleasure. A comparison
is indispensable, however, for the origin of this pleasure, and we find
this comparison between two energy expenditures which rapidly follow
each other and refer to the same function. It is produced either in
ourselves by way of identification with the other, or we find it without
any identification in our own psychic processes. The first case, in
which the other person still plays a part, though he is not compared
with ourselves, results when the pleasure-producing difference of energy
expenditures comes into existence through outer influences which we can
comprehend as a “situation,” for which reason this species of comic is
also called the “comic of situation.” The peculiarities of the person
who furnishes the comic do not here come into essential consideration;
we laugh when we admit to ourselves that had we been placed in the same
situation we should have done the same thing. Here we draw the comic
from the relation of the individual to the often all-too-powerful outer
world, which is represented in the psychic processes of the individual
by the conventions and necessities of society, and even by his bodily
needs. A typical example of the latter is when a person engaged in an
activity, which claims all his psychic forces, is suddenly disturbed by
a pain or excremental need. The opposite case which furnishes us the
comic difference through identification, lies between the great interest
which existed before the disturbance occurred and the minimum left for
his psychic activity after the disturbance made its appearance. The
person who furnishes us this difference again becomes comical through
inferiority; but he is only inferior in comparison with his former ego
and not in comparison with us, for we know that in a similar case we
could not have behaved differently. It is remarkable, however, that we
find this inferiority of the person only in the case where we “feel
ourselves” into some one, that is, we can only find it comical in the
other, whereas we ourselves are conscious only of painful emotions when
such or similar embarrassments happen to us. It is by keeping away the
painful from our own person that we are probably first enabled to enjoy
as pleasurable the difference which resulted from the comparison of the
changing energy.


                         _Comic of Expectation_

The other source of the comic, which we find in our own changes of
investing energy, lies in our relations to the future, which we are
accustomed to anticipate through our ideas of expectation. I assume that
a quantitatively determined expenditure underlies our every idea of
expectation, which in case of disappointment becomes diminished by a
certain difference, and I again refer to the observations made before
concerning “ideational mimicry.” But it seems to me easier to
demonstrate the real mobilized psychic expenditure for the cases of
expectation. It is well known concerning a whole series of cases that
the manifestation of expectation is formed by motor preliminaries; this
is first of all true of cases in which the expected events make demands
on my motility, and these preparations are quantitatively determinable
without anything further. If I am expecting to catch a ball thrown at
me, I put my body in states of tension in order to enable me to
withstand the collision with the ball, and the superfluous motions which
I make if the ball turns out to be light make me look comical to the
spectators. I allowed myself to be misled by the expectation to exert an
immoderate expenditure of motion. A similar thing happens if, for
example, I lift out a basket of fruit which I took to be heavy but which
was hollow and formed out of wax in order to deceive me. By its upward
jerk my arm betrays the fact that I have prepared a superfluous
innervation for this purpose and hence I am laughed at. In fact there is
at least one case in which the expectation expenditure can be directly
demonstrated by means of physiological experimentation with animals. In
Pawlof’s experiments with salivary secretions of dogs who, provided with
salivary fistulæ, are shown different kinds of food, it is noticed that
the amount of saliva secreted through the fistulæ depends on whether the
conditions of the experiment have strengthened or disappointed the dogs’
expectation to be fed with the food shown them.

Even where the thing expected lays claims only to my sensory organs, and
not to my motility, I may assume that the expectation manifests itself
in a certain motor emanation causing tension of the senses, and I may
even conceive the suspension of attention as a motor activity which is
equivalent to a certain amount of expenditure. Moreover, I can
presuppose that the preparatory activity of expectation is not
independent of the amount of the expected impression, but that I
represent mimically the bigness and smallness of the same by means of a
greater or smaller preparatory expenditure, just as in the case of
imparting something and in the case of thinking when there is no
expectation. The expectation expenditure naturally will be composed of
many components, and also for my disappointment diverse factors will
come into consideration; it is not only a question whether the realized
event is perceptibly greater or smaller than the expected one, but also
whether the expectation is worthy of the great interest which I had
offered for it. In this manner I am instructed to consider, besides the
expenditure for the representation of bigness and smallness (the
conceptual mimicry), also the expenditure for the tension of attention
(expectation expenditure), and in addition to these two expenditures
there is in all cases the abstraction expenditure. But these other forms
of expenditure can easily be reduced to the one of bigness and
smallness, for what we call more interesting, more sublime, and even
more abstract, are only particularly qualified special cases of what is
greater. Let us add to this that, among other things, Lipps holds that
the quantitative, not the qualitative, contrast is primarily the source
of comic pleasure, and we shall be altogether content to have chosen the
comic element of motion as the starting-point of our investigation.

In working out Kant’s thesis, “The comic is an expectation dwindled into
nothing,” Lipps made the attempt in his book, often cited here, to trace
the comic pleasure altogether to expectation. Despite the many
instructive and valuable results which this attempt brought to light I
should like to agree with the criticism expressed by other authors,
namely, that Lipps has formulated a field of origin of the comic which
is much too narrow, and that he could not subject its phenomena to his
formula without much forcing.


                              _Caricature_

Human beings are not satisfied with enjoying the comic as they encounter
it in life, but they aim to produce it purposely, thus we discover more
of the nature of the comic by studying the methods employed in producing
the comic. Above all one can produce comical elements in one’s
personality for the amusement of others, by making one’s self appear
awkward or stupid. One then produces the comic exactly as if one were
really so, by complying with the condition of comparison which leads to
the difference of expenditure; but one does not make himself laughable
or contemptible through this; indeed, under certain circumstances one
can even secure admiration. The feeling of superiority does not come
into existence in the other when he knows that the actor is only
shamming, and this furnishes us a good new proof that the comic is
independent in principle of the feeling of superiority.

To make another comical, the method most commonly employed is to
transfer him into situations wherein he becomes comical regardless of
his personal qualities, as a result of human dependence upon external
circumstances, especially social factors; in other words, one resorts to
the comical situation. This transferring into a comic situation may be
real as in practical jokes, such as placing the foot in front of one so
that he falls like a clumsy person, or making one appear stupid by
utilizing his credulity to make him believe some nonsense, etc., or it
can be feigned by means of speech or play. It is a good aid in
aggression, in the service of which production of the comic is wont to
place itself in order that the comic pleasure may be independent of the
reality of the comic situation; thus every person is really defenseless
against being made comical.

But there are still other means of making one comical which deserve
special attention and which in part also show new sources of comic
pleasure. _Imitation_, for example, belongs here; it accords the hearer
an extraordinary amount of pleasure and makes its subject comic, even if
it still keeps away from the exaggeration of caricature. It is much
easier to fathom the comic effect of caricature than that of simple
imitation. Caricature, parody and travesty, like their practical
counterpart—unmasking, range themselves against persons and objects who
command authority and respect and who are exalted in some sense—these
are procedures tending towards degradation.[72] In the transferred
psychic sense, the exalted is equivalent to something great and I want
to make the statement, or more accurately to repeat the statement, that
psychic greatness like somatic greatness is exhibited by means of an
increased expenditure. It needs little observation to ascertain that
when I speak of the exalted I give a different innervation to my voice,
I change my facial expression, an attempt to bring my entire bearing as
it were into complete accord with the dignity of that which I present. I
impose upon myself a dignified restriction not much different than if I
were coming into the presence of an illustrious personage, monarch, or
prince of science. I can scarcely err when I assume that this added
innervation of conceptual mimicry corresponds to an increased
expenditure. The third case of such an added expenditure I readily find
when I indulge in abstract trains of thought instead of in the concrete
and plastic ideas. If I can now imagine that the mentioned processes for
degrading the illustrious are quite ordinary, that during their activity
I need not be on my guard and in whose ideal presence I may, to use a
military formula, put myself “at ease,” all that saves me the added
expenditure of dignified restriction. Moreover, the comparison of this
manner of presentation instigated by identification with the manner of
presentation to which I have been hitherto accustomed which seeks to
present itself at the same time, again produces a difference in
expenditure which can be discharged through laughter.

As is known, caricature brings about the degradation by rendering
prominent one feature, comic in itself, from the entire picture of the
exalted object, a feature which would be overlooked if viewed with the
entire picture. Only by isolating this feature can the comic effect be
obtained which spreads in our memory over the whole picture. This has,
however, this condition; the presence of the exalted itself must not
force us into a disposition of reverence. Where such a comical feature
is really lacking then caricature unhesitatingly creates it by
exaggerating one that is not comical in itself. It is again
characteristic of the origin of comic pleasure that the effect of the
caricature is not essentially impaired through such a falsifying of
reality.


                              _Unmasking_

_Parody_ and _travesty_ accomplish the degradation of the exalted by
other means; they destroy the uniformity between the attributes of
persons familiar to us and their speech and actions; by replacing
either the illustrious persons or their utterances by lowly ones.
Therein they differ from caricature, but not through the mechanism of
the production of the comic pleasure. The same mechanism also holds
true in _unmasking_, which comes into consideration only where some
one has attached to himself dignity and authority which in reality
should be taken from him. We have seen the comic effect of unmasking
through several examples of wit, for example, in the story of the
fashionable lady who in her first labor-pains cries: “Ah, mon Dieu!”
but to whom the physician paid no attention until she screamed:
“A-a-a-ai-e-e-e-e-e-e-E-E-E!” Being now acquainted with the character
of the comic, we can no longer dispute that this story is really an
example of comical unmasking and has no just claim to the term
witticism. It recalls wit only through the setting, through the
technical means of “representation through a trifle”; here it is the
cry which was found sufficient to indicate the point. The fact
remains, however, that our feeling for the niceties of speech, when we
call on it for judgment, does not oppose calling such a story a
witticism. We can find the explanation for this in the reflection that
usage of speech does not enter scientifically into the nature of wit
so far as we have evolved it by means of this painstaking examination.
As it is a function of the activities of wit to reopen hidden sources
of comic pleasure (p. 150), every artifice which does not bring to
light barefaced comic may in looser analogy be called a witticism.
This is especially true in the case of unmasking, though in other
methods of comic-making the appellation also holds good.[73]

In the mechanism of “unmasking” one can also utilize those processes of
comic-making already known to us which degrade the dignity of
individuals in that they call attention to one of the common human
frailties, but particularly to the dependence of his mental functions
upon physical needs. Unmasking them becomes equivalent to the reminder:
This or that one who is admired like a demigod is only a human being
like you and me after all. Moreover, all efforts in this mechanism serve
to lay bare the monotonous psychic automatism which is behind wealth and
apparent freedom of psychic achievements. We have become acquainted with
examples of such “unmasking” through the witticisms dealing with
marriage agents, and at that time to be sure we felt doubt whether we
could rightly count these stories as wit. Now we can decide with more
certainty that the anecdote of the echo who reinforces all assertions of
the marriage agent and in the end reinforces the latter’s admission that
the bride has a hunch back with the exclamation “And what a hunch!” is
essentially a comic story, an example of the unmasking of the psychic
automatism. But here the comic story serves only as a façade; to any one
who wishes to note the hidden meaning of the marriage agent, the whole
remains a splendidly put together piece of wit. He who does not
penetrate so far sees only the comic story. The same is true of the
other witticism of the agent who, to refute an objection, finally
confirms the truth through the exclamation: “But who in the world would
lend them anything?” This is a comic unmasking which serves as a façade
for a witticism. Still the character of the wit is here quite evident,
as the speech of the agent is at the same time an expression through the
opposite. In trying to prove that the people are rich he proves at the
same time that they are not rich but very poor. Wit and the comic unite
here and teach us that a statement may be simultaneously witty and
comical.

We eagerly grasp the opportunity to return from the comic of unmasking
to wit, for our real task is to explain the relation between wit and
comic and not to determine the nature of the comic. Hence to the case of
uncovering the psychic automatism, wherein our feeling left us in doubt
as to whether the matter was comical or witty, we add another, the case
of nonsense-wit, wherein likewise wit and the comic fuse. But our
investigation will ultimately show us that in this second case the
meeting of wit and comic may be theoretically deduced.

In the discussion of the techniques of wit we have found that giving
free play to such modes of thinking as are common in the unconscious and
which in consciousness are conceived only as “faulty thinking,”
furnishes the technical means of a great many witticisms. We had then
doubted their witty character and were inclined to classify them simply
as comic stories. We could come to no decision regarding our uncertainty
because in the first place the real character of wit was not familiar to
us. Later we found this character by following the analogy to the
dream-work as to the compromise formed by the wit-work between the
demands of the rational critic and the impulse not to abandon the old
word-pleasure and nonsense-pleasure. What thus came into existence as a
compromise, when the foreconscious thought was left for a moment to
unconscious elaboration, satisfied both demands in all cases, but it
presented itself to the critic, in various forms and had to stand
various criticisms from it. In one case wit succeeded in surreptitiously
assuming the form of an unimportant but none the less admissible
proposition; a second time it smuggled itself into the expression of a
valuable thought. But within the outer limit of the compromise activity
it made no effort to satisfy the critic, and defiantly utilizing the
pleasure-sources at its disposal, it appeared before the critic as pure
nonsense. It had no fear of provoking contradiction because it could
rely on the fact that the hearer would decipher the disfigurement of the
expression through the operation of his unconscious and thus give back
to it its meaning.

Now in what case will wit appear to the critic as nonsense? Particularly
when it makes use of those modes of thought, which are common in the
unconscious, but forbidden in conscious thought; that is, when it
resorts to faulty thinking. Some of the modes of thinking, of the
unconscious, have also been retained in conscious thinking, for example,
many forms of indirect expression, allusions, etc., even though their
conscious use has to be much restricted. Using these techniques wit will
arouse little or no opposition on the part of the critic; but this only
happens when it also uses that technical means with which conscious
thought no longer cares to have anything to do. Wit can still further
avoid offending if it disguises the faulty thinking by investing it with
a semblance of logic as in the story of the fancy cake and liqueur,
salmon with mayonnaise, and similar ones. But should it present the
faulty thinking undisguised, the critic is sure to protest.


                   _The Meeting of Wit and the Comic_

In this case, something else comes to the aid of wit. The faulty
thinking, which as a form of thinking of the unconscious, wit utilizes
for its technique, appears comical to the critic, although this is not
necessarily the case. The conscious giving of free play to the
unconscious and to those forms of thinking which are rejected as faulty,
furnishes a means for the production of comic pleasure. This can be
easily understood, as a greater expenditure is surely needed for the
production of the foreconscious investing energy than for the giving of
free play to the unconscious. When we hear the thought which is formed
like one from the unconscious we compare it to its correct form, and
this results in a difference of expenditure which gives origin to comic
pleasure. A witticism which makes use of such faulty thinking as its
technique and therefore appears absurd can produce a comic impression at
the same time. If we do not strike the trail of the wit, there remains
to us only the comic or funny story.

The story of the borrowed kettle, which showed a hole on being returned,
whereupon the borrower excused himself by stating that in the first
place he had not borrowed the kettle; secondly, that it already had a
hole when he borrowed it; and thirdly, that he had returned it intact
without any hole (p. 82), is an excellent example of a purely comic
effect through giving free play to one’s unconscious modes of thinking.
Just this mutual neutralization of several thoughts, each of which is
well motivated in itself, is the province of the unconscious.
Corresponding to this, the dream in which the unconscious thoughts
become manifest, also shows an absence of either—or.[74] These are
expressed by putting the thoughts next to one another. In that dream
example given in my _Interpretation of Dreams_,[75] which in spite of
its complication I have chosen as a type of the work of interpretation,
I seek to rid myself of the reproach that I have not removed the pains
of a patient by psychic treatment. My arguments are: 1. she is herself
to blame for her illness, because she does not wish to accept my
solution, 2. her pains are of organic origin, therefore none of my
concern, 3. her pains are connected with her widowhood, for which I am
certainly not to blame, 4. her pains resulted from an injection with a
dirty syringe, which was given by another. All these motives follow one
another just as though one did not exclude the other. In order to escape
the reproach that it was nonsense I had to insert the words “either—or”
instead of the “and” of the dream.

_A similar comical story is the one which tells of a blacksmith in a
Hungarian village who has committed a crime punishable by death; the
bürgomaster, however, decreed that not the smith but a tailor was to be
hanged, as there were two tailors in the village but only one
blacksmith, and the crime had to be expiated._ Such a displacement of
guilt from one person to another naturally contradicts all laws of
conscious logic, but in no ways the mental trends of the unconscious. I
am in doubt whether to call this story comic, and still I put the story
of the kettle among the witticisms. Now I admit that it is far more
correct to designate the latter as comic rather than witty. But now I
understand how it happens that my feelings, usually so reliable, can
leave me in the lurch as to whether this story be comic or witty. The
case in which I cannot come to a conclusion through my feelings is the
one in which the comic results through the uncovering of modes of
thought which exclusively belong to the unconscious. A story of that
kind can be comic and witty at the same time; but it will impress me as
being witty even if it be only comic, because the use of the faulty
thinking of the unconscious reminds me of wit, just as in the case of
the arrangements for the uncovering of the hidden comic discussed before
(p. 325).

I must lay great stress upon making clear this most delicate point of my
analysis, namely, the relation of wit to the comic, and will therefore
supplement what has been said with some negative statements. First of
all, I call attention to the fact that the case of the meeting of wit
and comic treated here (p. 327) is not identical with the preceding one.
I grant it is a fine distinction, but it can be drawn with certainty. In
the preceding case the comic originated from the uncovering of the
psychic automatism. This is in no way peculiar to the unconscious alone
and it does not at all play a conspicuous part in the technique of wit.
Unmasking appears only accidentally in relation with wit, in that it
serves another technique of wit, namely, representation through the
opposite. But in the case of giving free play to unconscious ways of
thinking the union of wit and comic is an essential one, because the
same method which is used by the first person in wit as the technique of
releasing pleasure will naturally produce comic pleasure in the third
person.

We might be tempted to generalize this last case and seek the relation
of wit to the comic in the fact that the effect of wit upon the third
person follows the mechanism of comic pleasure. But there is no question
about that; contact with the comic is not in any way found in all nor
even in most witticisms; in most cases wit and the comic can be cleanly
separated. As often as wit succeeds in escaping the appearance of
absurdity, which is to say in most witticisms of double meaning or of
allusion, one cannot discover any effect in the hearer resembling the
comic. One can make the test with examples previously cited or with some
new ones given here.

Congratulatory telegram to be sent to a gambler on his 70th birthday.

“_Trente et quarante_”[76] (word-division with allusion).

Madame de _Maintenon_ was called Madame de _Maintenant_ (modification of
a name).

We might further believe that at least all jokes with nonsense façades
appear comical and must impress us as such. But I recall here the fact
that such witticisms often have a different effect on the hearer,
calling forth confusion and a tendency to rejection (see footnote, p.
212). Therefore it evidently depends whether the nonsense of the wit
appears comical or common plain nonsense, and the conditions for this we
have not yet investigated. Accordingly we hold to the conclusion that
wit, judging by its nature, can be separated from the comic, and that it
unites with it on the one hand only in certain special cases, on the
other in the tendency to gain pleasure from intellectual sources.

In the course of these examinations concerning the relations of wit and
the comic there revealed itself to us that distinction which we must
emphasize as most significant, and which at the same time points to a
psychologically important characteristic of the comic. We had to
transfer to the unconscious the source of wit-pleasure; there is no
occasion which can be discovered for the same localization of the comic.
On the contrary all analyses which we have made thus far indicate that
the source of comic pleasure lies in the comparison of two expenditures,
both of which we must adjudge to the foreconscious. Wit and the comic
can above all be differentiated in the psychic localization; _wit is, so
to speak, the contribution to the comic from the sphere of the
unconscious_.


                          _Comic of Imitation_

We need not blame ourselves for digressing from the subject, for the
relation of wit to the comic is really the occasion which urged us to
the examination of the comic. But it is time for us to return to the
point under discussion, to the treatment of the means which serve to
produce the comic. We have advanced the discussion of caricature and
unmasking, because from both of them we can borrow several points of
similarity for the analysis of the comic of _imitation_. Imitation is
mostly replaced by caricature, which consists in the exaggeration of
certain otherwise not striking traits, and also bears the character of
degradation. Still this does not seem to exhaust the nature of
imitation; it is incontestable that in itself it represents an
extraordinarily rich source of comic pleasure, for we laugh particularly
over faithful imitations. It is not easy to give a satisfactory
explanation of this if we do not accept Bergson’s view,[77] according to
which the comic of imitation is put next to the comic produced by
uncovering the psychic automatism. Bergson believes that everything
gives a comic impression which manifests itself in the shape of a
machine-like inanimate movement in the human being. His law is that “the
attitudes, gestures, and movements of the human body are laughable in
exact proportion as that body reminds us of a mere machine.” He explains
the comic of imitation by connecting it with a problem formulated by
Pascal in his _Thoughts_, why is it that we laugh at the comparison of
two faces that are alike although neither of them excites laughter by
itself. “The truth is that a really living life should never repeat
itself. Wherever there is repetition or complete similarity, we always
suspect some mechanism at work behind the living.” Analyze the
impression you get from two faces that are too much alike, and you will
find that you are thinking of two copies cast in the same mould, or two
impressions of the same soul, or two reproductions of the same
negative,—in a word, of some manufacturing process or other. This
deflection of life towards the mechanical is here the real cause of
laughter (l. c., p. 34). We might say, it is the degradation of the
human to the mechanical or inanimate. If we accept these winning
arguments of Bergson, it is moreover not difficult to subject his view
to our own formula. Taught by experience that every living being is
different and demands a definite amount of expenditure from our
understanding, we find ourselves disappointed when, as a result of a
perfect agreement or deceptive imitation, we need no new expenditure.
But we are disappointed in the sense of being relieved, and the
expenditure of expectation which has become superfluous is discharged
through laughter. The same formula will also cover all cases of comic
rigidity considered by Bergson, such as professional habits, fixed
ideas, and modes of expression which are repeated on every occasion. All
these cases aim to compare the expenditure of expectation with what is
commonly required for the understanding, whereby the greater expectation
depends on observation of individual variety and human plasticity. Hence
in imitation the source of comic pleasure is not the comic of situation
but that of expectation.

As we trace the comic pleasure in general to comparison, it is incumbent
upon us to investigate also the comic element of the comparison itself,
which likewise serves as a means of producing the comic. Our interest in
this question will be enhanced when we recall that in the case of
comparison the “feeling” as to whether something was to be classed as
witty or merely comical often left us in the lurch (v. p. 114).

The subject really deserves more attention than we can bestow upon it.
The main quality for which we ask in comparison is whether it is
pertinent, that is, whether it really calls our attention to an existing
agreement between two different objects. The original pleasure in
refinding the same thing (Groos, p. 103) is not the only motive which
favors the use of comparison. Besides this there is the fact that
comparison is capable of a utilization which facilitates intellectual
work; when for example, as is usually the case, one compares the less
familiar to the more familiar, the abstract to the concrete, and
explains through this comparison the more strange and the more difficult
objects. With every such comparison, especially of the abstract to the
concrete, there is a certain degradation and a certain economy in
abstraction expenditure (in the sense of a conceptual mimicry) yet this
naturally does not suffice to render prominent the character of the
comic. The latter does not emerge suddenly from the freed pleasure of
the comparison but comes gradually; there are many cases which only
touch the comic, in which one might doubt whether they show the comic
character. The comparison undoubtedly becomes comical when the _niveau_
difference of the expenditure of abstraction between the two things
compared becomes increased, if something serious and strange, especially
of intellectual or moral nature is compared to something banal and
lowly. The former release of pleasure and the contribution from the
conditions of conceptual mimicry may perhaps explain the gradual
change—which is determined by quantitative relations,—from the
universally pleasurable to the comic, which takes place during the
comparison. I am certainly avoiding misunderstandings in that I
emphasize that I deduce the comic pleasure in the comparison, not from
the contrast of the two things compared but from the difference of the
two abstraction expenditures. The strange which is difficult to grasp,
the abstract and really intellectually sublime, through its alleged
agreement with a familiar lowly one, in the imagination of which every
abstraction expenditure disappears, is now itself unmasked as something
equally lowly. The comic of comparison thus becomes reduced to a case of
degradation.

The comparison, as we have seen above, can now be witty without a trace
of comic admixture, especially when it happens to evade the degradation.
Thus the comparison of Truth to a torch which one cannot carry through a
crowd without singeing somebody’s beard is pure wit, because it takes an
obsolete expression (“The torch of truth”) at its full value and not at
all in a comical sense, and because the torch as an object does not lack
a certain distinction, though it is a concrete object. However, a
comparison may just as well be witty as comic, and what is more one may
be independent of the other, in that the comparison becomes an aid for
certain techniques of wit, as, for example, unification or allusion.
Thus Nestroy’s comparison of memory to a “Warehouse” (p. 120) is
simultaneously comical and witty, first, on account of the extraordinary
degradation to which the psychological conception must consent in the
comparison to a “Warehouse,” and secondly, because he who utilizes the
comparison is a clerk, and in this comparison he establishes a rather
unexpected unification between psychology and his vocation. Heine’s
verse, “until at last the buttons tore from the pants of my patience,”
seems at first an excellent example of a comic degrading comparison, but
on closer reflection we must ascribe to it also the attribute of
wittiness, since the comparison as a means of allusion strikes into the
realm of the obscene and causes a release of pleasure from the obscene.
Through a union not altogether incidental the same material also gives
us a resultant pleasure which is at the same time comical and witty; it
does not matter whether or not the conditions of the one promote the
origin of the other, such a union acts confusingly on the “feeling”
whose function it is to announce to us whether we have before us wit or
the comic, and only a careful examination independent of the disposition
of pleasure can decide the question.

As tempting as it would be to trace these more intimate determinations
of comic pleasure, the author must remember that neither his previous
education nor his daily vocation justifies him in extending his
investigations beyond the spheres of wit, and he must confess that it is
precisely the subject of comic comparison which makes him feel his
incompetence.

We are quite willing to be reminded that many authors do not recognize
the clear notional and objective distinction between wit and comic, as
we were impelled to do, and that they classify wit merely as “the comic
of speech” or “of words.” To test this view let us select one example of
intentional and one of involuntary comic of speech and compare it with
wit. We have already mentioned before that we are in a good position to
distinguish comic from witty speech. “With a fork and with effort, his
mother pulled him out of the mess,” is only comical, but Heine’s verse
about the four castes of the population of Göttingen: “Professors,
students, Philistines, and cattle,” is exquisitely witty.

As an example of the intentional comic of speech I will take as a model
Stettenheim’s _Wippchen_. We call Stettenheim witty because he possesses
the cleverness that evokes the comic. The wit which one “has” in
contradistinction to the wit which one “makes,” is indeed correctly
conditioned by this ability. It is true that the letters of Wippchen are
also witty in so far as they are interspersed with a rich collection of
all sorts of witticisms, some of which very successful ones, (as
“festively undressed” when he speaks of a parade of savages), but what
lends the peculiar character to these productions is not these isolated
witticisms, but the superabundant flow of comic speech contained
therein. Originally _Wippchen_ was certainly meant to represent a
satirical character, a modification of Freytag’s Schmock, one of those
uneducated persons who trade in the educational treasure of the nation
and abuse it; but the pleasure in the comic effect experienced in
representing this person seems gradually to have pushed to the
background the author’s satirical tendency. Wippchen’s productions are
for the most part “comic nonsense.” The author has justly utilized the
pleasant mood resulting from the accumulation of such achievements to
present beside the altogether admissible material all sorts of
absurdities which would be intolerable in themselves. Wippchen’s
nonsense appears to be of a specific nature only on account of its
special technique. If we look closer into some of these “witticisms,” we
find that some forms which have impressed their character on the whole
production are especially conspicuous. Wippchen makes use mostly of
compositions (fusions), of modifications of familiar expressions and
quotations. He replaces some of the banal elements in these expressions
by others which are usually more pretentious and more valuable. This
naturally comes near to the techniques of wit.


                         _The Comic of Speech_

Some of the fusions taken from the preface and the first pages are the
following: “_Turkey’s money is like the hay of the sea._” This is only a
condensation of the two expressions, “Money like hay,” “Money like the
sands of the sea.” Or: “_I am nothing but a leafless pillar which tells
of a vanished splendor_,” which is a fusion of “leafless trunk” and “a
pillar which, etc.” Or: “_Where is Ariadne’s thread which leads out of
the Scylla of this Augean stable?_” for which three different Greek
myths contribute an element each.

The modifications and substitutions can be treated collectively without
much forcing; their character can be seen from the following examples
which are peculiar to Wippchen, they are regularly permeated by a
different wording which is more fluent, most banal, and reduced to mere
platitudes.

“_To hang my paper and ink high._” The saying: “To hang one’s
bread-basket high,” expresses metaphorically the idea of placing one
under difficult conditions. But why not stretch this figure to other
material?

“_Already in my youth Pegasus was alive in me._” When the word “pegasus”
is replaced by “the poet,” one can recognize it as an expression often
used in autobiographies. Naturally “pegasus” is not the proper word to
replace the words “the poet,” but it has thought associations to it and
is a high-sounding word.

From Wippchen’s other numerous productions some examples can be shown
which present the pure comic. As an example of comic disillusionment the
following can be cited: “_For hours the battle raged, finally it
remained undecisive_”; an example of comical unmasking (of ignorance) is
the following: “_Clio, the Medusa of history_,” or quotations like the
following: “_Habent sua fata morgana._” But our interest is aroused more
by the fusions and modifications because they recall familiar techniques
of wit. We may compare them to such modification witticisms as the
following: “He has a great future behind him,” and Lichtenberg’s
modification witticisms such as: “New baths heal well,” etc. Should
Wippchen’s productions having the same technique be called witticisms,
or what distinguishes them from the latter?

It is surely not difficult to answer this. Let us remember that wit
presents to the hearer a double face, and forces him to two different
views. In nonsense-witticisms such as those mentioned last, one view,
which considers only the wording, states that they are nonsense; the
other view, which, in obedience to suggestion, follows the road that
leads through the hearer’s unconscious, finds very good sense in these
witticisms. In Wippchen’s wit-like productions one of these views of wit
is empty, as if stunted. It is a Janus head with only one countenance
developed. One would get nowhere should he be tempted to proceed by
means of this technique to the unconscious. The condensations lead to no
case in which the two fused elements really result in a new sense; they
fall to pieces when an attempt is made to analyze them. As in wit, the
modifications and substitutions lead to a current and familiar wording,
but they themselves tell us little else and as a rule nothing that is of
any possible use. Hence the only thing remaining to these “witticisms”
is the nonsense view. Whether such productions, which have freed
themselves from one of the most essential characters of wit, should be
called “bad” wit or not wit at all, every one must decide as he feels
inclined.

There is no doubt that such stunted wit produces a comic effect for
which we can account in more than one way. Either the comic originates
through the uncovering of the unconscious modes of thinking in a manner
similar to the cases considered above, or the wit originates by
comparison with perfect wit. Nothing prevents us from assuming that we
here deal with a union of both modes of origin of the comic pleasure. It
is not to be denied that it is precisely the inadequate dependence on
wit which here shapes the nonsense into comic nonsense.


                         _Comic of Inadequacy_

There are, of course, other quite apparent cases, in which such
inadequacy produced by the comparison with wit, makes the nonsense
irresistibly comic. The counterpart to wit, the riddle, can perhaps give
us better examples for this than wit itself. A facetious question
states: _What is this: It hangs on the wall and one can dry his hands on
it? It would be a foolish riddle if the answer were: a towel. On the
contrary this answer is rejected with the statement: No, it is a
herring,—“But, for mercy’s sake,” is the objection, “a herring does not
hang on the wall.”—“But you can hang it there,”—“But who wants to dry
his hands on a herring?”—“Well,” is the soft answer, “you don’t have
to.”_ This explanation given through two typical displacements show how
much this question lacks of being a real riddle, and because of this
absolute insufficiency it impresses one as irresistibly comic, rather
than mere nonsensical foolishness. Through such means, that is, by not
restricting essential conditions, wit, riddles, and other forms, which
in themselves produce no comic pleasure, can be made into sources of
comic pleasure.

It is not so difficult to understand the case of the involuntary comic
of speech which we can perhaps find realized with as much frequency as
we like in the poems of Frederika Kempner.[78]

                           ANTI-VIVISECTION.

                   Fraternal sentiment should urge us
                   To champion the Guinea-pig,
                   For has it not a soul like ours,
                   Although most likely not as big?

Or a conversation between a loving couple.

                           THE CONTRAST.

               The young wife whispers “I’m so happy,”
               “And I!” chimes in her husband’s voice,
               “Because your virtues, dearest help-mate,
               Reveal the wisdom of my choice.”

There is nothing here which makes one think of wit. Doubtless, however,
it is the inadequacy of these “poetic productions,” as the very
extraordinary clumsiness of the expressions which recall the most
commonplace or newspaper style, the ingenious poverty of thoughts, the
absence of every trace of poetic manner of thinking or speaking,—it is
all these inadequacies which make these poems comic. Nevertheless it is
not at all self-evident that we should find Kempner’s poems comical;
many similar productions we merely consider very bad, we do not laugh at
them but are rather vexed with them. But here it is the great disparity
in our demand of a poem which impels us to the comic conception; where
this difference is less, we are inclined to criticise rather than laugh.
The comic effect of Kempner’s poetic productions is furthermore assured
by the additional circumstances of the lady author’s unmistakably good
intentions, and by the fact that her helpless phrases disarm our feeling
of mockery and anger. We are now reminded of a problem the consideration
of which we have so far postponed. The difference of expenditure is
surely the main condition of the comic pleasure, but observation teaches
that such difference does not always produce pleasure. What other
conditions must be added, or what disturbances must be checked in order
that pleasure should result from the difference of expenditure? But
before proceeding with the answers to these questions we wish to verify
what was said in the conclusions of the former discussion, namely, that
the comic of speech is not synonymous with wit, and that wit must be
something quite different from speech comic.

As we are about to attack the problem just formulated, concerning the
conditions of the origin of comic pleasure from the difference of
expenditure, we may permit ourselves to facilitate this task so as to
cause ourselves some pleasure. To give a correct answer to this question
would amount to an exhaustive presentation of the nature of the comic
for which we are fitted neither by ability nor authority. We shall
therefore again be content to elucidate the problem of the comic only so
far as it distinctly separates itself from wit.

All theories of the comic were objected to by the critics on the ground
that in defining the comic these theories overlooked the essential
element of it. This can be seen from the following theories, with their
objections. The comic depends on a contrasting idea; yes, in so far as
this contrast effects one comically and in no other way. The feeling of
the comic results from the dwindling away of an expectation; yes, if the
disappointment does not prove to be painful. There is no doubt that
these objections are justified, but they are overestimated if one
concludes from them that the essential characteristic mark of the comic
has hitherto escaped our conception. What depreciates the general
validity of these definitions are conditions which are indispensable for
the origin of the comic pleasure, but which will be searched in vain for
the nature of comic pleasure. The rejection of the objections and the
explanations of the contradictions to the definitions of the comic will
become easy for us, only after we trace back comic pleasure to the
difference resulting from a comparison of two expenditures. Comic
pleasure and the effect by which it is recognized—laughter, can
originate only when this difference is no longer utilizable and when it
is capable of discharge. We gain no pleasurable effect, or at most a
flighty feeling of pleasure in which the comic does not appear, if the
difference is put to other use as soon as it is recognized. Just as
special precautions must be taken in wit, in order to guard against
making new use of expenditure recognized as superfluous, so also can
comic pleasure originate only under relations which fulfil this latter
condition. The cases in which such differences of expenditure originate
in our ideational life are therefore uncommonly numerous, while the
cases in which the comic originates from them is comparatively very
rare.


               _The Conditions of Isolation of the Comic_

Two observations obtrude themselves upon the observer who reviews even
only superficially the origin of comic pleasure from the difference of
expenditure; first, that there are cases in which the comic appears
regularly and as if necessarily; and, in contrast to these cases, others
in which this appearance depends on the conditions of the case and on
the viewpoint of the observer; but secondly, that unusually large
differences very often triumph over unfavorable conditions, so that the
comic feeling originates in spite of it. In reference to the first point
one may set up two classes, the inevitable comic and the accidental
comic, although one will have to be prepared from the beginning to find
exceptions in the first class to the inevitableness of the comic. It
would be tempting to follow the conditions which are essential to each
class.

What is important in the second class are the conditions of which one
may be designated as the “isolation” of the comic case. A closer
analysis renders conspicuous relations something like the following:

a) The favorable condition for the origin of comic pleasure is brought
about by a general happy disposition in which “one is in the mood for
laughing.” In happy toxic states almost everything seems comic, which
probably results from a comparison with the expenditure in normal
conditions. For wit, the comic, and all similar methods of gaining
pleasure from the psychic activities, are nothing but ways to regain
this happy state—euphoria—from one single point, when it does not exist
as a general disposition of the psyche.

b) A similar favorable condition is produced by the expectation of the
comic or by putting one’s self in the right mood for comic pleasure.
Hence when the intention to make things comical exists and when this
feeling is shared by others, the differences required are so slight that
they probably would have been overlooked had they been experienced in
unpremeditated occurrences. He who decides to attend a comic lecture or
a farce at the theater is indebted to this intention for laughing over
things which in his everyday life would hardly produce in him a comic
effect. He finally laughs at the recollection of having laughed, at the
expectation of laughing, and at the appearance of the one who is to
present the comic, even before the latter makes the attempt to make him
laugh. It is for this reason that people admit that they are ashamed of
that which made them laugh at the theater.

c) Unfavorable conditions for the comic result from the kind of psychic
activity which may occupy the individual at the moment. Imaginative or
mental activity tending towards serious aims disturbs the discharging
capacity of the investing energies which the activity needs for its own
displacements, so that only unexpected and great differences of
expenditure can break through to form comic pleasure. All manner of
mental processes far enough removed from the obvious to cause a
suspension of ideational mimicry are unfavorable to the comic; in
abstract contemplation there is hardly any room left for the comic,
except when this form of thinking is suddenly interrupted.

d) The occasion for releasing comic pleasure vanishes when the attention
is fixed on the comparison capable of giving rise to the comic. Under
such circumstances the comic force is lost from that which is otherwise
sure to produce a comic effect. A movement or a mental activity cannot
become comical to him whose interest is fixed at the time of comparing
this movement with a standard which distinctly presents itself to him.
Thus the examiner does not see the comical in the nonsense produced by
the student in his ignorance; he is simply annoyed by it, whereas the
offender’s classmates who are more interested in his chances of passing
the examination than in what he knows, laugh heartily over the same
nonsense. The teacher of dancing or gymnastics seldom has any eyes for
the comic movements of his pupils, and the preacher entirely loses sight
of humanity’s defects of character, which the writer of comedy brings
out with so much effect. The comic process cannot stand examination by
the attention, it must be able to proceed absolutely unnoticed in a
manner similar to wit. But for good reasons, it would contradict the
nomenclature of “conscious processes” which I have used in _The
Interpretation of Dreams_, if one wished to call it of necessity
_unconscious_. It rather belongs to the _foreconscious_, and one may use
the fitting name “automatic” for all those processes which are enacted
in the foreconscious and dispense with the attention energy which is
connected with consciousness. The process of comparison of the
expenditures must remain automatic if it is to produce comic pleasure.


                 _Conditions Disturbing the Discharge_

e) It is exceedingly disturbing to the comic if the case from which it
originates gives rise at the same time to a marked release of affect.
The discharge of the affective difference is then as a rule excluded.
Affects, disposition, and the attitude of the individual in occasional
cases make it clear that the comic comes or goes with the viewpoint of
the individual person; that only in exceptional cases is there an
absolute comic. The dependence or relativity of the comic is therefore
much greater than of wit, which never happens but is regularly made, and
at its production one may already give attention to the conditions under
which it finds acceptance. But affective development is the most
intensive of the conditions which disturb the comic, the significance of
which is well known.[79] It is therefore said that the comic feeling
comes most in tolerably indifferent cases which evince no strong
feelings or interests. Nevertheless it is just in cases with affective
release that one may witness the production of a particularly strong
expenditure-difference in the automatism of discharge. When Colonel
Butler answers Octavio’s admonitions with “bitter laughter,” exclaiming:

                  “Thanks from the house of Austria!”

his bitterness has thus not prevented the laughter which results from
the recollection of the disappointment which he believes he has
experienced; and on the other hand, the magnitude of this disappointment
could not have been more impressively depicted by the poet than by
showing it capable of affecting laughter in the midst of the storm of
unchained affects. It is my belief that this explanation may be
applicable in all cases in which laughing occurs on other than
pleasurable occasions, and in conjunction with exceedingly painful or
tense affects.

f) If we also mention that the development of the comic pleasure can be
promoted by means of any other pleasurable addition to the case which
acts like a sort of contact-effect (after the manner of the
fore-pleasure principle in the tendency-wit), then we have discussed
surely not all the conditions of comic pleasure, yet enough of them to
serve our purpose. We then see that no other assumption so easily covers
these conditions, as well as the inconstancy and dependence of the comic
effect, as this: the assumption that comic pleasure is derived from the
discharge of a difference, which under many conditions can be diverted
to a different use than discharge.


It still remains to give a thorough consideration of the comic of the
sexual and obscene, but we shall only skim over it with a few
observations. Here, too, we shall take the act of exposing one’s body as
the starting-point. An accidental exposure produces a comical effect on
us, because we compare the ease with which we attained the enjoyment of
this view with the great expenditure otherwise necessary for the
attainment of this object. The case thus comes nearer to the
naïve-comic, but it is simpler than the latter. In every case of
exhibitionism in which we are made spectators—or, in the case of the
smutty joke hearers,—we play the part of the third person, and the
person exposed is made comical. We have heard that it is the purpose of
wit to replace obscenity and in this manner to reopen a source of comic
pleasure that has been lost. On the contrary, spying out an exposure
forms no example of the comic for the one spying, because the effort he
exerts thereby abrogates the condition of comic pleasure; the only thing
remaining is the sexual pleasure in what is seen. If the spy relates to
another what he has seen, the person looked at again becomes comical,
because the viewpoint that predominates is that the expenditure was
omitted which would have been necessary for the concealment of the
private parts. At all events, the sphere of the sexual or obscene offers
the richest opportunities for gaining comic pleasure beside the
pleasurable sexual stimulation, as it exposes the person’s dependence on
his physical needs (degradation) or it can uncover behind the spiritual
love the physical demands of the same (unmasking.)


                    _The Psychogenesis of the Comic_

An invitation to seek the understanding of the comic in its
psychogenesis comes surprisingly from Bergson’s well written and
stimulating book _Laughter_. Bergson, whose formula for the conception
of the comic character has already become known to us—“mechanization of
life,” “the substitution of something mechanical for the
natural”—reaches by obvious associations from automatism to the
automaton, and seeks to trace a series of comic effects to the blurred
memories of children’s toys. In this connection he once reaches this
viewpoint, which, to be sure, he soon drops; he seeks to trace the comic
to the after-effect of childish pleasure. “Perhaps we ought even to
carry simplification still farther, and, going back to our earliest
recollection, try to discover in the games that amused us as children
the first faint traces of the combinations that make us laugh as
grown-up persons.”... “Above all, we are too apt to ignore the childish
element, so to speak, latent in most of our joyful emotions” (p. 67). As
we have now traced wit to that childish playing with words and thoughts
which is prohibited by the rational critic, we must be tempted to trace
also these infantile roots of the comic, conjectured by Bergson.

As a matter of fact we meet a whole series of conditions which seem most
promising, when we examine the relation of the comic to the child. The
child itself does not by any means seem comic to us, although its
character fulfills all conditions which, in comparison to our own, would
result in a comic difference. Thus we see the immoderate expenditure of
motion as well as the slight psychic expenditure, the control of the
psychic activities through bodily functions, and other features. The
child gives us a comic impression only when it does not behave as a
child but as an earnest grown-up, and even then it affects us only in
the same manner as other persons in disguise; but as long as it retains
the nature of the child our perception of it furnishes us a pure
pleasure, which perhaps recalls the comic. We call it naïve in so far as
it displays to us the absence of inhibitions, and we call naïve-comic
those of its utterances which in another we would have considered
obscene or witty.

On the other hand the child lacks all feeling for the comic. This
sentence seems to say no more than that this comic feeling, like many
others, first makes its appearance in the course of psychic development;
and that would by no means be remarkable, especially since we must admit
that it shows itself distinctly even during years which must be
accredited to childhood. Nevertheless it can be demonstrated that the
assertion that the child lacks feeling for the comic has a deeper
meaning than one would suppose. In the first place it will readily be
seen that it cannot be different, if our conception is correct, that the
comic feeling results from a difference of expenditure produced in the
effort to understand the other. Let us again take comic motion as an
example. The comparison which furnishes the difference reads as follows,
when put in conscious formulæ: “So he does it,” and: “So I would do it,”
or “So I have done it.” But the child lacks the standard contained in
the second sentence, it understands simply through imitation; it just
does it. Education of the child furnishes it with the standard: “So you
shall do it,” and if it now makes use of the same in comparisons, the
nearest conclusion is: “He has not done it right, and I can do it
better.” In this case it laughs at the other, it laughs at him with a
feeling of superiority. There is nothing to prevent us from tracing this
laughter also to a difference of expenditure; but according to the
analogy with the examples of laughter occurring in us we may conclude
that the comic feeling is not experienced by the child when it laughs as
an expression of superiority. It is a laughter of pure pleasure. In our
own case whenever the judgment of our own superiority occurs we smile
rather than laugh, or if we laugh, we are still able to distinguish
clearly this conscious realization of our superiority from the comic
which makes us laugh.

It is probably correct to say that in many cases which we perceive as
“comical” and which we cannot explain, the child laughs out of pure
pleasure, whereas the child’s motives are clear and assignable. If, for
instance, some one slips on the street and falls, we laugh because this
impression—we know not why—is comical. The child laughs in the same case
out of a feeling of superiority or out of joy over the calamity of
others. It amounts to saying: “You fell, but I did not.” Certain
pleasure motives of the child seems to be lost for us grown-ups, but as
a substitute for these we perceive under the same conditions the “comic”
feeling.


                     _The Infantile and the Comic_

If we were permitted to generalize, it would seem very tempting to
transfer the desired specific character of the comic into the awakening
of the infantile, and to conceive the comic as a regaining of “lost
infantile laughing.” One could then say, “I laugh every time over a
difference of expenditure between the other and myself, when I discover
in the other the child.” Or expressed more precisely, the whole
comparison leading to the comic would read as follows:

             “He does it this way—I do it differently—
             He does it just as I did when I was a child.”

This laughter would thus result every time from the comparison between
the ego of the grown-up and the ego of the child. The uncertainty itself
of the comic difference, causing now the lesser and now the greater
expenditure to appear comical to me, would correspond to the infantile
determination; the comic therein is actually always on the side of the
infantile.

This is not contradicted by the fact that the child itself as an object
of comparison does not make a comic impression on me but a purely
pleasurable one, nor by the fact that this comparison with the infantile
produces a comic effect only when any other use of the difference is
avoided. For the conditions of the discharge come thereby into
consideration. Everything that confines a psychic process in an
association of ideas works against the discharge of the surplus
occupation of energy and directs the same to other utilization; whatever
isolates a psychic act favors the discharge. By consciously focussing on
the child as the person of comparison, the discharge necessary for the
production of comic pleasure therefore becomes impossible; only in
foreconscious energetic states is there a similar approach to the
isolation which we may moreover also ascribe to the psychic processes in
the child. The addition to the comparison: “Thus I have also done it as
a child,” from which the comic effect would emanate, could come into
consideration for the average difference only when no other association
could obtain control over the freed surplus.

If we still continue with our attempt to find the nature of the comic in
the foreconscious association of the infantile, we have to go a step
further than Bergson and admit that the comparison resulting in the
comic need not necessarily awake old childish pleasure and play, but
that it is enough if it touches the childish nature in general, perhaps
even childish pain. Herein we deviate from Bergson, but remain
consistent with ourselves, when we connect the comic pleasure not with
remembered pleasure but always with a comparison. This is possible, for
cases of the first kind comprise in a measure those which are regularly
and irresistibly comic. Let us now draw up the scheme of the comic
possibilities instanced above. We stated that the comic difference would
be found either

(a) through a comparison between the other and one’s self, or (b)
through a comparison altogether within the other, or (c) through a
comparison altogether within one’s self.

In the first case the other would appear to me as a child, in the second
he would put himself on the level of a child, and in the third I would
find the child in myself. To the first class belong the comic of
movement and of forms, of psychic activity and of character. The
infantile corresponding to it would be the motion-impulse and the
inferior mental and moral development of the child, so that the fool
would perhaps become comical to me by reminding me of a lazy child, and
the bad person by reminding me of a naughty child. The only time one
might speak of a childish pleasure lost to grown-ups would be where the
child’s own motion pleasure came into consideration.

The second case, in which the comic altogether depends on identification
with the other, comprises numerous possibilities such as the comic
situation, exaggeration (caricature), imitation, degradation, and
unmasking. It is under this head that the presentation of infantile
viewpoints mostly take place. For the comic situation is largely based
on embarrassment, in which we feel again the helplessness of the child.
The worst of these embarrassments, the disturbance of other activities
through the imperative demands of natural wants, corresponds to the
child’s lack of control of the physical functions. Where the comic
situation acts through repetitions it is based on the pleasure of
constant repetition peculiar to the child (asking questions, telling
stories), through which it makes itself a nuisance to grown-ups.
Exaggeration, which also affords pleasure even to the grown-up in so far
as it is justified by his reason, corresponds to the characteristic want
of moderation in the child, and its ignorance of all quantitative
relations which it later really learns to know as qualitative. To keep
within bounds, to practice moderation even in permissible feelings is a
late fruit of education, and is gained through opposing inhibitions of
the psychic activity acquired in the same association. Wherever this
association is weakened as in the unconscious of dreams and in the
monoideation of the psychoneuroses, the want of moderation of the child
again makes its appearance.

The understanding of comic imitation has caused us many difficulties so
long as we left out of consideration the infantile factor. But imitation
is the child’s best art and is the impelling motive of most of its
playing. The child’s ambition is not so much to distinguish himself
among his equals as to imitate the big fellows. The relation of the
child to the grown-up determines also the comic of degradation, which
corresponds to the lowering of the grown-up in the life of the child.
Few things can afford the child greater pleasure than when the grown-up
lowers himself to its level, disregards his superiority, and plays with
the child as its equal. The alleviation which furnishes the child pure
pleasure is a debasement used by the adult as a means of making things
comic and as a source of comic pleasure. As for unmasking we know that
it is based on degradation.

The infantile determination of the third case, the comic of expectation,
presents most of the difficulties; this really explains why those
authors who put this case to the foreground in their conception of the
comic, found no occasion to consider the infantile factor in their
studies of the comic. The comic of expectation is farthest from the
child’s thoughts, the ability to understand this is the latest quality
to appear in him. Most of those cases which produce a comic effect in
the grown-up are probably felt by the child as a disappointment. One can
refer, however, to the blissful expectation and gullibility of the child
in order to understand why one considers himself as comical “as a
child,” when he succumbs to comic disappointment.

If the preceding remarks produce a certain probability that the comic
feeling may be translated into the thought; everything is comic that
does not fit the grown-up, I still do not feel bold enough,—in view of
my whole position to the problem of the comic—to defend this last
proposition with the same earnestness as those that I formulated before.
I am unable to decide whether the lowering to the level of the child is
only a special case of comic degradation, or whether everything comical
fundamentally depends on the degradation to the level of the child.[80]


                                _Humor_

An examination of the comic, however superficial it may be, would be
most incomplete if it did not devote at least a few remarks to the
consideration of _humor_. There is so little doubt as to the essential
relationship between the two that a tentative explanation of the comic
must furnish at least one component for the understanding of humor. It
does not matter how much appropriate and important material was
presented as an appreciation of humor, which, as one of the highest
psychic functions, enjoys the special favor of thinkers, we still cannot
elude the temptation to express its essence through an approach to the
formulæ given for wit and the comic.

We have heard that the release of painful emotions is the strongest
hindrance to the comic effect. Just as aimless motion causes harm,
stupidity mischief, and disappointment pain;—the possibility of a comic
effect eventually ends, at least for him who cannot defend himself
against such pain, who is himself affected by it or must participate in
it, whereas the disinterested party shows by his behavior that the
situation of the case in question contains everything necessary to
produce comic effect. Humor is thus a means to gain pleasure despite the
painful affects which disturb it; it acts as a substitute for this
affective development, and takes its place. If we are in a situation
which tempts us to liberate painful affects according to our habits, and
motives then urge us to suppress these affects _statu nascendi_, we have
the conditions for humor. In the cases just cited the person affected by
misfortune, pain, etc., could obtain humoristic pleasure while the
disinterested party laughs over the comic pleasure. We can only say that
the pleasure of humor results at the cost of this discontinued
liberation of affect; it originates through the _economized expenditure
of affect_.


                 _The Economy in Expenditure of Affect_

Humor is the most self-sufficient of the forms of the comic; its process
consummating itself in one single person and the participation of
another adds nothing new to it. I can enjoy the pleasure of humor
originating in myself without feeling the necessity of imparting it to
another. It is not easy to tell what happens dining the production of
humoristic pleasure in a person; but one gains a certain insight by
investigating these cases of humor which have emanated from persons with
whom we have entered into a sympathetic understanding. By
sympathetically understanding the humoristic person in these cases one
gets the same pleasure. The coarsest form of humor, the so-called humor
of the gallows or grim-humor (_Galgenhumor_), may enlighten us in this
regard. The rogue, on being led to execution on Monday, remarked: “Yes,
this week is beginning well.” This is really a witticism, as the remark
is quite appropriate in itself, on the other hand it is displaced in the
most nonsensical fashion, as there can be no further happening for him
this week. But it required humor to make such wit, that is, to overlook
what distinguished the beginning of this week from other weeks, and to
deny the difference which could give rise to motives for very particular
emotional feelings. The case is the same when on the way to the gallows
he requests a neckerchief for his bare neck, in order to guard against
taking cold, a precaution which would be quite praiseworthy under
different circumstances, but becomes exceedingly superfluous and
indifferent in view of the impending fate of this same neck. We must say
that there is something like greatness of soul in this _blague_, in this
clinging to his usual nature and in deviating from that which would
overthrow and drive this nature into despair. This form of grandeur of
humor thus appears unmistakably in cases in which our admiration is not
inhibited by the circumstances of the humoristic person.

In Victor Hugo’s _Ernani_ the bandit who entered into a conspiracy
against his king, Charles I, of Spain, (Charles V, as the German
Emperor), falls into the hands of his most powerful enemy; he foresees
his fate; as one convicted of high treason his head will fall. But this
prospect does not deter him from introducing himself as a hereditary
Grandee of Spain and from declaring that he has no intention of waiving
any prerogative belonging to such personage. A Grandee of Spain could
appear before his royal master with his head covered. Well:

                “Nos têtes ont le droit
                De tomber couvertes devant de toi.”[81]

This is excellent humor and if we do not laugh on hearing it, it is
because our admiration covers the humoristic pleasure. In the case of
the rogue who did not wish to take cold on the way to the gallows we
roar with laughter. The situation which should have driven this criminal
to despair, might have evoked in us intense pity, but this pity is
inhibited because we understand that he who is most concerned is quite
indifferent to the situation. As a result of this understanding the
expenditure for pity, which was already prepared in us, became
inapplicable and we laughed it off. The indifference of the rogue, which
we notice has cost him a great expenditure of psychic labor, infects us
as it were.

Economy of sympathy is one of the most frequent sources of humoristic
pleasure. Mark Twain’s humor usually follows this mechanism. When he
tells us about the life of his brother, how, as mi employee in a large
road-building enterprise, he was hurled into the air through a premature
explosion of a blast, to come to earth again far from the place where he
was working, feelings of sympathy for this unfortunate are invariably
aroused in us. We should like to inquire whether he sustained no injury
in this accident; but the continuation of the story that the brother
lost a half-day’s pay for being away from the place he worked diverts us
entirely from sympathy and makes us almost as hard-hearted as that
employer, and just as indifferent to the possible injury to the victim’s
health. Another time Mark Twain presents us his pedigree, which he
traces back almost as far back as one of the companions of Columbus. But
after describing the character of this ancestor, whose entire
possessions consisted of several pieces of linen each bearing a
different mark, we cannot help laughing at the expense of the stored-up
piety, a piety which characterized our frame of mind at the beginning of
this family history. The mechanism of humoristic pleasure is not
disturbed by our knowing that this family history is a fictitious one,
and that this fiction serves a satirical tendency to expose the
embellishments which result in imparting such pedigrees to others; it is
just as independent of the conditions of reality as the manufactured
comic. Another of Mark Twain’s stories relates how his brother
constructed for himself subterranean quarters into which he brought a
bed, a table, and a lamp, and that as a roof he used a large piece of
sail-cloth with a hole through the centre; how during the night after
the room was completed, a cow being driven home fell through the opening
in the ceiling on to the table and extinguished the lamp; how his
brother helped patiently to hoist the animal out and to rearrange
everything; how he did the same thing when the same disturbance was
repeated the following night; and then every succeeding night; such a
story becomes comical through repetition. But Mark Twain closes with the
information that in the forty-sixth night when the cow again fell
through, his brother finally remarked that the thing was beginning to
grow monotonous; and here we can no longer restrain our humoristic
pleasure, for we had long expected to hear how the brother would express
his anger over this chronic _malheur_. The slight humor which we draw
from our own life we usually produce at the expense of anger instead of
irritating ourselves.[82]


                            _Forms of Humor_

The forms of humor are extraordinarily varied according to the nature of
the emotional feelings which are economized in favor of humor, as
sympathy, anger, pain, compassion, etc. And this series seems incomplete
because the sphere of humor experiences a constant enlargement, as often
as an artist or writer succeeds in mastering humoristically the, as yet,
unconquered emotional feelings and in making them, through artifices
similar to those in the above example, a source of humoristic pleasure.
Thus the artists of _Simplicissimus_ have worked wonders in gaining
humor at the expense of fear and disgust. The manifestations of humor
are above all determined by two peculiarities, which are connected with
the conditions of its origin. In the first place, humor may appear fused
with wit or any other form of the comic; whereby it is entrusted with
the task of removing a possible emotional development which would form a
hindrance to the pleasurable effect. Secondly, it can entirely set aside
this emotional development or only partially, which is really the more
frequent case, because the simpler function and the different forms of
“broken”[83] humor, results in that humor which smiles under its tears.
It withdraws from the affect a part of its energy and gives instead the
accompanying humoristic sound.

As may be noticed by former examples the humoristic pleasure gained by
entering into sympathy with a thing results from a special technique
resembling displacement through which the liberation of affect held
ready is disappointed and the energy occupation is deflected to other,
and, not often, to secondary matters. This does not help us, however, to
understand the process by which the displacement from the development of
affect proceeds in the humoristic person himself. We see that the
recipient intimates the producer of the humor in his psychic processes,
but we discover nothing thereby concerning the forces which make this
process possible in the latter.

We can only say, when, for example, somebody succeeds in paying no heed
to a painful affect because he holds before himself the greatness of the
world’s interest as a contrast to his own smallness, that we see in this
no function of humor but one of philosophic thinking, and we gain no
pleasure even if we put ourselves into his train of thought. The
humoristic displacement is therefore just as impossible in the light of
conscious attention as is the comic comparison; like the latter it is
connected with the condition to remain in the foreconscious—that is to
say, to remain automatic.

One reaches some solution of humoristic displacement if one examines it
in the light of a defense process. The defense processes are the psychic
correlates of the flight reflex and follow the task of guarding against
the origin of pain from inner sources; in fulfilling this task they
serve the psychic function as an automatic adjustment, which finally
proves harmful and therefore must be subjected to the control of the
conscious thinking. A definite form of this defense, the failure of
repression, I have demonstrated as the effective mechanism in the origin
of the psychoneuroses. Humor can now be conceived as the loftiest
variant of this defense activity. It disdains to withdraw from conscious
attention the ideas which are connected with the painful affect, as
repression does, and thus it overcomes the defense automatism. It brings
this about by finding the means to withdraw the energy resulting from
the liberation of pain which is held in readiness and through discharge
changes the same into pleasure. It is even credible that it is again the
connection with the infantile that puts at humor’s disposal the means
for this function. Only in childhood did we experience intensively
painful affects over which to-day as grown-ups we would laugh; just as a
humorist laughs over his present painful affects. The elevation of his
ego, of which humoristic displacement gives evidence,—the translation of
which would read: I am too big to have these causes affect me
painfully—he could find in the comparison of his present ego with his
infantile ego. This conception is to some extent confirmed by the rôle
which falls to the infantile in the neurotic processes of repression.


                _The Relation of Humor to Wit and Comic_

On the whole humor is closer to the comic than wit. Like the former its
psychic localization is in the foreconscious, whereas wit, as we had to
assume, is formed as a compromise between the unconscious and the
foreconscious. On the other hand, humor has no share in the peculiar
nature in which wit and the comic meet, a peculiarity which perhaps we
have not hitherto emphasized strongly enough. It is a condition for the
origin of the comic that we be induced to apply—either _simultaneously_
or in rapid succession—to the same thought function two different modes
of ideas, between which the “comparison” then takes place and thus forms
the comic difference. Such differences originate between the expenditure
of the stranger and one’s own, between the usual expenditure and the
emergency expenditure, between an anticipated expenditure and one which
has already occurred.[84]

The difference between two forms of conception resulting simultaneously,
which work with different expenditures, comes into consideration in wit,
in respect to the hearer. The one of these two conceptions, by taking
the hints contained in the witticism, follows the train of thought
through the unconscious, while the other conception remains on the
surface and presents the witticism like any wording from the
foreconscious which has become conscious. Perhaps it would not be
considered an unjustified statement if we should refer the pleasure of
the witticism heard to the difference between these two forms of
presentation.

Concerning wit we here repeat our former statement concerning its
Janus-like double-facedness, a simile we used when the relation between
wit and the comic still appeared to us unsettled.[85]

The character thus put into the foreground becomes indistinct when we
deal with humor. To be sure, we feel the humoristic pleasure where an
emotional feeling is evaded, which we might have expected as a pleasure
usually belonging to the situation; and in so far humor really falls
under the broadened conception of the comic of expectation. But in humor
it is no longer a question of two different kinds of presentations
having the same content; the fact that the situation comes under the
domination of a painful emotional feeling which should have been
avoided, puts an end to possible comparison with the nature in the comic
and in wit. The humoristic displacement is really a case of that
different kind of utilization of a freed expenditure which proved to be
so dangerous for the comic effect.


                  _Formulæ for Wit, Comic, and Humor_

Now, that we have reduced the mechanism of humoristic pleasure to a
formula analogous to the formula of comic pleasure and of wit, we are at
the end of our task. It has seemed to us that the pleasure of wit
originates from an _economy of expenditure in inhibition_, of the comic
from an _economy of expenditure in thought_, and of humor from an
_economy of expenditure in feeling_. All three activities of our psychic
apparatus derive pleasure from economy. They all strive to bring back
from the psychic activity a pleasure which has really been lost in the
development of this activity. For the euphoria which we are thus
striving to obtain is nothing but the state of a bygone time in which we
were wont to defray our psychic work with slight expenditure. It is the
state of our childhood in which we did not know the comic, were
incapable of wit, and did not need humor to make us happy.




                                 INDEX


                                   A

 Abstract wit, 128

 Absurdity, 77

 Actuality, 186

 Æsthetics, vi

 Agassiz, 54

 Aggression, 138, 152, 160, 232

 Alluring-premiums, 210

 Allusions, 107, 108, 232

 Ambiguity, 45

 Ambitious impulse, 219

 Application of same material, 49

 Aristotle, 184

 Attributions, 121

 Automatic process, 238

 Automatisms, 85, 86, 87, 235, 358


                                   B

 Bain, 226, 322

 Bergson, 301, 337, 360

 Blasphemous witticisms, 171

 Bleuler, 278

 _Bonmot_, 43

 Brevity, 10, 29, 52, 243

 Brill, 22, 31, 35, 37, 38, 56


                                   C

 Caricature, 280, 303, 320

 Censor, 260

 Characterization-wit, 71

 Child, 190, 309, 362

 Childhood, 149

 Comic, 4, 10, 221, 287, 313
   element, 88
   façade, 236
   its origin, 302
   its psychogenesis, 360
   of expectation, 317
   of imitation, 336

 Comic, of speech, 345
   motion, 304
   pleasure, its origin, 351
   situations, 303, 314

 Comical character, 277

 Comparison, 113
   with unification, 130

 Composition, 31

 Condensation, 20, 48
   examples of, 21, 22, 23
   in dreams, 31, 49, 256
   with modification and substitution, 25

 Conflict, 163

 Contrast, 8

 Critical witticisms, 171

 Cynical tendency, 204
   witticisms and self-criticism, 166

 Cynicism, 65, 161
   pessimistic, 170


                                   D

 Darwin, 226

 Defence, 138
   reaction, 142

 Derision, 157

 De Quincey, 22

 Disguise, 303

 Displacement, 67, 61, 161
   in dreams, 256

 Displacement-wit, 68, 71, 237

 Don Quixote, 377

 Double meaning, 40, 103
   and displacement, 66
   of a name, 41

 Doubt in witty comparisons, 118

 Dream-formation, 260

 Dream-work, 249, 275

 Dreams, 30, 250, 251

 Dugas, 224, 242


                                   E

 Economy, 49, 52, 242, 245
   of psychic expenditure, 180

 Ehrenfels, 165

 Exaggeration, 280

 Exhibitionism, 142


                                   F

 Façade, 155, 158

 Facetious questions, 238

 Falke, 14, 80, 95

 Falstaff, Sir John, 376

 Faulty thinking, 81, 84

 Fechner, 188, 207, 280

 Fischer, 3, 4, 6, 11, 43, 47, 55, 89, 132, 136

 Flaubert, 24

 Foreconscious, 282

 Fore-pleasure, 209, 211


                                   G

 Goethe, 133

 Grim-humor, 372

 Groos, 183, 184, 185, 195

 Gross, 278


                                   H

 Harmless wit, 128, 211, 219, 222, 284
   and tendency-wit, 130

 Heine, 9, 15, 26, 43, 44, 47, 55, 57, 92, 94, 106, 109, 119, 122, 171,
    215, 216, 223, 341

 Heymans, 9, 215

 Holmes, 37

 Hugo, 373

 Humor, 370
   Mark Twain’s, 374


                                   I

 Imitations, 303, 322

 Impulse to impart wit, 200

 Indirect expression, 100
   with allusion, 101

 Infantile and the comic, 364

 Inhibitions, 140, 197, 206, 230, 231, 236, 290
   expenditure of, 180

 Insults, 209

 Invectives, 148, 277

 Ironical wit, 100

 Irony, 276


                                   J

 Jest, 197, 201, 211, 274, 284

 Johnson, 45

 Jokes, cynical, 164
   good or poor, 182
   Jewish, 59, 72, 97, 166, 218
   smutty, 139, 140, 145, 233


                                   K

 Kant, 320

 Kleinpaul, 198

 Kraepelin, 7


                                   L

 Lassalle, 115

 Laugh, 221

 Laughter as a discharge, 228
   its determination, 224, 226

 Lessing, 97, 130

 Libido, 141

 Lichtenberg, 39, 78, 89, 95, 97, 104, 115, 118, 121, 122, 129, 132,
    149, 218

 Lipps, 3, 4, 6, 10, 30, 93, 215, 227, 254, 320, 326


                                   M

 Manifold application, 40, 45

 Matthews, 44

 Michelet, 78

 Modification, 42

 Moll, 141

 Morality, 163

 Motives, 214, 239


                                   N

 Naïve, 290
   characteristics of, 295
   examples of, 291

 Negativism, 276

 Nestroy, 120, 341

 Nonsense, 72, 192, 200, 279

 Nonsense-witticisms, 76


                                   O

 Obscene wit, 138, 203

 Obscenity, 142

 Omission, 82, 107, 232

 Outdoing wit, 96, 97


                                   P

 Parody, 280, 324

 Pascal, 337

 Paul, 3, 7, 8, 18, 29, 301

 Persons in tendency-wit, 144, 221, 222, 230, 231, 240

 Perversion, 141

 Phillips, 151

 Play, 211
   and jest, 195
   on words, 40

 Playing with words, 196

 Pleasure in nonsense, 190, 271
   mechanisms of wit, 177
   sources, 150

 Psychic energy, 227

 Psychoneuroses, 147

 Puns, 53


                                   R

 Recognition, 183

 Regression, 259

 Representation through the opposite, 93, 95
   through the minute, 111, 112

 Repression, 147, 205, 211

 Riddle, 232

 Rousseau, J. B., 91

 Rousseau, J. J., 33


                                   S

 Sancho Panza, 216

 Satire, 43, 137

 Schnitzler, 42

 Sense in nonsense, 73, 74, 75, 199

 Sexual elements, 139, 140, 219

 Shakespeare, 222

 Shake-up rhymes, 129

 Sky-larking, 192

 Smutty jokes, 139, 145, 233

 Society, 150

 Sophism, 82, 83, 159

 Sophistic displacement, 161
   faulty thinking, 78, 79

 Soulié, 57

 Sound, similarity, 39

 Spencer, 225

 Spinoza, 106

 Stettenheim, 343

 Subjective determinations, 155, 156, 166, 215, 217

 Substitutive formation, 20


                                   T

 Tendencies of wit, 127, 206

 Tendency to economy, 49

 Tendency-wit, 130
   its effect, 210

 Thought-wit, 128
   its techniques, 154

 Travesty, 280, 324


                                   U

 Ueberhorst, 91

 Unconscious, 254, 255, 269, 279, 281, 329
   and the infantile, 268

 Unification, 45, 88, 117, 121, 188

 Unmasking, 303, 324


                                   V

 Vischer, 3, 8, 128

 Voltaire, 91


                                   W

 Winslow, 45

 Wish fulfilment, 249, 253

 Wit, 4
   and comic, 4, 330
   and dreams, 249, 273, 285
   and rebellion against authority, 153
   as an inspiration, 265
   as a social process, 214
   by word-division, 32
   definitions of, 6, 7, 8
   desire to impart it, 239
   double-facedness of, 240
   harmless, 128
   hostile and obscene, 138
   in the service of tendencies, 146
   ironical, 100
   its motives, 214
   its subjective determinations, 155
   its tendencies, 127

 Wit, literature of, 134
   outdoing, 96, 97
   pleasure mechanisms of, 177, 230
   psychogenesis of, 177, 195, 200
   shallow, 131
   skeptical, 172, 173
   technique of, 14, 194, 240

 Wit-work, its formula, 261

 Witticism and riddle, 232
   critical, 171

 Witticisms, blasphemous, 171

 Witty nonsense, 211, 212

 Woman, unyieldingness of, 143

 Word-division, 32, 33, 34

 Word-pleasure, 190

 Word-wit, 128, 131

-----

Footnote 1:

  Monograph Series, Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases Pub. Co., 2nd
  Ed., 1912.

Footnote 2:

  Monograph Series, Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases Pub. Co., 2nd
  Ed., 1916.

Footnote 3:

  The Macmillan Co., New York, and Allen &
  Unwin, London.

Footnote 4:

  The Macmillan Co., New York, and T. Fisher Unwin, London.

Footnote 5:

  This expression is used advisedly in order to distinguish it from
  other methods of “analysis,” which Professor Freud fully disavows. Cf.
  _The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement_, translated by A. A.
  Brill, _The Psychoanalytic Review_, June-Sept., 1916.

Footnote 6:

  Cf. the works of Freud, Abraham, Rank, and others.

Footnote 7:

  Cf. Freud: _Totem and Taboo_, a translation in preparation, and the
  works of Jones, Rank and Sachs, Jung, and Storfer.

Footnote 8:

  Cf. Freud, Berny, Rank, and Sachs, and Sperber.

Footnote 9:

  Cf. Freud: _Leonardo da Vinci_, a translation in preparation, and the
  works of many others.

Footnote 10:

  Cf. _v._ Hug-Hellmuth: _Aus dem Seelenleben des Kindes_, and the works
  of Jones, Pfister, and many others.

Footnote 11:

  Cf. the works of Freud, Putnam, Hitschmann, Winterstein, and others.

Footnote 12:

  _Beiträge zur Aesthetik_, edited by Theodor Lipps and Richard Maria
  Werner, VI,—a book to which I am indebted for the courage and capacity
  to undertake this attempt.

Footnote 13:

  J. V. Falke: _Lebenserinnerungen_, 1897.

Footnote 14:

  Since this joke will occupy us again and we do not wish to disturb the
  discussion following here, we shall find occasion later to point out a
  correction in Lipps’s given interpretation which follows our own.

Footnote 15:

  The same holds true for Lipps’s interpretation.

Footnote 16:

  _Psychanalysis_: Its Theories and Application, 2nd Ed., p. 331.

Footnote 17:

  This same witticism was supposed to have been coined before by Heine
  concerning Alfred de Musset.

Footnote 18:

  One of the complications involved in the technique of this example
  lies in the fact that the modification through which the omitted abuse
  is substituted is to be taken as an allusion to the latter, for it
  leads to it only through a process of deduction.

Footnote 19:

  Another factor which I shall mention later on is also effective in the
  technique of this witticism. It has to do with the inner character of
  the modification (representation through the opposite—contradiction).
  The technique of wit does not hesitate to make use simultaneously of
  several means, with which, however, we can only become acquainted in
  their sequential order.

Footnote 20:

  Translation of 4th Ed. by A. A. Brill, the Macmillan Co., New York,
  and Allen &
  Unwin, London.

Footnote 21:

  _The Interpretation of Dreams_, p. 280.

Footnote 22:

  Cited by Brill: _Psychanalysis_, p. 335.

Footnote 23:

  l. c., p. 334.

Footnote 24:

  The excellence of these jokes depends upon the fact that they, at the
  same time, present another technical means of a much higher order.

Footnote 25:

  Given by Translator.

Footnote 26:

  This resembles an excellent joke of Oliver Wendell Holmes cited by
  Brill: “Put not your trust in money, but put your money in trust.” A
  contradiction is here announced which does not appear. At all events
  it is a good example of the untranslatableness of the witticisms of
  such technique.

Footnote 27:

  Brill cites a very analogous modification wit: _Amantes—Amentes_
  (lovers—lunatics).

Footnote 28:

  Compare here K. Fischer (p. 85), who applies the term “double meaning”
  to those witticisms in which both meanings are not equally prominent,
  but where one overshadows the other. I have applied this term
  differently. Such a nomenclature is a matter of choice. Usage of
  speech has rendered no definite decision about them.

Footnote 29:

  L. c., page 339.

Footnote 30:

  Heine’s answer is a combination of two wit-techniques—a displacement
  and an allusion—for he does not say directly: “He is an ox.”

Footnote 31:

  The word “take,” owing to its meanings, lends itself very well towards
  the formation of plays upon words, a pure example of which I wish to
  cite as a contrast to the displacement mentioned above. While walking
  with his friend, in front of a café, a well-known stock-plunger and
  bank director made this proposal: “Let us go in and take something.”
  His friend held him back and said: “My dear sir, remember there are
  people in there.”

Footnote 32:

  For the latter see a later chapter. It will perhaps not be superfluous
  to add here a few words for better understanding. The displacement
  regularly occurs between a statement and an answer, and turns the
  stream of thought to a direction different from the one started in the
  statement. The justification for separating the displacement from the
  double meaning is best seen in the examples where both are combined,
  that is, where the wording of the statement admits of a double meaning
  which was not intended by the speaker, but which reveals in the answer
  the way to the displacement (see examples).

Footnote 33:

  See Chapter III.

Footnote 34:

  A similar nonsense technique results when the joke aims to maintain a
  connection which seems to be removed through the special conditions of
  its content. A joke of this sort is related by J. Falke (l. c.): “_Is
  this the place where the Duke of Wellington spoke these words?_”
  “_Yes, this is the place; but he never spoke these words._”

Footnote 35:

  Following an example of the _Greek Anthology_.

Footnote 36:

  Cf. my _Interpretation of Dreams_, Chap. VI, _The Dream Work_,
  translated by A. A. Brill, The Macmillan Co., New York, and Allen
  & Unwin, London.

Footnote 37:

  The word tendency encountered hereafter in the expression
  “Tendency-Wit” (Tendenz Witz) is used adjectively in the same sense as
  in the familiar phrase “Tendency Play.”

Footnote 38:

  Cf. my _Psychopathology of Everyday Life_, translated by A. A. Brill,
  The Macmillan Co., New York, and T. Fisher Unwin, London.

Footnote 39:

  Cf. _Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex_, 2nd Ed., 1916,
  translated by A. A. Brill, Monograph Series, _Journal of Nervous and
  Mental Diseases_.

Footnote 40:

  Moll’s _Kontrektationstrieb_ (Untersuchungen über die Libido
  sexualies, 1898).

Footnote 41:

  It is the same mechanism that controls “slips of the tongue” and other
  phenomena of self-betrayal. Cf. _The Psychopathology of Everyday
  Life_.

Footnote 42:

  “There is nothing certain about to-morrow,” Lorenzo del Medici.

Footnote 43:

  See his essays in the _Politisch-anthropologischen Revue_, II, 1903.

Footnote 44:

  An habitual beggar.

Footnote 45:

  If I may be permitted to anticipate what later is discussed in the
  text I can here throw some light upon the condition which seems to be
  authoritative in the usage of language when it is a question of
  calling a joke “good” or “poor.” If by means of a double meaning or
  slightly modified word I have gotten from one idea to another by a
  short route, and if this does not also simultaneously result in
  senseful association between the two ideas, then I have made a “poor”
  joke. In this poor joke one word or the “point” forms the only
  existing association between the two widely separated ideas. The joke
  “Home-Roulard” used above is such an example. But a “good” joke
  results if the infantile expectation is right in the end and if with
  the similarity of the word another essential similarity in meaning is
  really simultaneously produced—as in the examples Traduttore—Traditore
  (translator—traitor), and Amantes—Amentes (lovers—lunatics). The two
  disparate ideas which are here linked by an outer association are held
  together besides by a senseful connection which expresses an important
  relationship between them. The outer association only replaces the
  inner connection; it serves to indicate the latter or to clarify it.
  Not only does “translator” sound somewhat similar to “traitor,” but he
  is a sort of a traitor whose claims to that name are good. The same
  may be said of Amantes—Amentes. Not only do the words bear a
  resemblance, but the similarity between “love” and “lunacy” has been
  noted from time immemorial.

  The distinction made here agrees with the differentiation, to be made
  later, between a “witticism” and a “jest.” However, it would not be
  correct to exclude examples like Home-Roulard from the discussion of
  the nature of wit. As soon as we take into consideration the peculiar
  pleasure of wit, we discover that the “poor” witticisms are by no
  means poor as witticisms, i.e., they are by no means unsuited for the
  production of pleasure.

Footnote 46:

  _Die Spiele der Menschen_, 1899, p. 153.

Footnote 47:

  _Vorschule der Aesthetik_, 1, XVII.

Footnote 48:

  Chapter XVII.

Footnote 49:

  Kleinpaul: _Die Rätsel der Sprache_, 1890.

Footnote 50:

  _Vorschule der Aesthetik_, Vol. 1, V, p. 51, 2nd Ed., Leipzig, 1897.

Footnote 51:

  The nonsense-witticisms, which have been somewhat slighted in this
  treatise, deserve a short supplementary comment.

  In view of the significance attributed by our conception to the factor
  “sense in nonsense,” one might be tempted to demand that every
  witticism should be a nonsense-joke. But this is not necessary,
  because only the play with thoughts inevitably leads to nonsense,
  whereas the other source of wit-pleasure, the play with words, makes
  this impression incidental and does not regularly invoke the criticism
  connected with it. The double root of wit-pleasure—from the play with
  words and thoughts, which corresponds to the most important division
  into word- and thought-witticisms—sets its face against a short
  formulation of general principles about wit as a tangible aggravation
  of difficulties. The play with words produces laughter, as is well
  known, in consequence of the factor of recognition described above,
  and therefore suffers suppression only in a small degree. The play
  with thoughts cannot be motivated through such pleasure: it has
  suffered a very energetic suppression and the pleasure which it can
  give is only the pleasure of released inhibitions. Accordingly one may
  say that wit-pleasure shows a kernel of the original play-pleasure and
  a shell of removal-pleasure. Naturally we do not grant that the
  pleasure in nonsense-wit is due to the fact that we have succeeded in
  making nonsense despite the suppression, while we do notice that the
  play with words gives us pleasure. Nonsense, which has remained fixed
  in thought-wit, acquires secondarily the function of stimulating our
  attention through confusion, it serves as a reinforcement of the
  effect of wit, but only when it is insistent, so that the confusion
  can anticipate the intellect by a definite fraction of time. That
  nonsense in wit may also be employed to represent a judgment contained
  within the thought has been demonstrated by the example on p. 73. But
  even this is not the primal signification of nonsense in wit.

  A series of wit-like productions for which we have no appropriate
  name, but which may lay claim to the designation of “witty nonsense,”
  may be added to the nonsense-jokes. They are very numerous, but I
  shall cite only two examples: As the fish was served to a guest at the
  table he put both hands twice into the mayonnaise and then ran them
  through his hair. Being looked at by his neighbor with astonishment he
  seemed to have noticed his mistake and excused himself, saying:
  “Pardon me, I thought it was spinach.”

  Or: “Life is like a suspension bridge,” said the one. “How is that?”
  asked the other. “How should I know?” was the answer.

  These extreme examples produce an effect through the fact that they
  give rise to the expectation of wit, so that one makes the effort to
  find the hidden sense behind the nonsense. But none is found, they are
  really nonsense. Under that deception it was possible for one moment
  to liberate the pleasure in nonsense. These witticisms are not
  altogether without tendencies, they furnish the narrator a certain
  pleasure in that they deceive and annoy the hearer. The latter then
  calms his anger by resolving that he himself should take the place of
  the narrator.

Footnote 52:

  H. Spencer, _The Physiology of Laughter_ (first published in
  _Macmillan’s Magazine_ for March, 1860), Essays, Vol. 11, 1901.

Footnote 53:

  Different points in this declaration would demand an exhaustive
  inquiry into an investigation of the pleasure of the comic, a thing
  that other authors have already done, and which, at all events, does
  not touch our discussion. It seems to me that Spencer was not happy in
  his explanation of why the discharge happens to find just that path,
  the excitement of which results in the physical picture of laughter. I
  should like to add one single contribution to the subject of the
  physiological explanation of laughter, that is, to the derivation or
  interpretation of the muscular actions that characterize laughter—a
  subject that has been often treated before and since Darwin, but which
  has never been conclusively settled. According to the best of my
  knowledge the grimaces and contortions of the corners of the mouth
  that characterize laughter appear first in the satisfied and satiated
  nursling when he drowsily quits the breasts. There it is a correct
  motion of expression since it bespeaks the determination to take no
  more nourishment, an “enough,” so to speak, or rather a “more than
  enough.” This primal sense of pleasurable satiation may have furnished
  the smile, which ever remains the basic phenomenon of laughter, the
  later connection with the pleasurable processes of discharge.

Footnote 54:

  Cf. _The Interpretation of Dreams_, Chap. VII, also _On the Psychic
  Force_, etc., in the above cited book of Lipps (p. 123), where he
  says: “This is the general principle: The dominant factors of the
  psychic life are not represented by the contents of consciousness but
  by those psychic processes which are unconscious. The task of
  psychology, provided it does not limit itself to a mere description of
  the content of consciousness, must also consist of revealing the
  nature of these unconscious processes from the nature of the contents
  of consciousness and its temporal relationship. Psychology must itself
  be a theory of these processes. But such a psychology will soon find
  that there exist quite a number of characteristics of these processes
  which are unrepresented in the corresponding contents of
  consciousness.”

Footnote 55:

  Heymans (_Zeitschrift für Psychol._, XI) has taken up the viewpoint of
  the nascent state in a somewhat different connection.

Footnote 56:

  Through an example of displacement-wit I desire to discuss another
  interesting character of the technique of wit. The genial actress
  Gallmeyer when once asked how old she was is said to have answered
  this unwelcome question with abashed and downcast eyes, by saying, “In
  Brünn.” This is a very good example of displacement. Having been asked
  her age, she replied by naming the place of her birth, thus
  anticipating the next query, and in this manner she wishes to imply:
  “This is a question which I prefer to pass by.” And still we feel that
  the character of the witticism does not here come to expression
  undimmed. The deviation from the question is too obvious; the
  displacement is much too conspicuous. Our attention understands
  immediately that it is a matter of an intentional displacement. In
  other displacement-witticisms the displacement is disguised and our
  attention is riveted by the effort to discover it. In one of the
  displacement-witticisms (p. 69) the reply to the recommendation of the
  horse—“What in the world should I do in Monticello at 6:30 in the
  morning?”—the displacement is also an obtrusive one, but as a
  substitute for it it acts upon the attention in a senseless and
  confusing manner, whereas in the interrogation of the actress we know
  immediately how to dispose of her displacement answer.

  The so-called “facetious questions” which may make use of the best
  techniques deviate from wit in other ways. An example of the facetious
  question with displacement is the following: “What is a cannibal who
  devours his father and mother?—Answer: An orphan.—And when he has
  devoured all his other relatives?—Sole-heir.—And where can such a
  monster ever find sympathy?—In the dictionary under S.” The facetious
  questions are not full witticisms because the required witty answers
  cannot be guessed like the allusions, omissions, etc., of wit.

Footnote 57:

  Cf. _The Interpretation of Dreams_, Chapter VII.

Footnote 58:

  Besides the dream-work and the technique of wit I have been able to
  demonstrate condensation as a regular and significant process in
  another psychic occurrence, in the mechanism of normal (not purposive)
  forgetting. Singular impressions put difficulties in the way of
  forgetting; impressions in any way analogous are forgotten by becoming
  fused at their points of contact. The confusion of analogous
  impressions is one of the first steps in forgetting.

Footnote 59:

  Many of my patients while under psychoanalytic treatment are wont to
  prove regularly by their laughter that I have succeeded in
  demonstrating faithfully to their conscious perception the veiled
  unconscious; they laugh also when the content of what is disclosed
  does not at all justify this laughter. To be sure, it is conditional
  that they have approached this unconscious closely enough to grasp it
  when the physician has conjectured it and presented it to them.

Footnote 60:

  In doing this we must not forget to reckon with the distortion brought
  about by the censor which is still active in the psychoses.

Footnote 61:

  _The Interpretation of Dreams._

Footnote 62:

  The character of the comical which is referred to as its “dryness”
  also depends in the broadest sense upon the differentiation of the
  things spoken from the antics accompanying it.

Footnote 63:

  _The Interpretation of Dreams_, p. 296.

Footnote 64:

  This very remarkable and still inadequately understood behavior of
  antagonistic relationships is probably not without value for the
  understanding of the symptom of negativism in neurotics and in the
  insane. Cf. the two latest works on the subject: Bleuler, “Über die
  negative Suggestibilität,” _Psych.-Neurol. Wochenschrift_, 1904, and
  Otto Groos’s _Zur Differential diagnostik negativistischer Phänomene_,
  also my review of the _Gegensinn der Urworte_, in _Jahrb. f.
  Psychonalyse_ II, 1910.

Footnote 65:

  An expression of G. T. Fechner’s which has acquired significance from
  the point of view of my conception.

Footnote 66:

  Given by Translator.

Footnote 67:

  I have everywhere identified the naïve with the naïve-comic, a
  practice which is certainly not permissible in all cases. But it is
  sufficient for our purposes to study the characteristics of the naïve
  as exhibited by the “naïve joke” and the “naïve obscenity.” It is our
  intention to proceed from here with the investigation of the nature of
  the comic.

Footnote 68:

  Also Bergson (_Laughter_, An essay on the Meaning of the Comic,
  translated by Brereton and Rothwell, The Macmillan Co., 1914) rejects
  with sound arguments this sort of explanation of comic pleasure, which
  has unmistakably been influenced by the effort to create an analogy to
  the laughing of a person tickled. The explanation of comic pleasure by
  Lipps which might, in connection with his conception of the comic, be
  represented as an “unexpected trifle,” is of an entirely different
  nature.

Footnote 69:

  The recollection of this innervation expenditure will remain the
  essential part of the idea of this motion, and there will always be
  methods of thought in my psychic life in which the idea will be
  represented by nothing else than this expenditure. In other
  connections a substitute for this element may possibly be put in the
  form of other ideas, for instance the visual idea of the object of the
  motion, or it may be put in the form of the word-idea; and in certain
  types of abstract thought a sign instead of the full content itself
  may suffice.

Footnote 70:

  “What one has not in his head,” as the saying goes, “he must have in
  his legs.”

Footnote 71:

  The problem has been greatly confused by the general conditions
  determining the comic, whereby the comic pleasure is seen to have its
  source now in a too-muchness and now in a not-enoughness.

Footnote 72:

  Degradation: A. Bain (_The Emotions and the Will_, 2nd Ed., 1865)
  states: “The occasion of the ludicrous is the degradation of some
  person of interest possessing dignity, in circumstances that excite no
  other strong emotion” (p. 248).

Footnote 73:

  “Thus every conscious and clever evocation of the comic is called wit,
  be it the comic of views or situations. Naturally we cannot use this
  view of wit here.” Lipps, l. c., p. 78.

Footnote 74:

  At the most this is inserted by the dreamer as an explanation.

Footnote 75:

  l. c., p. 294.

Footnote 76:

  “Trente et quarante” is a gambling game.

Footnote 77:

  Bergson, l. c., p. 29.

Footnote 78:

  Sixth Ed., Berlin, 1891.

Footnote 79:

  “You may well laugh, that no longer concerns you.”

Footnote 80:

  That comic pleasure has its source in the “quantitative contrast,” in
  the comparison of big and small, which ultimately also expresses the
  essential relation of the child to the grown-up, would indeed be a
  peculiar coincidence if the comic had nothing else to do with the
  infantile.

Footnote 81:

  “Our heads have the right to fall covered before thee.”

Footnote 82:

  The excellent humoristic effect of a character like that of the fat
  knight, Sir John Falstaff, is based on economised contempt and
  indignation. To be sure we recognise in him the unworthy glutton and
  fashionably dressed swindler, but our condemnation is disarmed through
  a whole series of factors. We understand that he knows himself to be
  just as we estimate him; he impresses us through his wit; and besides
  that, his physical deformity produces a contact-effect in favor of a
  comic conception of his personality instead of a serious one; as if
  our demands for morality and honor must recoil from such a big
  stomach. His activities are altogether harmless and are almost excused
  by the comic lowness of those he deceives. We admit that the poor
  devil has a right to live and enjoy himself like any one else, and we
  almost pity him because in the principal situation we find him a
  puppet in the hands of one much his superior. It is for this reason
  that we cannot bear him any grudge and turn all we economize in him in
  indignation into comic pleasure which he otherwise provides. Sir
  John’s own humor really emanates from the superiority of an ego which
  neither his physical nor his moral defects can rob of its joviality
  and security.

  On the other hand the courageous knight Don Quixote de la Mancha is a
  figure who possesses no humor, and in his seriousness furnishes us a
  pleasure which can be called humoristic although its mechanism shows a
  decided deviation from that of humor. Originally Don Quixote is a
  purely comic figure, a big child whose fancies from his books on
  knighthood have gone to his head. It is known that at first the poet
  wanted to show only that phase of his character, and that the creation
  gradually outgrew the author’s original intentions. But after the poet
  endowed this ludicrous person with the profoundest wisdom and noblest
  aims and made him the symbolic representation of an idealism, a man
  who believed in the realization of his aims, who took duties seriously
  and promises literally, he ceased to be a comic personality. Like
  humoristic pleasure which results from a prevention of emotional
  feelings it originates here through the disturbance of comic pleasure.
  However, in these examples we already depart perceptibly from the
  simple cases of humor.

Footnote 83:

  A term which is used in quite a different sense in the _Aesthetik_ of
  Theo. Vischer.

Footnote 84:

  If one does not hesitate to do some violence to the conception of
  expectation, one may ascribe—according to the process of Lipps—a very
  large sphere of the comic to the comic of expectation; but probably
  the most original cases of the comic which result through a comparison
  of a strange expenditure with one’s own will fit least into this
  conception.

Footnote 85:

  The characteristic of the “double face” naturally did not escape the
  authors. Melinaud, from whom I borrowed the above expression,
  conceives the condition for laughing in the following formula: “Ce qui
  fait rire c’est qui est à la fois, d’un coté, absurde et de l’autre,
  familier” (“Pourquoi rit-on?” _Revue de deux mondes_, February, 1895).
  This formula fits in better with wit than with the comic, but it
  really does not altogether cover the former. Bergson (l. c., p. 96)
  defines the comic situation by the “reciprocal interference of
  series,” and states: “A situation is invariably comic when it belongs
  simultaneously to two altogether independent series of events and is
  capable of being interpreted in two entirely different meanings at the
  same time.” According to Lipps the comic is “the greatness and
  smallness of the same.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WIT AND ITS RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The problem of lay-analyses
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The problem of lay-analyses

Author: Sigmund Freud

Author of introduction, etc.: Sándor Ferenczi

Translator: A. Paul Maerker-Branden
        James Strachey

Release date: May 3, 2025 [eBook #76004]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Brentano's, 1927

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROBLEM OF LAY-ANALYSES ***





                              THE PROBLEM
                                   OF
                              LAY-ANALYSES


[Illustration: [Logo]]

                                   BY

                             SIGMUND FREUD

                    INTRODUCTION BY DR. S. FERENCZI

[Illustration: [Logo]]

                         NEW YORK      MCMXXVII

                         BRENTANO’S ▾ PUBLISHER




                  COPYRIGHT, 1927, BY BRENTANO’S INC.


              Manufactured in the United States of America




      _The Problem of Lay-Analyses_ has been translated by A. Paul
                            Maerker-Branden

                                  and

   _An Autobiographical Study_ has been translated by James Strachey.




                                CONTENTS


                    INTRODUCTION                 11
                    THE PROBLEM OF LAY-ANALYSES  25
                    AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUDY   189




                              INTRODUCTION


An all-pervading feeling of profound responsibility to society in
general, can be the only reason for a man, by far the most celebrated
expert in his special field of endeavor, not to try to maintain a
monopoly of his scientific findings, but make them accessible to the
public. Such altruism is so much more remarkable if this man happens to
be a member of the Æsculapian priesthood, a clan which, not unlike the
Holy Roman Church, always assumed, and still assumes to a certain
extent, an air of mysticism, for the purpose of barring the layman. For
the very same reason—that of maintaining a monopoly—dead and obsolete
languages are resorted to, for recording experiences in the form of
technical terms, and even for the writing of prescriptions.

Of course, it must be admitted that the activities of insufficiently
informed people, known as “quacks,” have done great damage to society.
On the other hand, nobody will deny any more that the popularizing of
modern hygiene, bacteriology, anatomy and pathology has proven a boon to
humanity in general.

It is typical of the Father of Psychoanalysis, imbued with a deep sense
of fairness towards mankind, that he has never indulged in a
narrow-minded, professional point of view.

The mere accident that it remained for the science of medicine to
discover the Psychology of the Unconscious and Psychoanalysis as such,
was not enough reason for Sigmund Freud to treat his discovery as a
strictly medical preserve.

Very helpful to Freud in this respect was the fact that he has a
striking gift to make himself easily understood to the laity, in a
manner usually not to be found in people specializing in the intricacies
of science. Doubtless, Sigmund Freud’s astonishing gift to be his own
best popularizer, unquestionably takes root in his ability to fathom the
soul of others, to speak to each and everyone in their own language, as
it were.

To my mind, Sigmund Freud’s treatise on _The Problem of Lay-Analyses_
gives much more than the title promises. This treatise is a complete
outline, succinct and lucid at the same time, of psychoanalysis in its
present state. If anybody would ask me today what book I could recommend
to him for the easy understanding and grasping of the very essence of
Psychoanalysis, I should not hesitate to recommend _The Problem of
Lay-Analyses_. This book, to my best knowledge and belief, appears to me
exemplary in its lucidity.

Freud unhesitatingly and strongly criticises “quacks,” who attempt to
employ psychoanalysis without first being fully prepared for such work.
To him it does not make the slightest difference whether these “quacks”
are medically trained men—most of whom have up to now given only scant
sympathy to his teachings—or, medically unprepared laymen. Freud is of
the opinion that it is not the _medical_ training and the “M.D.” degree
which makes a man a competent psychoanalyst, but rather inherent insight
into the human soul—first of all, into the unconscious layers of his own
soul—and _practical_ training. According to Freud, there are just as
many medical as non-medical “quacks” exploiting psychoanalysis to the
detriment of the general public and the new science as such. Moreover,
at the present time, the relations of psychoanalysis to sciences in
general are at least as close as they are to biology and medicine. It
would, therefore, seem unfair to exclude non-medically trained men and
women from the circle of psychoanalysts.

Of course, Freud does not close his eyes to the danger lurking behind
the possibility of confounding strictly organic diseases with so-called
functional or nervous ailments. Only after it is ascertained beyond
doubt, by thorough medical examination, that a patient is a subject for
psychoanalytical treatment, does Freud permit him to participate in the
benefits of this therapy.

The number of physicians is too limited and their duties in general too
manifold to allow all of them to devote themselves to the study and the
application of psychoanalysis, to an extent which would actually exhaust
the healing qualities of this new science. A whole army of
psychoanalysts alone would be necessary to treat all those so-called
incorrigible children whose ailings and failings constitute a grave
danger for the coming generation. Great numbers of trained
psychoanalysts would also be necessary to attend to such “cases” as
penal and insane institutions offer, for the purpose of gradually
substituting sanitariums for penitentiaries.

“Criminal Therapy,” on a psychoanalytical basis, looms up to me as one
of the biggest issues facing us, at the present time. Another issue,
less urgent perhaps, is the psychological readjustment that thousands
upon thousands need in their relations to family, profession and society
in general. This opens a tremendous field for the analytically trained
social workers.

Another field where applied psychoanalysis might become one of the
indispensable necessities is the realm of education. All school teachers
ought to have a thorough psychoanalytical training, so that we may
entrust our children to them with more confidence. Finally—last but not
least—all professional men whose work, in one way or another, has any
bearing on the human soul, should be psychoanalytically trained.
Anthropology, sociology, history, the psychology of art can no longer
dispense with psychoanalysis.

It is in view of the extreme importance of psychoanalysis in all these
fields of human endeavor that Freud asks whether the immeasurable
advantages which the new science presents should be restricted, from
sheer fear of a more or less studiously over-emphasized danger resulting
from quackery. Dissemination of information seems to be the best agent
for discouraging quackery and spreading dependable facts on the subject.

For the necessity of preparing an American edition of _The Problem of
Lay-Analyses_ so soon after the publication of the German original, I
myself may serve as a witness. It was my good fortune to accompany Dr.
Freud on his now almost historical Argonauts’ trip to America in 1909,
and admire the courageous readiness with which America’s outstanding
leaders in the fields of psychology and neurology interested themselves
in Freud’s theories. At that time, Freud and his teachings were still
the bone of contention in the camps of European scientists.

The Nestor of America’s psychology, Dr. G. Stanley Hall,
enthusiastically embraced Freud’s teachings. Dr. William James, the
great philosopher and psychologist, listened to our gospel with great
interest, though not as enthusiastic as Dr. Hall. Touching to the
extreme was that youthful thirst of knowledge, with which Dr. James J.
Putnam, that grand old man of Harvard University, hung on the lips of
Dr. Freud. It is due to the untiring efforts of these men and the
translation of Freud’s books by Dr. A. A. Brill, that psychoanalysis, in
a comparatively short time and to a surprisingly great extent, gained
ground in all strata of society in the United States. It is a matter of
record that America became interested in Psychoanalysis much quicker
than Europe.

Now, visiting America again after almost twenty years, I had occasion to
observe how lasting and far-reaching an influence Dr. Freud’s teachings
exert on all strata of American society. Of course, not only Freud and
what he stands for, but also psychology in general, especially as it is
applied to education. Time and again, I have noticed that it seems
fairly impossible to listen to a conversation for any length of time,
without hearing problems of psychoanalysis and the name Freud mentioned.

Not less stimulating and informative than the first, is the second part
of the present volume, containing Freud’s own story of his life and his
science. It is common knowledge today that Freud, in his inimitable
objectivity, has always published facts and fancies which other
scientists would have been only too careful to hide from the eyes of
their contemporaries.

On the occasion of Freud’s seventieth birthday, I wrote in THE
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PSYCHOANALYSIS (July/October 1926):


  So far as his personality is concerned, he has completely taken the
  wind from the sails of modern methods of inquiry which attempts to
  gain fresh insight into the development of a scientist’s views, by
  studying the intimate details of his private life. In his
  “_Traumdeutung_” and “_Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens_”, Freud has
  undertaken this task himself in a way previously unknown, and has not
  only indicated new lines of research for this kind of inquiry, but
  given for all time an example of a candor quite ruthless towards
  himself. He has also revealed unhesitatingly the ‘secrets of the
  laboratory’, the inevitable vacillations and uncertainties that are
  usually so carefully kept hidden.


I hope that the reader will agree with me that the part of this book
which contains Freud’s “An Autobiographical Study” again displays candor
and frankness to an astonishing degree. This part of the present volume,
aside from other information, will also demonstrate to the student of
psychology the tolerance Freud manifests in regard to former disciples
of his who, apparently driven by an overpowering impatience, or because
“they did not fancy to dwell in the Depths of the Unconscious” only too
early, and with deplorable rashness, hastened to generalize their ideas,
notwithstanding the insufficiency of their theories to explain
complicated facts. As far as I am personally concerned, I cannot help
considering Freud as one of the most progressive disciples of his own
teachings, while the apostates of his doctrine appear to me as
prematurely aged reactionaries.

Equipped with devious excuses and devices, these apostates deserted the
paths of Freud’s teachings—paths that require the courage of the born
pioneer—to return to the broad and beaten paths of orthodox psychology
and biology.

May I not once more quote myself in this connection?

On December 28, 1926, speaking before the Mid-winter meeting of the
American Psychoanalytical Association, I said:


  It is a great mistake to gauge the age of a person by the number of
  years he has lived. To remain productive and to be capable of changing
  one’s opinions is to stay young. Both of these attributes are highly
  characteristic of Professor Freud, as his latest works attest. One
  finds nothing in them of stagnation in dogmatic assertions or of
  exhaustion of the fantasy. Against his own earlier theses he is
  perhaps often too unsparing, and the breadth of his perspective often
  exceeds everything which he has created in the past.


In conclusion, I wish to express the hope that this book will assist in
dissipating an erroneous belief prevalent in certain circles. It appears
that the general public have a decided tendency to confound Freud’s
teachings and psychoanalysis, as such, with the subject of sex.
“According to Freud there is only one _causa movens_, and that is sex!”
is one of their mis-statements.

Of course, faithful students of Freud’s teachings will never arrive at
such fallacious deductions. True, the attentive reader of this book will
find that Freud, as far as sex is concerned, allots to this instinct
more importance than the prudery and hypocrisy of present-day society is
ready to grant it. But, ever and again, Freud emphasizes the mastering
of urges—not by repression, to be sure, but by elimination of all that
which appears logically, ethically, and æsthetically undesirable.

                                                    DR. S. FERENCZI.
                                                            Budapest,
                                                                Hungary.

New York, September 1927.




                      THE PROBLEM OF LAY-ANALYSES




                                   I


It appears to me that the title of this treatise may require an
explanation. Let me, therefore, state that the problem of Lay-Analyses
expresses itself most succinctly in the question of whether medically
untrained laymen should be permitted to practise psychoanalysis.

This problem, timely in general, is subject to national laws.

It is a timely question, in so far as, up to now, apparently nobody ever
cared who was practising psychoanalysis. As a matter of fact, too little
attention was paid to the question into whose hands the employment of
this new science was entrusted, with unanimity prevailing only in
reference to a more or less strong tendency to wish that nobody at all
should practise psychoanalysis. There were different reasons for this
well-nigh general aversion.

The demand, then, now put before the legislatures of certain countries,
that only physicians be permitted to apply psychoanalysis proves that,
after all, a new, and apparently more tolerant opinion is becoming
prevalent, as regards the recognition of our science. This new trend of
putting the stamp of official and scientific approval on psychoanalysis,
by reserving the monopoly of its application to medically trained men,
must, however, first successfully clear itself of any and all suspicion
of being nothing other than just a modification of the resistance
hitherto shown towards psychoanalysis. Today, at last, it is admitted
that, under certain circumstances, psychoanalytical treatment is in
order. However, if it is to be applied, certain countries stand ready to
impose the restriction that licensed physicians only shall be permitted
to administer this treatment.

The problem before us right now, then, is why only physicians should be
permitted to practise psychoanalysis. This is a problem subject to
national laws. In the United States and Germany, for example, this
problem does not amount to more than just an academic discussion,
because in these countries a patient may receive treatment from anybody
he chooses. In these countries, anybody who feels the inclination may
treat, as a “quack” to be sure, “cases,” provided he stands ready to
assume full responsibility for the effect of his treatment. Not before
the authorities are actually appealed to to retaliate for such tangible
harm as a patient may have suffered from the hands of an unlicensed
practitioner of psychoanalysis, does the law interfere in the United
States, Germany and many other countries.

In Austria, however, where I am writing this treatise, bearing in mind
the special conditions which prevail there, in regard to the
administration of psychoanalytical treatment, the authorities employ the
law of the country as a preventive. In my country, without considering
ultimate results, the law, in sweeping restrictions, enjoins all and
sundry laymen from treating ailing people.

In the Republic of Austria, therefore, there is a very practical aspect
to the question of whether laymen should be permitted to treat ailing
people with psychoanalysis. As a matter of fact, under present
conditions, this question seems to be settled since it is already
answered by the wording of the law, now appearing on the statutes of my
country: Nervous people are unquestionably sick people; laymen are
doubtlessly no licensed physicians; psychoanalysis is a remedy for the
healing, or improvement, of nervous disorders. As in the eyes of the
law, the latter are considered diseases and the treatment of all such
ailments reserved for licensed physicians exclusively, laymen are liable
to severe punishment when employing psychoanalysis for the treatment of
nervous people.

In view of this plain state of affairs, one scarcely dares to approach
the question of permitting the laity to practise psychoanalysis in
Austria. However, in spite of the obviousness of the situation as a
whole, there are some additional aspects to the question which, albeit
the law does not take cognisance of them, should nevertheless be
considered.

It may develop that in connection with psychoanalysis, people in need of
treatment are not sick people, in the broad meaning of this term; laymen
not always to be considered laymen, nor physicians what physicians are
generally supposed to be—the very premise upon which these physicians
base their claims. If such a state of affairs becomes apparent, it would
be justifiable to insist upon a modification of the law, prohibiting the
unlicensed practise of medicine, as far as the application of
psychoanalytic treatment is concerned.




                                   II


Whether this modification shall be enacted as a law will depend mostly
on people who may not be expected to know the peculiarities of
analytical treatment. It will be our task, therefore, to instruct these
impartial referees, these typical laymen whom we will assume, for the
time being, are completely uninformed. It is regrettable that we cannot
arrange for them to attend an analytical treatment in the rôle of an
observer. It is one of the peculiarities of the “analytical situation”
that it will not suffer the presence of a third party.

Moreover, individual sessions are liable to be very unequal, as regards
the information they may yield. Mr. Referee happening in at an
analytical session, would probably not profit to any great extent. As a
matter of fact, he might altogether misinterpret that which is discussed
between the analyst and the patient. He may even become downright bored
with the proceedings. Therefore Mr. Referee must needs be satisfied with
the information we shall presently impart to him, endeavoring to set it
forth as lucidly as possible.

Let us assume that the patient is suffering from attacks of moodiness,
which he is unable to control, or else is the victim of a despondency so
depressing as to paralyse his energy, causing him to lose all confidence
in himself, manifesting extreme self-consciousness when among strangers.
Without grasping the underlying elements of his case, the patient may
observe that not only the discharge of his daily duties becomes more and
more arduous for him, but also that he experiences difficulties when
called upon to make a decision or embark upon some enterprise.

One day—utterly ignorant of the exact cause—he succumbs to an attack of
fear. From then on, he is unable to cross a street alone, or board a
train, without fighting off a certain inarticulate fear. This condition,
as a matter of fact, may even become so pronounced as to render it
absolutely impossible for him to cross a street, or board a train,
unaccompanied.

Or—what appears very peculiar to him—his thoughts “wander”; they are no
longer subject to his will. They attach themselves to problems which, in
reality, do not interest him at all but which he is, nevertheless,
unable to dismiss from his mind. He imposes perfectly ludicrous tasks
upon himself, such as counting the windows along the street. When
attending to simple functions, such as mailing a letter or turning off
the gas, doubts harass him a few moments later, as to whether he has
really dropped the letter into the mail box and whether he actually
turned off the gas.

Perhaps such a condition is merely annoying at first, but it becomes
intolerable when, in advanced stages, it proves impossible to shake off
such preposterous ideas as having flung a child under the wheels of a
car, or thrown somebody from a bridge into the river, or being haunted
by the terrifying doubt of whether he is not in reality the murderer the
police are trying to apprehend for the latest spectacular crime.

All these delusions are utter nonsense, as he himself very well knows.
He has never done any harm to anybody, but if he really were a fugitive
from justice, this obsession, this feeling of contrition could not be
stronger.

To take another case:—this time of a female patient, who is suffering in
an entirely different way, presenting entirely different symptoms. We
will assume that she is a pianiste, who suddenly experiences cramps in
her fingers and discovers herself unable to play. As soon as she thinks
of attending a social affair, she immediately feels the necessity of
obeying a recurrent natural need, making it impossible for her to leave
her own house. Thus, she has been forced to give up mingling with her
friends, or attend dances, the theatre, or concerts.

At the most inopportune moments, she becomes the victim of headaches or
other painful sensations. Eventually, after meals, she feels impelled to
yield to nausea, a condition which, if prolonged, may become dangerous.
Finally, she becomes absolutely unable to stand any of those little
excitements which cannot be eliminated from daily life. Upon such
occasions, she readily faints. As these spells are frequently
complicated with muscular spasms, such attacks assume the aspect of
dreadful afflictions.

Still other patients become subject to disturbances in a sphere where
bodily functions coördinate with manifestations of sentiment. If men,
they find themselves unable to give physiological expression to those
tender urges that induce them to gravitate towards the other sex. On the
other hand, all these physiological reactions may be at their command
when not aimed at the person they cherish most. Then, there are still
other cases, when bonds of sensuality will tie them to persons whom they
actually despise and of whom they have the most earnest desire to free
themselves. Or their sensuality imposes urges upon them whose
fulfillment causes them to shudder.

If they be women, such patients, on account of fear or disgust, or from
some other restraint of unknown origin, become unable to perform those
functions which their sex imposes upon them. In cases where they have
yielded to the prompting of passion, they discover that that
gratification is withheld from them which nature normally offers as a
reward for such complacency.

Sooner or later, all such persons come to consider themselves as sick
and appeal to physicians, expecting to be cured of their nervous
ailments. Physicians have classified these manifestations, diagnosing
them differently, according to their own personal point of view. These
ailments are listed under such terms as neurasthenia, psychasthenia,
phobias and neuroses of different kinds, and with that sweeping term
hysterics. The parts of the body inducing such disturbances are
examined: the heart, the stomach, the intestines, the sex organs, and
all are found to be in the best of condition. The physician then advises
the patient to change his mode of living, to take a vacation, to
exercise. Thus, with perhaps the aid of mild stimulants, the patient’s
condition may, or may not, be temporarily relieved.

Eventually, the patient is informed that there are certain practitioners
who specialize in the treatment of just such ailments, and thus they
come to be psychoanalysed.

Mr. Referee, whom we will assume is present, has impatiently listened,
while we have given an account of the nervous disturbances with which
one may be afflicted. Mr. Referee suddenly becomes attentive, expressing
his growing interest in these words: “Well, now at last we shall see
what the psychoanalyst will do with the patient, whom physicians could
not help.”

To all appearances, nothing takes place between patient and
psychoanalyst except that they talk with each other. The psychoanalyst
does not take recourse to any instruments, while examining the patient,
nor does he write out prescriptions. If it can be arranged, he will not
even take the patient out of his usual surroundings, or upset his daily
routine in any way, while treating him. Such a procedure is, of course,
not of indispensable necessity, quite frequently proving impossible to
arrange. Usually the analyst simply makes an appointment with his
patient, then lets him talk, listens to him, lets him talk again and
listens once more.

Mr. Referee now clearly manifests relief but, at the same time, his face
also assumes a disdainful expression. Apparently, he thinks: “Is that
all? ‘Words, words, words,’ as Prince Hamlet says. Is psychoanalysis
perhaps some sort of magic rite, employing mere words with which to
chase away a patient’s ailment?”

Quite right! It surely would be magic if it would only work faster. One
of the indispensable essentialities of magic is quickness, sudden
results. But psychoanalytical treatment demands months, sometimes even
years. Proceeding at such a snail’s pace, it loses the character of
anything resembling magic.

As far as “words, words, words” are concerned, they are surely not to be
looked down upon. Words, after all, are a powerful instrument, the means
by which we express our feelings to each other, the agent through which
we influence one another. Words are able to benefit us in the extreme,
or liable to hurt us to the quick. Doubtless, “in the beginning was the
Deed” and the Word came only later. Under certain circumstances, the
reduction of the Deed to the mere Word may even prove a cultural
achievement. At any rate, the Word was originally an implement of
sorcery, a magic manifestation which even today still retains much of
its old potency.

Mr. Referee now remarks: “Assuming that the patient is not any better
prepared for the understanding of psychoanalytical treatment, than I
myself, how are you going to induce him to believe in the Magic of the
Word, that is to deliver him from his sufferings?”

Of course, some preparatory work is necessary, but that is easily
accomplished in a simple manner. The patient is asked to be absolutely
frank with the psychoanalyst, not to withhold intentionally anything
that crowds itself into his mind, and to overcome gradually all such
influences as may exert themselves to prevent certain of his thoughts or
memories from being communicated to the psychoanalyst.

There is not one of us but does not know that there are certain things
which we hate to tell anybody else, or which we are utterly unable to
express at all. These are the so-called “most intimate” things. We also
surmise—and this proves the great progress that has been made in the
psychological understanding of our Selves—that there are some other
things which we hate to admit to ourselves, which we try to hide from
ourselves and which, once they are accidentally touched upon, we
immediately endeavor to crowd out of our thoughts.

Doubtless, the root of a very remarkable psychological problem manifests
itself in the fact that there are certain of our thoughts which we try
to hide from our very own Self! That would seem to indicate that our
very own Self is not an indivisible unit, as we have always considered
it! Rather, that there is a certain something which may rise in
opposition to our very own Self! Vaguely, then, we surmise that our own
Self and our soul life may be two different things! If, now, the patient
submits to the demand of psychoanalysis to express everything in words
that comes to his mind, he comes to believe that an interchange of
thoughts, under such extraordinary conditions, is liable to lead to
extraordinary results.

“I understand you very well,” Mr. Referee says. “You simply assume that
everybody suffering from a nervous disturbance is harboring something
that depresses him, some dark secret, perhaps, and by inducing him to
impart this secret to you, you relieve him of that depression, thus
alleviating his suffering. That, after all, is the very principle of the
Confessional which the Catholic church has employed for centuries to
wield her influence over her communicants.”

Yes and no, is our answer to this. The Confessional, to a certain
extent, may be considered as belonging into the realm of psychoanalysis;
leading up to it, as it were. However, the Confessional as such is far
removed from coinciding with the very being of psychoanalysis, and it is
unable to explain the results of psychoanalytical treatment. In the
Confessional, the sinner tells what he knows, but in the Analysis, the
neurotic is expected to reveal much more. Besides, there are no known
cases where the Confessional proved effective enough to remedy direct
symptoms of ailments.

“Then I don’t understand you after all,” Mr. Referee interjects. “What
do you mean by stating that the neurotic is ‘expected to reveal more’ in
the course of psychoanalytical treatment? Of course, I can very well
imagine that you, as a psychoanalyst, may wield a greater influence over
your patient than the Father Confessor over a penitent, for the simple
reason that you become better acquainted with him, employing your
growing influence to talk unhealthy thoughts out of your patient, as it
were, disseminating his apprehensions, and so forth. Frankly, it appears
most remarkable to me that by such a procedure, it should be possible to
alleviate purely physical manifestations, such as nausea, diarrhœa, and
cramps. I know that such results are possible by taking recourse to
hypnosis. Most probably, through prolonged association with your
patient, you gradually succeed in establishing hypnotic relations
between you and him. By this I mean that you inadvertently come to exert
upon him a suggestive influence. Thus, the miracle wrought by your
therapy is nothing other than the result of hypnotic suggestion.
However, as far as I know, results by hypnotic therapy are procured much
quicker than by psychoanalysis which you yourself admit takes months,
and sometimes even years.”

After all, Mr. Referee does not seem to be so utterly uninformed and
helplessly at sea as we had considered him in the beginning. Doubtless,
he is eagerly bent upon grasping the essence of psychoanalysis, on the
basis of certain knowledge which he has acquired. He endeavors to
connect psychoanalysis with something he already knows.

Thus, he forces upon us the difficult task of explaining to him that he
will never succeed in comprehending psychoanalysis in this way, because
psychoanalysis is a process _sui generis_, something new and peculiar,
understandable only with the assistance of new conceptions, or
presumptions.

However, we still owe our inquisitive friend a reply to a point raised
by him.

What you, Mr. Referee, mentioned before about the personal influence
exerted by the psychoanalyst on his patient, should not go without
comment. Such an influence actually prevails in the analysis, playing an
important rôle. However, this influence is utterly unlike the influence
induced by hypnosis.

I shall have to prove to you that the situations in these two cases
decidedly differ from each other. However, for the time being, the
statement may suffice that this personal influence—this “suggestive
element” if you wish—is not drawn upon for the purpose of suppressing
symptoms of nervous afflictions analogous to treatment by hypnotic
suggestions. Besides, it is absolutely wrong to assume that this
“suggestive element” is the agent and promoter of analytical treatment.
It may be that such is the case right at the beginning of the treatment.
Later, however, this very same “suggestive element” proves itself an
opposing factor, forcing us to resort to extensive counter-measures.

Just let me explain to you how thoroughly opposed the technique of
analysis is to anything and everything resembling the hypnotic technique
of diverting or dissipating a patient’s apprehensions.

Assumed that our patient is obsessed with an intense feeling of being
guilty of, say, some horrible crime, we do not advise him to stifle the
qualms of his conscience simply on the strength of the fact that there
is no doubt as to his innocence. He himself has already proceeded along
this trend of reasoning, but to no avail. On the contrary, we try to
impress him with the possibility that there may be something tangible at
the bottom of so profound a feeling of guilt, and that it may be
possible to detect this disturbing something.

“I should be greatly astonished,” Mr. Referee interrupts, “if you could
really assuage your patient’s feeling of guilt by agreeing that there
may be some tangible reason for his apprehension. But what is the mode
of procedure which is applied in your analysis, and to what treatment do
you subject your patient?”




                                  III


To make myself perfectly plain to you, it will be necessary for me to
acquaint you with certain psychological teachings which are not known
beyond the circle of analysts and accordingly, not appreciated beyond
this group. On the basis of this theory, it will be easy for you to
deduce what we expect of the patient and how we go about obtaining it.

In explaining matters to you, I will allude to our theory dogmatically,
as if it already were an accepted doctrine. Nevertheless, I do not want
you to assume that our theory, as I shall presently put it before you,
came into being as a fully developed, well-rounded out philosophical
system. The development of our theory came about only very gradually,
little by little, and was built up through continuous contact with
observations. Moreover, our theory, in accordance with these
observations, was continually modified until it finally evolved in a
manner apparently satisfactory for our purposes.

Only so short a time as a few years back, it would have been necessary
for me to express this theory in somewhat different terms. And even
today, I cannot guarantee that the terms I am using are definitely fixed
and will not be modified again. You know very well that scientific
truths do not burst upon us with the unexpectedness of a sudden
phenomenon. As a rule, any science, long after its early stages, lacks
the character of definiteness, unchangeability, and infallibility for
which our human way of thinking longs so intensely. However, any
science, as it presents itself to contemporaries, is science as its
best, so far as contemporaries are able to judge.

My introductory remarks, I hope, will assist you in gaining a correct
perspective in reference to psychoanalysis, especially when I ask you to
bear in mind that our specific science is still very young—hardly as old
as our century, as a matter of fact—and deals with about the most
difficult matter presenting itself to human research. Let me therefore
encourage you to interrupt me unabashedly in my explanations, when you
do not grasp the full meaning of my words and require further
elucidation.

“I am already interrupting you, even before you really start. You say
that you are going to acquaint me with a new psychology. But I was
always under the impression that psychology as such is no new science.
As a matter of fact, it seems to me there always has been enough
psychology and enough psychologists. In college, I learned of the great
things achieved in this realm of human endeavor.”

Far be it from me to deny these achievements. However, scrutinizing them
closely, you will find that they rather belong in the category of
sensory psychology. A doctrine of soul life never had a chance for
development, because its conception was obstructed by one very essential
misunderstanding. After all, what does psychology embrace today, as it
is taught in colleges? Aside from a few important sensorimotoric
perceptions, there are just a number of classifications and definitions
referring to certain processes of the soul which, thanks to the fact
that these terms have become a part of our living language, are now the
common property of all educated people. To all appearances, such limited
information does not enable us to clearly grasp our soul life.

Did you ever notice that every philosopher, poet, historian and
biographer evolves his own psychology, based on individual presumptions,
in regard to the connection and the ultimate purpose of psychological
phenomena, all of which are more or less acceptable but altogether and
equally unreliable? Seemingly, a common foundation is missing. Thus it
happens that in the realm of psychology, there is an utter lack of
respect and authority. There, obviously, anybody is permitted to “poach”
or “freelance” to his heart’s content.

If you touch upon a question of physiology or chemistry, nobody will
dare speak up, unless he is in possession of authentic information.
However, when discussing psychological questions, you may expect
everybody to venture an opinion, or raise his voice in protest.
Evidently, there is no “professional knowledge” in his realm! Inasmuch
as everybody has a soul life, everybody considers himself a born
psychologist.

There is a story of an old woman who offered her services to take care
of babies. When asked whether she knew anything about babies, her answer
was: Why, sure, haven’t I been a baby myself once?

“And this common foundation of soul life, overlooked by all
psychologists, you claim to have discovered through the observation of
ailing people?”

I do not believe that the origin of our findings minimizes their value.
Embryology, for example, would not enjoy any confidence as a science if
it were unable to explain clearly the origin of pre-natal deformities.

You will remember that I have mentioned before persons whose thoughts
insist upon travelling their own way. To such an extent as a matter of
fact, that such persons are forced to ponder about problems which do not
interest them at all.

Do you believe that psychology, as generally taught, will be in a
position to render even so much as the slightest assistance for the
explanation of such anomalies? And after all, there is not one of us
whose thoughts, during the night, do not travel their very own way,
creating visions which we are unable to interpret, which we are at a
loss to understand, and which frequently appear to be, to an almost
disquieting extent, products of morbidity.

I am now referring to our dream life! Among the majority of people, the
opinion always prevailed, and still prevails, that there is an inherent
meaning to dreams, that some attention ought to be paid to our nocturnal
visions, that a certain interpretative value is attached to them.
Orthodox psychologists have never been able to interpret the meaning of
dreams. To them, dreams were something with which they did not know what
to do. And as soon as orthodox psychology tried to interpret our dream
life, their explanations ventured far afield from psychology proper.
Dreams, according to them, were nothing other than the result of
physiological sensations, originating from an unequal soundness of sleep
in different parts of the brain. I venture to state right here, that any
psychology unable to explain the essence of our dreams is also
inapplicable to the understanding of normal soul life and cannot be
expected to be recognized as science.

“You are becoming so aggressive that I surmise one of your sensitive
spots has been touched upon. I have heard before that in psychoanalysis
great value is attached to dreams, that dreams are interpreted and
behind them old memories of actual events are sought. On the other hand,
I also know that the interpretation of dreams is left to the arbitrary
conception of the analyst and that the analysts between themselves have
frequent squabbles, in regard to the question of how to interpret a
certain dream and the justification of arriving at certain conclusions.
If this is really the case, I do not think you should stress the
advantage of psychoanalysis, in regard to orthodox psychology.”

There you have said something very appropriate. It is only too true that
the interpretation of dreams in theory, as well as practice of
psychoanalysis, has achieved incomparable importance.

If at this point, I appear to be aggressive to you, this must be looked
upon as a defense mechanism. When I reflect upon all the nuisance
brought about by some of our analysts in connection with the
interpretation of dreams, I could despair. I feel like quoting the
pessimistic truism of our great satirist Nestroy, who once said: “Any
progress is only half as great as it seems to be in the beginning!” But
haven’t you noticed that we mortals are always bent upon confounding
everything and distorting it? Nevertheless, with a little caution and
self-training, most of the dangers lurking behind the interpretation of
dreams can be avoided.

But it will never be possible for me to get down to the explanation of
our new science which I promised you, if we continually digress.

“If I understood you correctly, you were going to speak about the
fundamental presumptions underlying the new psychology.”

It was not my intention to start with that. Rather, I intend to tell you
what we have learned of the soul apparatus, in the course of our
analytical studies.

“What do you mean by ‘soul apparatus’ and what is it made of, may I
ask?”

You will soon enough see what the soul apparatus is. It is irrelevant to
ask of what material it is made, as this question has no psychological
interest. As far as psychology is concerned, the question of material is
just as unimportant as the question would be in the realm of optic, of
whether a telescope is made of metal or cardboard. The question of
matter does not enter here at all, but there is great importance
attached to the aspect of space.

This obscure soul apparatus, which serves as the agent for all processes
of our soul, is conceived by us as an instrument consisting of several
parts. Each of these parts we shall call a stage. There is an individual
function attached to each of these stages, and all of them are
correlated to each other in reference to space. Aspects of space like
“near” and “far,” and “above” and “below,” for the time being, only
serve to illustrate the regular sequence of the functions allotted to
the different stages of the soul apparatus.—Do you still follow me?

“Hardly! However, I hope I will understand you eventually. At any rate,
your explanation appeals to me as a somewhat peculiar description of the
anatomy of the soul, which, according to biologists, is nonexistent.”

I will grant that what you call my “somewhat peculiar description of
the anatomy of the soul,” is merely a parallel drawn upon for the
purpose of elucidation, as is so often done in sciences. In the early
stages of a new science such parallels have always been quite
primitive,—open to revision, as it were. I consider it superfluous to
strengthen my argument by referring to the frequently applied “if,” as
is quite popular in such cases. The actual value of such “if”
argumentations—“fiction” the philosopher Vaihinger would call
it—greatly depends on how advantageously this argumentation may be
applied to the case in question.

However, for argument’s sake, let us accept the popular conception and
assume that within us there is a psychical organization, recording
sensations and perceptions of physical wants on one hand, and releasing
motoric actions on the other. This medium for establishing this definite
coöperation we call the “I.”

Of course, this is nothing new. Each one of us takes this for granted,
if he is not a philosopher, and some despite being philosophers.
However, our description of the psychical apparatus is not by far
complete.

Aside from the “I,” we perceive another region of the soul, much more
extensive, much more impressive, and much more obscure than the “I,”
which we designate the “It.”

It is the relation between the “I” and the “It” upon which we shall
dwell first.

Doubtless, you will raise an objection against our intention to refer to
these two regions or stages of the soul with simple pronouns, instead of
giving them beautiful euphonious Greek names. However, in
psychoanalysis, we prefer to remain in contact with the popular way of
thinking, and attach commonplace terms to our scientific conceptions,
rather than look upon such nomenclature in contempt. We do not expect to
receive credit for this popularization of psychoanalytical terms,
inasmuch as we are forced to do this in order to make ourselves plain to
our patients who are frequently very intelligent, but not always exactly
learned people.

The impersonal pronoun “It” is most appropriate for our purposes, as is
plainly proved by the fact that we frequently speak of something,
averring that “‘It’ came to me quite suddenly”; “‘It’ gave me a shock”;
“‘It’ was stronger than I.” “_C’était plus fort que moi._”

In the realm of psychology, we can only make ourselves understood by
taking recourse to comparisons. This, after all, is no special
peculiarity of psychology, inasmuch as other sciences also find it
necessary to avail themselves of analogous expedients. These
comparisons, however, must be modified time and again, as their
application generally proves too limited. If you are seeking an
explanation of the relation of the “I” to the “It,” it would be well to
remember that the “I” serves as a foreground to the “It.” The “I” is, as
it were, the outer, front layer of the “It.” We may so much more readily
accept this comparison, inasmuch as layers—say, of a tree—owe their
peculiar characteristics to the modifying influence of that exterior
medium with which they are in contact. Thus, we visualize that the “I,”
being the outer layer of the psychical apparatus, is the “It,” modified
in accordance with the influence which the outer world exerts upon it.

Here you will perceive how conceptions of space apply to psychoanalysis.
To all intents and purposes, the “I” is actually the front layer, the
obvious, whereas the “It” is the inner layer, the hidden. To make it
even more plain: The “I” is inserted between the reality of the outer
world and the “It,” the latter constituting the soul proper, the essence
of the soul, as it were.

“I am not going to inquire how you came to know all this. I should first
like to know how this differentiation between the ‘I’ and the ‘It’
assists you in your psychoanalytical work, and why you need it.”

Your question clearly shows me how to proceed.

It is most important and extremely valuable to know that the “I” and the
“It,” in many instances, greatly differ from each other. As far as the
“I” is concerned, psychical activations are subject to a different rule
than the one applying to the “It.” The “I” has different intentions from
the “It,” availing itself of means other than those resorted to by the
“It.”

Of course, much could be said in this respect, but perhaps it will be
best if I give you a new comparison and a new example. Just remember the
differences which developed, during the late war, between the actual
front and the hinterland. We were apparently never surprised to observe
that there were certain things going on at the front, utterly different
from analogous developments in the hinterland, and that in the
hinterland many a thing was permissible which had to be strictly
prohibited at the front. In the war, the deciding factor, of course, was
the proximity of the enemy. In our psychical life, the deciding factor
is the proximity of the outer world. Remember that in ancient times
“outside,” “strange,” “hostile,” used to be identical conceptions.

And now, the example I promised you: The “It” is never assailed by any
conflicts. Within the “It,” contradiction and opposition dwell
undisturbed in close proximity to each other, frequently equalizing one
another by means of compromise. However, while the “It” thus remains
undisturbed, the “I” cannot avoid facing conflicts, and the only way for
the “I” to escape the dilemma is by renouncing some particular
intention, or urge, for the benefit of the other.

The “I” is controlled by a very remarkable trend for unification, for
synthesis—a characteristic utterly lacking in the “It.” The latter never
manifests such unity of intention, but rather displays a tendency
towards dissipation and a diversity of aims, utterly independent of one
another, and without regard to each other.

“If there really is such an important hinterland of the soul, how do you
explain the fact that it was never discovered before the advent of
psychoanalysis?”

By this question, you are leading us back to one of your former
inquiries. Let me advise you, then, that orthodox psychology blocked its
own way to the “It,” by holding on tenaciously to a presumption which,
in itself, seemed obviously enough but which, nevertheless, cannot be
successfully sustained any more. It was presumed that all psychical
activations are conscious, that consciousness is the characteristic of
any psychological process, and that if there really were unconscious
processes of our brain, these processes did not deserve to be termed
psychological processes, having nothing at all to do with psychology
proper.

“I should say that this is self-evident!”

Of course. That is exactly what all the orthodox psychologists claim.
However, it is easy enough to prove that such a view is incorrect, or
rather amounts to an impractical separation. Observing ourselves, we
easily perceive that many of our thoughts could not have arisen unless
they were induced by certain premises. However, of the preparatory
stages of these thoughts, which must have been psychical, too, we are
unaware, inasmuch as only the complete result enters into our
consciousness. Once in a while, it may be possible for us to reconstruct
the development of a thought by retrospective contemplation.

“Most probably, our attention had been diverted so that we missed
observing the development of the thought in the making, so to speak.”

That’s just an obvious excuse!—insufficient to obscure the fact that
quite frequently psychical activations—and often highly complicated
ones, too—may occur in our soul life without our becoming actually aware
of them. Alas, you may be ready to accept the hypothesis that just a
little more or less of your “attention” may prove sufficient to
transmute a non-psychical action into a psychical one. But why squabble?
The existence of unconscious thoughts has been proven in hypnotic
experiments, time and again, to the satisfaction of everybody.

“I don’t wish to deny that, and I actually believe I am now beginning to
understand you at last. What you are terming the ‘I’ is the Conscious
while the ‘It’ describes the so-called Subconscious, which is so much
discussed just now. But why, pray, this masquerade of new terms, if I
may ask?”

This is no masquerade, inasmuch as other terms cannot be employed here
properly. Besides, let me ask you not to substitute literature for
science. If somebody refers to the Subconscious, I don’t know whether he
is alluding to it as a stratum, that is, something dwelling in the soul
beneath the Conscious, or whether he refers to it as to quality, that
is, another consciousness, a subterranean one, so to say. To be sure,
the greatest probability seems to be that anybody juggling such terms is
himself not at all sure of what he really means. The only permissible
differentiation is one between Conscious and Unconscious.

Nevertheless, it would be a severe error to believe that a
differentiation between Conscious and Unconscious would be analogous to
a differentiation between the “I” and the “It.” It would be too
wonderful, if it were as simple as all that, and it would be easy going
for our theory then. But, it is not so simple! Correct only is that
everything that occurs within the “It” is and remains unconscious, and
that only activities of the “I” may become conscious. However, not _all_
these activities are conscious, nor are they _always_ conscious, nor do
they necessarily _have_ to become conscious. Parts of the “I” may remain
permanently unconscious.

The penetration into Consciousness of a psychical process is quite
complicated. I cannot avoid demonstrating to you—dogmatically once
more—what our hypothesis is in this respect. You will remember that the
“I” is the outer, peripheral layer of the “It.” We now assume that on
this outermost surface of the “I,” there is a peculiar device, a system,
an organ if you wish, by whose exclusive actuation that phenomenon is
created which we call Consciousness. This organ may be actuated from the
outside—that is, our sensory nerves may convey to it sensations of an
outer world—as well as from the inside, where first it may perceive the
sensations from the “It” and, later on, the processes of the “I.”

“This is getting worse and worse, and more and more beyond my
understanding. Did you not invite me to discuss with you the question of
whether or no, medically trained laymen should be permitted to apply
psychoanalysis? Why, then, all these ramblings of vague and dark
theories, whose correctness you will be unable to prove to me?”

Only too well do I realize that I cannot convince you. As that would be
beyond all possibilities, I have, therefore, surrendered such
intentions. Even when instructing our own disciples in the theory of
psychoanalysis, we always observe how little impression we make on them
in the beginning. They accept the analytical teachings with just as much
equanimity as any other abstractions which have been fed to them. Some
of them may have the earnest desire to be convinced, but there is no
trace that they ever really are convinced.

We demand that anyone who intends to analyse somebody else, should first
submit to an analysis. Only if in the course of this “self-analysis”—as
it is usually incorrectly called—a disciple experiences the truth of
psychoanalytical teachings on his own body—or rather on his own
soul—then, and only then, he gains those convictions which later on will
guide him in his work as an analyst.

How, then, may I expect to convince you, Mr. Referee, of the correctness
of our theories, especially as I can only give you an incomplete,
abbreviated, and, therefore, none too lucid outline of psychoanalytical
teachings, without your being able to corroborate it through your own
experiences?

But such is not my intention at all! We are not discussing here the
question of whether psychoanalysis is sense or nonsense, nor whether the
premises of psychoanalysis are correct or full of grave fallacies. I am
simply presenting our theories to you, because in this way it seems
easiest to me to explain to you what is the real essence of
psychoanalysis, what are its premises in reference to individual
patients, and just what the treatment is that is administered to them.
In this way, the problem of lay-analyses is projected in a striking
light. If you have followed me up to now, you may rest assured that the
worst is over and that from now on, everything will be much more
comprehensible to you.

And now let me pause for a moment.




                                   IV


“I expect that, on the basis of psychoanalytical theories, you will
explain to me how the development of a nervous ailment may be
conceived!”

I shall try. For this purpose, however, it is necessary that we study
our “I” and “It” from a new point of view. We shall have to look upon
these two factors as to their dynamic values, that is, in regard to the
forces active in and between them. You will remember that previously we
restricted ourselves to the description of the psychical apparatus.

“I am only hoping that things won’t be so impossible to grasp.”

I do not think so. As a matter of fact, I believe that you will soon
comprehend the whole system. To start with, let us assume that those
forces which actuate the soul apparatus are generated by the different
organs of our system, as the result of important needs of our body.
Don’t forget what the poet-philosopher Schiller once said:

                  Until philosophy sublime,
                  Supremely rules the course of time,
                  The world, in oldest fashion,
                  By hunger moves, and passion.

Hunger and Passion are two very powerful agents!

The needs of our body which stimulate the soul into action—actuate the
soul, as I referred to it before—we call urges.

It is these urges which fill the “It.” All energies generated by the
“It” were incepted by these urges. The powers of the “I” have no other
origin either, inasmuch as they are derived from the “It.”

What, now, do these urges want?

They want to be satisfied, that is, they endeavor to create such
situations whereby the needs of our body are gratified.

As soon as any tension, created by our urges, slackens simultaneously
with the satisfied cravings of our body, our Consciousness experiences a
pleasurable sensation, whereas an intensification of our urges will soon
enough result in decided displeasure. In accordance with these
fluctuations of pleasurable and distressing sensations, our soul
apparatus regulates its activity. Thus, the rule of the Pleasure
Principle manifests itself.

Intolerable conditions develop in case the urges of the “It” are not
satisfied. Experience proves that situations of complete gratification
can only be achieved in contact with the outer world. Thus, that part of
the “It” which faces the outer world, i. e., the “I,” assumes its
functions. While the driving power is produced by the “It,” it is the
“I” which then assumes the management, takes the steering wheel in hand,
so to speak, without which the coveted goal could never be reached.

It is characteristic of the urges of the “It” that they are always bent
upon immediate, rash gratification without ever attaining their ends,
but frequently exposing themselves to severe harm. Therefore, it
devolves upon the “I” to forestall such failure, by mediating between
the reckless demands of the “It” and the practical outer world. Thus,
the censorial activity of the “I” makes itself felt in two different
directions.

On one hand, the “I,” assisted by that organ which conveys to it the
reactions of an outer world, scans the horizon, as it were, in an
attempt to seize upon the most opportune moment for a harmless
gratification of the urges prompting it. On the other hand, the “I”
exerts a restraining influence on the “It,” controlling its “passions”
and inducing its urges to postpone their gratification, or modify them,
or renounce them for some compensation, as the case may be.

Restraining the reckless “It” in such a way, the “I” replaces the
formerly predominant Pleasure Principle with the so-called Reality
Principle which, although striving for the same ends as the Pleasure
Principle, nevertheless considers such practical necessities as the
outer world imposes.

Later on, the “I” discovers that there is another way of insuring
gratification of urges than adaptation to the outer world. This newly
discovered method consists of changing conditions in the outer world in
such a way as to bring about circumstances favorable for gratification.
This activity of the “I” constitutes its most supreme achievement.
Sufficient discernment to perceive when it is opportune to stifle
passions and when it is opportune to either face or fight the realities
of the outer world is, after all, the Alpha and Omega of practical
wisdom.

“As I understand you, the ‘It’ is by far the stronger of the two. How,
then, is it possible that the ‘It’ will permit the weaker ‘I’ to hold
sway over it?”

The “I” is well in a position to exert such influence over the “It,”
provided its organization and efficiency is in no way hampered. Besides,
access to all parts of the “It” must be such as to enable the “I” to
bear sufficient influence on the “It.” There is no inherent opposition
between the “I” and the “It,” both belonging together. In cases of
normal health, it is practically impossible to distinguish between the
two.

“All this appears quite clear to me. However, what I cannot understand
is that under such ideal conditions, there could be any chance at all
for disturbances to arise?”

You are perfectly right! As long as the “I” discharges its duties fully,
and its relations to the “It” are maintained in a satisfactory manner,
no nervous disturbances will develop. However, disturbances are liable
to arise at some unsuspected spot. This will not surprise the
well-informed pathologist, but merely confirms the fact that the most
essential developments and evolvements contain the very germ for
diseased conditions and the break down of functions.

“This is too learned for me! I cannot follow you any more!”

I shall have to digress for a little. You will admit that a human being
is a puny, helpless thing in comparison to that tremendous outer world,
full of destructive agencies. Any primitive being who did not develop a
sufficiently strong “I” organisation, is subject to all these
“traumata.” Such a primitive being will achieve no more than just a
“blind” gratification of its urges, frequently to be destroyed in this
way.

The evolvement of an “I” is, most of all, a step towards insuring
maintenance of life. Destruction as such does not teach anything. But
after overcoming a trauma successfully, attention will be attracted by
similar situations and danger will be signalized by a fear affect—a
shortened reproduction of what was lived through during the trauma. This
reaction to approaching danger results in an attempt at flight, which is
maintained until sufficient strength is generated to oppose the danger
arising from the outer world in an active manner, perhaps even by taking
recourse to aggression.

“All this seems to be far, far different from what you promised me.”

You don’t realize how close I have already come to the fulfillment of my
promise to you. Even in such living beings who later on develop an
efficient “I” organisation, this “I” is quite weak in the years of
childhood and only slightly different from the “It.”

And now, I ask you to visualize what would happen in case this powerless
“I” is actuated by an urge arising from the “It”—an urge which the weak
“I” would like to resist, because it feels that a gratification of this
urge may involve danger, may result in a traumatic situation, a
collision with the outer world.

Alas, the weak “I” cannot sum up enough strength to resist.

Then what?

Then, the “I” deals with the danger, arising from an “It”-inspired urge,
in exactly the same way that an exterior danger would have to be faced.
The “I” makes an attempt at flight, deserting this specific part of the
“It” and leaving it to its fate. It refuses all such assistance as it
usually renders to urges arising from the “It.” We refer to such a case
as a repression of urges by the “I.”

For the time being, danger is thus parried, but to confound inner and
outer world is certain to invite punishment. Running away from oneself
is a thing that cannot be done! In a case of repression, the “I”
succumbs to the Pleasure Principle which it otherwise strives to
correct. Thus, it is the “I” upon which damage is inflicted in such
cases of repression. This damage consists of the “I” experiencing a
lasting restriction in its own sphere of rule. The repressed urge is now
isolated, left to itself, unapproachable, and cannot be influenced. The
repressed urge now goes its own way. Frequently, even after the “I” has
attained power, it proves impossible to release this repression. With
its synthesis disturbed, a part of the “It” remains forbidden ground to
the “I.”

The isolated urge does not remain idle, however. Because normal
gratification was denied it, it contrives to compensate itself by
engendering psychical derivates which take its place and, connecting
with other psychical activations, estrange them to the “I.” Finally, in
the form of an unrecognizable substitute, the isolated urge penetrates
to the “I” and to consciousness, presenting itself as what is known as a
“symptom.”

We now become aware of what a nervous disturbance is. We perceive an “I”
hampered in its synthesis, unable to exert any influence on certain
parts of the “It.” In addition, the “I” must renounce some of its
inherent activities, to avoid new collisions with the repressed urge. We
perceive an “I” exhausting itself in mostly unavailing defensive
measures against symptoms that are nothing other than results of the
repression. Moreover, it becomes evident now that in the “It,” some
urges have assumed independence. They aim at their own gratification
without any concern for the whole, subject only to such primitive
psychology as reigns in the lowermost depths of the “It.”

Observing such a state of affairs, we face the quite simple situation in
which the “I,” attempting to repress certain parts of the “It,”
proceeded in an utterly unsuitable manner. Consequently, the “I” has
failed in its intention and now the “It” is taking revenge on the “I.”
This revenge of the “It” on the “I” resulted in nothing less than a
neurosis.

Accordingly, a neurosis is the result of a conflict between the “I” and
the “It,” a conflict—as investigations will show—forced upon the “I,”
because the latter insisted on maintaining its state of pliability, in
reference to an outer world. The conflict, in fact, is one between the
“It” and the outer world. However, because the “I,” faithful and true,
takes sides with the outer world, it becomes entangled in this conflict
of the “It” with the outer world.

Note that the condition of nervous disturbances is not induced by the
conflict between the “I” and the “It” but rather by the fact that the
“I,” for the purpose of settling this conflict, availed itself of the
unsuitable agent of repression. As a rule, conflicts between reality and
the “It” are unavoidable, and it is a routine task for the “I” to act as
a mediator in such cases. That in the case of this specific conflict
which we have under observation just now, the “I” took recourse to
repression as agent, is due to the fact that at this time the “I” was
powerless and immature. After all, repressions of lasting importance
occur exclusively during early childhood!

“What a roundabout route you are taking! However, I shall heed your
advice and will try not to criticize you. You were going to explain to
me what psychoanalysis assumes to be the reason for neurosis and how
such conditions may be combated. There are quite a number of questions
which I shall ask you later on. At present, I am tempted to venture a
theory based on your own trend of thought.

“You have pointed out to me this interrelation between outer world, and
the ‘I’ and the ‘It.’ As an indispensable condition for the development
of a neurosis, you have mentioned the fact that the ‘I,’ on account of
its dependency on the outer world, opposes the ‘It.’ However, is not
some other course for the ‘I’ possible? For example, could not the ‘I,’
in such a conflict be simply swept off its feet by the ‘It,’ so to
speak, renouncing all dependency on the outer world?

“What, then, happens in such a case?

“Of course, I have merely the conception of the typical lay mind when it
comes to visualizing the development of mental diseases, but it seems to
me that such diseases may be easily induced if the ‘I’ would really
decide to side with the ‘It.’ To all appearances, such disregard for
realities is the very reason for mental diseases!”

Of course, I have thought of this myself. I even believe this assumption
to be correct. But in order to prove this hypothesis, quite a
complicated discussion would be necessary. Neurosis and Psychosis, to
all appearances, are closely related to one another. However, at some
important point, they widely diverge from each other. The partisanship
of the “I” with the “It,” in a case of conflict, may prove to be the
crossroad where the two seek different directions. In both cases, the
“It” would persist in its character of blind obstinacy.

“But, pray, tell me what advice your theory offers for the treatment of
neurotic conditions?”

It is quite simple to describe our therapeutic goal: We aim at
restituting the “I” and liberating it from its restrictions, restoring
to the “I” once more the sovereignty over the “It” which it lost, on
account of early repressions. Psychoanalysis, in general, aims at this
goal; our whole technique strives for this end. It is up to us to
discover those repressions, to induce the “I” to correct them with our
assistance, and to settle conflicts more satisfactory than by a mere
flight. Inasmuch as these repressions are part of our early childhood,
psychoanalysis must needs go back to those years of our life.

The way to those mostly forgotten conflict situations, which we must
revive in the memory of our “cases,” is pointed out to us by symptoms,
dreams, and “free associations” of the patient. Of course, all these
hints must first be interpreted, translated, as it were, because these
symptoms and dreams, under the influence of the psychology of the “It,”
have assumed various disguises which it is our purpose to penetrate.

If a patient communicates to us certain ideas, thoughts and memories
after long hesitation only, we feel safe in assuming that they have some
connection with his early repressions, or are, at least, derivates of
such. By encouraging the patient to conquer his hesitancy when talking
to us, we are training his “I” to overcome its tendency to “run away”
and rather face that early repression. At the end, after we have been
successful in reproducing the situation which originally induced his
repression, the complacency of the patient is splendidly rewarded. The
number of years that have meanwhile elapsed prove to be all in favor of
the patient. What once scared his immature “I” and threw it into panic
and flight, appears to the adult-strengthened “I” nothing more than just
a childish bugaboo.




                                   V


“Everything you spoke of so far pertained to psychology. Frequently it
sounded somewhat strange and far-fetched to me and altogether none too
clear. But at any rate, everything you said was, if I may say so, clean!
I admit, without hesitation, that I have never had more than just
superficial information in regard to psychoanalysis. However, I have
been told, time and again, that your psychoanalysis deals for the most
part, with things to which generally the word ‘clean’ may not be applied
readily.

“To be quite frank with you: I have a slight suspicion that, up to now,
you have intentionally avoided to touch upon this phase of
psychoanalysis.

“There is still another doubt in my mind which I cannot
suppress:—Neuroses, as you said yourself, are the result of disturbances
of our soul life. How is it possible, then, that such important factors
as our ethics, our conscience, our ideals, apparently do not enter at
all into the development of these far-reaching disturbances?”

I understand you quite well. It appears to you that in the information I
have given you so far, I have attached insufficient importance to the
most vulgar, as well as the most sublime aspects of the matter. The
reason for this is simply that, up to now, we have not spoken about the
substance of psychical life at all.

For once, permit me to delay the progress of our conversation.

I have told you so much about psychology, in order that you may see that
our analysis is just a part of applied psychology; to be sure, that part
of psychology which is unknown beyond the field of analysis. From this,
it follows that it must be the first task of the Analyst to become
acquainted with the Psychology of the Depths, or Psychology of the
Unconscious, to the very extent it is known today. It will be well to
bear this fact in mind, as we shall later on refer to it.

And now, I wish you would explain what you meant when referring to the
lack of “cleanliness” in psychoanalysis?

“Well, the general impression which prevails is that, in the course of
the analysis; the most intimate and the most revolting phases of sex
life are aired with all their sordid details. Of course, I do not draw
this conclusion from the lecture on psychology you have given me so far!
But if this is really true, it would constitute a strong argument in
favor of the demand that the practice of psychoanalysis should be
restricted to physicians. How else would it be possible to confide such
details to persons whose discretion may be open to doubt, and whose
character may not warrant such frankness on the part of a patient?”

It is true enough that physicians are privileged characters, as regards
sexual matters. In our times, physicians may even examine sex organs, a
prerogative denied to them in the dark ages.

However, you wished to know whether sexual matters play an important
part in psychoanalysis.

They do!

There is a necessity for this because, in the first place, frankness is
an indispensable condition for the efficacy of the analysis. But don’t
forget that, in the course of an analysis, the patient will be just as
frank in financial matters. He will give details which he otherwise
would withhold, not only from the tax collector and his competitors, but
practically from everybody. That such frankness on the part of the
patient puts the analyst under a heavy obligation, imposing upon him a
severe moral responsibility, I surely do not deny, but rather stress
energetically.

The second necessity for airing the sex life in psychoanalysis is proved
by the established fact that, among the reasons and causes for nervous
disturbances, phases of the sex life play a tremendously important, a
most essential part; they may even prove to be the specific reason of
such disturbances.

Could psychoanalysis, under such circumstances, do anything else than
adapt itself to this state of affairs? The analyst never persuades his
patient to venture into the realm of sex. He will never tell a patient
in advance: intimacies of your sex life are involved here! The analyst
permits the patient to start where he feels inclined to start,
encouraging him to roam in any fashion that suits his fancy, waiting
calmly for the patient himself to touch upon sex matters.

It is one of my strictest rules to remind my disciples time and again:
Our opponents are reiterating continuously that we shall run across
cases in which the sexual moment does not play any part whatever.
Therefore, beware of introducing it into the analysis! Do not let us
spoil the possibility of really discovering cases, in which there is no
sexual moment. To be sure, up to now, we have never been fortunate
enough to detect such a case.

Of course, I know very well that the recognition we give sex life
is—admitted or not—the strongest argument of those who oppose the
analysis. But is this fact liable to make us waver in our scientific
convictions? An argument of this kind only proves how widespread
neurosis is in civilized life, when allegedly normal people behave so
very much like nervous people.

At a time when learned societies, with much pomp and circumstance, used
to sit in judgment on psychoanalysis—they are not doing it so frequently
today!—one of the speakers once commanded special attention as an
authority because, according to his statement, he permitted his patients
to talk about their ailments. Apparently, he indulged in such tolerance
for reasons of diagnosis, and for the purpose of checking up analytical
claims. But, this great authority added, as soon as patients start to
discuss sex matters, I shut them up!

How does such a procedure strike you?

I regret to report that the learned audience applauded the great
authority fervently, instead of denouncing him, which would have been
more fitting. That loose logic in which the aforementioned authority
permitted himself to revel, I can only explain by assuming that he was
all puffed up with that strength which the knowledge of mutual prejudice
lent him.

In the course of years, some of my disciples, following a popular trend,
undertook to liberate the world from the bonds of sex which
psychoanalysis is supposed to force upon it. One of them came out with
the pronunciamento that sex, in the broad meaning of the term, does not
mean sexuality as such, but rather something abstract, something quite
mysterious. Another even emphatically declared that sex life was just
one of the different phases in which man manifests his inherent driving
force for power and rule. These new doctrines received public acclaim—at
least for a time.

“I strongly feel like taking sides in this issue. It seems somewhat
far-fetched to me to insist that sexuality is not a natural, innate
necessity for all living beings, but rather the expression for something
else. Just look upon the animal world!”

That does not matter! There is nothing absurd enough that society would
not gleefully swallow, if it only pretends to be an antidote against the
overpowering might of sex.

By the way, may I not tell you that, to my mind, your present status as
an impartial listener, a lay arbitrator, as it were, should not permit
you to betray the strong prejudice you yourself are manifesting, in
regard to the great part the sexual moment plays in the development of
neurotic conditions! Do you not think that such a strongly emphasized
prejudice may make it impossible for you to render a just verdict?

“I am very sorry to hear you say that! Apparently, you have lost
confidence in me. But, pray, tell me, why did you not appeal to some
other impartial referee?”

For the simple reason that this other impartial referee would not have
thought any differently from you. And in case he would have been ready
to admit at once the importance of sex life, everybody would have
howled: He is no impartial referee at all! He is one of your own camp
followers!

No, I am not the least discouraged and I am not abandoning hope that I
shall ultimately succeed in influencing your views. I will admit,
however, that the present case is different from the one I have
previously alluded to. As far as orthodox psychological argumentation
was concerned, it did not matter much for me whether you believed what I
said or not. It was merely important to impress you with the fact that
purely psychological problems were being dealt with. However, when the
question of sex is raised, it seems important to prove to you that the
strongest reason for your opposition is nothing but a general animosity
toward sex, which you have in common with many others.

“Do not forget that I lack the experiences upon which your firm
convictions are based.”

Very well, then. I shall proceed.

Sex life is not only something piquant, but also a very serious
scientific problem. Many new facts had to be ascertained in this phase
of life, many peculiarities. I have already explained to you that it is
necessary for the analysis to go back to the years of early childhood
because at this time, with an immature “I,” still weak, the essential
repressions of a patient are incepted. But childhood has no sex
life;—sex life enters with puberty only, is the general claim.

Wrong!

We have discovered that sexual tendencies permeate life from very birth.
We also ascertained that it is to combat these urges that the infantile
“I” resorts to repressions. It is indeed remarkable, is it not, that
even the wee babe fights against the very same sexuality against which
that learned great authority talked before an equally learned
audience;—and later on, those of my own disciples, even, who compiled
some new theories!

How is that possible?

The most platitudinous explanation would be that our whole civilization
unfolded at the expense of sexuality. However, there is much more to be
said about this.

That only now the sexuality of the child has been discovered, ought to
drive the blush of shame into our faces. Of course, there were always
some specialists of children’s diseases, some baby-wise nurses who knew
about it. On the other hand, men, calling themselves “child
psychologists,” in the face of these findings, raised a hue and cry and,
wringing their hands in desperation, spoke reproachfully of the
“Defloration of Childhood!”

Again and again, sentiment instead of argument! Such tactics are
generally resorted to in the course of political discussions.

Of course, the sex life of the child is different from that of the
adult. Sexual functions, from the very beginning until they assume those
ultimate forms which are well known to us, undergo a process of
complicated development. Many component urges, each driving in a
different direction, eventually consolidate, ultimately to serve the
purpose of propagation.

Not all of the individual component urges prove of equal value, in view
of the ultimate task they are called upon to serve. Many of them have to
be “re-routed,” refashioned, partially subdued. Such a protracted
process of development cannot always be pursued smoothly, without
obstacles arising here and there and without engendering partial
fixations in the course of the earlier stages. Wherever, in later life,
sexual functions are blocked by obstacles of some kind, sexuality—the
libido, as we call it—will show a decided tendency to gravitate towards
such early fixations.

The study of the sex life of the child and its transformations, until
full maturity, has also yielded to us the key for the understanding of
so-called sexual perversions. These, while generally spoken of with
profound disgust, up to then had remained obscure as to their origin.
Although this phase of sex life is extraordinarily interesting, it does
not serve our present purpose to dwell upon it in detail. To understand
all these ramifications of sex life, it is not only necessary to possess
sufficient anatomical and physiological information, but also that
knowledge which cannot be acquired in medical schools, i. e., a thorough
acquaintance with the history of civilization and mythology.

“Up to now, I am still unable to gain a clear conception of the sex life
of the child.”

I shall, then, dwell on this phase further. To be perfectly frank with
you, I should really hate not to go into it further.

The most remarkable thing in the sex life of the child, to my mind, is
the fact that its whole, extensive development is completed in the
course of the first five years of life. From then, until the beginning
of puberty, there is a time when sex remains latent, a time during
which—normally—sexuality is not progressing but rather losing in
intensity. During these years, the child is liable to abandon and forget
much that he has practised and known before.

It is during this period after the first bloom of sex life has withered,
that such conceptions of the “I” develop as shame, disgust, morality,
destined to serve as support later on, in the storm and stress of
puberty, and to direct newly awakened sexual tendencies. This new,
second phase of sex life plays a very important part in the inception of
nervous disturbances. Apparently, it is only in man that this twofold
onset of sex life prevails. It is, perhaps, this which is one of the
contributing factors to the truly human prerogative to indulge in
neuroses.

Before the advent of psychoanalysis, the early period of sex life had
been overlooked, just as had the unconscious background of conscious
soul life. If you should now suspect that both belong together, you have
guessed correctly.

There is abundant material, of the greatest interest as to contents,
manifestations, and performances of this early period of sex
life,—material, as a matter of fact, that would prove most astonishing.

For example: It will amaze you, no doubt, when I tell you that the baby
boy is frequently afraid of being devoured by his father. (Does it not
surprise you that I list this fear among the manifestations of sex?)

Let me remind you here of the mythological character of the god Cronus,
who eats his own children. How this myth must have astounded you, when
it was related to you for the first time! Most probably, you, like the
rest of us, did not pause to ponder over it.

Today, we frequently recognize, in such fairytale characters as the
carnivorous wolf in Little Red Riding Hood, the child-devouring father
in disguise. Let me assure you that mythology, as well as the world of
fairytales, can be understood only on the basis of the sex life of the
child.

It may also surprise you to learn that the male child is beset with
fears of having his father rob him of his sex organ, and that this fear
of being castrated is of the greatest influence, in connection with the
general development of a male child’s character and his sexual
tendencies, in later life.

Here is another case where psychoanalysis may draw upon mythology for
support. Remember that the same Cronus who devoured his own children,
also emasculated his own father Uranos, to be castrated, in revenge, by
his son Zeus, who had been saved through the perspicacity of his mother.

In case you are inclined to believe that all that which has been said
about the early sexuality of children is just a phantasmagoria of the
wild fancies of a psychoanalyst, you must nevertheless admit that these
wild fancies are very similar to those ideas which permeated the
phantasy of primitive man, of which myths and fairytales are the
tangible record.

Does it not seem more acceptable and more probable that in the soul life
of present-day children, the same archaic moments still prevail, which
generally prevailed at the time of primitive civilization? To all
appearances, the child, in the development of his soul, simply
recapitulates the evolution of his species, analogous to the
recapitulation of his physical development, which has long since been
accepted by embryology.

Another characteristic of the early sexual life of the male child is
that the female sex organ as such does not play any part in it; it has
not been discovered for him yet. All interest is directed to the male
organ, all attention concentrated on the question of whether this organ
is really existent.

We know less about the early sex life of the female child than about
that of the male offspring,—a fact not so surprising since the sex life
of even the mature woman still presents a “dark continent” to
psychology. Nevertheless, we know that the female child is extremely
sensitive about the lack of a sex organ equal to that of the male child.
Accordingly, the girl comes to consider herself inferior to the boy,
developing a condition of “Penis Envy,” from which may be traced a whole
chain of reactions characteristic of the female.

Another characteristic of the child is that excremental discharges of
the body are drawn into the sphere of sexual interest. To be sure,
education eventually draws a strict line of demarkation here. Later in
life, however, this demarkation line is wiped out, when the stage of
“off-color jokes” sets in. Although this may be distasteful to us it is,
nevertheless, well known that the child requires some time, before he
develops a sense of disgust. Even those who insist upon the seraphic
purity of a child’s soul have never dared to deny this fact.

No other manifestation in the sex life of the child is more important
than the fact that sexual desires of a child always aim at persons most
closely related to him. Such inclinations lean primarily toward the
father and the mother; secondarily, toward sisters and brothers. While
for the boy, the mother is the first object of love, for the girl it is
the father, unless bisexual tendencies favor different inclinations.
That parent toward whom the sexual tendencies of the child do not
gravitate, comes to be considered a disturbing rival and thus, not too
rarely, becomes the object of intense enmity.

Be sure to understand me correctly. I do not mean to say that the child
is bent upon receiving from the favored parent, only such demonstrations
of affection which we adults are wont to consider the very essence of a
beautiful relationship between parent and child. In the light of
psychoanalysis, there is no doubt that the child desires much more than
merely these demonstrations of parental affection. As a matter of fact,
the child desires that which we conceive as sensual gratification,
though naturally, only to the limited extent of the child’s
understanding.

It is obvious enough that the child never surmises the real facts as to
the actual physical relations of the sexes, but this ignorance is
compensated by impressions and experiences deducted from his own
observations. Usually, a child’s desires culminate in the wish to give
birth to a baby, or beget one, in some vague manner.

Even the little boy, in his ignorance, has this desire to give birth to
a child.

Such manifestations, in their entirety, are termed, in accordance with
Greek mythology, Œdipus Complex.

Normally, an Œdipus Complex should be abandoned or thoroughly changed,
simultaneously with the termination of early sex life. The results of
this transformation of the Œdipus Complex are destined to bring about
great achievements, to play a big part in later soul life.

As a rule, this transformation is not thorough enough. Therefore, during
the period of puberty, the Œdipus Complex may be revived, in which case
it is liable to induce dire results.

I am very much surprised that you are still silent. Could this mean
agreement?

No doubt, if psychoanalysis maintains that the first sexual desires of a
child are of incestuous nature, to apply a technical term, there is no
question that psychoanalysis has again trodden upon humanity’s holiest
feelings, thus once more incurring accusations, disbelief, and
opposition.

Psychoanalysis always had to face grave incriminations, but nothing has
robbed psychoanalysis of a favorable opinion on the part of its
contemporaries more than the conception of the Œdipus Complex, as a
general human characteristic, decreed by fate.

To be sure, Greek mythology must have similarly interpreted the Œdipus
situation, but the majority of our contemporaries—be they learned or
not—prefer to believe that nature herself has endowed us with an inborn
disgust, as a protection against the possibility of an incestuous trend.

But here we may refer to history for corroboration. When Cæsar met
Egypt’s youthful queen, soon to play such an important part in his life,
Cleopatra was married to her younger brother Ptolemy. This was nothing
extraordinary in Egyptian dynastic tradition. The Ptolemæëns, originally
of Greek extraction, had simply continued a custom practised for
thousands of years by their predecessors, the old Pharaohs. Incestuous
relationships, a common practice at that time, were after all, only
between brother and sister, which even today evokes a comparatively mild
judgment. But let us turn to our most important witness—mythology—for
conditions, as they prevailed in primitive times.

Mythology records that the myths, not only of the Greeks, but of all
nations, supply an over-abundance of amorous relations between father
and daughter, and even between mother and son; cosmology, as well as
genealogy, of royal families was founded on incest.

According to your mind, what was the underlying reason for the creation
of this lore? Was it to brand gods and kings as criminals, to invite the
disgust of mankind upon their heads?

It was rather that the gratification of incestuous desires—an ancient,
human heritage, never completely overcome—was still permissible for gods
and their offspring, although renounced by the majority of common
mortals.

From this, it would appear, that incestuous desires, in the childhood of
the individual, are in complete harmony with the teachings of history
and mythology.

“I am glad that you did not stand by your original intention to withhold
from me all this information, in regard to the sex life of the child,
inasmuch as it throws a very interesting light on the more primitive
stage of humanity.”

I was afraid that in so doing, I might digress too far. But, after all,
it may prove of advantage that you have these informations now.

“But tell me, what proofs have you, from an analytical point of view, of
the sex life of the child? Is your conviction founded merely on the
corroboration that mythology and history offer?”

Not at all! Our conviction rests upon direct observations. Here is how
we arrived at our conclusions:—In the first place, sex life of childhood
was revealed to us in the analysis of adults, who volunteered this
information. Then, we proceeded to analyse children, and it was no small
triumph when we succeeded in proving everything which we had deducted
from the information of adults, despite the fact that as regarded the
adults, twenty to forty years had passed, during which time these
memories had been submerged and undergone substantial changes.

“What! You really ventured to analyse little children, tots of less than
six years? How could such a thing be done at all? And wasn’t that
hazardous, as far as the children were concerned?”

It was easy enough to do.

You would hardly believe what takes place in the brain of a child of
four or five years. At this age, children are mentally very alert. For
them, the period of early sexuality is also a period of intellectual
bloom. I am under the impression that children, with the beginning of
the period of latency, experience a mental let-down; grow temporarily
dull, so to speak. During this period, many children also begin to lose
their physical charm.

As far as possible damage, arising from an early analysis is concerned,
let me assure you that the first child to undergo this experiment—about
twenty years ago—has meanwhile grown up to be a sound and efficient
young man who, despite severe psychological traumata, passed through his
pubescent period without complaint. This fact encourages me to expect
that all the other “victims” will not fare any worse.

Analyses of children yield various interesting results. Possibly, in
future, they will grow in importance. As far as theoretical findings are
concerned, there can be no doubt as to the value of these analyses. As
children give unequivocal information on questions which only yield hazy
results in the analyses of adults, the analyst is protected against
mistakes which might have proved to be serious. Analyses of children
have the added advantage, in that those moments are seized upon unaware,
when a neurosis is in the process of development. There can be no
mistake about such observations in children.

To be sure, in the interest of the child, it is necessary to combine
analytical influence with educational measures. This is a technique
still to be perfected. There is practical interest attached to this
problem, because observations prove that a great number of our children,
during their period of development, pass through a clearly discernable
neurotic phase. Ever since we perceived these things more keenly, we
have been tempted to venture that neurotic conditions of children are
not the exception, but rather the rule. It appears that in view of
infantile tendencies to neuroses, such trend of developments cannot be
avoided in the course of civilisatoric progress. In most cases, such
neurotic taints are spontaneously thrown off during childhood. The
question remains, however, whether traces of them are not frequently
left, even in such individuals as are considered of average health.

On the other hand, there is no neurotic adult in whom infantile
tendencies toward neuroses cannot be discerned, although originally they
may not necessarily have been so very obvious. Analogous to this,
specialists for internal diseases claim, I believe, that every
individual during the time of his childhood passes through a tubercular
condition.

Let me return to your question of proofs.

From direct analytical observation of children, we concluded that in
general the information which adults had given us, in reference to their
childhood, had been correctly interpreted by us. In some cases, it was
even possible to obtain confirmation of a different kind. For
example:—From material unearthed by the analysis, it was possible to
reconstruct certain occurrences and impressive events of childhood, of
which the conscious memory of the patient was no longer aware. Fortunate
accidents or information supplied by parents and educators yielded
unquestionable proof that the analyst had correctly reconstructed these
impressions and experiences of childhood.

Such proof, of course, could not be obtained very frequently, but
whenever it was obtained, it created an overpowering impression. You
must know that the correct reconstruction of such forgotten experiences
of childhood always results in a tremendous therapeutic effect, no
matter whether such reconstructions may be objectively confirmed or not.
The importance attached to these events is naturally derived from the
fact that these experiences occurred in early childhood, when they could
still affect the feeble “I” traumatically.

“What may those events be which analysis must unearth for therapeutic
purposes?”

Events of various nature.

In the first place, impressions strong enough to permanently influence
the awakening sex life of the child, such as observation of sexual
intercourse between adults or personal sexual experiences with an adult
or some other child—occurrences not at all rare. Then, overhearing the
conversation of adults, at a time when the child did not fully
comprehend the significance, but which, when the child came to grasp the
real meaning, conveyed to him knowledge to be coveted because of the air
of secrecy and mystery attached to it. Furthermore, utterances and
actions of the child himself, demonstrating a decidedly tender or else
hateful inclination toward other persons. It is of special importance,
in the course of the analysis, to revive cases of forgotten personal
sexual indulgence, and the interference of adults which served to
terminate these habits.

“It seems to be my turn, now, to ask a question which I have had on my
mind for a long time. What do you call ‘sexual indulgence’ of a child,
during his period of early sexuality which, as you say, is a time that
was completely overlooked before the advent of psychoanalysis?”

Of course that which is usual and essential in this indulgence had not
been overlooked. This is not so remarkable, because it simply couldn’t
be overlooked. Sexual tendencies of the child find their expression
mainly in masturbation. That this childish “naughtiness” is
extraordinarily common was always known to adults. It is considered a
grave sin, to be energetically suppressed.

But please do not ask me how such “immoral” tendencies in children—and
children admit that they indulge in them because they give them
pleasure!—can co-exist with that inborn purity and non-sensuality of
which we love to prate. You had better ask our opponents to solve this
puzzle for you.

A much more important problem is facing us now:—What is the position to
take towards sexual indulgence in early childhood?

There is not the slightest doubt as to the responsibility incurred by
suppressing such actions and, on the other hand, one dare not permit it
to go on, limitless.

It appears that sexuality of children is unrestricted among peoples of
low civilization and in the lower strata of civilized people. Such
tolerance may amount to a strong protection against the possibility of
neuroses cropping up in later years, but the question is whether there
does not then remain a concurrent, extraordinary loss in regard to an
individual’s aptness for cultural achievements. It seems we are facing a
case of Scylla and Charybdis there.

However, I shall leave it to you to decide whether such interest, as the
study of sex life may have for neurotics, would tend to create an
atmosphere, favorable for the awakening of libidinous desires.




                                   VI


“I think I know now what your intentions are:—You wish to show me just
what knowledge is necessary for the practice of psychoanalysis, so that
I may be able to judge whether physicians alone shall be permitted to
apply this method. Up to now, you have mainly discussed psychology, and
a little biology or sex science, without a decided medical slant.
However, I may not have heard everything yet.”

Certainly not. There are still a number of gaps to be filled. But may I
ask you a favor? Will you be good enough to describe to me how you
imagine psychoanalytical treatment is applied? Just pretend as if it
were up to you to analyse a patient.

“Well, I may make quite a mess of this! It is surely not my intention to
settle the argument between us, on the basis of such an experiment.
However, I shall do as you ask. After all, the responsibility falls upon
your shoulders.

“Now then: I assume that the patient comes to see me and embarks upon a
recital of his complaints. I promise him to cure, or at least improve,
his condition, provided that he will follow my instructions. Then, I
would ask him to tell me, in all frankness, what he knows, what ideas
enter his mind. I should also request him to make a clean breast of
everything, even though there may be things which he would hate to
mention. Am I adhering to your methods?”

You are! But, in addition you should have the patient tell you all his
thoughts, even if they seem unimportant to him or lacking in sense.

“Very well.—The patient, then, starts to relate his story and I listen.
And what next? Oh, yes, his information will make it possible for me to
conclude what impressions, experiences and desires he may have
repressed, because he came face to face with them at a time when his ‘I’
was still weak and too intimidated to face the dilemma squarely.

“After I have told that to the patient, he will reconstruct the old
situations and correct his reactions to them with my assistance. Thus,
the repressions, his ‘I’ had been forced to resort to, will disappear
and he is cured.—Is that correct?”

Very good, indeed.—I already foresee that more people are going to
reproach me for having trained a non-medical man to practise
psychoanalysis. I surely must admit that you digested what I told you.

“I have only repeated what you told me, like reciting something that has
been committed to memory.

“But I do not feel able to clearly visualize how I really would go about
it. I cannot understand why such an analysis should require an hour or
more a day, for a period of months. As a rule, the average human being
has not met with so many experiences. And as far as repressions during
childhood are concerned, I assume that these are probably identical in
all cases.”

There are many new experiences to make in the course of an analysis.

For example: You would find that it is not so simple at all, from the
information a patient may volunteer, to draw conclusions as to those of
his experiences which he has forgotten, the urges which he once
repressed.

A patient may tell you something which, at the moment, has just as
little sense for you as for him. You will have to make up your mind that
the material which the patient lays before you, in accordance with the
instruction you gave him, must be interpreted in a special way.
Analogous, perhaps, to the treatment iron ore receives for the purpose
of extracting from it valuable steel by some special process. In
retaining this picture, for the purpose of comparison, you must know
that tons and tons of iron ore contain only very little of the valuable
steel for which you are looking. This is one reason which would account
for the fact that psychoanalytical treatment is such a long drawn-out
process.

“But how is this ‘iron ore’ to be converted, to apply your comparison
once more?”

By assuming that the information and ideas of a patient are nothing but
distorted pictures of those impressions and experiences you are trying
to unearth. Hints, as it were, from which you would have to conclude
what is really behind them. To press it into a formula: the information
a patient yields, be it memories, ideas or dreams, will have to be
interpreted first. This interpretation, of course, must be guided by the
expectations you formed of the case on the basis of professional
knowledge, while listening to the patient’s recital.

“‘Interpretation’! What a dreadful word! I do not like to hear this term
because, in applying it, you are depriving me of all confidence. If
everything depends on my interpretation, who is going to assure me that
my interpretation is correct? Such a state of affairs, according to my
mind, simply means that everything is left to fancies and whims.”

Just a moment, now! Things are not as bad as all that. Why exclude
processes of your own soul from the same rule which you are ready to
admit to that of others?

Provided you have acquired a certain self-discipline and are in the
possession of sufficient information, your interpretations will not be
influenced by personal peculiarities, and are bound to prove correct.

Do not draw the conclusion from this that it is my opinion that the
personality of the analyst does not make any difference, for this phase
of the analysis. A certain sensitiveness for that which was
unconsciously repressed, is necessary; also an aptness with which
everybody is not equally endowed. Most of all, it is here where the
absolute necessity for a thorough and searching self-analysis of the
analyst is proved, for the purpose of precluding any prejudice that may
drag a distorted element into the interpretation.

One thing, of course, still remains: Personal Equation, which, as an
element of individuality, is destined to play a much more important part
in psychoanalysis than anywhere else. Although an abnormal man may
develop into an expert physicist, an analyst will always be handicapped
by his own anomalies, when it comes to conceive pictures of soul life,
free from distortions.

Inasmuch as it is impossible to prove to anybody his anomalies, general
unanimity in the matter of Psychology of the Depths will prove
especially difficult to achieve. There are even a handful of
psychologists who claim it to be practically impossible ever to achieve
such unanimity, and who also insist that every fool is entitled to
proclaim his special brand of foolishness as wisdom.

I admit I am more optimistically inclined. After all, our experiences
prove that, even in psychology, harmony of opinion may be achieved to a
tolerably satisfactory degree. No doubt, each individual realm of
science presents its own individual difficulties which have to be
eliminated. Moreover, there are some aspects of the art of
interpretation, as applied in analysis which, like some other knowledge,
may be acquired by study. For example, those aspects pertaining to the
peculiarly indirect representation by symbols.

“To be frank with you: I have lost all ambition, even to dabble
theoretically with the application of psychoanalysis. Heaven knows what
further surprises are still in store for me!”

You are perfectly correct to abandon such an intention.

You have already convinced yourself how much training and practice is
necessary. And once you have found the correct interpretations, a new
problem presents itself. It is then up to you to lay in wait and
virtually pounce upon the correct, the psychological moment, if you wish
to acquaint your patient of your interpretations with the idea of
benefiting him.

“How to tell what is the psychological moment?”

That is a matter of extreme tact which, by the way, may be greatly
improved through experience. You would commit a very grave error if you
would fling your interpretation, as soon as it had been ascertained, at
the patient. This would only lead to resistance, refusal, indignation,
but never result in his “I” getting a firm hold of whatever it was that
caused his repressions. It is an iron clad rule to permit your patient
to approach this elusive cause of repression close enough, to make it
possible for him to obtain an immediate and strong grip on it, under the
correctly timed guidance of the interpretation you may suggest.

“I am very much afraid that I would never master this art. But suppose
that I observe this rule strictly, then what?”

Then it will be your lot to make a discovery which you did not expect to
make.

“What kind of a discovery?”

That you had an entirely wrong opinion about your patient. That there is
no reason in the world for you to depend on his coöperation or
complacency. That, as a matter of fact, your patient is resolved to
raise as many obstacles as possible against your combined exertions.
With one word: that he does not altogether want to get well!

“Well, that is about the most ludicrous statement you have made so far!
I simply don’t believe it! The patient, suffering so intensely,
complaining so heartrendingly, sacrificing so much to be cured, actually
does not want to get well! Is it possible you really mean what you say?”

I mean every word of it! What I have just stated is the truth. Not the
whole truth, but a good deal of it. The patient wants, yet does not
want, to get well. Because his “I” has lost its unity of purpose, it is
preventing him from summing up undivided will power. Were the state of
affairs a different one, our patient would not be a neurotic!

The results of his repression have simply invaded his “I,” firmly
holding their ground there, so to speak. The “I” is wielding just as
little influence over these effects as over the repression itself.
Usually, the “I” is not at all aware of the prevailing state of affairs.
These patients are of a peculiar type, putting difficulties in our way
which we do not expect to encounter. All our social institutions are
organized to fit individuals with a unified, normal “I,” which may be
classified as either good or bad. This “I” either functions properly, or
is impeded by some overwhelming influence. Thus, the forensic
alternative: mentally responsible or not responsible.

But all these standard terms do not fit the neurotic!

Doubtless, it is difficult to adapt the demands of social life to their
psychological condition. During the War, this was proved to a great
extent.

Were those neurotics who shirked from military duty, pretending illness,
simulants or not?

They were both!

As soon as such patients were treated as simulants, by making it
uncomfortable for them to indulge in sickness, they recuperated; and as
soon as allegedly cured patients had been returned to the rank and file,
they once more became ill. There was simply no way to deal effectively
with them.

Analogous to this is the case of the neurotic in everyday life.

They complain about their sickness, at the same time exploiting it to
the limit. As a matter of fact, if an attempt is made to cure them of
their ailment, they will protect this most cherished possession of
theirs with the selfsame fervor with which a lioness defends her
offspring. But there would be no sense in blaming neurotics for the
contradictory behavior they display.

“Would it not be best, then, not to treat such difficult people at all?
Simply leave them to themselves? It seems to me that it cannot possibly
be worthwhile to spend as much effort on them as appears necessary,
according to what you say.”

I do not agree with you on this point.

Doubtless, it seems wiser to simply submit to the complications which
life presents, rather than to fight them. Not each and every one of the
neurotics we treat may be worth the exertions of an analysis, but there
are surely enough worthwhile individuals among them. It must be our goal
to decrease the number of persons who are forced to face the
exasperations of civilized life with a soul insufficiently prepared. To
this end, we must collect experience upon experience, and come to fully
grasp many problems. Every analysis is bound to prove instructive,
yielding new knowledge, aside from the personal benefit it may confer
upon an individual patient.

“Supposing that the ‘I’ of a patient developed such tendencies which
would make him wish to retain the sickness of which he complains, would
not these tendencies be justified, on the basis of certain reasons and
motives? It is impossible for me to understand why somebody should want
to be sick. What satisfaction could he derive from that?”

Just remember the war neurotics who were exempt from duty, because they
were considered sick. In everyday life, sickness may be successfully
employed as a screen, behind which to hide professional insufficiencies,
or—in the circle of family life—as a means to induce relatives to make
sacrifices, demonstrations of affection, or to foist one’s will upon
them, generally. All this is quite obvious and comes under the term
“sickness profit” (analogous to war profit). It is remarkable, however,
that the neurotic, or rather his “I,” proves unable to grasp the
connection of such motives with their logical consequences.

The influence of such tendencies to gain “sickness profit” is combated,
by forcing the “I” to become aware of them. But there are still other,
more obscure motives, for holding on to sickness, which cannot be
disposed so easily. As a matter of fact, these reasons cannot be
understood, without venturing once more into the sphere of psychological
theories.

“Oh, go right ahead! A little theory, more or less—what does it matter?”

When I explained to you the relations between the “I” and the “It,” I
withheld from you an important part of the soul apparatus. You see,
within the “I” itself, there persists a particular faction which we call
the “Super-Ego.”

This “Super-Ego” enjoys a privileged position between the “I” and the
“It.” It belongs to the “I,” sharing with it its intricate psychological
make-up. On the other hand, it entertains very close relations with the
“It.” The “Super-Ego” is in reality the record of first impressions as
conceived by the “It”; it is the heir of the dissolved Œdipus Complex.

This “Super-Ego,” as a matter of fact, is able to oppose the “I,” act
towards it as if it were something inferior and, in general, treat it
almost with contempt. For the “I” it is just as important to remain in
agreement with the “Super-Ego” as with the “It.” Disagreement between
the “Super-Ego” and the “I” is of far-reaching consequences for the soul
life.

Doubtless, you have already surmised that the “Super-Ego” is the agent
of that phenomenon which we call our conscience.

For the maintenance of healthy soul life, it is very important that the
“Super-Ego” develop normally, that is, becomes sufficiently impersonal.
It is just this development which is insufficient in the neurotic,
because his Œdipus Complex was not properly transformed. His
“Super-Ego,” in regard to the “I,” still assumes the rôle of the strict
father to the child, with the morality of the “I” manifesting itself in
a primitive manner by meekly submitting to punishment, meted out by the
“Super-Ego.” Sickness is resorted to, as the means of this
“self-punishment.” The neurotic, behaving as if under a burden of guilt
accepts sickness as a punishment to assuage this feeling of delinquency.

“That sounds very mysterious. But the most remarkable thing seems to be
that the patient remains unconscious of the power of his conscience.”

Well, we are only now beginning to appreciate the importance of all
these vital conditions. That is the reason why my explanations were so
puzzling to you. But now, I believe I can continue.

All those agents which oppose the recuperation of a patient, we term the
“resistance” of the patient. While “sickness profit” is the source of
such resistance, the “unconscious feeling of guilt” represents the
resistance of the “Super-Ego” of which, as the strongest factor, we are
very much in fear.

But there are other manifestations of resistance which become evident in
the process of treatment.

If the “I,” at an early period, was induced through fear, to take
recourse to a repression, this fear still persists, manifesting itself
now as a resistance, as soon as the “I” approaches that which was
repressed. It is easy enough to realize that difficulties may be
encountered, if a certain tendency, which for decades has proceeded
along a specific course, is suddenly expected to swing into a new path
opened to it.

Such a condition may be termed the resistance of the “It.”

The battle against all these resistances is our main work during the
analytical treatment, in comparison with which the task of
interpretation almost fades into insignificance. But by this battle and
the ensuing defeat of resistances, the “I” of the patient is so
transformed and strengthened that his future behavior, after the
termination of the treatment, may be regarded with complete equanimity.

On the other hand, you will understand now why our treatment is so
protracted. Expanse and multifariousness of the material are not as
decisive factors as the question of whether the way is clear. Remember
that the same course, which in times of peace, may be traveled in a few
hours by railroad, may take an army, during wartime, weeks and weeks,
because the resistance of the enemy must first be overcome. Battles to
overcome resistance require time in soul life also. I am sorry to say
that, up to now, all exertions to shorten the duration of analytical
treatments to any appreciable degree, have proved unavailing. It seems
that the best way to shorten the length of the treatment, is simply to
apply it as correctly as possible.

“If I ever felt the temptation to dabble with your science and to
attempt to analyze a patient, your information in reference to those
resistances, that may be encountered, cured me thoroughly of any such
ambition.

“But, tell me about the element of personal influence which you have
admitted is present in the analysis. Is this not a valuable factor in
the battle against resistance?”

I am glad that you bring this question up. This personal influence is
our strongest dynamic weapon; it is the agent which we introduce as
something new, into the analytical situation, thus lending it impetus.

This could never be accomplished by the intellectual substance of our
interpretation alone because the patient, sharing all the prejudices of
his environment, need not have more faith in us than our scientific
critics. The neurotic coöperates with the analyst simply because he
believes in him, and he believes in him because he gradually develops a
certain sentimental trend toward the analyst. A child, also, believes
only persons to whom it is attached.

I have already told you how we employ this especially great “suggestive”
influence. Not to suppress the symptoms—it is here where the analytical
method is utterly unlike any other psycho-therapeutical method!—but as a
driving power to induce the “I” of the patient to defeat his
resistances.

“And suppose you succeed? Would that insure easy sailing from then on?”

Such ought to be the case. But an unexpected complication arises.

It was perhaps the greatest surprise for the analyst to observe that the
sentimental relations which the patient endeavors to establish, are of a
very particular nature. Already the first physician who attempted
analysis—it was not I—discovered this phenomenon, which served to
bewilder him intensely. These sentimental relations are, to express it
bluntly, of an amorous nature. Remarkable, isn’t it, if you take into
consideration the fact that the analyst does nothing to invite such
emotions, but rather endeavors to maintain distance, sentimentally
speaking, between the patient and himself.

All this is so much more remarkable, as these odd sentimental relations
utterly disregard all such obstacles, as difference in age, sex, and
social strata. This amorousness appears fated. Not that it constitutes a
characteristic otherwise alien to spontaneous love. You are well aware
that the contrary of this may be only too frequently observed. Although
it is the rule in the analytical situation, the latter, as such, cannot
serve as a rational explanation for this development. To all
appearances, nothing else should result from the relation between the
patient and the analyst, than just a certain measure of respect,
confidence, gratitude and humane sympathy. However, what really results
from it is this condition of attachment, which in itself gives the
impression of being some disorder.

“Well, I should say that such a development would tend to favor
analytical purposes. If one is enamoured, one is complacent and ready to
do almost anything for love’s sweet sake.”

Of course, in the beginning, this condition favors the analysis, but
later on, when these sentimental relations gradually become intensified,
displaying their inherent nature, difficulties crop up which do not
promote the aim of the analysis. You see, an enamoured patient is not
satisfied merely to obey the analyst. The patient becomes presumptuous,
demanding tenderness and sensual gratification. Eventually, jealousy
develops and the lovelorn patient gradually arrives at a stage where
more and more clearly, a preparedness for enmity and revenge is shown.
Simultaneously, analogous to any other form of love, all other impulses
of the soul are repressed, submerging the interest in treatment and
recuperation. There is no doubt that love has assumed the place of the
neurosis, and that our labors have simply resulted in substituting one
disturbance for another.

“That sounds hopeless. What can be done? Perhaps analysis in such a case
should be discarded. But since you say that every case yields this
result, then analysis in general would have to be discarded.”

First, let us take stock of the situation in order to learn from it.
Whatever is thus gained may assist us in mastering the situation. After
all, is it not quite remarkable that we should succeed in transforming a
neurotic condition into a state of unwholesome attachment?

Our conviction that neurotic conditions arise partly from abnormally
directed sentimental tendencies, gains unquestionable corroboration by
our findings. Ascertaining these facts, we feel more assured and dare to
make this enamoured condition the object of analysis.

We also make another observation. This condition of amorousness, as part
of the analysis, is not always so apparent in all cases, as I have tried
to picture it to you.

And why isn’t that the case? We shall soon see.

In the same measure as the sensual and hostile aspects of a patient’s
attachment endeavor to manifest themselves, the inherent opposition of
the patient against such tendencies asserts itself. He combats them and
attempts to repress them, before our very eyes. Thus we come to
comprehend the whole development:—The patient merely repeats, in the
form of being enamoured with the analyst, experiences of his soul life
of days gone by. Certain tendencies of his soul, ready to burst forth,
and closely connected with the inception of his neurosis, have simply
been transferred by him to the analyst. He also repeats before our eyes
all those gestures of opposition, gone through before, and would like
nothing so much as to repeat in his relations with the analyst, all the
phases of that forgotten period of his life.

What the patient is showing us now is accordingly the very nucleus of
the most intimate story of his life. He is reproducing this nucleus in a
tangible form, as if actual, instead of just remembering this incipient
stage of his condition. Thus, the riddle of transferred love has been
solved and the analysis, with the assistance of this new discovery
which, for a time, almost seemed to wreck it, may be continued.

“That is surely complicated. Does the patient believe so easily that he
is not in love, and merely feels forced to revive an old episode, as it
were?”

Everything now depends upon the greatest dexterity in handling this
“transference,” to achieve our objective. You will easily see that the
demands of the analytical technique at this point are very exacting. It
is here where the most serious mistakes may be committed, or the most
splendid results achieved. Any attempt to evade these difficulties, by
suppressing or neglecting the transference, would be senseless. Such
evasion would not be deserving of the term of analysis. To send a
patient home, as soon as the discomfort of a transference neurosis
manifests itself, would also be senseless and would amount to cowardice.
It would be approximately analogous to calling forth spirits and then
running away, as soon as they put in their appearance.

Of course, there is no other way out sometimes. There are cases in which
it is impossible to master an unshackled transference, and the analysis
must then be terminated. But at least one should wrestle with these evil
spirits to the best of one’s ability.

To give in to the demands of a transference—the desires of a patient for
tenderness or sensual gratification—is impossible, not only for moral
reasons but also as it would prove impractical, if resorted to as a
means to achieve a successful analysis. A neurotic cannot be healed, by
being permitted to indulge in uncorrected repetitions of situations
which he unconsciously prepared. When making a compromise with a
neurotic, by meeting him halfway, it is necessary to take care not to be
manœuvred into the ludicrous position of the clergyman, who tried to
convert the insurance agent with the result that the insurance agent did
not join the church, but the clergyman took out a policy.

The only way out of the dilemma of transference is to delve into the
past of the patient and reconstruct events as they were actually lived
through by the patient, or else only pictured, with the assistance of
his urge-stimulated imagination. For all this, the analyst requires much
dexterity, patience, calmness and self-effacement.

“And where, do you think, did the neurotic meet the original of this
transference love?”

In his childhood, and, as a rule, in one of his parents. You will
readily remember how much importance we had to attach to these earliest
of all sentimental relations. Here, the circle is completed.

“You have finished, then? To be frank with you, I am quite bewildered by
all you have told me. But, now pray tell me, where to study all that is
necessary to practise analysis?”

Two institutes serve this purpose by giving instruction in
psychoanalysis. The first is in Berlin, in charge of Dr. Max Eitigon of
the local organization. The second is maintained by the Vienna
Psychoanalytical Society, with great sacrifice. The authorities, up to
now, have thrown many obstacles in the path of the young institute. A
third institute will be opened in London, by the local organization
there and will be under the direction of Dr. E. Jones.

In all these institutes, the disciples themselves are analysed, and are
then given theoretical instruction in all subjects important for them.
When permitted to analyse their first, simple cases, they have the
advantage of being under the supervision of more experienced analysts.
The course usually requires about two years, but even after this period,
a disciple is still a beginner, and not by far to be considered a
master. What else the young analyst needs, he acquires thorough
practice, and by intercourse with older colleagues.

The preparatory work for the analytical training is not at all simple:
the work is hard, the responsibility tremendous.

Whoever attended such a course, has been analysed himself, has grasped
the Psychology of the Unconscious, as far as it can be taught today, is
sufficiently versed in the science of sex, and has acquired the
difficult technique of psychoanalysis, including the art of
interpretation, the method of combating resistances and the manner in
which to handle transferences, can no longer be considered a layman, in
the field of psychoanalysis. He is able to treat neurotic disturbances
and will, in time, be in a position to achieve all that may be expected
of this therapy.




                                  VII


“You have explained to me, at great length, what psychoanalysis is, and
what knowledge is necessary to practise it with a chance for success. It
certainly could not have hurt me to listen to you.

“However, I do not see how your informations are expected to influence
my personal view. Neuroses, it would appear, are a certain form of
disturbance, and psychoanalysis a certain method to treat such cases—a
special medical treatment, as it were.

“I understand that it is the rule that any physician who intends to
specialize in the one phase or the other of his science is not satisfied
with the training he received before winning his diploma, but rather
goes on studying the intricacies of his special field. This is
especially a necessity, in case he intends to establish himself in a big
city, the only place which opens a satisfactory field for specialists.
Anybody who is going to specialize in surgical work, will practise, for
a few years, in the surgical ward. Corresponding specialized work will
be taken up by the eye or the nose and throat specialist, and the
psychiatrist may forever remain on the staff of a city or county
institution or a private sanitarium.

“The same method of development may be expected of the psychoanalyst.
Whoever decides to take up this new medical specialty, after finishing
his studies proper, will have to attend those institutes, for the
duration of two years, which you have mentioned before, provided it
really takes as long as that to gain the necessary knowledge. He will
then also learn that it would be to his advantage to join a
psychoanalytical society, in order to remain in contact with his
colleagues.

“I really cannot understand why there is any necessity for raising this
question of lay-analyses?”

Any physician, proceeding along the lines you suggested, shall be
welcome to us. As a matter of fact, four-fifths of those whom I consider
my disciples, are physicians. However, permit me to enlighten you as to
relations, as they actually developed between physicians and
psychoanalysis, and what development they appear to be taking in the
future.

Past developments do not give physicians any right to claim a monopoly
of psychoanalysis. As a matter of fact, physicians, in the past, have
done about everything to damage psychoanalysis, beginning with
superficial mockery and going even so far as to indulge in serious
defamation. Of course, you may correctly say that all this belongs to
the past, and should not have any influence on the future. I fully
agree, but I am afraid that the future will not live up to your
expectations.

At this point, permit me to interpret for you the term of “quack,” not
in the way it is legally employed, but rather in the sense in which it
should be logically applied. As far as the law is concerned, a “quack”
is an individual who treats sick people, without being in the possession
of a diploma. I, however, would rather qualify the term “quack” in this
way: A “quack” is anybody who undertakes the treatment of a disease,
without having the indispensable knowledge and ability.

On the basis of this definition, I venture to assert that—not only in
the European countries—physicians, as far as psychoanalysis is
concerned, constitute the majority of “quacks.” Frequently, physicians
will employ psychoanalysis, without having studied it, and without
sufficiently understanding it.

Do not tell me that this would display a lack of conscience, which you
would not suspect in any physician. You might be tempted to say that,
after all, a physician ought to know that a medical diploma does not
constitute a “Letter of Marque,” and that a sick person should not be
considered outlawed. As far as a physician is concerned, it should be
taken for granted that he is proceeding in good faith, even if he makes
a mistake.

However, facts are facts. Let us hope that it will be possible to
explain these facts in a manner, which you apparently wish. I, for my
part, shall try to explain to you how it is possible that a physician,
in matters of psychoanalysis, takes liberties he would carefully avoid
in any other specialized field.

In the first place, it must be taken in consideration that the training
the medical student received is almost the very opposite of that which
would be required of him, as a preparation for psychoanalysis. His
attention has simply been focused upon facts which may be objectively
ascertained, such as present themselves in anatomy, physics, and
chemistry, and which must be understood properly and applied correctly,
to achieve results.

As far as the psychological aspects of life are concerned, no interest
is created in the medical student. The study of higher mental
achievements is not considered to belong within the field of medicine,
but rather into the realm of another science. Psychiatry alone is
supposed to attend to disturbances of psychological functions, and it is
only too well known in which way, and with what objective in view this
is done: psychiatry simply tries to discover the physical reasons for
psychological disturbances, treating them in turn like any other
ailment.

Psychiatry is correct in that respect, and medical training apparently
excellent. Should it be maintained that psychiatry is one-sided, it will
be necessary to fix the point of view from which such a reproach may
arise.

Inherently, all science is one-sided, and must be one-sided, inasmuch as
any science is limited to certain subjects, points of view, and methods.
It is a nonsense which I do not wish to support that one science may be
played against any other. Physics after all, does not minimize the value
of chemistry; it cannot replace the latter nor be substituted for it.
And, surely, psychoanalysis is especially one-sided, as the science of
the psychological Unconscious.

Thus, the right to one-sidedness should not be denied to medicine.

However, a more practical point of view is gained if observations are
not made as to scientific medicine, but rather as to practical healing.
Sick people, presenting complicated problems, should impress upon us the
fact that psychological manifestations—be they ever so hard to
comprehend—cannot be simply eliminated from the picture. The neurotic,
more than any other patient, presents an undesirable complication. He
offers a dilemma, not less embarrassing to medicine than to law.
However, as long as such cases exist, they are a responsibility
especially of medicine. Nevertheless, medical training, sorry to say, is
not paying sufficient attention to such conditions,—doing nothing for
them. Absolutely nothing at all!

As there are very close inter-relations between those things we consider
physical and those which we look upon as psychological, it may be
expected that the day will come when organic biology and chemistry will
finally approach the understanding of neurotic manifestations. This day,
to be sure, seems to be in the distant future. At present, such ailments
are still unapproachable, from a medical angle.

If medical training would only deny information to the student in the
field of neurosis, this would be tolerable. But medical training is
doing more. It implants into the young student an incorrect and harmful
point of view. Physicians, whose interest for psychological facts has
not been awakened, have naturally a tendency of making little of such
facts, going even so far as to decry them as unscientific. Conditions of
neurotic character are hardly ever taken seriously by them, while their
lack of knowledge serves to breed disrespect for psychological research.
Thus, neurosis is not accorded sufficient attention.

Of course, these neurotics must be treated when they consult physicians,
and new discoveries must be tried out right along. But why go in for a
protracted period of preparation? It can be done without that! After
all, who knows whether there is really any value to that which is taught
in psychoanalytical institutes?

Thus, as usual, lack of information results in a most daring spirit of
enterprise. Only true initiates are modest, because they realize how
insufficient their knowledge is!

From all this, it follows that it is impossible to draw upon a
comparison of psychoanalysis with other branches of medicine, as you
attempted to do.

As far as surgery, and ophthalmology, are concerned, medical schools and
post graduate courses offer sufficient opportunities for training. The
psychoanalytical institutes are limited in number, young in years, and
lack the aureola of authority. Medical science has not recognized them,
nor does it give a hoot about them. On the other hand, the young
physician who has been forced to believe his teachers, to such a degree,
that he hardly ever had a chance to form his own judgment, will only be
too glad to try his hand at playing the critic, in a field where there
is no established authority as yet.

There are still other circumstances which favor the mushroom-like
increase of young physicians as psychoanalytical “quacks.”

If a physician would undertake cataract operations, without sufficient
training as an eye specialist, he would soon enough lose his patients.
Compared to this, the application of psychoanalysis hardly involves any
danger. The public, generally observing effective cataract operations,
expects results from a physician pretending to be an eye specialist.
However, if a nerve specialist does not achieve results, apparently
nobody is surprised. We surely have not been spoiled by the efficacy of
therapeutical treatment of nerve cases, and it seems to suffice that the
physician “tried everything.” Nature must simply assert herself and time
exert its healing propensities.

If the patient happens to be a young girl, it is first the menstruation
which is expected to work wonders, then marriage, and in later years,
change of life. In the end, death itself may finally prove the great
healer.

Moreover, whatever the medical analyst employed in the treatment of such
a case, is so inconspicuous, as to offer no cause for reproach. After
all, he did not resort to instruments, nor did he write prescriptions.
He just talked and talked, trying either to talk something into the
patient, or out of the patient.

How could such treatment do any damage, especially as extreme care had
been taken not to touch upon painful or exciting matters? The medical
analyst, once he has thrown the strict instructions overboard that were
given to him, will surely have tried to improve upon psychoanalysis by
extracting from it certain features—poisonous fangs, as it were—to make
analysis more acceptable to the patient. How splendid, if he really went
only as far as that and not so far as to awaken resistances which he
would be unable to cope with. He would be apt to make himself disliked
in such a case!

Justice demands that it be admitted that an untrained analyst cannot do
as much harm to a patient, as an untrained surgeon. The possible injury
may amount to unnecessary expenditure of money and time, and chances for
a cure may have either been destroyed, or else spoilt to a certain
degree. In addition to this, the reputation of psychoanalytical therapy
as a whole would suffer. All this is quite undesirable, but surely not
as serious as the damage that may arise from the knife of a surgical
“quack.” According to my observations, permanent aggravation of an
ailment is not to be expected from the incorrect application of
psychoanalysis. Reactions of an undesirable nature disappear quickly. In
comparison to the traumata inflicted by life itself, which resulted in
the disturbances, a little incorrect treatment does not amount to
anything. The unsuitable therapeutical attempt has simply not benefited
the patient.

“I have listened to your description of the ‘quack’ without interrupting
you, and have gained the impression that your position in regard to
physicians is barbed with hostility. The reason for this enmity is
obvious, from the many hints you have dropped. At any rate, I am of the
opinion that as long as psychoanalysis is to be employed, it should be
only by such persons as are thoroughly trained for it. But it seems that
you believe that even those physicians who may take up psychoanalysis,
in the course of time, will not go in for the necessary thorough
training?”

Exactly! As long as the relation between the medical schools and the
psychological institutes prevail as they do today, I do not think that
young physicians will resist the temptation of making things easy for
themselves.

“It appears to me that you constantly avoid making any direct statement
in regard to the problem of lay-analyses. Apparently, what you wish me
to surmise now is that it would be your suggestion to withhold, as a
means of revenge, as an act of punishment, so to speak, the monopoly of
practising psychoanalysis from physicians, because such physicians as
employ analysis, are beyond control. You would, however, permit the
application of such medical activity to laymen.”

I am not so sure that you surmised my motives correctly. Perhaps, I may
later on be in a position to prove to you that my point of view is not
as partial as all that. But be that as it may, _I strongly emphasize my
demand that nobody should be permitted to practise psychoanalysis,
unless he has obtained this privilege on the basis of thorough
training_. Whether such a person is a qualified physician or not does
not seem important to me.

“What, then, are your practical suggestions?”

I am not as far as that yet. I don’t even know whether I shall ever get
that far. There is some other question which I wish to take up with you,
and by way of introduction, touch upon a certain point.

It is reported that the authorities, on the strength of suggestions made
by medical bodies, may put a sweeping prohibition for the practise of
psychoanalysis by laymen on the statute books. Such prohibition would
naturally also hit the non-medical members of psychoanalytical
societies—men and women who have undergone a very thorough training and
improved themselves greatly by practice. Should such a sweeping
prohibition become an actual fact, the incongruous condition would then
present itself whereby people really capable of applying psychoanalysis
properly, would be excluded from this practice, while on the other hand,
this privilege would be extended to individuals insufficiently informed,
and not specially trained for such work.

Of course, no legislature aims at so absurd an effect.

But the dilemma that presents itself with this piece of legislature, is
neither important nor difficult. It would concern only a handful of
people who would not even suffer appreciably. Analogous to measures
enacted by monarchical Austria, republican Austria could also resort to
exception laws. Under the Hapsburg régime, it happened that certain
“quacks” whose ability in the treatment of certain diseases was
convincing, were privileged _ad personam_ to treat sick people. These
were mostly cases of rustic healers, who enjoyed the recommendation of
one of those exalted, once so plentiful, archduchesses. However, it
should be possible to assume that the benefit of such exception laws
should also pertain to city inhabitants, who are recommended by mere
experts.

Of course, if the law is put on the statutes in accordance with the
wording of the bill now pending, the Vienna Psychoanalytical Institute,
for example, would no longer be permitted to accept students, unless
they belonged to the medical profession. All these endeavors to restrict
the application of psychoanalysis hark back, more or less, to obsolete
legislature, dealing with quackery as such. This seems anachronistic,
inasmuch as at the time of the enactment of these anti-quackery laws,
the particular nature of neurotic disturbances had not yet been
discovered and psychoanalysis did not yet exist.

I am now approaching the question which appears most essential to me: Is
the practice of psychoanalysis of such a nature as to lend itself to the
interference of legislative authorities, or would it not be much better
to leave psychoanalysis to its natural development?

Of course, I shall not decide this question, but I am taking the liberty
of submitting it to you. It appears that in Austria, not unlike other
countries, by the way, there prevails a real _furor prohibendi_, a
veritable mania for prohibition and general interference, a trend which
usually, as is only too well known, makes for unsatisfactory results.
According to my own personal view, a superabundance of ordinances and
prohibitions will only serve to injure the dignity of the law. It may
usually be observed that wherever there are just a few laws, these laws
are strictly adhered to, whereas where laws exist in great numbers, the
temptation arises to break them.

Furthermore, a man cannot be considered an anarchist, simply because he
believes that legislative statutes—in the view of their very
origin—cannot very well be regarded as something holy that must never be
touched. Legislative measures sometimes are insufficient, or gradually
become that, at the same time outraging our innate sense for justice and
common sense. Then the time is on hand, where there is no other means of
correcting such unbearable conditions than to simply trespass against
such laws. It seems advisable, for the purpose of maintaining respect
for laws and ordinances, not to enact any which may be difficult to
enforce.

Much of what has been said here about the application of psychoanalysis
by physicians would have to be repeated with regard to lay-analyses
proper, which the legislatures of some countries are now prepared to
prohibit. In view of the fact that the application of the analysis is a
very simple procedure, consisting merely of conversation without
resorting to instruments or prescriptions, it would be rather difficult
to prove that a layman actually employed psychoanalysis, if he stoutly
maintained that he had merely benefited a person by administering a good
“talking to.” Such assistance, to a person in need of it, could not very
well be prohibited simply because a physician may once in a while resort
to the identical thing!

In English speaking countries, Christian Science has gained tremendous
popularity. To my mind, it constitutes a dialectic abnegation of such
evils as life presents, by resorting to the teaching of Christian
religion. I do not hesitate to state that such measures strike me as a
regrettable fallacy of the human mind. But who in the United States or
England would ever think of prohibiting Christian Science or seek to
punish its followers?

Generally speaking, is governmental authority always so certain to be on
the right side? Assumed even that many, left to their own devices, would
encounter danger and experience harm, would it not just the same be much
better if governmental authority would merely indicate dangerous ground,
but on the whole leave it to the individual to be taught by experience
and mutual influence?

Psychoanalysis is so new, the broad masses so insufficiently informed
about it, the official view of science still so vacillating, that it
appears to me as premature to impede its progress by legislative
measures.

Why not leave it to the patients themselves to learn that it is
dangerous for them to apply for psychological assistance to persons who
are not sufficiently informed?

If people are sufficiently enlightened and warned, prohibition will
surely prove superfluous.

On Italian highways, poles, carrying high tension electric power,
display this warning: “_Chi tocca, muore!_” Which has proven perfectly
sufficient. In contrast to this, in other countries, for example Austria
and Germany, this warning is of an insulting verbosity:— “Inasmuch as
touching these high tension wires is dangerous to life, it is herewith
strictly prohibited to meddle with them!” Why this prohibition? Whoever
cherishes his life will not touch them, and whoever wants to commit
suicide will surely not be detained by the warning.

“But there are cases which may be quoted as precedent for the
prohibition of lay-analyses. For example, the law against the practice
of hypnosis by laymen, and another enacted against occult séances and
the organization of spiritualistic societies.”[1]

I must admit that it is beyond me to admire these measures. As far as
the last mentioned prohibition is concerned, it surely constitutes a
case of grave over-officiousness, encroaching upon intellectual freedom.
As far as I am personally concerned, I do not think that anybody would
suspect me of having faith in occult phenomena, or of being interested
in its general acceptance. However, such prohibitive measures will never
serve to stifle the interest that some people manifest for the alleged
secrets of an occult world. Such officious interference may do a lot of
damage by preventing impartial seekers for truth to arrive at a finding
which would do away with occult misconceptions. Here also, we observe
the fact that other countries do not interfere with so-called
“parapsychic” research, but only Austria.

As far as hypnosis is concerned, it is somewhat different from analysis.
Hypnosis is nothing else but induction of an abnormal condition of the
soul, serving the layman merely as a means of entertainment. Had
hypnotic therapy fulfilled its early promise, conditions would have
evolved similar to those now prevailing in psychoanalysis.

Aside from this, the history of hypnosis contributes another precedent
for the fate of psychoanalysis. When I was still a young instructor of
neuropathology, physicians fervently fought against hypnosis, claiming
it to be nothing but a fake, an infernal delusion, a most dangerous
practice. Today, this same hypnosis has been monopolized by them. They
are resorting to it as a method of examination. For some nerve
specialists, hypnosis is their most important stock in trade.

However, I have already told you that I do not intend to discuss whether
restriction by law or a hands-off policy would be the most correct
procedure, concerning psychoanalysis. I know very well that this is a
question of principle which will be decided by the inclination of
influential people rather than by strict argumentation. What seems to me
to suggest a policy of _laissez faire_ I have already mentioned. But if
the decision should be one for active interference, then, to be sure, it
would appear to me as a one-sided and unjust measure to enact a sweeping
prohibition against the practice of psychoanalysis by laymen. Then, it
would be up to the legislature to fix the conditions under which the
application of psychoanalysis would be permissible for those who would
be privileged to employ it. It would also be necessary to appoint an
authority who could be appealed to for information, who would decide
what constitutes psychoanalysis, what the training would be, and how to
administer it.

Thus, things must either be left alone or else order must be created and
the situation, in general, clarified. But there is no use in simply
interfering with a complicated situation, by means of a prohibition,
which is based without much discretion, upon obsolete acts of an
antiquated legislature.




                                  VIII


“But the physicians! It seems I am really unable to bring you to the
main point of our conversation. You are continually evading me. After
all, the question before us is whether physicians should be given the
exclusive right to employ psychoanalysis, that is, after they have
fulfilled certain conditions, if you should insist upon such. According
to your own statement, the majority of ‘quacks,’ dabbling with
psychoanalysis, does not consist of physicians. You also admit that the
greatest number of your disciples and followers are physicians. I have
heard that these do not share your point of view, in regard to
lay-analyses.

“Of course, it is to be expected that your disciples agree with you in
the question of sufficient training. Just the same, they hold the laymen
should be excluded from the practice of psychoanalysis. Is that really
the case? And if so, how do you account for it?”

You are correctly informed. Not all, but a great number of my medically
trained collaborators do not side with me in this matter, but insist
that psychoanalytical treatment of neurotics be exclusively reserved for
physicians. From this, you may gather that even within the limits of our
own camps, there prevails a difference of opinion. Although my point of
view is very well known, the divergence of opinion in matters of
lay-analyses, in no way interferes with an otherwise splendid harmony.

How to explain this position of some of my disciples?

I am not so sure, but I assume that professional pride is behind it. You
see, their process of development has been different from mine. That
they find themselves somewhat isolated from their colleagues, is still
annoying them. They would like to be considered, by the profession as a
whole, as members in good standing, so to say. Thus, in order to win the
tolerance of their Æsculapian brothers, they are willing to make a
sacrifice, whose value is apparently not clear to them.

Of course, I may be wrong here. To assume that fear of competition is
dictating their position, would not only amount to suspecting them of a
low motive, but also condemn them for a peculiar shortsightedness. After
all, as long as they are ready to initiate colleagues into
psychoanalysis, it can be of no importance to them whether they will
have to share prospective patients with them, or with laymen.

Probably, there is something else to be considered. They may be
impressed by certain features which, in the practice of psychoanalysis
assure the physician of an unquestionable advantage over the layman.

“There you are:—‘Assure the advantage’! At last, you admit this
advantage! I should think this admission settles our argument.”

I admit this advantage. Perhaps by doing so I shall prove to you that I
am not as passionately deluded as you think. I postponed mentioning
these conditions, because in airing them, additional theoretical
discussion is necessary.

“What are you driving at now?”

There is first the question of diagnosis. Before admitting a patient,
suffering from nervous disturbances, to psychoanalytical treatment, one
naturally desires to have as much assurance as possible that this
therapy is suitable in that particular case, that is, that the patient
has a good chance of being benefited by psychoanalysis. This can only be
the case, if he is actually suffering from neurosis.

“I should think that would be easily ascertained, by the symptoms he
complains about.”

You are putting your finger just on the point, where new complications
may arise. It is not always possible to be perfectly sure of such a
case. The patient, in spite of displaying all the visible symptoms of
neurosis, may actually be suffering from something else. The incipient
stage of a mental disease, for example, or the beginning of a process
destroying his brain. To distinguish between such symptoms is not always
easy or possible. Responsibility for such a decision must naturally be
assumed by the physician alone. And as mentioned before, it is not so
easy for him. For the longest time, an ailment may appear absolutely
harmless, until finally manifesting its malignant character. Nervous
people, as a rule, fear that they may be on the road to some mental
disease.

Assumed that a physician has not correctly diagnosed a case, or has been
unable to discover its true nature, nothing has been lost, no damage has
been done. Analytical treatment, although not doing any harm to the
patient, would have been superfluous in such a case. It might have given
any number of people a chance to lay the blame for the unfortunate
development of the case at the door of psychoanalysis. Unjustly so, to
be sure, but such a likelihood should be avoided nevertheless.

“That sounds hopeless. It apparently tears out, by the very roots,
everything you told me about the nature and development of a neurosis.”

Not at all. It only strengthens the fact that neurotics are a nuisance
and a dilemma for all parties concerned, including the psychoanalysts. I
may be able to alleviate your new apprehensions if I make myself
clearer. Probably it would be more correct to say of such cases, as we
now have under discussion, that they actually present neuroses. However,
these neuroses are not psychic but rather somatic, that is, they do not
originate from the soul, but rather from the body. Do you understand me?

“I do. But I am at a loss to connect all this with the psychological
aspect.”

That can easily be done, if only complications of the living substance
are sufficiently taken into consideration. What was the inherent feature
of a neurosis? That the “I,” constituting the very essence of the soul,
so to speak, developed and improved by the influence of the outer world,
proved unable to fulfill its mediating functions between the “It” and
reality; that the “I,” on account of its weakness, shirked its duties in
regard to the “It,” thus incurring repressions from which it suffers. It
is because such weakness of the “I” regularly takes place in all of us
in childhood that events of our tender years exert such great importance
in later life.

In the few years of our childhood, we have to cover the enormous
distance of development from primitive man of the Stone Age to civilized
man of today. In addition to this tremendous burden, the child has to
ward off the urges of an early sexuality. Small wonder, then, that our
“I” takes recourse to repressions, thus exposing itself to childhood
neuroses, the effects of which in turn furnish the disposition for
nervous disturbances in more mature years.

Everything now depends upon how the growing up individual will be
treated by fate. If life is too hard, the divergence between urges and
the opposition of reality too great, the “I” may remain unsuccessful in
its endeavors to mediate between the two. This is the more probable, the
more the “I” is encroached upon by such infantile dispositions as it may
have acquired in tender years. Thus, the process of repression is
repeated; urges tear themselves free from the sovereignty of the “I” to
gain, by way of regression, a substitute for the gratification they
crave, while the poor “I” has become helplessly neurotic.

Let us hold on firmly to this: that the most important, the pivotal
point in the whole situation, so to speak, is the relative strength of
the “I” in all its phases. It is easy, then, to complete our whole
etiological survey, that is our endeavor to assign causes to the
phenomena observed. We already know the normal causes for nervousness to
be the infantile weakness of the “I,” the checking of early sexual
urges, and the influence of chance episodes in our childhood.

But is there no possibility that there are also some other contributory
factors, antedating childhood? For example, an inborn strength and
unruliness of those urges which constitute the “It,” presenting right
from the very start a task much too difficult for the “I”? Or could a
certain weakness, existing for reasons unknown, in the development of
the “I” be held responsible? Of course, all these possibilities will
exert an etiological importance, in some cases of surpassing value.

The specific driving power of the “It” must always be taken into
consideration, and wherever it is developed to an excessive degree,
there are only meagre chances for a successful application of our
therapy. Of the reasons that block the development of the “I,” we still
know too little to account for such cases of neurosis which arise on a
constitutional basis. It may be assumed that neurosis hardly ever
develops unless there are constitutional or congenital factors
increasing the possibility for such a condition. However, if it is
correct that the relative weakness of the “I” is the deciding factor for
the development of neuroses, then it would also appear possible that
later, physical disturbances may result in a neurosis provided it also
results in a weakening of the “I.”

This happens only too frequently. Such a physical disturbance may aim at
the “It,” intensifying its urges to an extent where the “I” is not able
to cope with them any more. As an example for such developments, the
changes induced in woman by the disturbances of menstruation and
menopause could perhaps be drawn upon. Other reasons that may weaken the
“I” are general physical disturbances, organic diseases of the central
nervous system. All of these may result in interference with those
sources from which the soul apparatus draws its strength, to lead, in
turn, to an encroachment of its more delicate functions, which are
necessary to maintain unimpaired the whole “I” organization. In all
these cases, neurosis presents about the same picture. However, while
manifesting the same psychological mechanism, neuroses develop on the
basis of a multifarious, frequently highly complicated etiology; that
is, they arise from a great number of various causes.

“That suits me better. At last you have spoken like a physician. And now
I am waiting for you to admit that so complicated a condition as a
neurosis should only be treated by a physician.”

I am afraid you are expecting too much. What we have just discussed
belonged in the realm of pathology. Psychoanalysis, however, is a
therapeutical process. I admit, no, I even insist, that a physician
should first diagnose each and every case where psychoanalysis seems
applicable. Fortunately, the greater number of neuroses are of a
psychical nature and not pathologically induced. As soon as the
physician has ascertained this, he may safely leave the treatment to the
lay-analyst. We have always followed this procedure within our
analytical societies. Thanks to this close coöperation between the
medically trained and non-trained members, errors almost never occur.

There is another emergency when the analyst has to invite the assistance
of a physician. It is possible that, in the course of psychoanalytical
treatment, symptoms—mostly of physical nature—appear which may either be
part of the neurosis, or else manifestations of independent, organic
disturbances. Here, the decision must once more be left to the
physician.

“From all this, there follows that the analysts, even during the
analysis, cannot dispense with the physician. This is another argument
against lay-analyses.”

No, this possibility cannot be drawn upon as an argument against
lay-analyses, because in an analogous case the medically trained analyst
would not proceed any differently.

“I do not understand that.”

There is a rule that even a medically trained analyst, running across
such dubious symptoms in the course of the treatment, is not to depend
on his own judgment, but to consult some colleague, preferably a
specialist of internal diseases.

“Why this rule, apparently so superfluous?”

This rule is not superfluous at all. There are several reasons for it.
In the first place, it is hard to combine organic and psychical
treatment. In the second place, the particular condition of transference
frequently prevailing in analyses may make it inadvisable for the
analyst to subject his patient to physical examination. In the third
place, there are all the reasons in the world for the analyst to doubt
his own opinion, inasmuch as he is so intensely interested in the
psychical aspects of the case.

“I now understand your position towards lay-analyses. You insist that
there must be lay-analysts. However, as you have to admit their
insufficiency for the task, you compile everything that could serve to
excuse them, and make things in general easier for them. To be frank
with you, I cannot understand why we should have lay-analysts at all,
inasmuch as they would never be more than second-class therapeutists.
This need not include those few laymen who have already received their
training, but institutes for psychological training should not accept
laymen any more.”

I would assent to all this, if I could be shown that such restrictions
would benefit all parties interested. You will admit that these
interests are tri-fold:—There is the interest of the patient, the
interest of the physicians, and last but not least, the interest of
science which, in turn, includes the interest of all patients of the
future. Let us investigate these three points.

It does not matter whether the patient be analysed by a physician or a
layman, as long as any danger of mistaking his condition is excluded by
being properly examined by a physician before the beginning of the
treatment, or re-examined as soon as developments, in the course of the
analysis, make this advisable. It is much more important for the patient
that the analyst possesses those personal qualities which invite full
confidence, and that he has that knowledge and experience which alone
qualify him to apply psychoanalysis. To some people, it may seem that it
might undermine the authority of the analyst to have his patient know
that he is no physician and must obtain the advice of a medically
trained expert in certain matters. However, although we have never kept
a patient in the dark, as to the qualifications of an analyst, we have
come to the conclusion that the patients have no prejudice against a
non-medically trained analyst; they are only too glad to accept the
benefits of treatment, wherever they offer themselves—a fact resented by
the medical profession for the longest time.

It also must be considered that analysts, practising today, are men and
women with academic training and degrees, pedagogues, of great
experience and impressive personality. The analysis, to which all
candidates of psychoanalytical institutes are required to submit, is the
best means of testing their personal suitability for the performance of
so exerting an activity as an analysis presents.

In reference to the interest of the physicians, I do not believe that
medicine has anything to gain by annexing psychoanalysis. Today, medical
training requires five years, with almost a whole sixth year taken up
with examinations. Ever so often, new demands in regard to training are
made with which the young student must comply, if his medical education
is to be considered adequate. Generally speaking, while it is difficult
today to enter the medical profession, the practice of medicine is
neither very satisfactory nor very advantageous. And as soon as the
undoubtedly justified necessity is realized that the physician be also
informed of the psychological aspects of diseases, thus including in
medical training a partial preparation for psychoanalysis, there would
follow an extension of the medical curriculum and a corresponding
extension of the period of training. I do not know how physicians would
like such a development, arising from the monopoly they claim on
psychoanalysis. But these demands would then have to be fulfilled and at
a time when, in general, the material aspects of those strata of society
which contribute the greatest contingent to the medical profession, are
such that young physicians must establish a practice, as soon as
possible.

However, the medical profession may not intend to include preparation
for psychoanalysis into the medical curriculum proper. The general
opinion may be that it is much more practical for the young physician to
acquire psychoanalytical knowledge only after having completed his
medical education. It may be said that such a procedure would not
involve any actual loss of time, inasmuch as a young man under thirty
never gains that confidence of patients which is an indispensable
condition for benefiting a patient psychoanalytically. Of course, it
could be said that a young physician, too, who has just won his diploma,
cannot command too much respect, as regards his opinion of the physical
ailments of his patients, and that the young analyst could very well
utilize his time, by working in a psychological clinic, under the
supervision of an experienced practitioner.

It seems to me that the aforementioned demand amounts to a waste of
energy which, in view of economic conditions, does not seem justified.
Although analytical training invades the field of medical training, it
neither includes this training, nor is included by it. If a
psychoanalytical college were to be organized, which today may strike
one as being a fantastic idea, the curriculum of this institution would
have to include much of what is taught in medical schools. Aside from
the Psychology of the Depths, which would naturally always be the main
subject taught, Biology would have to be included in the course, and
Science of Sex would also be one of the major subjects. In addition,
adequate instruction would have to be given on such disturbances which
belong in the realm of Psychiatry. Psychoanalytical training would have
to include a number of subjects which have no connection with medicine,
and never enter the physician’s practice, such as History of
Civilization, Mythology, Psychology of Religion, and Literature. Without
being well acquainted with these subjects, the analyst will be unable to
grasp the problems that will face him in the course of his practice.

Most of the subjects, however, belonging to medical training, will not
be of any use to him and although all this knowledge is highly valuable
for those who need it, it would not assist the analyst to understand a
neurotic condition nor to alleviate it. In case the objection is made
here that specialists in other fields of medical endeavor, also do not
need all the details they acquire in the course of their training, it
must be said that such a case could not be considered analogous. For
many branches of medicine, such facts as, for example, Pathology
presents, are of great importance. The analyst, however, reaches out for
a variety of experiences, with different phenomena, underlying different
laws. Although philosophy may succeed in bridging the chasm between body
and soul, as far as our own experience is concerned, this chasm,
nevertheless, exists, presenting itself in an especially striking light,
as regards our practical endeavors.

It seems unjust and impractical to force a person to take a roundabout
route via medical training, if this person be bent upon relieving
another individual from the agonies of a phobia or a fixed idea.
Moreover, such a procedure would be ineffective, as long as
psychoanalysis in general is not suppressed.

Just imagine that somewhere in the country, there is a certain mountain
top that can be reached by two different roads, the one being short and
straight, and the other long and winding. An attempt is made to block
the short road by a “no-trespass” sign. There is some chance of this
sign being respected, if the short road is steep and difficult to climb,
whereas the long road is easy to travel. However, if the detour should
be the more difficult road, you can easily surmise how little the
trespassing sign would be respected.

I am very much afraid it will be just as difficult to force the laymen
to study medicine, as it is for me to induce physicians to study
psychoanalysis. Human nature is like that.

“If you are correct in your assumption that analytical treatment cannot
be administered without a special training, but that on the other hand
the medical curriculum could not bear the burden of psychoanalytical
training, and that medical knowledge, to the greatest extent, is
superfluous for the analyst, how will we ever achieve the ideal medical
personality, the physician who can cope with all the demands of his
profession?”

I am unable to foresee how to solve these difficulties, and I do not
feel called upon to make any suggestions. I only perceive two things
clearly: firstly, that the analysis seems to constitute a dilemma, but
certainly the neurotic is also a dilemma; secondly, that for the time
being, all interests would be served if physicians resolve to tolerate a
class of therapeutists who will relieve them of the arduous treatment of
those tremendously frequent psychical neuroses, in addition benefiting
the patients by remaining in constant contact with them.

“Is that your last word in reference to the problem of lay-analyses, or
is there something else?”

There is a third interest to be considered:—that of science. Although
what I have to say in that respect may not mean much to you, it
nevertheless means a good deal to me.

We do not consider it advisable that psychoanalysis be swallowed up by
medicine, finally to be shelved in a text-book of psychiatry, under the
chapter heading of Therapy, together with such other treatments as
Hypnotic Suggestion, Auto Suggestion, Persuasion which, due to lack of
knowledge, were indebted for their short lives to the indolence and
ignorance of the broad masses. Psychoanalysis deserves a better fate,
which, let us hope, it will really attain.

As the Psychology of the Depths, the teaching of the Unconscious,
psychoanalysis may prove indispensable to all sciences which deal with
the development of human culture, and such of its great achievements as
art, religion, and civilized society. Psychoanalysis has already
appreciably assisted these sciences in the solution of their problems.
But all this is insignificant, compared to what may be achieved through
psychoanalysis in the future, when students of History, Psychology of
Religion, and Etymology, will avail themselves to the fullest extent of
the assistance psychoanalysis will be able to render them.

The employment of psychoanalysis for the treatment of neuroses is only
one of its possibilities, and time may yet prove that this is not even
the most important of them. At any rate, it would be unfair to sacrifice
all other advantages of psychoanalysis, simply because there is just one
phase where the application of psychoanalysis encroaches upon the
preserves of medicine.

Here another aspect manifests itself which cannot be interfered with,
without causing damage. If the representatives of the different sciences
should really take up the study of psychoanalysis, to apply it in their
own spheres of interest, it would not suffice for them to merely avail
themselves of such results as have been recorded in psychoanalytical
literature. They will have to come to an understanding of psychoanalysis
in the only way possible, that is, by submitting themselves to analysis.

Thus, to the neurotics in need of analysis, a second class of persons
would be added: those who undergo analysis for intellectual reasons and
who would welcome that intensification of their efficiency which would
result incidentally from analysis. To undertake these analyses, a number
of analysts would be necessary for whom medical knowledge would be of
specially limited importance. However, these instructor-analysts—as they
ought to be called—are in need of an especially thorough training, which
they can only obtain if they are given opportunities to study
interesting and convincing cases. Inasmuch as healthy persons do not
feel the necessity and curiosity to be analysed, neurotics would have to
be the objects of study for the instructor-analysts. Their study would
be guided by expert analysts, with a special eye to their future,
non-medical work. Of course, all this necessitates a certain amount of
freedom of action, and would not brook petty interference.

Perhaps you do not believe in these strictly theoretical endeavors of
psychoanalysis, and are not ready to admit their importance, in
connection with the practical side of the problem of lay-analyses. In
that case, let me remind you that there is another field for the
application of psychoanalysis, outside the hunting ground of the
“quack”—a field which physicians will hardly claim as their own. I
allude to the application of psychoanalysis to pedagogy.

As soon as a child manifests the first signs of an undesirable
development, by being moody, stubborn and inattentive, neither the child
specialist nor the school physician will be able to do anything for him;
not even when a child shows such clear signs of nervous disturbances as
timidity, lack of appetite, vomiting, and sleeplessness. A treatment
which combines analytical influence with pedagogic measures and is
applied by persons who are not above delving into the child’s own world
and who understand how to penetrate the soul life of the child, will
succeed not only in dissolving nervous disturbances, but also in
reversing incipient traits of character.

The importance which we were forced to attach to apparently unimportant
neurotic conditions of children, in view of the fact that they very
often serve as a disposition for disturbances in later life, would prove
that the analyses of children constitute a splendid means of
prophylaxis. Although psychoanalysis still has its enemies, I do not
know what means are at their disposal to hinder the activity of a
pedagogic analyst, or analytical pedagogue, and I doubt whether this
could be done so easily.

To return once more to the problem of the analytical treatment of
adults, suffering from nervous disturbances, we have not yet exhausted
all points of view. Civilized life of today exerts an almost unbearable
pressure, which necessitates corrective measures. Does it seem too
fantastic to expect that psychoanalysis, in spite of the many
difficulties it encounters, should be called upon to furnish this
corrective agent? Maybe some American millionaire will one day donate
enough money for the psychoanalytical training of the social workers of
his country, thus creating an emergency corps, to fight neurotic
conditions brought about by present-day life.

“You mean some sort of a new Salvation Army?”

Why not? After all, our fancy always follows existing patterns. The
stream of eager students that will then flood towards Europe, will, of
course, have to pass Vienna, because there the development of
psychoanalysis may have prematurely died, on account of governmental
interference. You smile? I’m not saying this to sway your judgment. I
know you don’t believe me, and I surely cannot guarantee that my
predictions will come true. But there is one thing I know: it is not at
all important what the opinions of individuals and of individual
governments may be, in respect to the problem of lay-analyses. All this
can only have limited effects. What is really important is that
potentialities for the development of psychoanalysis cannot be affected
by ordinances and prohibitions.




                       AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUDY




                                   I


Several of the contributors to this series of “Autobiographical
Studies”[2] have begun by expressing their misgivings at the unusual
difficulties of the task they have undertaken. The difficulties in my
case are, I think, even greater; for I have already more than once
published papers upon the same lines as the present one, papers which,
from the nature of the subject, have dealt more with personal
considerations than is usual or than would otherwise have been
necessary.

I gave my first account of the development and subject-matter of
psychoanalysis in five lectures which I delivered in 1909 before Clark
University at Worcester, Mass., where I had been invited to attend the
celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the foundation of that
body.[3] Only recently I gave way to the temptation of making a
contribution of a similar kind to an American collective publication
dealing with the opening years of the twentieth century, since its
editors had shown their recognition of the importance of psychoanalysis
by allotting a special chapter to it.[4] Between these two dates
appeared a paper, “On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement,”[5]
which, in fact, contains the essence of all that I can say on the
present occasion. Since I must not contradict myself and since I have no
wish to repeat myself exactly, I must endeavor to construct a narrative
in which subjective and objective attitudes, biographical and historical
interests, are combined in a new proportion.

I was born on May 6th, 1856, at Freiberg in Moravia, a small town in
what is now Czecho-Slovakia. My parents were Jews, and I have remained a
Jew myself. I have reason to believe that my father’s family were
settled for a long time on the Rhine (at Cologne), that, as a result of
a persecution of the Jews during the fourteenth or fifteenth century,
they fled eastwards, and that, in the course of the nineteenth century,
they migrated back from Lithuania through Galicia into German Austria.
When I was a child of four I came to Vienna, and I went through the
whole of my education there. At the Gymnasium I was at the top of my
class for seven years; I enjoyed special privileges there, and was
scarcely obliged to pass any examinations. Although we lived in very
limited circumstances, my father insisted that, in my choice of a
profession, I should follow my own inclinations. Neither at that time,
nor indeed in my later life, did I feel any particular predilection for
the career of a physician. I was moved, rather, by a sort of curiosity,
which was, however, directed more towards human concerns than towards
natural objects; nor had I recognized the importance of observation as
one of the best means of gratifying it. At the same time, the theories
of Darwin, which were then of topical interest, strongly attracted me,
for they held out hopes of an extraordinary advance in our understanding
of the world; and it was hearing Goethe’s beautiful essay on Nature read
aloud at a popular lecture just before I left school that decided me to
become a medical student.

When, in 1873, I first joined the University, I was met by some
appreciable disappointments. Above all, I found that I was expected to
feel myself inferior and an alien, because I was a Jew. I refused
absolutely to do the first of these things. I have never been able to
see why I should feel ashamed of my descent or, as people were beginning
to say, of my race. I put up, without much regret, with my nonadmission
to the community; for it seemed to me that in spite of this exclusion an
active fellow-worker could not fail to find some nook or cranny in the
frame-work of humanity. These first impressions at the University,
however, had one consequence which was afterwards to prove important;
for at an early age I was made familiar with the fate of being in the
Opposition and of being put under the ban of the “compact majority.” The
foundations were thus laid for a certain degree of independence of
judgment.

I was compelled, moreover, during my first years at the University, to
make the discovery that the peculiarities and limitations of my gifts
denied me all success in many of the departments of science into which
my youthful eagerness had plunged me. Thus I learned the truth of
Mephistopheles’ warning:

        “Vergebens, dass ihr ringsum wissenschaftlich schweift,
        Ein jeder lernt nur, was er lernen kann.”[6]

At length, in Ernst Brücke’s physiological laboratory, I found rest and
satisfaction—and men, too, whom I could respect and take as my models.
Brücke gave me a problem to work out in the histology of the nervous
system; I succeeded in solving it to his satisfaction and in carrying
the work further on my own account. I worked at this Institute, with
short interruptions, from 1876 to 1882, and it was generally thought
that I was marked out to fill the next post of Assistant that might fall
vacant there. The various branches of medicine proper, apart from
psychiatry, had no attraction for me. I was decidedly negligent in
pursuing my medical studies, and it was not until 1881 that I took my
somewhat belated degree as a Doctor of Medicine.

The turning point came in 1882, when my teacher, for whom I felt the
highest possible esteem, corrected my father’s generous improvidence by
strongly advising me, in view of my bad financial position, to abandon
my theoretical career. I followed his advice, left the physiological
laboratory and entered the General Hospital[7] as an “Aspirant.” I was
soon afterwards promoted to being a junior physician, and worked in
various departments of the hospital, amongst others for more than six
months under Meynert, by whose work and personality I had been greatly
struck while I was still a student.

In a certain sense I nevertheless remained faithful to the line of work
upon which I had originally started. The subject which Brücke had
proposed for my investigations had been the spinal cord of one of the
lowest of the fishes (Ammocoetes Petromyzon); and I now passed on to the
human central nervous system. Just at this time Flechsig’s discoveries
of the non-simultaneity of the formation of the medullary sheaths were
throwing a revealing light upon the intricate course of its tracts. The
fact that I began by choosing the medulla oblongata as the one and only
subject of my work was another sign of the continuity of my development.
In complete contrast to the diffuse character of my studies during my
earlier years at the University, I was now developing an inclination to
concentrate my work exclusively upon a single subject or problem. This
inclination has persisted and has since led to my being accused of
one-sidedness.

I now became as active a worker in the Institute of Cerebral Anatomy as
I had previously been in the physiological one. Some short papers upon
the course of the tracts and the nuclear origins in the medulla
oblongata date from these hospital years, and my results were regularly
noted down by Edinger. One day Meynert, who had given me access to the
laboratory even during the times when I was not actually working under
him, proposed that I should definitely devote myself to the anatomy of
the brain, and promised to hand over his lecturing work to me, as he
felt he was too old to manage the newer methods. This I declined, in
alarm at the magnitude of the task; it is possible, too, that I had
guessed already that this great man was by no means kindly disposed
towards me.

From the practical point of view, brain anatomy was certainly no better
than physiology, and, with an eye to material considerations, I began to
study nervous diseases. There were, at that time, few specialists in
that branch of medicine in Vienna, the material for its study was
distributed over a number of different departments of the hospital,
there was no satisfactory opportunity of learning the subject, and one
was forced to be one’s own teacher. Even Nothnagel, who had been
appointed a short time before, on account of his book upon cerebral
localization, did not single out neuropathology from among the other
subdivisions of medicine. In the distance glimmered the great name of
Charcot; so I formed a plan of first obtaining an appointment as
Lecturer on Nervous Diseases in Vienna and of then going to Paris to
continue my studies.

In the course of the following years, while I continued to work as a
junior physician, I published a number of clinical observations upon
organic diseases of the nervous system. I gradually became familiar with
the ground; I was able to localize the site of a lesion in the medulla
oblongata so accurately that the pathological anatomist had no further
information to add; I was the first person in Vienna to send a case for
autopsy with a diagnosis of polyneuritis acuta. The fame of my diagnoses
and their _post mortem_ confirmation brought me an influx of American
physicians, to whom I lectured upon the patients in my department in a
sort of pidgin-English. I understood nothing about the neuroses. On one
occasion I introduced to my audience a neurotic suffering from a
persistent headache as a case of chronic localized meningitis; they
quite rightly rose in revolt against me, and my premature activities as
a teacher came to an end. By way of excuse I may add that this happened
at a time when greater authorities than myself in Vienna were in the
habit of diagnosing neurasthenia as cerebral tumor.

In the spring of 1885 I was appointed Lecturer on Neuropathology on the
ground of my histological and clinical publications. Soon afterwards, as
the result of a warm testimonial from Brücke, I was awarded a Traveling
Fellowship of considerable value. In the autumn of the same year I made
the journey to Paris.

I became a student at the Salpêtrière, but as one of the crowd of
foreign visitors, I had little attention paid me to begin with. One day
in my hearing Charcot expressed his regret that since the war he had
heard nothing from the German translator of his lectures; he went on to
say that he would be glad if someone would undertake to translate the
new volume of his lectures into German. I wrote to him and offered to do
so; I can still remember a phrase in the letter, to the effect that I
suffered only from _l’aphasie motrice_ and not from _l’aphasie
sensorielle du français_. Charcot accepted the offer, I was admitted to
the circle of his personal acquaintances, and from that time forward I
took a full part in all that went on at the Clinic.

As I write these lines, a number of papers and newspaper-articles have
reached me from France, which gave evidence of a violent objection to
the acceptance of psychoanalysis, and which often make the most
inaccurate assertions in regard to my relations with the French school.
I read, for instance, that I made use of my visit to Paris to
familiarize myself with the theories of Pierre Janet and then made off
with my booty. I should therefore like to say explicitly that during the
whole of my visit to the Salpêtrière, Janet’s name was never so much as
mentioned.

What impressed me most of all while I was with Charcot were his latest
investigations upon hysteria, some of which were carried out under my
own eyes. He had proved, for instance, the genuineness of hysterical
phenomena and their conformity to laws (“_introite et hic dii sunt_”),
the frequent occurrence of hysteria in men, the production of hysterical
paralyses and contractures by hypnotic suggestion and the fact that such
artificial products showed, down to their smallest details, the same
features as spontaneous attacks, which were often brought on
traumatically. Many of Charcot’s demonstrations began by provoking in me
and in other visitors a sense of astonishment and an inclination to
scepticism, which we tried to justify by an appeal to one of the
theories of the day. He was always friendly and patient in dealing with
such doubts, but he was also most decided; it was in one of these
discussions that (speaking of theory) he remarked, “_Ça n’empêche pas
d’exister_,” a _mot_ which left an indelible mark upon my mind.

No doubt the whole of what Charcot taught us at that time does not hold
good today: some of it has become doubtful, some has definitely failed
to withstand the test of time. But enough is left over, and has found a
permanent place in the storehouse of science. Before leaving Paris I
discussed with the great man a plan for a comparative study of
hysterical and organic paralyses. I wished to establish the thesis that
in hysteria paralyses and anæsthesias of the various parts of the body
are demarcated according to the popular idea of their limits and not
according to anatomical facts. He agreed with this view, but it was easy
to see that in reality he took no special interest in penetrating more
deeply into the psychology of the neuroses. When all is said and done,
it was from pathological anatomy that his work had started.

Before I returned to Vienna I stopped for a few weeks in Berlin, in
order to gain a little knowledge of the general disorders of childhood.
Kassowitz, who was at the head of a public institute in Vienna for the
treatment of children’s diseases, had promised to put me in charge of a
department for the nervous diseases of children. In Berlin I was given
assistance and a friendly reception by Baginsky. In the course of the
next few years I published, from the Kassowitz Institute, several
monographs of considerable size on unilateral and bilateral cerebral
palsies in children. And for that reason, at a later date (in 1897),
Nothnagel made me responsible for dealing with the same subject in his
great _Handbuch der allgemeinen und speziellen Therapie_.

In the autumn of 1886 I settled down in Vienna as a physician, and
married the girl who had been waiting for me in a distant city for more
than four years. I may here go back a little and explain how it was the
fault of my _fiancée_ that I was not already famous at that early age. A
side interest, though it was a deep one, had led me in 1884 to obtain
from Merck some of what was then the little-known alkaloid cocaine and
to study its physiological action. While I was in the middle of this
work, an opportunity arose for making a journey to visit my _fiancée_,
from whom I had been parted for two years. I hastily wound up my
investigation of cocaine and contented myself in my book on the subject
with prophesying that further uses for it would soon be found. I
suggested, however, to my friend, L. Königstein, the ophthalmologist,
that he should investigate the question of how far the anæsthetizing
properties of cocaine were applicable in diseases of the eye. When I
returned from my holiday I found that not he, but another of my friends,
Carl Koller (now in New York), to whom I had also spoken about cocaine,
had made the decisive experiments upon animals’ eyes and had
demonstrated them at the Ophthalmological Congress at Heidelberg. Koller
is therefore rightly regarded as the discoverer of local anæsthesia by
cocaine, which has become so important in minor surgery; but I bore my
_fiancée_ no grudge for my neglected opportunity.

I will now return to the year of 1886, the time of my settling down in
Vienna as a specialist in nervous diseases. The duty devolved upon me of
giving a report before the “Gesellschaft der Aerzte” [Society of
Medicine] upon what I had seen and learnt with Charcot. But I met with a
bad reception. Persons of authority, such as the chairman (Bamberger,
the physician), declared that what I said was incredible. Meynert urged
me to find some cases in Vienna similar to those which I had described
and to present them before the Society. I tried to do so; but the senior
physicians in whose departments I found any such cases, refused to allow
me to observe them or to work at them. One of them, an old surgeon,
actually broke out with the exclamation: “But, my dear sir, how can you
talk such nonsense? _Hysteron_ (sic) means the uterus. So how can a man
be hysterical?” I objected in vain that what I wanted was, not to have
my diagnosis approved, but to have the case put at my disposal. At
length, outside the hospital, I came upon a case of classical hysterical
hemi-anæsthesia in a man, and demonstrated it before the “Gesellschaft
der Aerzte.” This time I was applauded, but no further interest was
taken in me. The impression that the great authorities had rejected my
innovations remained unshaken; and, with my hysteria in men and my
production of hysterical paralyses by suggestion, I found myself forced
into the Opposition. As I was soon afterwards excluded from the
laboratory of cerebral anatomy and for a whole term had nowhere to
deliver my lectures, I withdrew from academic life and ceased to attend
the learned societies. It is a whole generation since I have visited the
“Gesellschaft der Aerzte.”

Anyone who wanted to make a living from the treatment of nerve-patients
must clearly be able to do something to help them. My therapeutic
arsenal contained only two weapons, electrotherapy and hypnosis, for
prescribing a visit to a hydropathic establishment after a single
consultation was an inadequate source of income. My knowledge of
electrotherapy was derived from W. Erb’s text-book, which provided
detailed instructions for the treatment of all the symptoms of nervous
diseases. Unluckily I was soon driven to see that following these
instructions was of no help whatever and that what I had taken for an
epitome of exact observations was merely the construction of phantasy.
The realization that the work of the greatest name in German
neuropathology had no more relation to reality than some “Egyptian”
dream-book, such as are sold in cheap book-shops, was painful, but it
helped to rid me of yet another piece of the innocent faith in authority
by which I was still obsessed. So I put my electrical apparatus aside,
even before Möbius had solved the problem by explaining that the
successes of electric treatment in nervous disorders (in so far as there
were any) were the effect of suggestion on the part of the physician.

With hypnosis the case was better. While I was still a student I had
attended a public exhibition given by the “magnetist” Hansen and had
noticed that one of the persons experimented upon had became deathly
pale at the onset of cataleptic rigidity and had remained so as long as
that condition lasted. This firmly convinced me of the genuineness of
the phenomena of hypnosis. Scientific support was soon afterwards given
to this view by Heidenhain; but that did not restrain the professors of
psychiatry from declaring for a long time to come that hypnosis was not
only fraudulent but dangerous and from regarding hypnotists with
contempt. In Paris I had seen hypnosis used freely as a method for
producing symptoms in patients and then removing them again. And now the
news reached us that a school had arisen at Nancy which made an
extensive and remarkably successful use of suggestion, with or without
hypnosis, for therapeutic purposes. It thus came about, as a matter of
course, that in the first years of my activity as a physician my
principal instrument of work, apart from haphazard and unsystematic
psycho-therapeutic methods, was hypnotic suggestion.

This implied, of course, that I abandoned the treatment of organic
nervous diseases; but that was of little importance. For on the one hand
the prospects in the treatment of such disorders were in any case never
promising, while on the other hand, in the private practice of a
physician working in a large town, the quality of such patients was
nothing compared to the crowds of neurotics, whose number seemed further
multiplied by the manner in which they hurried, with their troubles
unsolved, from one physician to another. And apart from this, there was
something positively seductive in working with hypnosis. For the first
time there was a sense of having overcome one’s impotence; and it was
highly flattering to enjoy the reputation of being a miracle-worker. It
was not until later that I was to discover the drawbacks of the
procedure. At the moment there were only two points to complain of:
first, that I could not succeed in hypnotizing every patient, and
secondly, that I was unable to put individual patients into as deep a
state of hypnosis as I should have wished. With the idea of perfecting
my hypnotic technique, I made a journey to Nancy in the summer of 1889
and spent several weeks there. I witnessed the moving spectacle of old
Liébault working among the poor women and children of the laboring
classes, I was a spectator of Bernheim’s astonishing experiments upon
his hospital patients, and I received the profoundest impression of the
possibility that there could be powerful mental processes which
nevertheless remained hidden from the consciousness of men. Thinking it
would be instructive, I had persuaded one of my patients to follow me to
Nancy. She was a very highly gifted hysteric, a woman of good birth, who
had been handed over to me because no one knew what to do with her. By
hypnotic influence I had made it possible for her to lead a tolerable
existence and I was always able to take her out of the misery of her
condition. But she always relapsed again after a short time, and in my
ignorance I attributed this to the fact that her hypnosis had never
reached the stage of somnambulism with amnesia. Bernheim now attempted
several times to bring this about, but he too failed. He frankly
admitted to me that his great therapeutic successes by means of
suggestion were only achieved in his hospital practice and not with his
private patients. I had many stimulating conversations with him, and
undertook to translate into German his two works upon suggestion and its
therapeutic effects.

During the period from 1886 to 1891 I did little scientific work, and
published scarcely anything. I was occupied with establishing myself in
my new profession and with assuring my own material existence as well as
that of a rapidly increasing family. In 1891 there appeared the first of
my studies upon the cerebral palsies of children, which was written in
collaboration with my friend and assistant, Dr. Oskar Rie. An invitation
which I received in the same year to contribute to an encyclopædia of
medicine led me to investigate the theory of aphasia, which was at that
time dominated by the views of Wernicke and Lichtheim, which laid stress
exclusively upon localization. The fruit of this inquiry was a small
critical and speculative book, _Zur Auffassung der Aphasie_. But I must
now show how it happened that scientific research once more became the
chief interest of my life.




                                   II


I must supplement what I have just said by explaining that from the very
first I made use of hypnosis in another manner, apart from hypnotic
suggestion. I used it for questioning the patient upon the origin of his
symptom, which in his waking state he could often describe only very
imperfectly or not at all. Not only did this method seem more effective
than bald suggestive commands or prohibitions, but it also satisfied the
curiosity of the physician, who, after all, had a right to learn
something of the origin of the phenomenon which he strove to remove by
the monotonous procedure of suggestion.

The manner in which I arrived at this other procedure was as follows:
While I was still working in Brücke’s laboratory I had made the
acquaintance of Dr. Josef Breuer, who was one of the most respected
family physicians in Vienna, but who also had a scientific past, since
he had produced several works of permanent value upon the physiology of
breathing and upon the organ of equilibrium. He was a man of striking
intelligence and fourteen years older than myself. Our relations soon
became more intimate and he became my friend and helper in my difficult
circumstances. We grew accustomed to share all our scientific interests
with each other. In this relationship the gain was naturally mine. The
development of psychoanalysis afterwards cost me his friendship. It was
not easy for me to pay such a price, but I could not escape it.

Even before I went to Paris, Breuer had told me about a case of hysteria
which, between 1880 and 1882, he had treated in a peculiar manner which
had allowed him to penetrate deeply into the causation and significance
of hysterical symptoms. This was at a time, therefore, when Janet’s
works still belonged to the future. He repeatedly read me pieces of the
case history, and I had an impression that it accomplished more towards
an understanding of neuroses than any previous observation. I determined
to inform Charcot of these discoveries when I reached Paris, and I
actually did so. But the great man showed no interest in my first
outline of the subject, so that I never recurred to it and allowed it to
pass from my mind.

When I was back in Vienna I turned once more to Breuer’s observation and
made him tell me more about it. The patient had been a young girl of
unusual education and gifts, who had fallen ill while she was nursing
her father, of whom she was devotedly fond. When Breuer took over her
case it presented a variegated picture of paralyses and contractures,
inhibitions and states of mental confusion. A chance observation showed
her physician that she could be relieved of these clouded states of
consciousness if she was induced to express in words the affective
phantasy by which she was at the moment dominated. From this discovery,
Breuer arrived at a new method of treatment. He put her into deep
hypnosis and made her tell him each time what it was that was oppressing
her mind. After the attacks of depressive confusion had been overcome in
this way, he employed the same procedure for removing her inhibitions
and physical disorders. In her waking state the girl could no more
describe than other patients how her symptoms had arisen, and she could
discover no link between them and any experiences of her life. In
hypnosis she immediately revealed the missing connection. It turned out
that all of her symptoms went back to moving events which she had
experienced while nursing her father; that is to say, her symptoms had a
meaning and were residues or reminiscences of those emotional
situations. It turned out in most instances that there had been some
thought or impulse which she had had to suppress while she was by her
father’s sick-bed, and that, in place of it, as a substitute for it, the
symptom had afterwards appeared. But as a rule the symptom was not the
precipitate of a single such “traumatic” scene, but the result of a
summation of a number of similar situations. When the patient recalled a
situation of this kind in a hallucinatory way under hypnosis and carried
through to its conclusion, with a free expression of emotion, the mental
act which she had originally suppressed, the symptom was wiped away and
did not return. By this procedure Breuer succeeded, after long and
painful efforts, in relieving his patient of all her symptoms.

The patient had recovered and had remained well and, in fact, had become
capable of doing serious work. But over the final stage of this hypnotic
treatment there rested a veil of obscurity, which Breuer never raised
for me; and I could not understand why he had so long kept secret what
seemed to me an invaluable discovery instead of making science the
richer by it. The immediate question, however, was whether it was
possible to generalize from what he had found in a single case. The
state of things which he had discovered seemed to me to be of so
fundamental a nature that I could not believe it could fail to be
present in any case of hysteria if it had been proved to occur in a
single one. But the question could only be decided by experience. I
therefore began to repeat Breuer’s investigations with my own patients
and eventually, especially after my visit to Bernheim in 1889 had taught
me the limitations of hypnotic suggestion, I worked at nothing else.
After observing for several years that his findings were invariably
confirmed in every case of hysteria that was accessible to such
treatment, and after having accumulated a considerable amount of
material in the shape of observations analogous to his, I proposed to
him that we should issue a joint publication. At first he objected
vehemently, but in the end he gave way, especially since, in the
meantime, Janet’s works had anticipated some of his results, such as the
tracing back of hysterical symptoms to events in the patient’s life, and
their removal by means of hypnotic reproduction _in statu nascendi_. In
1893 we issued a preliminary paper, “On the Psychical Mechanism of
Hysterical Phenomena,”[8] and in 1895 there followed our book, _Studien
über Hysterie_.

If the account I have so far given has led the reader to expect that the
_Studien über Hysterie_ must, in all essentials of their material
content, be the product of Breuer’s mind, that is precisely what I
myself have always maintained and what it has been my aim to repeat
here. As regards the theory put forward in the book, I was partly
responsible, but to an extent which it is today no longer possible to
determine. That theory was in any case unpretentious and hardly went
beyond the direct description of the observations. It did not seek to
establish the nature of hysteria but merely to throw light upon the
origin of its symptoms. Thus it laid stress upon the significance of the
life of the emotions and upon the importance of distinguishing between
mental acts which are unconscious and those which are conscious (or
rather capable of being conscious); it introduced a dynamic factor, by
supposing that a symptom arises through the damming-up of an effect, and
an economic factor, by regarding that same symptom as the product or
equivalent of a quantity of energy which would otherwise have been
employed in some other way. (This latter process was described as
_conversion_.) Breuer spoke of our method as _cathartic_; its
therapeutic aim was explained as being to provide that the accumulated
affect used for maintaining the symptom, which had got onto the wrong
lines and had, as it were, become stuck there, should be directed onto
the normal path along which it could obtain discharge (or _abreaction_).
The practical results of the cathartic procedure were excellent. Its
defects, which became evident later, were those of all forms of hypnotic
treatment. There are still a number of psychotherapists who have not
gone beyond catharsis as Breuer understood it and who still speak in its
favor. Its value as an abridged method of treatment was shown afresh in
the hands of E. Simmel in the treatment of war neuroses in the German
army during the Great War. The theory of catharsis had not much to say
on the subject of sexuality. In the case histories which I contributed
to the _Studien_, sexual factors played a certain part, but scarcely
more attention was paid to them than to other emotional excitations.
Breuer wrote of the girl, who has since become famous as his first
patient, that her sexual side was extraordinarily undeveloped. It would
have been difficult to guess from the _Studien über Hysterie_ what an
importance sexuality has in the ætiology of the neuroses.

The stage of development which now followed, the transition from
catharsis to psychoanalysis proper, has been described by me several
times already in such detail that I shall find it difficult to bring
forward any new facts. The event which formed the opening of this period
was Breuer’s retirement from our common work, so that I became sole
administrator of his legacy. There had been differences of opinion
between us at quite an early stage, but they had not been a ground for
our separating. In answering the question of when it is that a mental
process becomes pathogenic, that is, when it is that it becomes
impossible for it to find a normal discharge, Breuer preferred what
might be called a physiological theory: he thought that the processes
which could not find normal outcome were such as had originated during
unusual, hypnoid, mental states. This opened the further question of the
origin of these hypnoid states. I, on the other hand, was inclined to
suspect the existence of an interplay of forces and the operation of
intentions and purposes such as are to be observed in normal life. Thus
it was a case of “Hypnoid Hysteria” versus “Defence Neurosis.” But such
differences as this would scarcely have alienated him from the subject
if there had not been other factors at work. One of these was
undoubtedly that his work as a physician and family doctor took up much
of his time and that he could not, like me, devote his whole strength to
the work of catharsis. Again, he was affected by the reception which our
book had received both in Vienna and in Germany. His self-confidence and
powers of resistance were not developed so fully as the rest of his
mental organization. When, for instance, the _Studien_ met with a severe
rebuff from Strümpell, I was able to laugh at the lack of comprehension
which his criticism showed, but Breuer felt hurt and grew discouraged.
But what contributed chiefly to his decision was that my own further
work led in a direction with which he found it impossible to reconcile
himself.

The theory which we had attempted to construct in the _Studien_
remained, as I have said, very incomplete; and in particular we had
scarcely touched upon the problem of ætiology, upon the question of the
ground in which the pathogenic process takes root. I now learned from my
rapidly increasing experience that it was not _any_ kind of emotional
excitation that was in action behind the phenomena of the neurosis but
regularly one of a sexual nature, whether it was a current sexual
conflict or the effect of earlier sexual experiences. I was not prepared
for this conclusion and my expectations played no part in it, for I had
begun my investigation of neurotics quite unsuspectingly. While I was
writing my “History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement” in 1914, there
recurred to my mind some remarks that had been made to me by Breuer,
Charcot and Chrobak, which might have led me to this discovery earlier.
But at the time I heard them I did not understand what these authorities
meant; indeed they had told me more than they knew themselves or were
prepared to defend. What I heard from them lay dormant and passive
within me, until the chance of my cathartic experiments brought it out
as an apparently original discovery. Nor was I then aware that in
deriving hysteria from sexuality, I was going back to the very
beginnings of medicine and following up a thought of Plato’s. It was not
until later that I learnt this from an essay by Havelock Ellis.

Under the influence of my surprising discovery, I now took a momentous
step. I went beyond the domain of hysteria and began to investigate the
sexual life of the so-called neurasthenics who used to visit me in
numbers during my consultation hours. This experiment cost me, it is
true, my popularity as a doctor, but it brought me convictions which
today, almost thirty years later, have lost none of their force. There
was a great deal of equivocation and mystery-making to be overcome, but
once that had been done, it turned out that in all of these patients
grave abuses of the sexual function were present. Considering how
extremely widespread are these abuses on the one hand and neurasthenia
on the other, a frequent coincidence between the two would not have
proved much; but there was more in it than that one bald fact. Closer
observation suggested to me that it was possible to pick out from the
confused jumble of clinical pictures covered by the name of neurasthenia
two fundamentally different types, which might appear in any degree of
mixture but which were nevertheless to be observed in their pure forms.
In the one type the central phenomenon was the anxiety attack with its
equivalents, rudimentary forms and chronic surrogate symptoms; I
consequently gave it the name of _anxiety neurosis_, and limited the
term _neurasthenia_ to the other type. Now it was easy to establish the
fact that each of these types have a different abnormality of sexual
life as its corresponding ætiological factor: in the former case _coitus
interruptus_, undischarged excitement and sexual abstinence, and in the
latter, excessive masturbation and too numerous nocturnal emissions. In
a few specially instructive cases, which had shown a surprising
alternation in the clinical picture from one type to the other, it was
possible to prove that there had been a corresponding change in the
underlying sexual _régime_. If it was possible to put an end to the
abuse and allow its place to be taken by normal sexual activity, a
striking improvement in the condition was the reward.

I was thus led into regarding the neuroses as being without exception
disturbances of the sexual function, the so-called “actual” neuroses
being the direct toxic expression of such disturbances and the
psycho-neuroses their mental expression. My conscience as a physician
felt pleased at my having arrived at this conclusion. I hoped that I had
filled up a gap in medical science, which, in dealing with a function of
such great biological importance, had failed to take into account any
injuries beyond those caused by infection or by gross anatomical
lesions. The standpoint of medicine was, moreover, favored by the view
that sexuality was not something purely mental. It had a somatic side as
well, and it was possible to assign special chemical processes to it and
to attribute sexual excitement to the presence of some particular,
though at present unknown, substance. There must also have been some
good reason why the true spontaneous neuroses resembled no group of
diseases more closely than the phenomena of intoxication and abstinence,
which are produced by the administration or privation of certain toxic
substances, or than Basedow’s disease, which is known to depend upon the
product of the thyroid gland.

Since that time I have had no opportunity of returning to the
investigation of the actual neuroses; nor has this part of my work been
continued by anyone else. If I look back today at my early findings,
they strike me as being the first rough outlines of what is probably a
far more complicated subject. But on the whole they seem to me still to
hold good. I should have been very glad if I had been able, later on, to
make a psychoanalytical examination of some more cases of simple
juvenile neurasthenia, but unluckily the occasion did not arise. To
avoid misconceptions, I should like to make it clear that I am far from
denying the existence of mental conflicts and of neurotic complexes in
neurasthenia. All that I am asserting is that the symptoms of these
patients are not mentally determined or removable by analysis, but that
they must be regarded as direct toxic consequences of disturbed sexual
chemical processes.

During the years that followed the publication of the _Studien_, having
reached these conclusions upon the part played by sexuality in the
ætiology of the neuroses, I read some papers on the subject before
various medical societies, but was only met with incredulity and
contradiction. Breuer did what he could for some time longer to throw
the great weight of his personal influence into the scales in my favor,
but he effected nothing and it was easy to see that he too shrank from
recognizing the sexual ætiology of the neuroses. He might have crushed
me or at least disconcerted me by pointing to his own first patient, in
whose case sexual factors had ostensibly played no part whatever. But he
never did so, and I could not understand why this was until I came to
interpret the case correctly and to reconstruct, from some remarks which
he had made, the conclusion of his treatment of it. After the work of
catharsis had seemed to be completed, the girl had suddenly developed a
condition of “transference love”; he had not connected this with her
illness, and had therefore retired in dismay. It was obviously painful
to him to be reminded of this apparent _contretemps_. His attitude
towards me oscillated for some time between appreciation and bitter
criticism; then accidental difficulties arose, as they never fail to do
in a strained situation, and we parted.

Another result of my taking up the study of nervous disorders in general
was that I altered the technique of catharsis. I abandoned hypnosis and
sought to replace it by some other method, because I was anxious not to
be restricted to treating hysteriform conditions. Increasing experience
had also given rise to two grave doubts in my mind as to the use of
hypnosis even as a means to catharsis. The first was that even the most
brilliant results were liable to be suddenly wiped away if my personal
relation with the patient became disturbed. It was true that they became
reestablished if a reconciliation could be effected; but such an
occurrence showed that the personal emotional relation between doctor
and patient was after all stronger than the whole cathartic process, and
it was precisely that factor which escaped every effort at control. And
one day I had an experience which showed me in the crudest light what I
had long suspected. One of my most acquiescent patients, with whom
hypnosis had enabled me to bring about the most marvellous results, and
whom I was engaged in relieving of her suffering by tracing back her
attacks of pain to their origins, as she woke up on one occasion, threw
her arms round my neck. The unexpected entrance of a servant relieved us
from a painful discussion, but from that time onwards there was a tacit
understanding between us that hypnotic treatment should be discontinued.
I was modest enough not to attribute the event to my own irresistible
personal attraction, and I felt that I had now grasped the nature of the
element of mystery that was at work behind hypnosis. In order to exclude
it, or at all events to isolate it, it was necessary to abandon
hypnosis.

But hypnosis had been of immense help in the cathartic treatment, by
widening the field of the patient’s consciousness and putting within his
reach knowledge which he did not possess in his waking life. It seemed
no easy task to find a substitute for it. While I was in this
perplexity, a recollection came to my help of an experiment which I had
often witnessed while I was with Bernheim. When the subject awoke from
the state of somnambulism, he seemed to have lost all memory of what had
happened while he was in that state. But Bernheim maintained that the
memory was present all the same; and if he insisted on the subject
remembering, if he asseverated that he knew it all and had only to say
it, and if at the same time he laid his hand on the subject’s forehead,
then the forgotten memories used in fact to return, hesitatingly at
first, but eventually in a flood and with complete clarity. I determined
that I would act in the same way. My patients, I reflected, must in fact
“know” all the things which had hitherto only been made accessible to
them by hypnosis; and assurances and encouragement on my part, assisted
perhaps by the touch of my hand, would, I thought, have the power of
forcing the forgotten facts and connections into consciousness. No doubt
this seemed a more laborious process than putting them under hypnosis,
but it might prove highly instructive. So I abandoned hypnosis, only
retaining my practice of requiring the patient to lie upon a sofa while
I sat behind him, seeing him, but not seen myself.




                                  III


My expectations were fulfilled; I was set free from hypnosis. But along
with the change in technique, the process of catharsis took on a new
complexion. Hypnosis had screened from view an interplay of forces which
now came in sight, and the understanding of which gave a solid
foundation to my theory.

How had it come about that the patients had forgotten so many of the
facts of their external and internal lives, but could nevertheless
recollect them if a particular technique was applied? Observation
supplied an exhaustive answer to these questions. Everything that had
been forgotten had in some way or other been painful; it had been either
alarming or disagreeable or shameful, by the standards of the subject’s
personality. The thought arose spontaneously: it was precisely on that
account that it had been forgotten, i. e. that it had not remained
conscious. In order to make it conscious again, in spite of this, it was
necessary to overcome something that fought against one in the patient;
it was necessary to make an expenditure of effort on one’s own part in
order to compel and subdue it. The amount of effort required of the
physician varied in different cases; it increased in direct proportion
to the difficulty of what had to be remembered. The expenditure of force
on the part of the physician was evidently the measure of a _resistance_
on the part of the patient. It was only necessary to translate into
words what I myself had observed, and I was in possession of the theory
of _repression_.

It was now easy to reconstruct the pathogenic process. Let us keep to a
simple example, in which a particular impulsion had arisen in the
subject’s mind, but was opposed by other powerful tendencies. We should
have expected the mental _conflict_ which now arose to take the
following course. The two dynamic quantities—for our present purposes
let us call them “the instinct” and “the resistance”—would struggle with
each other for some time in the fullest light of consciousness, until
the instinct was repudiated and the charge[9] of energy withdrawn from
it. This would have been the normal solution. In a neurosis, however,
(for reasons which were still unknown) the conflict found a different
outcome. The ego drew back, as it were, after the first shock of its
conflict with the objectionable impulse; it debarred the impulse from
access to consciousness and to direct motor discharge, but at the same
time the impulse retained its full charge of energy. I named this
process _repression_; it was a novelty, and nothing like it had ever
before been recognized in mental life. It was obviously a primary
mechanism of defence, comparable to an attempt at flight, and was only a
fore-runner of the later developed normal condemning judgment. The first
act of repression involved further consequences. In the first place, the
ego was obliged to protect itself against the constant threat of a
renewed advance on the part of the repressed impulse by making a
permanent expenditure of energy, a _counter-charge_, and it thus
impoverished itself. On the other hand, the repressed impulse, which was
now _unconscious_, was able to find means of discharge and of
substitutive gratification by circuitous routes and thus to bring the
whole purpose of the repression to nothing. In the case of
conversion-hysteria, the circuitous route led to the nerve supply of the
body; the repressed impulse broke through at some point or other and
produced _symptoms_. The symptoms were thus results of a compromise, for
although they were substitutive gratifications, they were nevertheless
distorted and deflected from their aim, owing to the resistance of the
ego.

The theory of repression became the foundation-stone of our
understanding of the neuroses. A different view had now to be taken of
the task of therapy. Its aim was no longer to “abreact” an effect which
had got onto the wrong lines, but to uncover repressions and replace
them by acts of judgment which might result either in the acceptance or
in the rejection of what had formerly been repudiated. I showed my
recognition of the new situation by no longer calling my method of
investigation and treatment _catharsis_ but _psychoanalysis_.

It is possible to take repression as a centre and to bring all the
elements of psychoanalytic theory into relation with it. But before
doing so, I have a further remark of a polemical nature to make.
According to Janet’s view, a hysteric was a wretched person who, on
account of a constitutional weakness, was unable to hold her mental acts
together, and it was for that reason that she fell a victim to mental
dissociation and to a restriction of the field of her consciousness. The
results of psychoanalytical investigations, on the other hand, showed
that these phenomena were the result of dynamic factors—of mental
conflict and of repression. This distinction seems to me to be
far-reaching enough to put an end to the glib repetition of the view
that whatever is of value in psychoanalysis is merely borrowed from the
ideas of Janet. The reader will have learned from my account that
historically psychoanalysis is completely independent of Janet’s
discoveries, just as, in its content, it diverges from them and goes far
beyond them. Janet’s works would never have had the implications which
have made psychoanalysis of such importance to the mental sciences and
have made it attract such universal interest. I always treated Janet
himself with respect, since his discoveries coincided, to a considerable
extent, with those of Breuer, which had been made earlier, but were
published later than his. But when, in the course of time,
psychoanalysis became a subject of discussion in France, Janet behaved
ill, showed ignorance of the facts and used ugly arguments. And finally
he revealed himself to my eyes and destroyed the value of his own work
by declaring that when he had spoken of ‘unconscious’ mental acts, he
had meant nothing by the phrase—it had been no more than a _façon de
parler_.

But the study of pathogenic repressions and of other phenomena which
have still to be mentioned compelled psychoanalysis to take the concept
of the “unconscious” seriously. Psychoanalysis regarded everything
mental as being in the first instance unconscious; the further quality
of “consciousness” might also be present, or again it might be absent.
This, of course, provoked a denial from the philosophers, for whom
“conscious” and “mental” were identical, and who protested that they
could not conceive of such a monstrosity as the “unconscious mental.”
There was no help for it, however, and this idiosyncrasy of the
philosophers could only be disregarded with a shrug. Experience (gained
from pathological material, of which the philosophers were ignorant) of
the frequency and power of impulses of which one knew nothing directly,
and whose existence had to be inferred like some fact in the external
world, left no alternative open. It could be pointed out, incidentally,
that this was only treating one’s own mental life as one had always
treated other people’s. One did not hesitate to ascribe mental processes
to other people, although one had no immediate consciousness of them and
could only infer them from their words and actions. But what held good
for other people must be applicable to oneself. Anyone who tried to push
the argument further and to conclude from it that one’s own hidden
processes belonged actually to a second consciousness would be faced
with the concept of a consciousness of which one knew nothing, of an
“unconscious consciousness”—and this would scarcely be preferable to the
assumption of an “unconscious mental.” If, on the other hand, one
declared, like some other philosophers, that one was prepared to take
pathological phenomena into account, but that the processes underlying
them ought not to be described as mental but as “psychoid,” the
difference of opinion would degenerate into an unfruitful dispute about
words, though, even so, expediency would decide in favour of keeping the
expression “unconscious mental.” The further question as to the ultimate
nature of this unconscious is no wiser or more profitable than the older
one as to the nature of the conscious.

It would be more difficult to explain concisely how it came about that
psychoanalysis made a further distinction in the unconscious, and
separated it into a _preconscious_ and an unconscious proper. It will be
sufficient to say that it appeared a legitimate course to supplement the
theories which were a direct expression of experience by hypotheses
which were designed to facilitate the handling of the material and
related to matters which could not be a subject of immediate
observation. The very same procedure is adopted by the older sciences.
The sub-division of the unconscious is part of an attempt to picture the
apparatus of the mind as being built up of a number of _instances_ or
systems, whose inter-relations may be expressed in spatial terms,
without reference, of course, to the actual anatomy of the brain. (I
have described this as the _topographical method of approach_.) Such
ideas as these are part of a speculative superstructure of
psychoanalysis, any portion of which can be abandoned or changed without
loss or regret the moment its inadequacy has been proved. But there is
still plenty to be described that lies closer to actual experience.

I have already mentioned that my investigation of the precipitating and
underlying causes of the neuroses led me more and more frequently to
conflicts between the subject’s sexual impulses and his resistances to
sexuality. In my search for the pathogenic situations in which the
repressions of sexuality had set in and in which the symptoms, as
substitutes for what was repressed, had their origin, I was carried
further and further back into the patient’s life and ended by reaching
the first years of his childhood. What poets and students of human
nature had always asserted turned out to be true: the impressions of
that remote period of life, though they were for the most part buried in
amnesia, left ineradicable traces upon the individual’s growth and in
particular laid the foundations of any nervous disorder that was to
follow. But since these experiences of childhood were always concerned
with sexual excitations and the reaction against them, I found myself
faced by the fact of infantile sexuality—once again a novelty and a
contradiction of one of the strongest of human prejudices. Childhood was
looked upon as “innocent” and free from the lusts of sex, and the fight
with the demon of “sensuality” was not thought to begin until the
troubled age of puberty. Such occasional sexual activities as it had
been impossible to overlook in children were put down as signs of
degeneracy and premature depravity or as a curious freak of nature. Few
of the findings of psychoanalysis have met with such universal
contradiction or have aroused such an outburst of indignation as the
assertion that the sexual function starts at the beginning of life and
reveals its presence by important signs even in childhood. And yet no
other finding of analysis can be demonstrated so easily and so
completely.

Before going further into the question of infantile sexuality, I must
mention an error into which I fell for a while and which might well have
had fatal consequences for the whole of my work. Under the pressure of
the technical procedure which I used at that time, the majority of my
patients reproduced from their childhood, scenes in which they were
sexually seduced by some grown-up person. With female patients the part
of seducer was almost always assigned to their father. I believed these
stories, and consequently supposed that I had discovered the roots of
the subsequent neurosis in these experiences of sexual seduction in
childhood. My confidence was strengthened by a few cases in which
relations of this kind with a father, uncle or elder brother had
continued up to an age at which memory was quite to be trusted. If the
reader feels inclined to shake his head at my credulity, I cannot
altogether blame him; though I may plead that this was at a time when I
was intentionally keeping my critical faculty in abeyance so as to
preserve an unprejudiced and receptive attitude towards the many
novelties which were coming to my notice every day. When, however, I was
at last obliged to recognize that these scenes of seduction had never
taken place, and that they were only phantasies which my patients had
made up or which I myself had perhaps forced upon them, I was for some
time completely at a loss. My confidence alike in my technique and in
its results suffered a severe blow, it could not be disputed that I had
arrived at these scenes by a technical method which I considered
correct, and their subject-matter was unquestionably related to the
symptoms from which my investigation had started. When I had pulled
myself together, I was able to draw the right conclusions from my
discovery: namely, that the neurotic symptoms were not related directly
to actual events but to phantasies embodying wishes, and that, as far as
the neurosis was concerned, psychical reality was of more importance
than material reality. I do not believe even now that I forced the
seduction-phantasies upon my patients, that I “suggested” them. I had,
in fact, stumbled for the first time upon the _Œdipus complex_, which
was later to assume such an overwhelming importance, but which I did not
recognize as yet in its disguise of phantasy. Moreover, seduction during
childhood retained a certain share, though a humbler one, in the
ætiology of neuroses. But the seducers turned out as a rule to have been
older children.

It will be seen, then, that my mistake was of the same kind as would be
made by someone who believed that the legendary story of the early kings
of Rome (as told by Livy) was historical truth instead of what it is in
fact—a reaction against the memory of times and circumstances that were
insignificant and occasionally, perhaps, inglorious. When the mistake
had been cleared up, the path to the study of the sexual life of
children lay open. It thus became possible to apply psychoanalysis to
another field of science and to use its data as a means of discovering a
new piece of biological knowledge.

The sexual function, as I found, is in existence from the very beginning
of the individual’s life, though at first it is assimilated to the other
vital functions and does not become independent of them until later; it
has to pass through a long and complicated process of development before
it becomes what we are familiar with as the normal sexual life of the
adult. It begins by manifesting itself in the activity of a whole number
of _component instincts_. These are dependent upon _erotogenic zones_ in
the body; some of them make their appearance in pairs of opposite
impulses (such as sadism and masochism or the impulses to look and to be
looked at); they operate independently of one another in their search
for pleasure, and they find their object for the most part in the
subject’s own body. Thus, to begin with, they are non-centralized and
predominantly _auto-erotic_. Later they begin to be co-ordinated; a
first stage of organization is reached under the dominance of the _oral_
components, an _anal-sadistic_ stage follows, and it is only after the
third stage has at last been reached that the primacy of the _genitals_
is established and that the sexual function begins to serve the ends of
reproduction. In the course of this process of development a number of
elements of the various component instincts turn out to be unserviceable
for this last end and are therefore left on one side or turned to other
uses, while others are diverted from their aims and carried over into
the genital organization. I gave the name of _libido_ to the energy of
the sexual instincts and to that form of energy alone. I was next driven
to suppose that the libido does not always pass through its prescribed
course of development smoothly. As a result either of the excessive
strength of certain of the components or of experiences involving
premature gratification, _fixations_ of the libido may occur at various
points in the course of its development. If subsequently a repression
takes place, the libido flows back to these points (a process described
as _regression_), and it is from them that the energy breaks through in
the form of a symptom. Later on it further became clear that the
localization of the point of fixation is what determines the _choice of
neurosis_, that is, the form in which the subsequent illness makes its
appearance.

The process of arriving at an object, which plays an important part in
mental life, takes place alongside of the organization of the libido.
After the stage of auto-erotism, the first love-object in the case of
both sexes is the mother; and it seems probable that, to begin with, the
child does not distinguish its mother’s organ of nutrition from its own
body. Later, but still in the first years of infancy, the relation known
as the Œdipus complex, becomes established: boys concentrate their
sexual wishes upon their mother and develop hostile impulses against
their father as being a rival, while girls develop an analogous
attitude. All of the different variations and consequences of the Œdipus
complex are important; and in particular the innately bisexual
constitution of human beings makes itself felt and increases the number
of simultaneously active tendencies. Children do not become clear for
quite a long time upon the differences between the sexes; and during
this period of _sexual enquiry_ they produce typical _sexual theories_
which, since they are limited by the incompleteness of their authors’
own physical development, are a mixture of truth and error and fail to
solve the problems of sexual life (the riddle of the Sphinx, the
question of where babies come from). We see, then, that a child’s first
object-choice is an _incestuous_ one. The whole course of development
that I have described is run through rapidly. For the most remarkable
feature of the sexual life of man is that it comes on in two waves, with
an interval between them. It reaches a first climax in the fourth or
fifth year of a child’s life. But this early growth of sexuality is
nipped in the bud; the sexual impulses, which have shown such
liveliness, are overcome by repression, and a _period of latency_
follows, which lasts until puberty and during which the
“reaction-formations” of morality, shame and disgust are built up. Of
all living creatures, man alone seems to show this double onset of
sexual growth, and it may perhaps be the biological determinant of his
predisposition to neuroses. At puberty the impulses and object-relations
of a child’s early years become re-animated, and amongst them the
emotional ties of his Œdipus complex. The sexual life of puberty is a
struggle between the impulses of early years and the inhibitions of the
latency period. Before this, and while the child is at the highest point
of its infantile sexual development, a genital organization of a sort is
established; but only the _male_ genitals play a part in it, and the
female ones remain undiscovered. (I have described this as the period of
_phallic_ primacy.) At this stage the contrast between the sexes is not
stated in terms of “male” or “female” but of “possessing a penis” or
“castrated.” The _castration complex_ which arises in this connexion is
of the profoundest importance in the formation alike of character and of
neuroses.

In order to make this condensed account of my discoveries as to the
sexual life of man more intelligible, I have brought together
conclusions which I reached at different dates and incorporated by way
of supplement or correction in the successive editions of my _Three
Contributions to the Theory of Sexuality_.[10] I hope it will have been
easy to gather the nature of my extension (on which so much stress has
been laid and which has excited so much opposition) of the concept of
sexuality. That extension is of a twofold kind. In the first place
sexuality is divorced from its too close connection with the genitals
and is regarded as a more comprehensive bodily function, having pleasure
as its goal and only secondarily coming to serve the ends of
reproduction. In the second place, the sexual impulses are regarded as
including all of those merely affectionate and friendly impulses to
which usage applies the exceedingly ambiguous word ‘love.’ I do not,
however, consider that these extensions are innovations, but rather
restorations: they signify the removal of inexpedient limitations of the
concept into which we had allowed ourselves to be led.

The detaching of sexuality from the genitals has the advantage of
allowing us to bring the sexual activities of children and of perverts
into the same scope as those of normal adults. The former have hitherto
been entirely neglected and, though the latter have been recognized, it
has been with moral indignation and without understanding. Looked at
from the psychoanalytic standpoint, even the most eccentric and
repellent perversions are explicable as manifestations of component
instincts of sexuality which have freed themselves from the primacy of
the genitals and are going in pursuit of pleasure on their own account
as they did in the very early days of the libido’s development. The most
important of these perversions, homosexuality, scarcely deserves the
name. It can be traced back to the constitutional bisexuality of all
human beings and to the after-effects of the phallic primacy.
Psychoanalysis enables us to point to some trace or other of a
homosexual object-choice in everyone. If I have described children as
“poly-morphously perverse,” I was only using a terminology that was
generally current; no moral judgment was implied by the phrase.
Psychoanalysis has no concern whatever with such judgments of value.

The second of my alleged extensions of the concept of sexuality finds
its justification in the fact revealed by psychoanalytic investigation,
that all of these affectionate impulses were originally of a completely
sexual nature but have become _inhibited in their aim or sublimated_.
The manner in which the sexual instincts can thus be influenced and
diverted enables them to be employed for cultural activities of every
kind, to which indeed they bring the most important contributions.

My surprising discoveries as to the sexuality of children were made in
the first instance through the analysis of adults. But later (from about
1908 onwards) it became possible to confirm them in the most
satisfactory way and in every detail by direct observations upon
children. Indeed, it is so easy to convince oneself of the regular
sexual activities of children, that one cannot help asking in
astonishment how the human race can have succeeded in over-looking the
facts and in maintaining for so long the agreeable legend of the
asexuality of childhood. This surprising circumstance must be connected
with the amnesia which, just as with the majority of adults, hides their
own infancy.




                                   IV


The theories of resistance and of repression, of the unconscious, of the
ætiological significance of sexual life and of the importance of
infantile experiences—these form the principal constituents of the
theoretical structure of psychoanalysis. In these pages, unfortunately,
I have been able to describe only the separate elements and not their
inter-connections and their bearing upon one another. But I am obliged
now to turn to the alterations which gradually took place in the
technique of the analytic method.

The means which I first adopted for overcoming the patient’s resistance,
by pressing and encouraging him, had been indispensable for the purpose
of giving me a first general survey of what was to be expected. But in
the long run it proved to be too much of a strain upon both sides and,
further, it seemed open to certain obvious criticisms. It therefore gave
place to another method which was in one sense its opposite. Instead of
urging the patient to say something upon some particular subject, I now
asked him to abandon himself to a process of _free association_, i. e.
to say whatever came into his head, while ceasing to give any conscious
direction to his thoughts. It was essential, however, that he should
bind himself to report literally everything that occurred to his
self-perception and not to give way to critical objections which sought
to put certain associations on one side on the ground that they were not
sufficiently important or that they were irrelevant or that they were
altogether meaningless. There was no necessity to repeat explicitly the
insistence upon the need for candor on the patient’s part in reporting
his thoughts, for it was the precondition of the whole analytic
treatment.

It may seem surprising that this method of free association, carried out
subject to the observation of _the fundamental rule of psychoanalysis_,
should have achieved what was expected of it, namely the bringing into
consciousness of the repressed material which was held back by
resistances. We must, however, bear in mind that free association is not
really free. The patient remains under the influence of the analytic
situation even though he is not directing his mental activities onto a
particular subject. We shall be justified in assuming that nothing will
occur to him that has not some reference to that situation. His
resistance against reproducing the repressed material will now be
expressed in two ways. Firstly, it will be shown by critical objections;
and it was to deal with these that the fundamental rule of
psychoanalysis was invented. But if the patient observes that rule and
so overcomes his reticences, the resistance will find another means of
expression. It will so arrange it that the repressed material itself
will never occur to the patient but only something which approximates to
it in an allusive way; and the greater the resistance, the more remote
will be the substitutive association which the patient has to report
from the actual idea that the analyst is in search of. The analyst, who
listens composedly, but without any constrained effort, to the stream of
associations and who, from his experience, has a general notion of what
to expect can make use of the material brought to light by the patient
according to two possibilities. If the resistance is slight, he will be
able, from the patient’s allusions, to infer the unconscious material
itself; or if the resistance is stronger, he will be able to recognize
from the associations, as they seem to become more remote from the
subject, the character of the resistance itself and will explain it to
the patient. Uncovering the resistance, however, is the first step
towards overcoming it. Thus the work of analysis involves an _art of
interpretation_, the successful handling of which may require tact and
practice, but which is not hard to acquire. But it is not only in the
saving of labour that the method of free association has an advantage
over the earlier method. It exposes the patient to the least possible
amount of compulsion, it never allows of contact being lost with the
actual current situation, it guarantees to a great extent that no factor
in the structure of the neurosis will be overlooked and that nothing
will be introduced into it by the expectations of the analyst. It is
left to the patient in all essentials to determine the course of the
analysis and the arrangement of the material; any systematic handling of
particular symptoms or complexes thus becomes impossible. In complete
contrast to what happened with hypnosis and with the urging method,
inter-related material makes its appearance at different times and at
different points in the treatment. To a spectator, therefore—though, in
fact, there can be none—an analytic treatment would seem completely
obscure.

Another advantage of the method is that it need never break down. It
must theoretically always be possible to have an association, provided
that no conditions are made as to its character. Yet there is one case
in which, in fact, a break down occurs with absolute regularity; from
its very uniqueness, however, this case, too can be interpreted.

I now come to the description of a factor which adds an essential
feature to my picture of analysis and which can claim alike technically
and theoretically, to be regarded as of the first importance. In every
analytic treatment, there arises, without the physician’s agency, an
intense emotional relationship between the patient and the analyst which
is not to be accounted for by the actual situation. It can be of a
positive or of a negative character, and can vary between the extremes
of a passionate, completely sensual love and the unbridled expression of
an embittered defiance and hatred. This _transference_—to give it its
shortened name—soon replaces, in the patient’s mind, the desire to be
cured, and, so long as it is affectionate and moderate becomes the agent
of the physician’s influence and neither more nor less than the
main-spring of the joint work of analysis. Later on, when it has become
passionate or has been converted into hostility, it becomes the
principal tool of the resistance. It may then happen that it will
paralyse the patient’s powers of associating and endanger the success of
the treatment. Yet it would be senseless to try to evade it; for an
analysis without transference is an impossibility. It must not be
supposed, however, that the transference is created by analysis and does
not occur apart from it. The transference is merely uncovered and
isolated by analysis. It is a universal phenomenon of the human mind, it
decides the success of all medical influence and, in fact, dominates the
whole of each person’s relations to his human environment. We can easily
recognize it as the same dynamic factor that the hypnotists have named
“suggestibility,” which is the agent of hypnotic _rapport_ and the
incalculable behavior of which led to such difficulties with the
cathartic method. When there is no inclination to a transference of
emotion such as this, or when it has become entirely negative, as
happens in dementia præcox or paranoia, then there is also no
possibility of influencing the patient by psychological means.

It is perfectly true that psychoanalysis, like other psycho-therapeutic
methods, employs the instrument of suggestion (or transference). But the
difference is this: that in analysis it is not allowed to play the
decisive part in determining the therapeutic results. It is used instead
to induce the patient to perform a piece of mental work—the overcoming
of his transference-resistances—which involves a permanent alteration in
his mental economy. The transference is made conscious to the patient by
the analyst, and it is resolved by convincing him that in his
transference-attitude he is _re-experiencing_ emotional relations which
had their origin in his earliest object-relationships during the
repressed period of his childhood. In this way the transference is
changed from the strongest weapon of the resistance into the best
instrument of the analytic treatment. Nevertheless, its handling remains
the most difficult as well as the most important part of the technique
of analysis.

With the help of the method of free association and of the closely
related art of interpretation, psychoanalysis succeeded in achieving
something which appeared to be of no practical importance but which, in
fact, necessarily led to a fresh attitude and a fresh scale of values in
scientific thought. It became possible to prove that dreams have a
meaning and to discover it. In classical antiquity great importance was
attached to dreams as foretelling the future; but modern science would
have nothing to do with them, it handed them over to superstition,
declaring them to be purely “somatic” processes—a kind of spasm
occurring in a mind that is otherwise asleep. It seemed quite
inconceivable that anyone who had done serious scientific work could
make his appearance as an “interpreter of dreams.” But by disregarding
the excommunication pronounced upon dreams, by treating them as
unexplained neurotic symptoms, as delusional or obsessional ideas, by
neglecting their apparent content and by making their separate component
images into subjects for free association, a different conclusion was
reached. The numerous associations produced by the dreamer led to the
discovery of a mental structure which could no longer be described as
absurd or confused, which was on an equality with any other product of
the mind, and of which the _manifest_ dream was no more than a
distorted, abbreviated and misunderstood translation and usually a
translation into visual images. These _latent dream-thoughts_ contained
the meaning of the dream, while its manifest content was simply a
make-believe, a façade, which could serve as a starting-point for the
associations but not for the interpretation.

There were now a whole series of questions to be answered, among the
most important of them being whether there was a motive for the
formation of dreams, under what conditions it took place, by what
methods the dream-thoughts (which are invariably full of sense) became
converted into the dream (which is often senseless), and others besides.
I attempted to solve all of these problems in _The Interpretation of
Dreams_,[11] which I published in the year 1900. I can only find space
here for the briefest abstract of my investigation. When the latent
dream-thoughts that are revealed by the analysis of a dream are
examined, one of them is found to stand out from among the rest, which
are intelligible and well known to the dreamer. These latter thoughts
are residues of waking life (the _day’s residues_, as they are called
technically); but the isolated thought is found to be an impulse in the
form of a wish, often of a very repellent kind, which is foreign to the
waking life of the dreamer and is consequently disavowed by him with
surprise or indignation. This impulse is the actual constructor of the
dream: it provides the energy for its production and makes use of the
day’s residues as material; the dream which thus originates represents a
situation in which the impulse is satisfied, it is the fulfilment of the
wish which the impulse contains. It would not be possible for this
process to take place without being favored by the presence of something
in the nature of a state of sleep. The necessary mental precondition of
sleep is the concentration of the ego upon the wish to sleep and the
withdrawal of psychical energy from all the interests of life; since at
the same time all the paths of approach to motility are blocked, the ego
is also able to reduce the expenditure of energy by which at other times
it maintains the repressions. The unconscious impulse makes use of this
nocturnal relaxation of repression in order to push its way into
consciousness with the dream. But the repressive resistance of the ego
is not abolished in sleep, but merely reduced. Some of it remains in the
shape of a _censorship of dreams_ and forbids the unconscious impulse to
express itself in the forms which it would properly assume. In
consequence of the severity of the censorship of dreams, the latent
dream-thoughts are obliged to submit to being altered and softened so as
to make the forbidden meaning of the dream unrecognizable. This is the
explanation of _dream-distortion_, which accounts for the most striking
characteristic of the manifest dream. We are therefore justified in
asserting that _a dream is the (disguised) fulfilment of a (repressed)
wish_. It will now be seen that dreams are constructed like neurotic
symptoms: they are compromises between the demands of a repressed
impulse and the resistance of a censoring force in the ego. Since they
have a similar origin they are equally unintelligible and stand in equal
need of interpretation.

There is no difficulty in discovering the general function of dreaming.
It serves the purpose of warding off, by a kind of soothing action,
external or internal stimuli which would tend to arouse the sleeper, and
thus of securing sleep against interruption. External stimuli are warded
off by being given a new interpretation and by being woven into some
harmless situation; internal stimuli, caused by the pressure of
instincts, are given free play by the sleeper and allowed to find
satisfaction in the formation of dreams, so long as the latent
dream-thoughts submit to the control of the censorship. But if they
threaten to break free and the meaning of the dream becomes too plain,
the sleeper cuts short the dream and awakens in terror. (Dreams of this
class are known as _anxiety-dreams_). A similar failure in the function
of dreaming occurs if an external stimulus becomes too strong to be
warded off. (This is the class of _awakening-dreams_). I have given the
name of _dream-work_ to the process which, with the co-operation of the
censorship, converts the latent thoughts into the manifest content of
the dream. It consists in a peculiar way of treating the preconscious
material of thought, so that its component parts become _condensed_, its
mental emphasis becomes _displaced_, and the whole of it is translated
into visual images or _dramatized_, and filled out by a deceptive
secondary elaboration. The dream-work is an excellent example of the
processes occurring in the deeper, unconscious layers of the mind, which
differ considerably from the familiar normal processes of thought. It
also displays a number of archaic characteristics, such as the use of a
_symbolism_ (in this case of a predominantly sexual kind) which it has
since also been possible to discover in other spheres of mental
activity.

We have explained that the unconscious impulse which causes the dream
connects itself with part of the day’s residues, with some unexhausted
interest of waking life; this lends the dream which is thus brought into
being a double value for the work of analysis. It is true that, on the
one hand, a dream that has been analysed reveals itself as the
fulfilment of a repressed wish; but, on the other hand, it will be a
continuation of some preconscious activity of the day before and will
contain subject-matter of some kind or other, giving expression, for
instance, to a determination, a warning, a reflection or once more to
the fulfilment of a wish. Analysis exploits the dream in both directions
as a means of obtaining knowledge alike of the patient’s conscious and
of his unconscious processes. It also profits from the fact that dreams
have access to the forgotten material of childhood, and so it happens
that infantile amnesia is for the most part overcome in connection with
the interpretation of dreams. In this respect dreams achieve a part of
what was previously the task of hypnosis. On the other hand, I have
never maintained the assertion which has so often been ascribed to me,
that dream-interpretation shows that all dreams have a sexual content or
are derived from sexual motive forces. It is easy to see that hunger,
thirst, or the need to excrete, can produce dreams of satisfaction just
as well as any repressed sexual or egoistic impulse. The case of young
children affords us a convenient test of the validity of our theory of
dreams. In them the various psychical systems are not yet sharply
divided and the repressions have not yet grown deep, so that we often
come upon dreams which are nothing more than undisguised fulfilments of
impulses left over from waking life. Under the influence of imperative
needs, adults may also produce dreams of this infantile type.

In the same way that psychoanalysis makes use of dream-interpretation,
it also profits by the study of the numerous little slips and mistakes
which people make—symptomatic actions, as they are called. I
investigated this subject in a series of papers which were published for
the first time in book-form in 1904 under the title of _The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life_.[12] In this widely circulated work I
have pointed out that these phenomena are not accidental, that they
require more than physiological explanations, that they have a meaning
and can be interpreted, and that one is justified in inferring from them
the presence of restrained or repressed impulses and intentions. But
what constitutes the enormous importance of dream-interpretation, as
well as of this latter study, is not the assistance they give to the
work of analysis but another of their qualities. Previously
psychoanalysis had only been concerned with solving pathological
phenomena and in order to explain them it had often been driven into
making assumptions whose comprehensiveness was out of all proportion to
the importance of the actual material under consideration. But when it
came to dreams, it was no longer dealing with a pathological symptom,
but with a phenomenon of normal mental life which might occur in any
healthy person. If dreams turned out to be constructed like symptoms, if
their explanation required the same assumptions—the repression of
impulses, substitute-formation, compromise-formation, the dividing of
the conscious and the unconscious into various psychical systems—then
psychoanalysis was no longer a subsidiary science in the field of
psycho-pathology, it was rather the foundation for a new and deeper
science of the mind which would be equally indispensable for the
understanding of the normal. Its postulates and findings could be
carried over to other regions of mental happening; a path lay open to it
that led far afield, into spheres of universal interest.




                                   V


I must interrupt my account of the internal growth of psychoanalysis and
turn to its external history. What I have so far described of its
discoveries has related for the most part to the results of my own work;
but I have filled in my account with material from later dates and have
not distinguished between my own contributions and those of my pupils
and followers.

For more than ten years after my separation from Breuer, I had no
followers. I was completely isolated. In Vienna I was shunned, abroad no
notice was taken of me. My _Interpretation of Dreams_, published in
1900, was scarcely reviewed in the technical journals. In my essay “On
the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement” I mentioned, as an instance
of the attitude adopted by psychiatric circles in Vienna, a conversation
with an assistant at the Clinic, who had written a book against my
theories, but had never read my _Interpretation of Dreams_. He had been
told at the Clinic that it was not worth while. The man in question, who
has since become a professor, has gone so far as to repudiate my report
of the conversation and to throw doubts in general upon the accuracy of
my recollection. I can only say that I stand by every word of the
account I then gave.

As soon as I realized the inevitable nature of what I had come up
against, my sensitiveness greatly diminished. Moreover, my isolation
gradually came to an end. To begin with, a small circle of pupils
gathered round me in Vienna; and then, after 1906, came the news that
the psychiatrists at Zurich, E. Bleuler, his assistant C. G. Jung, and
others, were taking a lively interest in psychoanalysis. We got into
personal touch with one another, and at Easter 1908, the friends of the
young science met at Salzburg, agreed upon the regular repetition of
similar informal congresses and arranged for the publication of a
periodical which was edited by Jung and was given the title of _Jahrbuch
für psychopathologische und psychoanalytische Forschungen_. It was
brought out under the direction of Bleuler and myself and ceased
publication at the beginning of the Great War. At the same time that the
Swiss psychiatrists joined the movement, interest in psychoanalysis
began to be aroused all over Germany, it became the subject of a large
number of written comments as well as of lively discussions at
scientific congresses. But its reception was nowhere friendly or even
benevolently impartial. After the briefest acquaintance with
psychoanalysis, German science was united in rejecting it.

Even today it is, of course, impossible for me to foresee the final
judgment of posterity upon the value of psychoanalysis for psychiatry,
psychology and the mental sciences in general. But I fancy that, when
the history of the phase we have lived through comes to be written,
German science will not have cause to be proud of those who represented
it. I am not thinking of the fact that they rejected psychoanalysis or
of the decisive way in which they did so; both of these things were
easily intelligible, they were only to be expected and at any rate they
threw no discredit upon the character of the opponents of analysis. But
for the degree of arrogance which they displayed, for their
conscienceless contempt of logic, and for the coarseness and bad taste
of their attacks, there could be no excuse. It may be said that it is
childish of me to give free rein to such feelings as these now, after
fifteen years have passed; nor would I do so unless I had something more
to add. Years later, during the Great War, when a chorus of enemies were
bringing against the German nation the charge of barbarism, a charge
which sums up all that I have written above, it none the less hurt
deeply to feel that my own experience would not allow me to contradict
it.

One of my opponents boasted of silencing his patients as soon as they
began to talk of anything sexual and evidently thought that this
technique gave him a right to judge the part played by sexuality in the
neuroses. Apart from emotional resistances, which were so easily
explicable by the psychoanalytical theory that it was impossible to be
misled by them, it seemed to me that the main obstacle to agreement lay
in the fact that my opponents regarded psychoanalysis as a product of my
speculative imagination and were unwilling to believe in the long,
patient and unbiased work which had gone to its making. Since, in their
opinion, analysis had nothing to do with observation or experience, they
believed that they themselves were justified in rejecting it without
experience. Others again, who did not feel so strongly convinced of
this, repeated in their resistance the classical manœuvre of not looking
through the microscope so as to avoid seeing what they had denied. It is
remarkable, indeed, how incorrectly most people act when they are
obliged to form a judgment of their own upon some new subject. I have
heard for years from “benevolent” critics—and I am told the same thing
even today—that psychoanalysis is right up to such-and-such a point, but
that there it begins to exaggerate and to generalize without
justification. But I know that, while nothing is more difficult than to
draw such a line, only a few weeks or days earlier the critic has been
completely ignorant of the whole subject.

The result of the official anathema against psychoanalysis was that the
analysts began to come closer together. At the second Congress, held at
Nuremberg in 1910, they formed themselves, on the proposal of S.
Ferenczi, into an “International Psycho-Analytical Association,” divided
into a number of local societies, but under a common president. The
Association survived the Great War and still exists, consisting today of
branch societies in Austria, Germany, Hungary, Switzerland, Great
Britain, Holland, Russia and India as well as two in the United
States.[13] I arranged that C. G. Jung should be appointed as the first
President, which turned out later to have been a most unfortunate step.
At the same time a second journal devoted to psychoanalysis was started,
the _Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, edited by Adler and Stekel, and a
little later a third, _Imago_, edited by two non-medical analysts, H.
Sachs and O. Rank, and intended to deal with the application of analysis
to the mental sciences. Soon afterwards Bleuler published a paper in
defence of psychoanalysis.[14] Though it was a relief to find honesty
and straight-forward logic for once taking part in the dispute yet I
could not feel completely satisfied by Bleuler’s essay. He strove too
eagerly after an appearance of impartiality; nor is it a matter of
chance that it is to him that our science owes the valuable concept of
_ambivalence_. In later papers Bleuler adopted such a critical attitude
towards the theoretical structure of analysis and rejected or threw
doubts upon such essential parts of it, that I could not help asking
myself in astonishment what could be left of it for him to admire. Yet
not only has he subsequently uttered the strongest pleas in favor of
“depth psychology,” but he based his comprehensive study of
schizophrenia upon it. Nevertheless Bleuler did not for long remain a
member of the International Psycho-Analytical Association; he resigned
from it as a result of misunderstandings with Jung, and the
Burghölzli[15] was lost to analysis.

Official disapproval could not hinder the spread of psychoanalysis
either in Germany or in other countries. I have elsewhere[16] followed
the stages of its growth and given the names of those who were its first
representatives. In 1909 G. Stanley Hall invited Jung and me to America
to go to the Clark University, Worcester, Mass., of which he was
President, and to spend a week giving lectures (in German) at the
celebration of the twentieth anniversary of that body’s foundation. Hall
was justly esteemed as a psychologist and educationalist, and had
introduced psychoanalysis into his courses some years before; there was
a touch of the “king-maker” about him, a pleasure in setting up
authorities and in then deposing them. We also met James J. Putnam
there, the Harvard neurologist, who, in spite of his age, was an
enthusiastic supporter of psychoanalysis and threw the whole weight of a
personality that was universally respected into the defence of the
cultural value of analysis and the purity of its aims. He was an
estimable man, in whom, as a reaction against a predisposition to
obsessional neurosis, an ethical bias predominated; and the only thing
in him that we could regret was his inclination to attach psychoanalysis
to a particular philosophical system and to make it the servant of moral
aims. Another event of this time, which made a lasting impression upon
me, was a meeting with William James, the philosopher. I shall never
forget one little scene that occurred as we were on a walk together. He
stopped suddenly, handed me a bag he was carrying and asked me to walk
on, saying that he would catch me up as soon as he had got through an
attack of angina pectoris which was just coming on. He died of that
disease a year later; and I have always wished that I might be as
fearless as he was in the face of approaching death.

At that time I was only 53, I felt young and healthy, and my short visit
to the new world encouraged my self-respect in every way. In Europe I
felt as though I were despised; but over there I found myself received
by the foremost men as an equal. As I stepped onto the platform at
Worcester to deliver my _Five Lectures upon Psycho-Analysis_, it seemed
like the realization of some incredible day-dream: psychoanalysis was no
longer a product of delusion, it had become a valuable part of reality.
It has not lost ground in America since our visit; it is extremely
popular among the lay public and is recognized by a number of official
psychiatrists as an important element in medical training.
Unfortunately, however, it has suffered a great deal from being watered
down. Moreover, many abuses which have no relation to it find a cover
under its name, and there are few opportunities for any thorough
training in technique or theory. In America, too, it has come in
conflict with Behaviorism, a theory which is naïve enough to boast that
it has put the whole problem of psychology completely out of court.

In Europe, during the years 1911–1913, two secessionist movements from
psychoanalysis took place, led by men who had previously played a
considerable part in the young science, Alfred Adler and C. G. Jung.
Both movements seemed most threatening and quickly obtained a large
following. But their strength lay, not in their own content, but in the
temptation which they offered of being freed from what were felt as the
repellent findings of psychoanalysis without the necessity of rejecting
its actual material. Jung attempted to give to the facts of analysis a
fresh interpretation of an abstract, impersonal and non-historical
character, and thus hoped to escape the need for recognizing the
importance of infantile sexuality and of the Œdipus complex, as well as
the necessity for any analysis of childhood. Adler seemed to depart
still further from psychoanalysis; he entirely repudiated the importance
of sexuality, traced back the formation both of character and of the
neuroses solely to men’s desire for power and to their need to
compensate for their constitutional inferiority, and threw all the
psychological discoveries of psychoanalysis to the winds. But what he
had rejected forced its way back into his closed system under other
names; his “masculine protest” is nothing else than repression
unjustifiably sexualized. The criticism with which the two heretics were
met was a mild one; I only insisted that both Adler and Jung should
cease to describe their theories as “psychoanalysis.” After a lapse of
ten years, it can be asserted that both of these attempts against
psychoanalysis have blown over without doing any harm.

If a community is based on agreement upon a few cardinal points, it is
obvious that people who have abandoned that common ground will cease to
belong to it. Yet the secession of former pupils has often been brought
up against me as a sign of my intolerance or has been regarded as
evidence of some special fatality that hangs over me. It is a sufficient
answer to point out that, in contrast to those who have left me, like
Jung, Adler, Stekel and a few besides, there are a great number of men,
like Abraham, Eitingon, Ferenczi, Rank, Jones, Brill, Sachs, Pfister,
van Emden, Reik and others who have worked with me for some fifteen
years in loyal collaboration and for the most part in uninterrupted
friendship. I have only mentioned the oldest of my pupils who have
already made a distinguished name for themselves in the literature of
psychoanalysis; if I have passed over others, that is not to be taken as
a slight, and indeed among those who are young and have joined me
lately, talents are to be found on which great hopes may be set. But I
think I can say in my defence that an intolerant man, dominated by an
arrogant belief in his own infallibility, would never have been able to
maintain his hold upon so large a number of intelligent people,
especially if he had at his command as few practical attractions as I
had.

The Great War, which broke up so many other organizations, could do
nothing against our “International.” The first meeting after the war
took place in 1920 at the Hague on neutral ground. It was moving to see
how hospitably the Dutch welcomed the starving and impoverished subjects
of the Central European states; and I believe this was the first
occasion in a ruined world on which Englishmen and Germans sat at the
same table for the friendly discussion of scientific interests. Both in
Germany and in the countries of Western Europe, the war had actually
stimulated interest in psychoanalysis. The observation of war neuroses
had at last opened the eyes of the medical profession to the importance
of psycho-genesis in neurotic disturbances, and some of our
psychological conceptions, such as the “advantage of being ill” and the
“flight into illness,” suddenly became popular. The last Congress before
the German collapse, which was held at Budapest in 1918, was attended by
official representatives of the allied governments of the Central
European powers, and they agreed to the establishment of psychoanalytic
stations for the treatment of war neuroses. But this point was never
reached. Similarly, too, the comprehensive plans made by one of our
leading members, Dr. Anton von Freund, for establishing in Budapest a
centre for analytic study and treatment came to grief as a result of the
political disorders of the time and of the premature death of their
generous author. At a later date some of his ideas were put into
execution by Max Eitingon, who, in 1920, founded a psychoanalytical
clinic in Berlin. During the brief period of Bolshevist rule in Hungary,
Ferenczi was able to carry on a successful course of instruction as the
official representative of psychoanalysis at the University of Budapest.
After the war, our opponents announced with great joy that events had
produced a conclusive argument against the validity of the theses of
analysis. The war neuroses, they said, had proved that sexual factors
were unnecessary to the ætiology of neurotic disorders. But their
triumph was frivolous and premature. For, on the one hand, no one had
been able to carry out a thorough analysis of a case of war neurosis, so
that, in fact, nothing whatever was known for certain as to their
motivation and no conclusions could be drawn from this uncertainty.
While, on the other hand, psychoanalysis had long before arrived at the
concept of narcissism and of narcissistic neuroses, in which the
subject’s libido is attached to his own ego instead of to an object.
Though, on other occasions, therefore, the charge was brought against
psychoanalysis of having made an unjustifiable extension of the concept
of sexuality, yet, when it became convenient for polemical ends, this
crime was forgotten and we were once more held down to the narrowest
meaning of the word.

If the preliminary cathartic period is left on one side, the history of
psychoanalysis falls, from my point of view, into two phases. In the
first of these, I stood alone and had to do all the work myself: this
was from 1895–96 until 1906 or 1907. In the second phase, lasting from
then until the present time, the contributions of my pupils and
collaborators have been growing more and more in importance, so that
today, when a grave illness warns me of the approaching end, I can think
with a quiet mind of the cessation of my own labors. For that very
reason, however, it is impossible for me in this _Autobiographical
Study_ to deal as fully with the progress of psychoanalysis during the
second phase as I did with its gradual rise during the first phase,
which was concerned with my own activity alone. I feel that I should
only be justified in mentioning here those new discoveries in which I
still played a prominent part—in particular, therefore, those made in
the sphere of narcissism, of the theory of the instincts, and of the
application of psychoanalysis to the psychoses.

I must begin by saying that increasing experience showed more and more
plainly that the Œdipus complex was the nucleus of the neuroses. It was
at once the climax of infantile sexual life and the point of junction
from which all of its later developments proceeded. But if so, it was no
longer possible to expect analysis to discover a factor that was
specific in the ætiology of the neuroses. It must be true, as Jung
expressed it so well in the early days when he was still an analyst,
that neuroses have no peculiar content which belongs exclusively to
them, but that neurotics break down at the same difficulties that are
successfully overcome by normal people. This discovery was very far from
being a disappointment. It was in complete harmony with another one:
that the depth psychology revealed by psychoanalysis was in fact the
psychology of the normal mind. Our path had been like that of chemistry:
the great qualitative differences between substances were traced back to
quantitative variations in the proportions in which the same elements
were combined.

In the Œdipus complex, the libido is attached to the image of the
parents. But earlier there has been a period in which there were no such
objects. There followed from this fact the concept (of fundamental
importance for the libido theory) of a state in which the subject’s
libido fills his own ego and has that for its object. This state could
be called _narcissism_ or self-love. A moment’s reflection showed that
this state never completely ceases. All through the subject’s life his
ego remains the great reservoir of his libido, from which the
attachments to objects (the _objectcathexes_[17]) radiate out and into
which the libido can stream back again from the objects. Thus
narcissistic libido is constantly being converted into object-libido,
and _vice versa_. An excellent instance of the length to which this
conversion can go is afforded by the sexual or sublimated devotion which
involves a sacrifice of the self. Whereas, hitherto, in considering the
process of repression, attention had only been paid to what was
repressed, these ideas made it also possible to form a correct estimate
of the repressing forces. It had been said that repression was set in
action by the instincts of self-preservation operating in the ego (the
“ego-instincts”), and that it was brought to bear upon the libidinal
instincts. But since the instincts of self-preservation were now
recognized as also being of a libidinal nature, as being narcissistic
libido, the process of repression was seen to be a process occurring
within the libido itself; narcissistic libido was opposed to
object-libido, the interests of self-preservation defended themselves
against the demands of object-love, that is, against the demands of
sexuality in the narrower sense.

There is no more urgent need in psychology than for a securely founded
theory of the instincts on which it might then be possible to build
further. Nothing of the sort exists, however, and psychoanalysis is
driven to making tentative efforts towards some such theory. It began by
drawing a contrast between the ego-instincts (the instinct of
self-preservation, hunger) and the libidinal instincts (love), but later
replaced it by a new contrast between narcissistic and object-libido.
This was clearly not the last word on the subject; biological
considerations seemed to make it impossible to remain content with
assuming the existence of only a single class of instincts.

In the works of my later years (_Beyond the Pleasure Principle_, _Group
Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego_, and _The Ego and the Id_)[18] I
have given free rein to the inclination to speculation which I kept down
for so long and I have also taken stock of a new solution of the problem
of the instincts. I have combined the instincts for self-preservation
and for the preservation of the species under the concept of _Eros_ and
have contrasted with it an instinct of death or destruction which works
in silence. Instinct, in general, is regarded as a kind of elasticity of
living things, an impulsion towards the restoration of a situation which
once existed but was brought to an end by some external disturbance.
This essentially conservative character of instincts is exemplified by
the phenomena of the _compulsion to repeat_. The picture which life
presents to us is the result of the working of Eros and the
death-instinct together and against each other.

It remains to be seen whether this construction will turn out to be
serviceable. Although it arose from a desire to fix some of the most
important theoretical ideas of psychoanalysis, it goes far beyond
psychoanalysis. I have repeatedly heard it said contemptuously that it
is impossible to take a science seriously whose most general concepts
are as lacking in precision as those of libido and of instinct in
psychoanalysis. But this reproach is based upon a complete misconception
of the facts. Clear fundamental concepts and sharply drawn definitions
are only possible in the mental sciences in so far as the latter seek to
fit a department of facts into the frame of a logical system. In the
natural sciences, of which psychology is one, such clearcut general
concepts are superfluous and indeed impossible. Zoology and Botany did
not start from correct and adequate definitions of an animal and a
plant; to this very day Biology has been unable to give any certain
meaning to the concept of life. Physics itself, indeed, would never have
made any advance if it had had to wait until its concepts of matter,
force, gravitation, and so on, had reached the desirable degree of
clarity and precision. The fundamental concepts or most general ideas in
any of the disciplines of science are always left indeterminate at first
and are only explained to begin with by reference to the realm of
phenomena from which they were derived; it is only by means of a
progressive analysis of the material of observation that they can be
made clear and can find a significant and consistent meaning.

I had already made attempts at earlier stages of my work to arrive at
some more general points of view, starting from the observations of
psychoanalysis. In a short essay, “Formulations regarding the Two
Principles of Mental Functioning,”[19] published in 1911, I drew
attention (and there was, of course, nothing original in this), to the
domination of the “pleasure-pain principle” in mental life and to its
displacement by the so-called “reality principle.” Later on (1915–17), I
made an attempt to produce a “Metapsychology.” By this I meant a method
of approach according to which every mental process is considered in
relation to three coördinates, which I described as _dynamic_,
_topographical_, and _economic_ respectively; and this seemed to me to
represent the farthest goal that psychology could attain. The attempt
remained no more than a torso; after writing two or three
papers—“Instincts and their Vicissitudes,” “Repression,” “The
Unconscious,” “Mourning and Melancholia,” etc[20]—I broke off, wisely
perhaps, since the time for theoretical predictions of this kind had not
yet come. In my latest speculative works I have set about the task of
dissecting our mental apparatus on the basis of the analytic view of
pathological facts and have divided it into an _ego_, and _id_, and a
_super-ego_.[21] The super-ego is the heir of the Œdipus complex and
represents the ethical standards of mankind.

I should not like to create an impression that during this last period
of my work I have turned my back upon patient observation and have
abandoned myself entirely to speculation. I have, on the contrary,
always remained in the closest touch with the analytic material and have
never ceased working at detailed points of clinical or technical
importance. Even when I have moved away from observation, I have
carefully avoided any contact with philosophy proper. This avoidance has
been greatly facilitated by constitutional incapacity. I was always open
to the ideas of G. T. Fechner and have followed that thinker upon many
important points. The large extent to which psychoanalysis coincides
with the philosophy of Schopenhauer—not only did he assert the dominance
of the emotions and the supreme importance of sexuality, but he was even
aware of the mechanism of repression—is not to be traced to my
acquaintance with his teaching. I read Schopenhauer very late in my
life. Nietzsche, another philosopher whose guesses and intuitions often
agree in the most astonishing way with the laborious findings of
psychoanalysis, was, for a long time, avoided by me on that very
account; I was less concerned with the question of priority than with
keeping my mind unembarrassed.

The neuroses were the first subject of analysis and for a long time they
were the only one. No analyst could doubt that medical practice was
wrong in separating those disorders from the psychoses and in attaching
them to the organic nervous diseases. The theory of the neuroses belongs
to psychiatry and is indispensable as an introduction to it. It would
seem, however, that the analytical study of the psychoses is
impracticable owing to its lack of therapeutic results. Mental patients
are, as a rule, without the capacity for forming a positive
transference, so that the principal instrument of analytic technique is
inapplicable to them. There are, nevertheless, a number of methods of
approach to be found. Transference is often not so completely absent but
that it can be used to a certain extent; and analysis has achieved
undoubted successes with cyclical depressions, light paranoic
modifications and partial schizophrenias. It has at least been a benefit
to science that in many cases the diagnosis can oscillate for quite a
long time between assuming the presence of a psychoneurosis or of a
dementia præcox; for therapeutic attempts initiated in such cases have
resulted in valuable discoveries before they have had to be broken off.
But the chief consideration in this connection is that so many things
that, in the neuroses, have to be laboriously fetched up from the
depths, are found in the psychoses upon the surface, visible to every
eye. So that the best subjects for the demonstration of many of the
assertions of analysis are provided by the psychiatric clinic. It was
thus bound to happen before long that analysis would find its way to the
objects of psychiatric observation. At a very early date (1896) I was
able to establish, in a case of paranoid dementia, the presence of the
same ætiological factors and the same emotional complexes as in the
neuroses. Jung explained some most puzzling stereotypes in dements by
bringing them into relation with the patients’ life histories; Bleuler
demonstrated the existence in various psychoses of mechanisms like those
which analysis had discovered in neurotics. Since then analysts have
never relaxed their efforts to come to an understanding of the
psychoses. Especially since it has been possible to work with the
concept of narcissism, they have managed, now in this place and now in
that, to get a glimpse beyond the wall. Most of all, no doubt, was
achieved by Abraham in his elucidation of melancholia. It is true that
in this sphere all our knowledge is not yet converted into therapeutic
power; but the mere theoretical gain is not to be despised, and we may
be content to wait for its practical application. In the long run even
the psychiatrists have been unable to resist the convincing force of
their own clinical material. At the present time German psychiatry is
undergoing a kind of “peaceful penetration” by analytic views. While
they continually declare that they will never be psychoanalysts, that
they do not belong to the “orthodox” school or agree with its
exaggerations, and in particular that they do not believe in the
predominance of the sexual factor, nevertheless the majority of the
younger workers take over one piece or another of analytic theory and
apply it in their own fashion to the material. All the signs point to
the proximity of further developments in the same direction.




                                   VI


I now watch from a distance the symptomatic reactions that are
accompanying the introduction of psychoanalysis into the France which
was for so long refractory. It seems like a reproduction of something I
have lived through before, and yet it has peculiarities of its own.
Objections of incredible simplicity are raised, such as that French
sensitiveness is offended by the pedantry and crudity of
psychoanalytical terminology. (One cannot help being reminded of
Lessing’s immortal Chevalier Riccaut de la Marlinière.[22]) Another
comment has a more serious ring (a Professor of Psychology at the
Sorbonne did not think it beneath him): the whole method of thought of
psychoanalysis is inconsistent with the _génie latin_. Here the
Anglo-Saxon allies of France, who count as supporters of analysis, are
explicitly thrown over. Anyone hearing such words would suppose that
psychoanalysis had been the favourite child of the _génie teutonique_
and had been clasped to its heart from the moment of birth.

In France the interest in psychoanalysis began among the men of letters.
To understand this, it must be borne in mind that from the time of the
writing of _The Interpretation of Dreams_, psychoanalysis ceased to be a
purely medical subject. Between its appearance in Germany and in France
lies the history of its numerous applications to departments of
literature and of æsthetics, to the history of religions and to
pre-history, to my theology, to folk-lore, to education, and so on. None
of these things have much to do with medicine; in fact it is only
through psychoanalysis that they are connected with it. I have no
business, therefore, to go into them in detail in these pages.[23] I
cannot pass them over completely in silence, however, for, on the one
hand, they are essential to a correct appreciation of the nature and
value of psychoanalysis, and, on the other hand, I have, after all,
undertaken to give an account of my lifework. The beginnings of the
majority of these applications of psychoanalysis will be found in my
works. Here and there I have gone a little way along the path in order
to gratify my non-medical interests. Later on, others (not only doctors,
but specialists in the various fields as well) have followed in my
tracks and penetrated far into the different subjects. But since my
programme limits me to a mention of my own share in these applications
of psychoanalysis, I can only give a quite inadequate picture of their
extent and importance.

A number of suggestions came to me out of the Œdipus complex, the
ubiquity of which gradually dawned on me. The poet’s choice, or his
invention, of such a terrible subject seemed puzzling; and so, too, did
the overwhelming effect of its dramatic treatment, and the general
nature of such tragedies of destiny. But all of this became intelligible
when one realized that a universal law of mental life had here been
captured in all its emotional significance. Fate and the oracle were no
more than materializations of an internal necessity; and the fact of the
hero sinning without his knowledge and against his intentions was
evidently a right expression of the _unconscious_ nature of his criminal
tendencies. From understanding this tragedy of destiny it was only a
step further to understanding a tragedy of character—_Hamlet_, which had
been admired for 300 years without its meaning being discovered or its
author’s motives guessed. It could scarcely be a chance that this
neurotic creation of the poet should have broken down, like his
numberless fellows in the real world, at the Œdipus complex; for Hamlet
was faced with the task of taking vengeance upon another for the two
deeds which are the subject of the Œdipus desires, and before that task
his arm was paralysed by his own obscure sense of guilt. Shakespeare
wrote _Hamlet_ very soon after his father’s death. The suggestions made
by me for the analysis of this tragedy were fully worked out later on by
Ernest Jones. And the same example was afterwards used by Otto Rank as
the starting-point for his investigation of the choice of material made
by dramatists. In his large volume upon the incest theme[24] he was able
to show how often imaginative writers have taken as their subject the
themes of the Œdipus situation, and traced in the different literatures
of the world the way in which the material has been transformed,
modified and softened.

It was tempting to go on from there to an attempt at an analysis of
poetic and artistic creation in general. The realm of imagination was
evidently a “sanctuary” made during the painful transition from the
pleasure principle to the reality principle in order to provide a
substitute for the gratification of instincts which had to be given up
in real life. The artist, like the neurotic, had withdrawn from an
unsatisfying reality into this world of imagination, but, unlike the
neurotic, he knew how to find a way back from it and once more to get a
firm foothold in reality. His creations, works of art, were the
imaginary gratifications of unconscious wishes, just as dreams are; and
like them, they were in the nature of compromises, since they too were
obliged to avoid any open conflict with the forces of repression. But
they differed from the asocial, narcissistic products of dreaming in
that they were calculated to arouse interest in other people and were
able to evoke and to gratify the same unconscious wishes in them too.
Besides this, they have made use of the perceptual pleasure of formal
beauty as what I have called an “incitement-premium.” What
psychoanalysis was able to do was to take the inter-relations between
the impressions of the artist’s life, his chance experiences and his
works, and from them to construct his constitution and the impulses at
work in it—that is to say, that part of him which he shared with all
men. With this aim in view, for instance, I made Leonardo da Vinci the
subject of a study which is based upon a single memory of childhood
related by him and which aims chiefly at explaining his picture of “St.
Anne with the Virgin and Child.” It does not appear that the enjoyment
of a work of art is spoiled by the knowledge gained from such an
analysis. The layman may perhaps expect too much from analysis in this
field, for it must be admitted that it throws no light upon the two
problems which probably interest him the most. It can do nothing towards
elucidating the nature of the artistic gift, nor can it explain the
means by which the artist works—artistic technique.

I was able to show from a short story by W. Jensen called _Gradiva_,
which has no particular merit in itself, that invented dreams can be
interpreted in the same way as real ones and that the unconscious
mechanisms familiar to us in the “dream-work” are thus also operative in
the processes of imaginative writing.

My book upon _Wit and its Relation to the Unconscious_[25] was a
side-issue, indirectly derived from _The Interpretation of Dreams_. The
only friend of mine who was at that time interested in my work remarked
to me that my interpretations of dreams often impressed him as being
like jokes. In order to throw some light on this impression, I began to
investigate jokes and found that their essence lay in the technical
methods employed in them, and that these were the same as the means used
in the “dream-work”—that is to say, condensation, displacement, the
representation of a thing by its opposite or by a triviality, and so on.
This led to an economic enquiry as to the origin of the high degree of
pleasure obtained from hearing a joke. And to this the answer was that
it was due to the momentary suspension of the energy expended upon
maintaining repression owing to the attraction exercised by the offer of
a premium of pleasure (“fore-pleasure”).

I myself set a higher value upon my contributions to the psychology of
religion, which began in 1907 with the establishment of a remarkable
similarity between obsessive acts and religious practices or ritual.
Without as yet understanding the deeper connections, I described the
obsessional neurosis as a distorted private religion and religion as a
kind of universal obsessional neurosis. Later on, in 1912, the explicit
indications of Jung as to the far-reaching analogies between the mental
products of neurotics and of primitive peoples, led me to turn my
attention to that subject. In four essays, which were collected into a
book with the title of _Totem and Taboo_,[26] I showed that the dread of
incest was even more marked among primitive than among civilized races
and had given rise to very special measures of defence against it; I
examined the relations between taboo prohibitions (the earliest form in
which moral restrictions make their appearance) and emotional
ambivalence; and I discovered under the primitive scheme of the
universe, known as animism, the principle of the over-estimation of the
importance of psychical reality, the principle of “the omnipotence of
thoughts,” which also lies at the root of magic. I developed the
comparison with the obsessional neurosis at every point, and showed how
many of the postulates of primitive mental life are still in force in
that remarkable disorder. Above all, however, I was attracted by
totemism, the first system of organization in primitive tribes, a system
in which the beginnings of social order are united with a rudimentary
religion and the implacable domination of a small number of taboo
prohibitions. The being that is honored is ultimately always an animal,
from which the clan also claims to be descended. Many indications
pointed to the conclusion that every race, even the most highly
developed, had once passed through the stage of totemism.

The chief literary sources of my studies in this field were the well
known works of J. G. Frazer (_Totemism and Exogamy_ and _The Golden
Bough_), a mine of valuable facts and opinions. But Frazer effected
little towards elucidating the problems of totemism; he had more than
once fundamentally altered his views on the subject, and the other
ethnologists and prehistorians seemed in equal uncertainty and
disagreement. My starting-point was the striking correspondence between
the two taboo-injunctions of totemism (not to kill the totem and not to
have sexual relations with any woman of the same totem-clan) and the two
elements of the Œdipus complex (killing the father and taking the mother
to wife). I was therefore tempted to equate the totem animal with the
father; and, in fact, primitive peoples themselves do this explicitly,
by honouring it as the forefather of the clan. There next came to my
help two facts from psychoanalysis, a lucky observation of a child made
by Ferenczi, which made it possible to speak of an “infantile return of
totemism,” and the analysis of early animal-phobias in children, which
so often showed that the animal was a substitute for the father, a
substitute onto which the fear of the father derived from the Œdipus
complex had been displaced. Not much was lacking to enable me to
recognize the killing of the father as the nucleus of totemism and the
starting-point in the formation of religion.

This missing element was supplied when I became acquainted with W.
Robertson Smith’s work, _The Religion of the Semites_. Its author (a man
of genius, who was both a physicist and a biblical expert) introduced
the so-called totem-feast as an essential part of the totemistic
religion. Once a year the totem animal, which was at other times
regarded as sacred, was solemnly killed in the presence of all the
members of the clan, was devoured and was then mourned over. The
mourning was followed by a great festival. When I further took into
account Darwin’s conjecture that men originally lived in hordes, each
under the domination of a single, powerful, violent and jealous male,
there rose before me, out of all these components, the following
hypothesis, or, I would rather say, vision. The father of the primal
horde, since he was an unlimited despot, had seized all the women for
himself; his sons, being dangerous to him as rivals, had been killed or
driven away. One day, however, the sons came together and united to
overwhelm, kill and devour their father, who had been their enemy, but
also their ideal. After the deed, they were unable to take over their
heritage since they stood in one another’s way. Under the influence of
failure and regret, they learned to come to an agreement among
themselves, they banded themselves into a clan of brothers by the help
of the ordinances of totemism, which aimed at preventing a repetition of
such a deed, and they jointly undertook to forego the possession of the
women on whose account they had killed their father. They were then
driven to finding strange women, and this was the origin of the exogamy
which is so closely bound up with totemism. The totem-feast was the
commemoration of the fearful deed, from which sprang man’s sense of
guilt (or “original sin”) and which was the beginning at once of social
organization, of religion, and of ethical restrictions.

Now, whether we suppose that such a possibility was a historical event
or not, it brings the formation of religion within the circle of the
father-complex and bases it upon the ambivalence which dominates that
complex. After the totem animal had ceased to serve as a substitute for
him, the primal father, at once feared and hated, honoured and envied,
became the prototype of God himself. The son’s rebelliousness and his
affection for his father struggled against each other through a constant
succession of compromises, which sought, on the one hand, to atone for
the act of parricide, and, on the other, to consolidate the advantages
it had brought. This view of religion throws a particularly clear light
upon the psychological basis of Christianity, in which, it may be added,
the ceremony of the totem-feast still survives, with but little
distortion, in the form of Communion. I should like explicitly to
mention that this last observation was not made by me, but is to be
found in the works of Robertson Smith and Frazer.

Theodor Reik and G. Róheim, the ethnologist, have taken up the line of
thought which I developed in _Totem and Taboo_, and, in a series of
important works, have extended it, amplified it or corrected it. I
myself have since returned to it more than once in the course of my
investigations into the “unconscious sense of guilt” (which also plays
such an important part among the motives of neurotic suffering) and in
my attempts at forming a closer connection between social psychology and
the psychology of the individual.[27] I have, moreover, made use of the
idea of an archaic inheritance from the “primal horde” epoch of
mankind’s development in explaining susceptibility to hypnosis.

I have taken but little direct part in certain other applications of
psychoanalysis, though they are none the less of general interest. It is
only a step from the phantasies of individual neurotics to the
imaginative creations of groups and peoples as we find them in myths,
legends and fairy tales. Mythology became the special province of Otto
Rank; the interpretation of myths, the tracing of them back to the
familiar unconscious complexes of infancy, the replacing of astral
explanations by a discovery of human motives, all of this is to a large
extent due to his analytic efforts. The subject of symbolism has also
found many students among my followers. Symbolism has brought
psychoanalysis many enemies; many enquirers with unduly prosaic minds
have never been able to forgive it the recognition of symbolism, which
followed from the interpretation of dreams. But analysis is guiltless of
the discovery of symbolism, for it had long been known in other regions
of thought (such as folk-lore, legends and myths) and plays even a
larger part in them than in the “language of dreams.”

I myself have contributed nothing to the application of analysis to
education. It was natural, however, that the analytic discoveries as to
the sexual life and mental development of children should attract the
attention of educators and make them see their problems in a new light.
Dr. Oskar Pfister, a protestant pastor at Zurich, led the way as a
tireless pioneer along these lines, nor did he find the practice of
analysis incompatible with the retention of his religion, though it is
true that this was of a sublimated kind. Among the many others who
worked alongside of him, I may mention Frau Dr. Hug-Hellmuth and Dr. S.
Bernfeld, both of Vienna. The application of analysis to the
prophylactic education of healthy children and to the correcting of
those who, though not actually neurotic, have deviated from the normal
course of development, has led to one consequence which is of practical
importance. It is no longer possible to restrict the practice of
psychoanalysis to physicians and to exclude laymen from it. In fact, a
physician who has not been through a special training is, in spite of
his diploma, a layman in analysis, and a non-physician who has been
suitably trained can, with occasional reference to a physician, even
carry out the analytic treatment of neuroses.

By a process of development against which it would have been useless to
struggle, the word “psychoanalysis” has itself become ambiguous. While
it was originally the name of a particular therapeutic method, it has
now also become the name of a science—the science of unconscious mental
processes. By itself this science is seldom able to deal with a problem
completely, but it seems destined to give important contributory help in
a large number of regions of knowledge. The sphere of application of
psychoanalysis extends as far as that of psychology, to which it forms a
complement of the greatest moment.

Looking back, then, over the patch-work of my life’s labours, I can say
that I have made many beginnings and thrown out many suggestions.
Something will come of them in the future. But I cannot tell myself
whether it will be much or little.

-----

Footnote 1:

  These laws are on the statutes of the Austrian Republic.

Footnote 2:

  [The present work appeared originally in Volume 4 of _Die Medizin der
  Gegenwart in Selbstdarstellungen_ (Leipzig: Felix Meiner, 1925), a
  collection of autobiographical studies by leaders of the medical
  profession.]

Footnote 3:

  The lectures were first published (in English) in the _American
  Journal of Psychology_ (1910); the original German was issued under
  the title of _Ueber Psychoanalyse_, (Vienna, 1910).

Footnote 4:

  _These Eventful Years_ (New York, 1924). My essay translated by Dr. A.
  A. Brill, forms Chapter LXXIII of the second volume. [The original
  German appears in Vol. XI of Freud’s _Gesammelte Schriften_ (Vienna,
  1927).]

Footnote 5:

  Published in the _Jahrbuch der Psychoanalyse_, Vol. VI, 1914. [English
  translation in Freud’s _Collected Papers_, Vol. I].

Footnote 6:

  [“It is in vain that you range around from science to science: each
  man learns only what he can learn.” _Faust_, Part I.]

Footnote 7:

  The principal hospital in Vienna.

Footnote 8:

  Freud, _Collected Papers_, Vol. I.

Footnote 9:

  [The German word _Besetzung_, here translated “charge,” is applied by
  Freud to the sum of energy which he supposes to become attached
  (somewhat upon the analogy of an electric charge) to mental impulses,
  whether conscious or unconscious, when they are in a condition of
  activity. The recognized English technical translation of the word is
  “cathexis”. Trans.]

Footnote 10:

  [First German edition, under the title of _Drei Abhandlungen zur
  Sexual theorie_, Vienna, 1905.]

Footnote 11:

  _Die Traumdeutung_, Vienna, 1900.

Footnote 12:

  _Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens_, Berlin, 1904.

Footnote 13:

  [A branch society has since been formed in France.—Trans.]

Footnote 14:

  “Die Psychoanalyse Freud’s,” _Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und
  psychopathologische Forschungen_, Bd. II, 1910.

Footnote 15:

  [The public mental hospital at Zurich.—Trans.]

Footnote 16:

  “On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement.”

Footnote 17:

  [See foot-note, p. 35.]

Footnote 18:

  _Jenseits des Lustprinzips_, Vienna, 1920, _Massenpsychologie und
  Ichanalyse_, Vienna, 1921, and _Das Ich und das Es_, Vienna, 1923.

Footnote 19:

  _Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen_,
  Bd. III, 1911. English translation in Freud’s _Collected Papers_, Vol.
  IV.

Footnote 20:

  Published in the _Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse_ between 1915 and
  1917. English Translation in Freud’s _Collected Papers_, Vol. IV.

Footnote 21:

  _The Ego and the Id._

Footnote 22:

  [The comic French soldier of fortune in _Minna von Barnhelm_, who is
  amazed when his sharp practice at cards is described as cheating:
  “Comment, Mademoiselle? Vous appelez cela ‘cheating’? Corriger la
  fortune, l’enchaîner sous ses doigts, être sûr de son fait—do the
  Germans call that ‘cheating’? Cheating! Oh, what a poor language, what
  a crude language German must be!”—_Trans._]

Footnote 23:

  [The present work originally formed part of a series of medical
  autobiographies.—_Trans._]

Footnote 24:

  _Das Inzest-Motiv in Dichtung und Sage_, Vienna, 1912.

Footnote 25:

  _Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten_, Vienna, 1905.

Footnote 26:

  _Totem und Tabu_, Vienna, 1913.

Footnote 27:

  _The Ego and the Id_, and _Group Psychology and the Analysis of the
  Ego_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROBLEM OF LAY-ANALYSES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The history of the psychoanalytic movement
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The history of the psychoanalytic movement

Author: Sigmund Freud

Translator: A. A. Brill

Release date: June 14, 2025 [eBook #76298]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Company, 1917

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT ***



           NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE MONOGRAPH SERIES NO. 25




               THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT


                                    BY
                      PROF. DR. SIGMUND FREUD, LL.D.
                                OF VIENNA


                    AUTHORIZED ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
                         A. A. BRILL, PH.B., M.D.
 LECTURER IN PSYCHOANALYSIS AND ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY, NEW YORK UNIVERSITY
        FORMER CHIEF OF CLINIC OF PSYCHIATRY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY


                                 NEW YORK
                      THE NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE
                            PUBLISHING COMPANY
                                   1917




                       NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE
                            MONOGRAPH SERIES


Edited by

Drs. SMITH ELY JELLIFFE and WM. A. WHITE

Numbers Issued

1. Outlines of Psychiatry. (5th Edition.) $3.00.

                                                By Dr. William A. White.

2. Studies in Paranoia. (Out of Print.)

                                    By Drs. N. Gierlich and M. Friedman.

3. The Psychology of Dementia Praecox. (Out of Print).

                                                      By Dr. C. G. Jung.

4. Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses.

                            (2d Edition.) $2.50. By Prof. Sigmund Freud.

5. The Wassermann Serum Diagnosis in Psychiatry. $2.00.

                                                     By Dr. Felix Plaut.

6. Epidemic Poliomyelitis. New York, 1907. (Out of Print).

7. Three Contributions to Sexual Theory. (2d Ed.) $2.00.

                                                 By Prof. Sigmund Freud.

8. Mental Mechanisms. $2.00. By Dr. Wm. A. White.

                                                         (Out of Print.)

9. Studies in Psychiatry. $2.00.

                                         New York Psychiatrical Society.

10. Handbook of Mental Examination Methods. $2.00.

                           (Out of Print.)      By Shepherd Ivory Franz.

11. The Theory of Schizophrenic Negativism. $0.60.

                                                By Professor E. Bleuler.

12. Cerebellar Functions. $3.00. By Dr. André-Thomas.

13. History of Prison Psychoses. $1.25.

                                     By Drs. P. Nitsche and K. Wilmanns.

14. General Paresis. $3.00.

                                                  By Prof. E. Kraepelin.

15. Dreams and Myths. $1.00.

                                                    By Dr. Karl Abraham.

16. Poliomyelitis. $3.00.

                                                        Dr. I. Wickmann.

17. Freud’s Theories of the Neuroses. $2.00.

                                                      Dr. E. Hitschmann.

18. The Myth of the Birth of the Hero. $1.00.

                                                          Dr. Otto Rank.

19. The Theory of Psychoanalysis. $1.50.

                                                         Dr. C. G. Jung.

20. Vagotonia. By Drs. Eppinger and Hess.

                                                                  $1.00.

21. Wishfulfillment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales.

                                                                  $1.00.

By Dr. Ricklin.

22. The Dream Problem. By Dr. A. E. Maeder.

                                                                  $0.60.

23. The Significance of Psychoanalysis for the Mental Sciences. $1.50.
By Dr. O. Rank and D. H. Sachs.

24. Organ Inferiority and its Psychical Compensation.

                                             By Dr. Alfred Adler. $1.00.

25. The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement. $0.60.

                                                      By Prof. S. Freud.


                          Copyright, 1917, by
             NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE PUBLISHING COMPANY

                                PRESS OF
                      THE NEW ERA PRINTING COMPANY
                             LANCASTER, PA




                        _Fluctuat nec mergitur_

               From the Coat of Arms of the City of Paris




                                   I


If in what follows I bring any contribution to the history of the
psychoanalytic movement nobody must be surprised at the subjective
nature of this paper, nor at the rôle which falls to me therein. For
psychoanalysis is my creation; for ten years I was the only one occupied
with it, and all the annoyance which this new subject caused among my
contemporaries has been hurled upon my head in the form of criticism.
Even today, when I am no longer the only psychoanalyst, I feel myself
justified in assuming that none can know better than myself what
psychoanalysis is, wherein it differs from other methods of
investigating the psychic life, what its name should cover, or what
might better be designated as something else.

In the year 1909, when I was first privileged to speak publicly on
psychoanalysis in an American University, fired by this momentous
occasion for my endeavors, I declared that it was not myself who brought
psychoanalysis into existence. I said that it was Josef Breuer, who had
merited this honor at a time when I was a student and busy working for
my examinations (1880–1882).[1] Since then, well-intentioned friends
have frequently repeated that I then expressed my gratitude out of all
due proportion. They considered that, as on previous occasions, I should
have dignified Breuer’s “cathartic procedure” as merely preliminary to
psychoanalysis, and should have claimed that psychoanalysis itself only
began with my rejection of the hypnotic technique and my introduction of
free association. Now it is really a matter of indifference whether the
history of psychoanalysis be considered to have started with the
cathartic method or only with my modification of the same. I only enter
into this uninteresting question because some opponents of
psychoanalysis are wont to recall, now and then, that the art of
psychoanalysis did not originate with me at all, but with Breuer.
Naturally, this only happens to be the case when their attitude permits
them to find in psychoanalysis something that is noteworthy; on the
other hand when their repudiation of psychoanalysis is unlimited, then
psychoanalysis is always indisputably my creation. I have never yet
heard that Breuer’s great part in psychoanalysis has brought him an
equal measure of insult and reproach. As I have recognized long since
that it is the inevitable fate of psychoanalysis to arouse opposition
and to embitter people, I have come to the conclusion that I must surely
be the originator of all that characterizes psychoanalysis. I add, with
satisfaction, that none of the attempts to belittle my share in this
much disdained psychoanalysis has ever come from Breuer himself, or
could boast of his support.

The content of Breuer’s discovery has been so often presented that a
detailed discussion of it here may be omitted. Its fundamental fact is
that the symptoms of hysterical patients depend upon impressive but
forgotten scenes in their lives (traumata). The therapy founded thereon
was to cause the patients to recall and reproduce these experiences
under hypnosis (catharsis), and the fragmentary theory, deduced from it
was that these symptoms corresponded to an abnormal use of undischarged
sums of excitement (conversion). In his theoretical contribution to the
“Studies of Hysteria” Breuer, wherever obliged to mention _conversion_,
has always added my name in parenthesis, as though this first attempt at
a theoretical formulation was my mental property. I think this allotment
refers only to the nomenclature, whilst the conception itself occurred
to us both at the same time.

It is also well known that Breuer, after his first experience with it,
allowed the cathartic treatment to rest for a number of years and only
resumed it after I caused him to do so, on my return from Charcot. He
was then an internist and taken up with a rather busy medical practice.
I had become a physician quite reluctantly but had, at that time,
received a strong motive for desiring to help nervous patients or, at
least, to learn to understand something of their conditions. I had
placed reliance on physical therapy and found myself helpless in the
face of disappointments that came to me with W. Erb’s “Electrotherapy,”
so rich in advice and indications. If I did not, at that time, pilot
myself independently to the opinion later announced by Moebius, that the
successes of electrotherapy in nervous disorders are the results of
suggestion, it was surely only the absence of these successes that was
to blame. The treatment by _suggestion_ in deep hypnosis seemed to offer
me at that time sufficient compensation for the lost electrical therapy.
I learned this treatment through the extremely impressive demonstrations
of Liébault and Bernheim. But the investigation under hypnosis with
which I became acquainted through Breuer, I found, owing to its
automatic manner of working and the simultaneous gratification of one’s
eagerness for knowledge, much more attractive than the monotonous and
violent suggestive command which was devoid of every possibility of
inquiry.

As one of the latest achievements of psychoanalysis, we have lately been
admonished to put the actual conflict and the cause of the illness into
the foreground of analysis. This is exactly what Breuer and I did in the
beginning of our work with the cathartic method. We guided the patient’s
attention directly to the traumatic scene during which the symptom had
arisen, tried to find therein the psychic conflict and to free the
repressed affect. We thus discovered the procedure characteristic of the
psychic processes of the neuroses which I later named _regression_. The
associations of the patients went back from the scene to be explained,
to earlier experiences, and this forced the analysis which was to
correct the present to occupy itself with the past. This regression led
even further backwards. At first it went quite regularly to the time of
puberty. Later, however, such failures as gaps in the understanding
tempted the analytic work further back into the years of childhood which
had, hitherto, been inaccessible to every sort of investigation. This
regressive direction became an important characteristic of the analysis.
It was proved that psychoanalysis could not clear up anything actual,
except by going back to something in the past. It even proved that every
pathological experience presupposes an earlier one which, though not in
itself pathological, lent a pathological quality to the later
occurrence. But the temptation to stop short at the known actual cause
was so great that even in later analyses I yielded to it. In the case of
the patient called “Dora,” carried out in 1899, the scene which caused
the outbreak of the actual illness was known to me. I tried uncounted
times to analyse this experience, but all that I could receive to my
direct demands was the same scanty and broken description. Only after a
long detour, which led through the earliest childhood of the patient, a
dream appeared in the analysis of which the hitherto forgotten details
of the scene were remembered, and this made possible the understanding
and solution of the actual conflict.

From this one example it may be seen how misleading is the above
mentioned admonition and how much of a scientific regression it is to
follow the advice of neglecting the regression in the analytic
technique.

The first difference of opinion between Breuer and myself came to light
on a question of the more intimate psychic mechanism of hysteria. He
still favored a physiological theory, so to speak, and wished to explain
the psychic splitting of consciousness of hysterical subjects by means
of the non-communication of various psychic states (or states of
consciousness, as we then called them). He thus created the theory of
the “hypnoid states,” the results of which were supposed to bring the
unassimilated foreign body into the “waking consciousness.” I had
formulated this to myself less scientifically. I suspected everywhere
tendencies and strivings analogous to those of everyday life and
conceived the psychic splitting itself as a result of a repelling
process, which I then called “defense” and later “regression.” I made a
short-lived attempt to reconcile both mechanisms, but as experience
showed me always the same and only one thing, my defense theory, I soon
became opposed to Breuer’s theory of hypnoid states.

I am, however, quite certain that this difference of opinion had nothing
to do with the parting of the ways which occurred soon afterward between
us. The latter had a deeper reason, but it happened in such a manner
that at first I did not understand it, and only later did I learn to
interpret it, following many good indexes. It will be recalled that
Breuer had stated, concerning his first famous patient, that the sexual
element had been astonishingly undeveloped in her and had never
contributed anything to her very marked morbid picture.[2] I have always
wondered why the critics of my theory of the sexual etiology of the
neuroses have not often opposed it with this assertion of Breuer, and up
to this day I do not know whether in this reticence I am to see a proof
of their discretion, or of their lack of observation. Whoever will
reread the history of Breuer’s patient in the light of the experience
gained in the last twenty years, will have no difficulty in
understanding the symbolism of the snakes and of the arm. By taking into
account also the situation at the sick-bed of the father, he will easily
guess the actual meaning of that symptom-formation. His opinion as to
the part sexuality played in the psychic life of that girl will then
differ greatly from that of her physician. To cure the patient Breuer
utilized the most intensive suggestive _rapport_ which may serve us as
prototype of that which we call “transference.” Now I have strong
grounds to suppose that Breuer, after the disposal of the symptoms, must
have discovered the sexual motivity of this transference by new signs,
but that the general nature of this unexpected phenomenon escaped him,
so that here, as though hit by “an untoward event,” he broke off the
investigation. I did not obtain from him any direct information of this,
but at different times he has given me sufficient connecting links to
justify me in making this combination. And then, as I stood more and
more decidedly for the significance of sexuality in the causation of the
neuroses, Breuer was the first to show me those reactions of unwilling
rejection, with which it was my lot to become so familiar later on, but
which I had then not yet recognized as my unavoidable destiny.

The fact that a grossly sexual, tender or inimical, transference occurs
in every treatment of a neurosis, although this was neither desired nor
induced by either party, has, for me, always seemed to be the most
unshakable proof that the forces of the neuroses originate in the sexual
life. This argument has surely not been seriously enough considered, for
if it were, there would be no question as to where the investigation
would tend. For my own conviction, it has remained decisive over and
above the special results of the work of the analysis.

Some comfort for the bad reception which my theory of the sexual
etiology of the neuroses met with, even in the closer circle of my
friends—a negative space was soon formed about my person—I found in the
thought that I had taken up the fight for a new and original idea. One
day, however, my memories grouped themselves in such a way that this
satisfaction was disturbed, but in return I obtained an excellent
insight into the origin of our activities and into the nature of our
knowledge. The idea for which I was held responsible had not at all
originated with me. It had come to me from three persons, whose opinions
could count upon my deepest respect; from Breuer himself, from Charcot,
and from Chrobak, the gynecologist of our university, probably the most
prominent of our Vienna physicians. All three men had imparted to me an
insight which, strictly speaking, they had not themselves possessed. Two
of them denied their communication to me when later I reminded them of
this: the third (Master Charcot) might also have done so, had it been
granted me to see him again. But these identical communications,
received without my grasping them, had lain dormant within me, until one
day they awoke as an apparently original discovery.

One day, while I was a young hospital doctor, I was accompanying Breuer
on a walk through the town when a man came up to him urgently desiring
to speak with him. I fell back and, when Breuer was free again, he told
me, in his kindly, teacher-like manner, that this was the husband of a
patient, who had brought him some news about her. The wife, he added,
behaved in so conspicuous a manner when in company, that she had been
turned over to him for treatment as a nervous case. He ended with the
remark—“those are always secrets of the alcove.” Astonished, I asked his
meaning and he explained the expression to me (“secrets of the conjugal
bed”), without realizing how preposterous the matter appeared to me.

A few years later, at one of Charcot’s evening receptions, I found
myself near the venerated teacher who was just relating to Brouardel a
very interesting history from the day’s practice. I did not hear the
beginning clearly but gradually the story obtained my attention. It was
the case of a young married couple from the far East. The wife was a
great sufferer and the husband was impotent, or exceedingly awkward. I
heard Charcot repeat: “Tâchez donc, je vous assure vous y arriverez.”
Brouardel, who spoke less distinctly, must have expressed his
astonishment that symptoms as those of the young wife should have
appeared as a result of such circumstances, for Charcot said suddenly
and with great vivacity: “Mais, dans des cas pareils c’est toujours la
chose génital, toujours—toujours—toujours.” And while saying that he
crossed his hands in his lap and jumped up and down several times, with
the vivacity peculiar to him. I know that for a moment I was almost
paralyzed with astonishment, and I said to myself: “Yes, but if he knows
this why does he never say so?” But the impression was soon forgotten;
brain-anatomy and the experimental production of hysterical paralysis
absorbed all my interests.

A year later when I had begun my medical activities in Vienna as a
private _dozent_ in nervous diseases I was as innocent and ignorant in
all that concerned the etiology of the neuroses as any promising
academician could be expected to be. One day I received a friendly call
from Chrobak, who asked me to take a patient to whom he could not give
sufficient time in his new capacity as lecturer at the university. I
reached the patient before he did and learned that she suffered from
senseless attacks of anxiety, which could only be alleviated by the most
exact information as to the whereabouts of her physician at any time in
the day. When Chrobak appeared, he took me aside and disclosed to me
that the patient’s anxiety was due to the fact that though she had been
married eighteen years, she was still a _virgo intacta_, that her
husband was utterly impotent. In such cases the physician can only cover
the domestic mishap with his reputation and must bear it if people shrug
their shoulders and say of him: “He is not a good doctor if in all these
years, he has not been able to cure her.” He added: “The only
prescription for such troubles is the one well known to us, but which we
cannot prescribe. It is:

                             Penis normalis
                                 dosim
                             Repetatur!”

I had never heard of such a prescription and would like to have shaken
my head at my informant’s cynicism.

I certainly have not uncovered the illustrious origins of this vicious
idea because I would like to shove the responsibility for it on others.
I know well that it is one thing to express an idea once or several
times in the form of a rapid _aperçu_, and quite another to take it
seriously and literally to lead it through all opposing details and
conquer for it a place among accepted truths. It is the difference
between a light flirtation and a righteous marriage with all its duties
and difficulties. Epouser les idées de—(to marry so and so’s ideas,) is,
at least in French, a quite usual form of speech.

Other doctrines which were contributed to the cathartic method through
my efforts thus transforming it into psychoanalysis, are the following:
The theories of repression and resistance, the addition of the infantile
sexuality, and the usage and interpretation of dreams for the
understanding of the unconscious.

Concerning the theory of repression, I was certain that I worked
independently. I knew of no influence that directed me in any way to it,
and I long considered this idea to be original, till O. Rank showed us
the place in Schopenhauer’s “The World as Will and Idea,” where the
philosopher is struggling for an explanation for insanity.[3] What is
there said concerning the striving against the acceptance of a painful
piece of reality agrees so completely with the content of my theory of
repression that, once again, I must be indebted to my not being
well-read for the possibility of making a discovery. To be sure, others
have read this passage and overlooked it, without making this discovery
and perhaps the same would have happened to me, if, in former years, I
had taken more pleasure in reading philosophical authors. In later years
I denied myself the great pleasure of Nietzsche’s works, with the
conscious motive of not wishing to be hindered in the working out of my
psychoanalytic impressions by any preconceived ideas. Therefore, I had
to be prepared—and am so gladly—to renounce all claim to priority in
those many cases in which the laborious psychoanalytic investigation can
only confirm the insights intuitively won by the philosophers.

The theory of repression is the main pillar upon which rests the edifice
of psychoanalysis. It is really the most essential part of it, and is
itself nothing other than the theoretical expression of an experience
which can be repeated at pleasure whenever one analyzes a neurotic
patient without the aid of hypnosis. One is then confronted with a
resistance which opposes the analytic work by causing a failure of
memory in order to block it. This resistance had to be covered by the
use of hypnosis; hence the history of psychoanalysis proper only starts
technically with the rejection of hypnosis. The theoretical value of the
fact that this resistance is connected with an amnesia leads unavoidably
to that conception of the unconscious psychic activities which is
peculiar to psychoanalysis, and distinguishes it markedly from the
philosophical speculations about the unconscious. It may, therefore, be
said that the psychoanalytic theory endeavors to explain two
experiences, which result in a striking and unexpected manner during the
attempt to trace back the morbid symptoms of a neurotic to their source
in his life-history; viz., the facts of transference and of resistance.
Every investigation which recognizes these two facts and makes them the
starting points of its work may call itself psychoanalysis, even if it
lead to other results than my own. But whoever takes up other sides of
the problem and deviates from these two assumptions will hardly escape
the charge of interfering with the rights of ownership through attempted
imitation, if he insist upon calling himself a psychoanalyst.

I would very energetically oppose any attempt to count the principles of
repression and resistance as mere assumptions instead of results of
psychoanalysis. Such assumptions of a general psychological and
biological nature exist, and it would be quite to the point to deal with
them in another place. The principle of repression, however, is an
acquisition of the psychoanalytic work, won by legitimate means, as a
theoretical extract from very numerous experiences. Just such an
acquisition, but of much later days, is the theory of the infantile
sexuality, of which no count was taken during the first years of
tentative analytic investigation. At first it was only noticed that the
effect of actual impressions had to be traced back to the past. However,
“the seeker often found more than he bargained for.” He was tempted
always further back into this past and finally hoped to be permitted to
tarry in the period of puberty, the epoch of the traditional awakening
of the sexual impulses. His hopes were in vain. The tracks led still
further back into childhood and into its earliest years. In the process
of this work it became almost fatal for this young science. Under the
influence of the traumatic theory of hysteria, following Charcot, one
was easily inclined to regard as real and as of etiological importance
the accounts of patients who traced back their symptoms to passive
sexual occurrences in the first years of childhood, that is to say,
speaking plainly, to seductions. When this etiology broke down through
its own unlikelihood, and through the contradiction of well-established
circumstances, there followed a period of absolute helplessness. The
analysis had led by the correct path to such infantile sexual traumas,
and yet these were not true. Thus the basis of reality had been lost. At
that time I would gladly have let the whole thing slide, as did my
respected forerunner Breuer, when he made his unwished-for discovery.
Perhaps I persevered only because I had no longer any choice of
beginning something else. Finally I reflected that, after all, no one
has a right to despair if he has been disappointed only in his
expectations. He merely needs to review them. If hysterics refer their
symptoms to imaginary traumas, then this new fact signifies that they
create such scenes in their phantasies, and hence psychic reality
deserves to be given a place next to actual reality. This was soon
followed by the conviction that these phantasies serve to hide the
autoerotic activities of the early years of childhood, to idealize them
and place them on a higher level, and now the whole sexual life of the
child made its appearance behind these phantasies.

In this sexual activity of the first years of childhood, the concomitant
constitution could finally attain its rights. Disposition and experience
here became associated into an inseparable etiological unity, in that
the disposition raised certain impressions to inciting and fixed
traumas, which otherwise would have remained altogether banal and
ineffectual, whilst the experiences evoked factors from the disposition
which, without them, would have continued to remain dormant, and,
perhaps, undeveloped. The last word in the question of traumatic
etiology was later on said by Abraham, when he drew attention to the
fact that just the peculiar nature of the child’s sexual constitution
enables it to provoke sexual experiences of a peculiar kind, that is to
say, traumas.

My formulations concerning the sexuality of the child were founded at
first almost exclusively on the results of the analyses of adults, which
led back into the past. I was lacking in opportunity for direct
observation of the child. It was, therefore, an extraordinary triumph
when, years later, my discoveries were successfully confirmed for the
greater part by direct observation and analyses of children of very
early years, a triumph that appeared less and less on reflecting that
the discovery was of such a nature that one really ought to be ashamed
of having made it. The deeper one penetrated into the observation of the
child, the more self-evident this fact seemed, and the more strange,
too, became the circumstances that such pains had been taken to overlook
it.

To be sure, so certain a conviction of the existence and significance of
the infantile sexuality can be obtained only, if one follows the path of
analysis, if one goes back from the symptoms and peculiarities of
neurotics to their uttermost sources, the discovery of which explains
what is explainable in them, and permits of modifying what can be
changed. I understand that one can arrive at different conclusions if,
as was recently done by C. G. Jung, one first forms for one’s self a
theoretical conception of the nature of the sexual impulse and thereby
tries to understand the life of the child. Such a conception can only be
chosen arbitrarily or with regard to secondary considerations, and is in
danger of becoming inadequate to the sphere in which it was to be
utilized. Doubtless, the analytic way also leads to certain final
difficulties and obscurities in regard to sexuality and its relation to
the whole life of the individual; but these cannot be set aside by
speculations, and must wait till solutions will be found by means of
other observations or of observations in other spheres.

I shall briefly discuss the history of dream interpretation. This came
to me as the first-fruits of the technical innovation, after, following
a dim presentiment, I had decided to replace hypnosis with free
associations. It was not the understanding of dreams towards which my
curiosity was originally directed. I do not know of any influences which
had guided my interest to this or inspired me with any helpful
expectations. Before the cessation of my intercourse with Breuer I
hardly had time to tell him, in so many words, that I now knew how to
translate dreams. During the development of these discoveries the
symbolism of the language of dreams was about the last thing which
became known to me, since, for the understanding of symbols, the
associations of the dreamer offer but little help. As I have held fast
to the habit of first studying things themselves, before looking them up
in books, I was able to ascertain for myself the symbolism of dreams
before I was directed to it by the work of Sherner. Only later I came to
value fully this means of expression of dreams. This was partly due to
the influence of the works of Stekel, who was at first very meritorious
but who later became most perfunctory. The close connection between the
psychoanalytic interpretation of dreams and the once so highly esteemed
art of dream interpretation of the ancients only became clear to me many
years afterwards. The most characteristic and significant portion of my
dream theory, namely, the reduction of the dream distortion to an inner
conflict, to a sort of inner dishonesty, I found later in an author to
whom medicine but not philosophy is unknown. I refer to the engineer J.
Popper, who had published “Phantasies of a Realist” under the name of
Lynkeus.

The interpretation of dreams became for me a solace and support in those
difficult first years of analysis, when I had to master at the same time
the technique, the clinic and the therapy of the neuroses, when I stood
entirely alone, and in the confusion of problems and the accumulation of
difficulties I often feared to lose my orientation and my confidence. It
often took a long time before the proof of my assumption, that a
neurosis must become comprehensible through analysis, was seen by the
perplexed patient, but the dreams, which might be regarded as analogous
to the symptoms, almost regularly confirmed this assumption.

Only because of these successes was I in condition to persevere. I have,
therefore, acquired the habit of measuring the grasp of a psychological
worker by his attitude to the problem of dream interpretation, and I
have noticed, with satisfaction, that most of the opponents of
psychoanalysis avoided this field altogether, or if they ventured into
it, they behaved most awkwardly. The analysis of myself, the need of
which soon became apparent to me, I carried out by the aid of a series
of my own dreams which led me through all the happenings of my childhood
years. Even today I am of the opinion that in the case of a prolific
dreamer and a person not too abnormal, this sort of analysis may be
sufficient.

By unfurling this developmental history, I believe I have shown what
psychoanalysis is, better than I could have done by a systematic
presentation of the subject. The special nature of my findings I did not
then recognize. I sacrificed, unhesitatingly, my budding popularity as a
physician and an extensive practice among nervous patients, because I
searched directly for the sexual origin of their neuroses. In this way I
gained a number of experiences which definitely confirmed my conviction
of the practical significance of the sexual factor. Without any
apprehension, I appeared as speaker at the Vienna Neurological Society,
then under the presidency of Krafft-Ebing, expecting to be compensated,
by the interest and recognition of my colleagues, for my own voluntary
sacrifices. I treated my discoveries as indifferent contributions to
science and hoped that others would treat them in the same way. Only the
silence that followed my lectures, the space that formed about my
person, and the insinuations directed towards me caused me to realize,
gradually, that statements about the part played by sexuality in the
etiology of the neuroses cannot hope to be treated like other
communications. I realized that from then on I would belong to those
who, according to Hebbel’s expression, “have disturbed the world’s
sleep,” and that I could not count upon being treated objectively and
with toleration. But as my conviction of the average correctness of my
observations and the conclusions grew greater and greater, and as my
faith in my own judgment was not small, any more than was my moral
courage, there could be no doubt as to the issue of this situation. I
decided to believe that it fell to my lot to discover particularly
significant associations, and felt prepared to bear the fate which
sometimes accompanies such discoveries.

This fate I pictured to myself in the following manner. I would probably
succeed in sustaining myself through the therapeutic successes of the
new treatment, but science would take no notice of me in my lifetime.
Some decades later, another would surely stumble upon the same, now
untimely things, compel their recognition and thus bring me to honor as
a necessarily unfortunate forerunner. Meantime I arrayed myself as
comfortably as possible à la Robinson Crusoe upon my lonely island. When
I look back to those lonely years, from the perplexities and
vexatiousness of the present, it seems to me it was a beautiful and
heroic time. The “splendid isolation” did not lack its privileges and
charms. I did not need to read any literature nor to listen to badly
informed opponents. I was subject to no influences, and no pressure was
brought to bear on me. I learned to restrain speculative tendencies and,
following the unforgotten advice of my master, Charcot, I looked at the
same things again and often until they began of themselves to tell me
something. My publications, for which I found shelter despite some
difficulty, could safely remain far behind my state of knowledge. They
could be delayed as long as I pleased, as there was no doubtful
“priority” to be defended. “The Interpretation of Dreams,” for example,
was completed in all essentials in the beginning of 1896, but was
written down only in 1899. The treatment of “Dora” was finished at the
end of 1899. The history of her illness was completed in the next two
weeks, but was only published in 1905. Meantime my writings were not in
the reviewed professional literature of the day. If an exception was
made they were always treated with scornful or pitying condescension.
Sometimes a colleague would refer to me in one of his publications in
very short and unflattering terms, such as “unbalanced,” “extreme,” or
“very odd.” It happened once that an assistant at the clinic in Vienna
asked me for permission to attend one of my lecture courses. He listened
devoutly and said nothing, but after the last lecture he offered to
accompany me. During this walk he disclosed to me that, with the
knowledge of his chief, he had written a book against my teachings, but
he expressed much regret that he had only come to know these teachings
better through my lectures. Had he known these before, he would have
written very differently. Indeed, he had inquired at the clinic if he
had not better first read “The Interpretation of Dreams,” but had been
advised against doing so, as it was not worth the trouble. As he now
understood it, he compared my system of instruction with the Catholic
Church. In the interests of his soul’s salvation I will assume that this
remark contained a bit of sincere recognition. But he ended by saying
that it was too late to alter anything in his book as it was already
printed. This particular colleague did not consider it necessary later
on to tell the world something of the change in his opinions concerning
my psychoanalysis. On the contrary, as permanent reviewer of a medical
journal, he showed a preference to follow its development with his
hardly serious comments.

Whatever I possessed of personal sensitiveness was blunted in those
years, to my advantage. But I was saved from becoming embittered by a
circumstance that does not come to the assistance of all lonely
discoverers. Such a one usually frets himself to find out the cause of
the lack of sympathy or of the rejection he receives from his
contemporaries, and perceives them as a painful contradiction against
the certainty of his own conviction. That did not trouble me, for the
psychoanalytic fundamental principles enabled me to understand this
attitude of my environment as a necessary sequence. If it was true that
the associations discovered by me were kept from the knowledge of the
patient by inner affective resistances, then this resistance must
manifest itself also in normal persons as soon as the repressed material
is conveyed to them from the outside. It was not strange that these
latter knew how to give intellectual reasons for their affective
rejections of my ideas. This happened just as often with the patients,
and the arguments advanced—arguments are as common as blackberries, to
borrow from Falstaff’s speech—were the same and not exactly brilliant.
The only difference was that in the case of patients one had the means
of bringing pressure to bear, in order to help them recognize and
overcome their resistances, but in the case of those seemingly normal,
such help had to be omitted. To force these normal people to a cool and
scientifically objective examination of the subject was an unsolved
problem, the solution of which was best left to time. In the history of
science it has often been possible to verify that the very assertion
which, at first, called forth only opposition, received recognition a
little later without the necessity of bringing forward any new proofs.

That I have not developed any particular respect for the opinion of the
world or any desire for intellectual deference during those years, when
I alone represented psychoanalysis, will surprise no one.




                                   II


Beginning with the year 1902 a number of young doctors crowded about me
with the expressed intention to learn psychoanalysis, to practice it and
to spread it. The impetus for this came from a colleague who had himself
experienced the beneficial effects of the analytic therapy. We met on
certain evenings at my residence, and discussed subjects according to
certain rules. The visitors endeavored to orient themselves in this
strange and new realm of investigation, and to interest others in the
matter. One day a young graduate of the technical school found admission
to our circle by means of a manuscript which showed extraordinary sense.
We induced him to go through college and enter the university, and then
devote himself to the non-medical application of psychoanalysis. Thus
the little society gained a zealous and reliable secretary, and I
acquired in Otto Rank a most faithful helper and collaborator.

Soon the little circle expanded, and in the course of the next few years
changed a good deal in its composition. On the whole, I could flatter
myself that in the wealth and variety of talent our circle was hardly
inferior to the staff of any clinical teacher. From the very beginning
it included those men who later were to play a considerable, if not
always a delectable, part in the history of the psychoanalytic movement.
But these developments could not have been guessed at that time. I was
satisfied, and I believe I did all I could, to convey to the others what
I knew and had experienced. There were only two inauspicious
circumstances which at least mentally estranged me from this circle. I
could not succeed in establishing among the members that friendly
relation which should obtain among men doing the same difficult work,
nor could I crush out the quarrels about the priority of discoveries,
for which there were ample opportunities in those conditions of working
together. The difficulties of teaching the practise of psychoanalysis,
which are particularly great, and are often to blame for the present
rejection of psychoanalysis, already made themselves felt in this
Viennese private psychoanalytic society. I myself did not dare to
present an as yet incomplete technique, and a theory still in the
making, with that authority which might have spared the others many a
blind alley and many a final tripping up. The self-dependence of mental
workers, their early independence of the teacher, is always gratifying
psychologically, but it can only result in a scientific gain when during
these labors certain, not too frequently occurring, personal relations
are also fulfilled. Psychoanalysis particularly should have required a
long and severe discipline and training of self-control. On account of
the courage displayed in devotion to so ridiculed and fruitless a
subject, I was inclined to tolerate among the members much to which
otherwise I would have objected. Besides, the circle included not only
physicians, but other cultured men who had recognized something
significant in psychoanalysis. There were authors, artists, and so
forth. The “Interpretation of Dreams,” the book on “Wit,” and other
writings, had already shown that the principles of psychoanalysis cannot
remain limited to the medical field, but are capable of application to
various other mental sciences.

In 1907 the situation suddenly altered and quite contrary to all
expectations; it became evident that psychoanalysis had unobtrusively
awakened some interest and gained some friends, that there were even
some scientific workers who were prepared to admit their allegiance. A
communication from Bleuler had already acquainted me with the fact that
my works were studied and applied in Burghölzli.[4] In January, 1907,
the first man attached to the Zürich Clinic, Dr. Eitingon, visited me at
Vienna. Other visitors soon followed, thus causing a lively exchange of
ideas. Finally, by invitation of C. G. Jung, then still an assistant
physician at Burghölzli, the first meeting took place at Salzburg, in
the spring of 1908, where the friends of psychoanalysis from Vienna,
Zürich, and other places met together. The result of this first
psychoanalytic congress, was the founding of a periodical, which began
to appear in 1909, under the name of “Jahrbuch für Psychoanalytische und
Psychopathologische Forschungen,” published by Bleuler and Freud, and
edited by Jung. An intimate comradeship in the work done at Vienna and
Zürich found its expression in this publication.

I have repeatedly and gratefully acknowledged the efforts of the Zürich
Psychiatric School in the spreading of psychoanalysis, especially those
of Bleuler and Jung, and I do not hesitate to do the same today, even
under such changed circumstances. It was certainly not the partisanship
of the Zürich School which at that time first directed the attention of
the scientific world to the subject of psychoanalysis. This latency
period had just come to an end, and psychoanalysis everywhere became the
object of constantly increasing interest. But whilst in all the other
places this manifestation of interest resulted first in nothing but a
violent and emphatic repudiation of the subject, in Zürich, on the
contrary, the main feeling of the situation was that of agreement. In no
other place was so compact a little gathering of adherents to be found,
nowhere also was it possible to place a public clinic at the service of
psychoanalytic investigation, or to find a clinical teacher who regarded
the principles of psychoanalysis as an integral part of the teaching of
psychiatry. The Zürich doctors became, as it were, the nucleus of the
little band which was fighting for the recognition of psychoanalysis.
Only in Zürich was there a possible opportunity to learn the new art and
to apply it in practice. Most of my present-day followers and co-workers
came to me via Zürich, even those who might have found, geographically
speaking, a shorter road to Vienna than to Switzerland. Vienna lies in
an eccentric position from western Europe, which houses the great
centers of our culture. For many years it has been much affected by
weighty prejudices. The representatives of the most prominent nations
stream into Switzerland, which is so mentally active, and an infective
lesion in this place was sure to become very important for the
dissemination of the “psychic epidemic,” as Hoche of Freiburg called it.

According to the testimony of a colleague who was an eyewitness of the
developments at Burghölzli, it may be asserted that psychoanalysis
awakened an interest there very early. Already in Jung’s work on occult
phenomena, published in 1902, there was an allusion to dream
interpretation. Ever since 1903 or 1904, according to my informer,
psychoanalysis came into prominence. After the establishment of personal
relations between Vienna and Zürich, a society was also founded in
Burghölzli in 1907 which discussed the problems of psychoanalysis at
regular meetings. In the bond that united the Vienna and Zürich schools,
the Swiss were by no means the merely recipient part. They had
themselves already performed respectable scientific work, the results of
which were of much use to psychoanalysis. The association-experiment,
started by the Wundt School, had been interpreted by them in the
psychoanalytic sense and had proved itself of unexpected usefulness.
Thus it had become possible to get rapid experimental confirmation of
psychoanalytic facts, and to demonstrate experimentally to beginners
certain relationships which the analyst could only have talked about
otherwise. The first bridge leading from experimental psychology to
psychoanalysis had thus been constructed.

In psychoanalytic treatment, however, the association-experiment enables
one to make only a preliminary, qualitative analysis of the case, it
offers no essential contribution to the technique, and is really not
indispensable in the work of analysis. Of more importance, however, was
another discovery of the Zürich School, or rather, of its two leaders,
Bleuler and Jung. The former pointed out that a great many purely
psychiatric cases can be explained by the same psychoanalytic process as
those used in dreams and in the neuroses (Freudsche Mechanismen). Jung
employed with success the analytic method of interpretation in the
strangest and most obscure phenomena of dementia præcox, the origin of
which appeared quite clear when correlated with the life and interests
of the patient. From that time on it became impossible for the
psychiatrists to ignore psychoanalysis. Bleuler’s great work on
Schizophrenie (1911), in which the psychoanalytic points of view are
placed on an equal footing with the clinical-systematic ones, brought
this success to completion.

I must not omit to point out a divergence which was then already
distinctly noticeable in the working tendencies of the two schools.
Already in 1897 I had published the analysis of a case of schizophrenia,
which showed, however, paranoid trends, so that its solution could not
have anticipated the impression of Jung’s analyses. But to me the
important element had not been the interpretation of the symptoms, but
rather the psychic mechanisms of the disease, and above all, the
agreement of this mechanism with the one already known in hysteria. No
light had been thrown at that time on the difference between these two
maladies. I was then already working toward a theory of the libido in
the neuroses which was to explain all neurotic as well as psychotic
appearances on the basis of abnormal drifts of the libido. The Swiss
investigators lacked this point of view. So far as I know Bleuler, even
today, adheres to an organic causation for the forms of Dementia Præcox,
and Jung, whose book on this malady appeared in 1907, upheld the toxic
theory of the same at the Congress at Salzburg in 1908, which though not
excluding it, goes far beyond the libido theory. On this same point he
came to grief later (1912), in that he now used too much of the stuff
which previously he refused to employ at all.

A third contribution from the Swiss School, which is to be ascribed
probably entirely to Jung, I do not value as highly as do others who are
not in as close contact with it. I speak of the theory of the
_complexes_, which grew out of the “Diagnostische Assoziationsstudien”
(1906–1910). It itself has neither resulted in a psychological theory
nor has it added an unconstrained insertion to the context of the
psychoanalytic principles. On the other hand, the word “complex” has
gained for itself the right of citizenship in psychoanalysis, as being a
convenient and often an indispensable term for descriptive summaries of
psychologic facts. None other among the names and designations, newly
coined as a result of psychoanalytic needs, has attained such widespread
popularity; but no other term has been so misapplied to the detriment of
clear thinking. In psychoanalytic diction one often spoke of the “return
of the complex” when “the return of the repression” was intended to be
conveyed, or one became accustomed to say “I have a complex against
him,” when more correctly he should have said “a resistance.”

In the years after 1907, which followed the union of the schools of
Vienna and Zürich, psychoanalysis received that extraordinary impetus in
which it still finds itself today. This is positively attested by the
spread of psychoanalytic literature and the increase in the number of
doctors who desire to practice or learn it, also by the mass of attacks
upon it by congresses and learned societies. It has wandered into the
most distant countries, it everywhere shocked psychiatrists, and has
gained the attention of the cultured laity and workers in other
scientific fields. Havelock Ellis, who has followed its development with
sympathy without ever calling himself its adherent, wrote, in 1911, in a
paper for the Australasian Medical Congress: “Freud’s psychoanalysis is
now championed and carried out not only in Austria and in Switzerland,
but in the United States, in England, India, Canada, and, I doubt not,
in Australasia.”[5] A doctor from Chile (probably a German) appeared at
the International Congress in Buenos Ayres, in 1910, and spoke on behalf
of the existence of infantile sexuality and praised the results of
psychoanalytic therapy in obsessions.[6] An English neurologist in
Central India informed me through a distinguished colleague who came to
Europe, that the cases of Mohammedan Indians on whom he had practiced
analysis showed no other etiology of their neuroses than our European
patients.

The introduction of psychoanalysis into North America took place under
particularly glorious auspices. In the autumn of 1909, Jung and myself
were invited by President Stanley Hall, of Clark University, to take
part in the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the opening of
Clark University, by giving some lectures in German. We found, to our
great astonishment, that the unprejudiced men of that small but
respected pedagogic-philosophical university knew all the psychoanalytic
writings and had honored them in their lectures to their students. Thus
even in prudish America one could, at least in academic circles, discuss
freely and treat scientifically all those things that are regarded as
offensive in life. The five lectures that I improvised at Worcester then
appeared in English in the American Journal of Psychology; later on they
were printed in German under the title, “Über Psychoanalyse.” Jung
lectured on diagnostic association studies and on “conflicts in the
psychic life of the child.” We were rewarded for it with the honorary
degree of LL.D. During this week of celebration at Worcester,
psychoanalysis was represented by five persons. Besides Jung and myself
there were Ferenczi, who had joined me as travelling-companion, Ernest
Jones, then of Toronto University (Canada), now in London, and A. A.
Brill, who was already practising psychoanalysis in New York.

The most noteworthy personal relationship which resulted at Worcester,
was that established with James J. Putnam, teacher of neuropathology at
Harvard University. For years he had expressed a disparaging opinion of
psychoanalysis, but now he befriended it and recommended it to his
countrymen and his colleagues in numerous lectures, rich in content and
fine of form. The respect which he enjoys in America, owing to his
character, his high moral standard and his keen love for truth, was very
helpful to the cause of psychoanalysis and protected it against the
denunciations to which it might otherwise have early succumbed. Yielding
too much to the great ethical and philosophic bent of his nature Putnam
later required of psychoanalysis what, to me, seems an impossible
demand. He wished that it should be pressed into the service of a
certain moral philosophical conception of the universe; but Putnam has
remained the chief prop of the psychoanalytic movement in his native
land.

For the diffusion of this movement Brill and Jones deserve the greatest
credit. With a self-denying industry they constantly brought under the
notice of their countrymen, through their works, the easily observable
fundamental principles of psychoanalysis of everyday life, of the dream
and of the neuroses. Brill has strengthened these influences by his
medical activities and his translations of my writings: Jones, by
illuminating lectures and clever discussions at the American
Congresses.[7] The lack of a rooted scientific tradition and the lesser
rigidity of official authority have been of decided advantage to the
impetus given to psychoanalysis in America by Stanley Hall. It was
characteristic there from the beginning that professors, heads of insane
asylums, as well as independent practitioners, all showed themselves
equally interested in psychoanalysis. But just for this very reason it
is clear that the fight for psychoanalysis must be fought to a decisive
end, where the greater resistance has been met with, namely, in the
countries of the old cultural centers.

Of the European countries, France has so far shown herself the least
receptive towards psychoanalysis, although creditable writings by the
Zürich physician, A. Maeder, have opened up for the French reader an
easy path to its principles. The first indications of interest came from
provincial France. Moricheau-Beauchant (Poitiers) was the first
Frenchman who openly accepted psychoanalysis. Régis and Hesnard
(Bordeaux) have lately tried (1913) to overcome the prejudices of their
countrymen by an exhaustive and senseful presentation of the subject,
which takes exception only to symbolism. In Paris itself there still
appears to reign the conviction (given such oratorical expression at
London Congress 1913 by Janet) that every thing good in psychoanalysis
only repeats, with slight modifications, the views of Janet—everything
else in psychoanalysis being bad. Janet himself had to stand at this
Congress a number of corrections from Ernest Jones, who was able to
reproach him for his lack of knowledge of the subject. We cannot,
however, forget the credit due Janet for his works on the psychology of
the neuroses, although we must repudiate his claims.

Italy, after many promising starts, ceased to take further interest.
Owing to personal connections psychoanalysis gained an early hearing in
Holland: Van Emden, Van Ophuijsen, Van Renterghem (“Freud en zijn
school”) and the two doctors Stärke are busy in Holland particularly on
the theoretical side.[8] The interest in psychoanalysis in scientific
circles in England developed very slowly, but the indications are that
just here, favored by the English liking for the practical and their
passionate championship of justice, a flourishing future awaits
psychoanalysis.

In Sweden, P. Bjerre, successor to Wetterstand, has, at least
temporarily, given up hypnotic suggestion in favor of analytic
treatment. A. Vogt (Christiania) honored psychoanalysis already in 1907
in his “Psykiatriens gruntraek,” so that the first text-book on
psychiatry that took any notice of psychoanalysis was written in
Norwegian. In Russia, psychoanalysis is very generally known and
widespread; almost all my writings as well as those of other advocates
of analysis are translated into Russian. But a deeper grasp of the
analytic teaching has not yet shown itself in Russia. The contributions
written by Russian physicians and psychiatrists are not at present
noteworthy. Only Odessa possesses a trained psychoanalyst in the person
of M. Wulff. The introduction of psychoanalysis into the science and
literature of Poland is due chiefly to the endeavors of L. Jekels.
Hungary, geographically so near to Austria, scientifically so foreign to
it, has given to psychoanalysis only one co-worker, S. Ferenczi, but
such an one as is worth a whole society.

The standing of psychoanalysis in Germany can be described in no other
way than to state that it is the cynosure of all scientific discussion,
and evokes from physicians as well as from the laity, opinions of
decided rejection, which, so far, have not come to an end, but which, on
the contrary, are constantly renewed and strengthened. No official seat
of learning has, so far, admitted psychoanalysis. Successful
practitioners who apply it are few. Only a few institutions, such as
that of Binswanger’s in Kreuzlingen (on Swiss soil) and Marcinowski’s in
Holstein, have opened their doors to psychoanalysis. In the critical
city of Berlin, we have K. Abraham, one of the most prominent
representatives of psychoanalysis. He was formerly an assistant of
Bleuler. One might wonder that this state of things has thus continued
for a number of years without any change, if it was not known that the
above account merely describes the superficial appearances. One must not
overestimate the significance of the rejection of psychoanalysis by the
official representatives of science, the heads of institutions, as well
as their young following. It is easy to understand why the opponents
loudly raise their voices whilst the followers, being intimidated, keep
silent. Many of the latter, whose first contributions to analysis raised
high expectations, later withdrew from the movement under the pressure
of circumstances. But the movement itself strides ahead quietly. It is
always gaining new supporters among psychiatrists and the laity. It
constantly increases the number of readers of psychoanalytic literature
and thus forces the opponents to a more violent attempt at defense. In
the course of these years I have read, perhaps a dozen times, in the
reports of the transactions of certain congresses and of meetings of
scientific societies, or in reviews of certain publications, that
psychoanalysis was now dead, that it was finally overcome and settled.
The answer to all this would have to read like the telegram from Mark
Twain to the newspaper that falsely announced his death: “The report of
my death is grossly exaggerated.” After each of these death-notices,
psychoanalysis has gained new followers and co-workers and has created
for itself new organs. Surely to be reported dead is an advance over
being treated with dead silence!

Hand in hand with its territorial expansion just described
psychoanalysis became enlarged with regard to its contents through its
encroaching upon fields of knowledge outside of the study of the
neuroses and psychiatry. I will not treat in detail the development of
this part of our branch of science since this was excellently done by
Rank and Sachs (in Löwenfeld’s “Grenzfragen”)[9] which presents
exhaustively just these achievements in the work of analysis. Besides,
here everything is in inchoate form, hardly worked out, mostly only
preliminary and sometimes only in the stage of an intention. Every
honest thinker will find herein no grounds for reproach. There is a
tremendous amount of problems for a small number of workers whose chief
activity lies elsewhere, who are obliged to attack the special problems
of the new science with only amateurish preparation. These workers
hailing from the psychoanalytic field make no secret of their
dilettantism, they only desire to be guides and temporary occupants of
the places of those specialists to whom they recommend the analytic
technique and principles until the latter are ready to take up this work
themselves. That the results aimed at are, even now, not at all
insignificant, is due partly to the fruitfulness of the psychoanalytic
method, and partly to the circumstance that already there are a few
investigators, who, without being physicians, have made the application
of psychoanalysis to the mental sciences their lifework.

Most of these psychoanalytic applications can be traced, as is easily
understood, to the impetus given by my early analytic works. The
analytic examinations of nervous patients and neurotic manifestations of
normal persons drove me to the assumption of psychological relationships
which, most certainly, could not be limited only to that field. Thus
analysis presented us not only with the explanation of pathological
occurrences, but also showed us their connection with normal psychic
life and uncovered undreamed-of relations between psychiatry and a
variety of other sciences dealing with activities of mind. Thus certain
typical dreams furnished the understanding of many myths and fairy
tales. Riklin and Abraham followed this hint and began those
investigations about myths which have found their completion in the
works of Rank on Mythology, works which do full justice to all the
requirements of the specialist. The prosecution of dream-symbology led
to the very heart of the problems of mythology, folk-lore (Jones,
Storfer) and of religious abstraction. At one of the psychoanalytic
congresses the audience was deeply impressed when a student of Jung
pointed out the similarity of the phantasy-formation of schizophrenics
with the cosmogonies of primitive times and peoples. In a later
elaboration, no longer free from objection yet very interesting, Jung
made use of mythological material in an attempt to harmonize the
neurotic with religious and mythological phantasies.

Another path led from the investigation of dreams to the analysis of
poetic creations, and finally to the analysis of authors and artists
themselves. Very soon it was discovered that the dreams invented by
writers stand in the same relation to analysis as do genuine dreams.[10]
The conception of the unconscious psychic activity enabled us to get the
first glimpse into the nature of the poetic creativeness. The valuation
of the emotional feelings which we were forced to recognize while
studying the neuroses enabled us to recognize the sources of artistic
productions and brought up the problem as to how the artist reacts to
those stimuli and with what means he disguises his reactions.[11] Most
psychoanalysts with wide interests have furnished contributions from
their works for the treatment of these problems, which are among the
most attractive in the application of psychoanalysis. Naturally here
also opposition was not lacking from those who are not acquainted with
analysis, and expressed itself with the same lack of understanding and
passionate rejection as on the native soil of psychoanalysis. For it was
to be expected as a matter of course, that everywhere psychoanalysis
penetrates, it would have to go through the same struggle with the
natives. However, these attempted invasions have not yet stirred up
interest in all fields which will, in the future, be open to them. Among
the strictly scientific applications of analysis to literature the deep
work of Rank on the theme of incest easily ranks first. Its content is
certain to evoke the greatest unpopularity. Philological and historical
works on the basis of psychoanalysis are few, at present. I myself dared
to venture to make the first attempt into the problems of the psychology
of religion in 1910, when I compared religious ceremonials with neurotic
ceremonials. In his work on the “piety of the Count of Zinzendorf,” as
well as in other contributions, the Rev. Dr. Pfister, of Zürich, has
succeeded in tracing back religious zealotism to perverse eroticism. In
the recent works of the Zürich School one is more likely to find that
religion becomes injected into the analysis rather than rationally
explained by it.

In my four essays on “Totem and Taboo”[12] I made the attempt to discuss
the problems of race psychology by means of analysis. This should lead
us directly to the origins of the most important institutions of our
civilization, such as state regulations, morality, religion, as well as
to the origins of the interdiction of incest and of conscience. To what
extent the relations thus obtained will be proof to criticism cannot be
determined today.

My book on Wit[13] furnished the first examples of the application of
analytic thinking to esthetic themes. Everything else is still waiting
for workers, who can expect a rich harvest in this very field. We are
lacking here in workers from these respective specialties and in order
to attract such, Hanns Sachs founded in 1912, the journal Imago, edited
by himself and Rank. Hitschmann and v. Winterstein made a beginning with
the psychoanalytic elucidation of philosophical systems and
personalities. The continuation and deeper treatment of the same is much
to be desired.

The revolutionary findings of psychoanalysis concerning the psychic life
of the child, the part played therein by sexual impulses (v.
Hug-Helmuth) and the fate of such participation of sexuality which
becomes useless for the purpose of propagation, naturally drew attention
to pedagogics, and instigated the effort to push the analytical
viewpoint into the foreground of this sphere. Recognition is due to the
Rev. Pfister for having begun this application of analysis with honest
enthusiasm, and for having brought it to the notice of ministers and
educators.[14] He succeeded in winning over a number of Swiss pedagogues
as sympathizers in this work. It is said that some preferred to remain
circumspectly in the background. A portion of the Vienna analysts seem
to have landed in their retreat from psychoanalysis on a sort of medical
pedagogy. (Adler and Furtmüller, “Heilen and Bilden,” 1913.)

I have attempted in these incomplete suggestions to indicate the, as
yet, hardly visible wealth of associations which have sprung up between
medical psychoanalysis and other fields of science. There is material
for the work of a whole generation of investigators and I doubt not that
this work will be done when once the resistance to psychoanalysis as
such has been overcome.[15]

To write the history of the resistances, I consider, at present, both
fruitless and inopportune. It would not be very glorious for the
scientific men of our day. But I will add at once that it has never
occurred to me to rail against the opponents of psychoanalysis merely
because they were opponents, not counting a few unworthy individuals,
fortune hunters and plunderers such as in time of war are always found
on both sides. For I knew how to account for the behavior of these
opponents and had besides discovered that psychoanalysis brings to light
the worst in every man. But I decided not to answer my opponents and, so
far as I had influence, to keep others from polemics. The value of
public or literary discussions seemed to me very doubtful under the
particular conditions in which the fight over psychoanalysis took place.
The value of majorities at congresses or society meetings was certainly
doubtful, and my confidence in the honesty and distinction of my
opponents was always slight. Observation shows that only very few
persons are capable of remaining polite, not to speak of objective, in
any scientific dispute, and the impression gained from a scientific
quarrel was always a horror to me. Perhaps this attitude of mine has
been misunderstood, perhaps I have been considered as good-natured or so
intimidated that it was supposed no further consideration need be shown
me.

This is a mistake. I can revile and rave as well as any other, but I am
not able to render into literary form the expressions of the underlying
affects and therefore I prefer to abstain entirely.

Perhaps in many respects it might have been better had I permitted free
vent to my own passions and to those about me. We have all heard the
interesting attempt at an explanation of the origin of psychoanalysis
from its Viennese milieu. Janet did not scorn to make use of it as late
as 1913, although, no doubt, he is proud of being a Parisian. This
_aperçu_ says that psychoanalysis, especially the assertion that the
neuroses can be traced back to disturbances in the sexual life, could
only have originated in a city like Vienna, in an atmosphere of
sensuality and immorality not to be found in other cities, and that it
thus represents only a reflection, the theoretical projection as it
were, of these particular Viennese conditions. Well, I certainly am no
local patriot, but this theory has always seemed to be especially
nonsensical, so nonsensical that sometimes I was inclined to assume that
the reproaching of the Vienna spirit was only a euphemistic substitution
for another one which one did not care to bring up publicly. If the
assumptions had been of the opposite kind, we might be inclined to
listen. But even if we assume that there might be a city whose
inhabitants have imposed upon themselves special sexual restrictions and
at the same time show a peculiar tendency to severe neurotic maladies,
then such a town might well furnish the soil on which some observer
might get the idea of connecting these two facts and of deducting the
one from the other. But neither assumption fits Vienna. The Viennese are
neither more abstemious nor yet more nervous than dwellers in any other
metropolis. Sex matters are a little freer, prudishness is less than in
the cities of western and northern Europe that are so proud of their
chastity. Our supposed observer would, more likely, be led astray by the
particular conditions prevailing in Vienna than be enlightened as to the
cause of the neuroses.

But Vienna has done everything possible to deny her share in the origin
of psychoanalysis. Nowhere else is the inimical indifference of the
learned and cultured circles so clearly evident to the psychoanalyst.

Perhaps I am somewhat to blame for this by my policy of avoiding
widespread publicity. If I had caused psychoanalysis to occupy the
medical societies of Vienna with noisy sessions, with an unloading of
all passions, wherein all reproaches and invectives carried on the
tongue or in the mind would have been expressed, then perhaps the ban
against psychoanalysis might, by now, have been removed and its standing
no longer might have been that of a stranger in its native city. As it
is, the poet may be right when he makes Wallenstein say:

              “Yet this the Viennese will not forgive me,
              That I did them out of a spectacle.”

The task to which I am unequal, namely, that of reproaching the
opponents “suaviter in modo” for their injustice and arbitrariness, was
taken up by Bleuler in 1911 and carried out in most honorable fashion in
his work, “Freud’s Psychoanalysis: a Defense and a Criticism.” It would
be so entirely natural for me to praise this work, critical in two
directions, that I hasten to tell what there is in it I object to. This
work appears to me to be still very partisan, too lenient to the
mistakes of our opponents, and altogether too severe to the shortcomings
of our followers. This characterization of it may explain why the
opinion of a psychiatrist of such high standing, of such indubitable
ability and independence, has not had greater influence on his
colleagues. The author of “Affectivity” (1906) must not be surprised if
the influence of a work is not determined by the value of its argument
but by the tone of its affect. Another part of this influence—the one on
the followers of psychoanalysis—Bleuler himself destroyed later on by
bringing into prominence in 1913, in his “Criticism of the Freudian
School,” the obverse side of his attitude to psychoanalysis. Therein he
takes away so much from the structure of the psychoanalytic principles
that our opponents may well be satisfied with the assistance of this
defender. It was not new arguments or better observations that served
Bleuler as a guidance for these verdicts, but only the reference to his
own knowledge, the inadequacy of which the author no longer admits as in
his earlier writings. Here an almost irreparable loss seemed to threaten
psychoanalysis. However, in his last utterance (“Die Kritiken der
Schizophrenie,” 1914) on the occasion of the attacks made upon him owing
to his introduction of psychoanalysis into his book on “Schizophrenie,”
Bleuler rises to what he himself terms a “haughty presumption:” “But now
I will assume a haughty presumption, I consider that the many
psychologies to date have contributed mighty little to the explanation
of the connection between psychogenetic symptoms and diseases, but that
the deeper psychology (tiefen psychologie) furnishes us a part of the
psychology still to be created, which the physician needs in order to
understand his patients and to heal them rationally; and I even believe
that in my ‘Schizophrenie’ I have taken a very small step towards this.”
The first two assertions are surely correct, the latter may be an error.

Since by the “deeper psychology” psychoanalysis alone is to be
understood, we may, for the present, remain satisfied with this
admission.




                                  III

             “Cut it short!
         On doomsday ’twon’t be worth a farthing!”
                                                     _Goethe._


Two years after the first congress the second private congress of
psychoanalysts took place at Nuremberg, March, 1910. During the
interval, whilst I was still under the impression of the favorable
reception in America, the growing hostility in Germany and the
unexpected support through the acquisition of the Zürich School, I had
conceived a project which I was able to carry out, at this second
congress, with the help of my friend S. Ferenczi. I had in mind to
organize the psychoanalytic movement, to transfer its center to Zürich,
and place it under a head who would take care of its future. As this
found much opposition among the adherents of psychoanalysis, I will
explain my motives more fully. Thus I hope to justify myself, even if it
turns out that my action was not a very wise one.

I judged that the association with Vienna was no recommendation, but
rather an obstacle for the new movement. A place like Zürich, in the
heart of Europe, where an academic teacher had opened his institution to
psychoanalysis, seemed to me much more promising. Moreover, I assumed
that my own person was a second obstacle. The estimate put upon my
personality was utterly confused by the favor or dislike from different
factions. I was either compared to Darwin and Kepler or reviled as a
paralytic. I, therefore, desired to push into the background not only
the city whence psychoanalysis emanated, but also my own personality.
Furthermore, I was no longer young, I saw a long road before me and I
felt oppressed by the idea that it had fallen to my lot to become a
leader in my advanced age. Yet I felt that there must be a leader. I
knew only too well what mistakes lay in wait for him who would undertake
the practice of psychoanalysis, and hoped that many of these might be
avoided if we had an authority who was prepared to guide and admonish.
Such authority naturally devolved upon me in view of the indisputable
advantage of fifteen years’ experience. It was now my desire to transfer
this authority to a younger man who would, quite naturally, take my
place on my death. I felt that this person could be only C. G. Jung, for
Bleuler was of my own age. In favor of Jung was his conspicuous talents,
the contributions he had already made to analysis, his independent
position, and the impression of energy which his personality always
made. He also seemed prepared to enter into friendly relations with me,
and to give up, for my sake, certain race-prejudices which he had so far
permitted himself to indulge. I had no notion then that in spite of the
advantages enumerated, this was a very unfortunate choice; that it
concerned a person who, incapable of tolerating the authority of
another, was still less fitted to be himself an authority, one whose
energy was devoted to the unscrupulous pursuit of his own interests.

The formation of an official organization I considered necessary because
I feared the abuses to which psychoanalysis would be subjected, once it
should achieve popularity. I felt that there should be a place that
could give the dictum: “With all this nonsense, analysis has nothing to
do; this is not psychoanalysis.” It was decided that at the meeting of
the local groups which together formed the international organization,
instruction should be given how psychoanalysis should be practised, that
physicians should be trained there and that the local society should, in
a way, stand sponsor for them. It also appeared to me desirable that the
adherents of psychoanalysis should meet for friendly intercourse and
mutual support, inasmuch as official science had pronounced its great
ban and boycott against physicians and institutions practising
psychoanalysis.

This and nothing else I wished to attain by the founding of the
“International Psychoanalytic Association.” Perhaps it was more than
could possibly be attained. Just as my opponents learned that it was not
possible to stem the new movement, so I had to learn, by experience,
that it would not permit itself to be led along the particular path
which I had laid out for it. The motion made by Ferenczi at Nuremberg
was seconded. Jung was elected president, and Riklin was chosen as
secretary. It was also decided to publish a corresponding journal
through which the central association was “to foster and further the
science of psychoanalysis as founded by Freud both as pure psychology,
as well as in its application to medicine and the mental sciences, and
to promote assistance among the members in all their efforts to acquire
and to spread psychoanalytic knowledge.” The members of the Vienna group
alone firmly opposed the project with passionate excitement. Adler
expressed his fear that “a censorship and limitation of scientific
freedom” was intended. The Viennese finally gave in, after having gained
their point that Zürich should not be raised to the center of the
association, but that the center should be the home city of the
president, who was to be elected for two years.

At this congress three local groups were constituted: one in Berlin
under the chairmanship of Abraham, one in Zürich, whose chairman became
the president of the central association, and one in Vienna, the
chairmanship of which I relinquished to Adler. A fourth group, in
Budapest, could not be formed until later. On account of illness Bleuler
had been absent from the congress. Later he evinced considerable
hesitation about entering the association and although he let himself be
persuaded to do so by my personal representations, he resigned a short
time afterwards owing to disagreements at Zürich. This severed the
connection between the Zürich group and the Burghölzli institution.

Another result of the Nuremberg Congress was the founding of the
Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, which caused a reconciliation between
Adler and Stekel. It had originally been intended as an opposing
tendency and was to win back for Vienna the hegemony threatened by the
election of Jung. But when the two founders of the journal, under
pressure of the difficulty of finding a publisher, assured me of their
friendly intentions and as guarantee of their attitude gave me the right
to veto, I accepted the editorship and worked vigorously for this new
organ, the first number of which appeared in September, 1910.

I will not continue the history of the Psychoanalytic Congress. The
third one took place at Weimar, September, 1911, and even surpassed the
previous ones in spirit and scientific interest. J. J. Putnam, who was
present at this meeting, later expressed in America his satisfaction and
his respect for the “mental attitude” of those present and quoted words
which I was supposed to have used in reference to the latter: “They have
learned to endure a bit of truth.” As a matter of fact any one who has
attended scientific congresses must have received a lasting impression
in favor of the Psychoanalytic Association. I myself had presided over
two former congresses. I thought it best to give every lecturer ample
time for his paper and left the discussions of these lectures to take
place later as a sort of private exchange of ideas. Jung, who presided
over the Weimar meeting, reëstablished the discussions after each
lecture, which had not, however, proved disturbing at that time.

Two years later, in September, 1913, quite another picture was presented
by the congress at Münich which is still vividly recalled by those who
were present. It was presided over by Jung in an unamiable and incorrect
fashion: the lecturers were limited as to time, and the discussion
dwarfed the lectures. Through a malicious mood of chance the evil genius
of Hoche had taken up his residence in the same house in which the
analysts held their meetings. Hoche could easily have convinced himself
that his characterization of these psychoanalysts, as a sect, blindly
and meekly following their leader, was true _ad absurdum_. The fatiguing
and unedifying proceedings ended in the reëlection of Jung as president
of the International Psychoanalytic Association, which fact Jung
accepted, although two fifths of those present refused him their
support. We took leave from one another without feeling the need to meet
again!

About the time of this third Congress the condition of the International
Psychoanalytic Association was as follows: The local groups at Vienna,
Berlin, and Zürich had constituted themselves already at the congress at
Nuremberg in 1910. In May, 1911, a group, under the chairmanship of Dr.
L. Seif, was added at Münich. In the same year the first American local
group was formed under the chairmanship of A. A. Brill under the name of
“The New York Psychoanalytic Society.” At the Weimar Congress, the
founding of a second American group was authorized. This came into
existence during the next year as “The American Psychoanalytic
Association.” It included members from Canada and all America; Putnam
was elected president, and Ernest Jones was made secretary. Just before
the congress at Münich in 1913, a local group was founded at Budapest
under the leadership of S. Ferenczi. Soon afterwards Jones, who settled
in London, founded the first English group. The number of members of the
eight groups then in existence could not, of course, furnish any
standard for the computation of the non-organized students and adherents
of psychoanalysis.

The development of the periodical literature of psychoanalysis is also
worthy of a brief mention. The first periodical publications serving the
interests of analysis were the Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunden
which have appeared irregularly since 1907 and have reached the
fifteenth volume.[16] They published writings by Freud, Riklin, Jung,
Abraham, Rank, Sadger, Pfister, M. Graf, Jones, Storfer and
Hug-Hellmuth. The founding of the Imago, to be mentioned later, has
somewhat lowered the value of this form of publication. After the
meeting at Salzburg, 1908, the Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und
psychopathologische Forschungen was founded, which appeared under Jung’s
editorship for five years, and it has now reappeared under new
editorship and under the slightly changed title of Jahrbuch der
Psychoanalyse. It no longer wishes to be as in former years, merely an
archive for collecting works of psychoanalytic merit, but it wishes to
justify its editorial task by taking due notice of all occurrences and
all endeavors in the field of psychoanalysis. As mentioned before Das
Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse started by Adler and Stekel after the
founding of the “International Association” (Nuremberg, 1910) went
through in a short time a very varied career. Already in the tenth issue
of the first volume there was an announcement that in view of scientific
difference of opinion with the editors, Dr. Adler had decided
voluntarily to withdraw his collaboration. This placed the entire
editorship in the hands of Dr. Stekel (summer of 1911). At the Weimar
congress the Zentralblatt was raised to the official organ of the
“International Association” and by raising the annual dues it was made
accessible to all members. Beginning with the third number of the second
year (winter 1912) Stekel alone became responsible for the contents of
the journal. His behavior, which is difficult to explain in public,
forced me to sever all my connections with this journal and to give
psychoanalysis in all haste a new organ, the International Journal for
Medical Psychoanalysis (Internationale Zeitschrift für Ärztliche
Psychoanalyse). With the help of almost all my collaborators and the new
publisher, H. Heller, the first number of this new journal was able to
appear in January, 1913, to take the place of the Zentralblatt as the
official organ of the “International Psychoanalytic Association.”

Meanwhile Dr. Hanns Sachs and Dr. Otto Rank founded early in 1912 a new
journal, Imago (published by Heller), whose only aim is the application
of psychoanalysis to mental sciences. Imago has now reached the middle
of its third year, and enjoys the increasing interest of readers who are
not medically interested in psychoanalysis.

Apart from these four periodical publications (Schriften z. Angew.
Seelenkunde, Jahrbuch, Intern. Zeitschrift, and Imago) other German and
foreign journals have contributed works that can claim a place in
psychoanalytic literature. The Journal of Abnormal Psychology, published
by Morton Prince, as a rule, contains many good analytical
contributions. In the winter of 1913 Dr. White and Dr. Jelliffe started
a journal exclusively devoted to psychoanalysis, THE PSYCHOANALYTIC
REVIEW, which takes into account the fact that most physicians in
America interested in psychoanalysis do not master the German language.

I am now obliged to speak of two secessions which have taken place among
the followers of psychoanalysis. The first of these took place in the
interval between the founding of the association in 1910 and the
congress at Weimar, 1911, the second took place after this, and came to
light in Münich in 1913. The disappointment which they caused me might
have been avoided if more attention had been paid to the mechanisms of
those who undergo analytical treatment. I was well aware that any one
might take flight on first approach to the unlovely truths of analysis;
I myself had always asserted that any one’s understanding may be
suspended by one’s own repressions (through the resistances which
sustain them) so that in his relation to psychoanalysis he cannot get
beyond a certain point. But I had not expected that any one who had
mastered analysis to a certain depth could renounce this understanding
and lose it. And yet daily experience with patients had shown that the
total rejection of all knowledge gained through analysis may be brought
about by any deeper stratum of particularly strong resistance. Even if
we succeed through laborious work in causing such a patient to grasp
parts of analytic knowledge and handle these as his own possessions, it
may well happen that under the domination of the next resistance he will
throw to the winds all he has learned and will defend himself as in his
first days of treatment. I had to learn that this can happen among
psychoanalysts just as among patients during treatment.

It is no enviable task to write the history of these two secessions,
partly because I am not impelled to it by strong personal motives—I had
not expected gratitude nor am I to any active degree revengeful—and
partly because I know that I hereby lay myself open to the invectives of
opponents manifesting but little consideration, and at the same time I
regale the enemies of psychoanalysis with the long wished-for spectacle
of seeing the psychoanalysts tearing each other to pieces. I had to
exercise much control to keep myself from fighting with the opponents of
psychoanalysis, and now I feel constrained to take up the fight with
former followers or such as still wish to be called so. I have no
choice; to keep silent would be comfortable or cowardly, but it would
hurt the subject more than the frank uncovering of the existing evils.
Any one who has followed the growth of scientific movements will know
that quite similar disturbances and dissensions took place in all of
them. It may be that elsewhere they are more carefully concealed.
However, psychoanalysis, which denies many conventional ideals, is also
more honest in these things.

Another very palpable inconvenience lies in the fact that I cannot
altogether avoid going into an analytic elucidation. Analysis is not,
however, suitable for polemical use; it always presupposes the consent
of the one analyzed and the situation of a superior and subordinate.
Therefore he who wishes to use analysis with polemic intent must offer
no objection if the person so analyzed will, in his turn, use analysis
against him, and if the discussion merges into a state in which the
awakening of a conviction in an impartial third party is entirely
excluded. I shall, therefore, make here the smallest possible use of
analysis, thereby limiting my indiscretion and aggression against my
opponents, and I will also add that I base no scientific criticism on
this means. I have nothing to do with the possible substance of truths
in the theories to be rejected nor am I seeking to refute the same. This
task may be left to other able workers in the field of psychoanalysis,
and some of it has already been done. I only desire to show that these
theories deny the basic principles of analysis—I will show in what
points—and for this reason should not be known under this name. I shall,
therefore, use analysis only to make clear, how these deviations from
analysis could take place among analysts. At the parting places I am, of
course, obliged to defend the just rights of psychoanalysis with purely
critical remarks.

Psychoanalysis has found as its first task the explanation of the
neuroses; it has taken the two facts of resistance and transference as
starting points, and by bearing in mind the third fact of amnesia in the
theories of repression, it has given justification to the sexual motive
forces of the neuroses and of the unconscious. Psychoanalysis has never
claimed to give a perfect theory of the human psychic life, but has only
demanded that its discoveries should be used for the completion and
correction of knowledge we have gained elsewhere. But Alfred Adler’s
theory goes far beyond this goal. It pretends to explain with one stroke
the behavior and character of men as well as their neurotic and
psychotic maladies. As a matter of fact, Adler’s theory is more adequate
to any other field than to that of the neuroses, which he still puts in
the first place because of the history of its origin. I had the
opportunity of studying Dr. Adler many years and have never denied him
the testimonial of having a superior mind, especially endowed
speculatively. As proof of the “persecution” which he claims to have
suffered at my hands, I can only say that after the formation of the
Association I handed over to him the leadership of the Vienna group. It
was only after urgent requests from all the members of the society that
I could be prevailed upon to resume the presidency at the scientific
proceedings. When I had recognized Dr. Adler’s slight talent for the
estimation of the unconscious material, I expected that he would know
how to discover the connections between psychoanalysis and psychology
and the biological bases of the impulses, a discovery to which he was
entitled, in a certain sense, through his valuable studies about the
inferiority of organs. He really did bring out some thing, but his work
makes the impression as if—to speak in his own jargon—it were intended
to prove that psychoanalysis was wrong in everything and that the
significance of the sexual impelling forces could only be due to
gullibility about the assertions of neurotics. Of the personal motive of
his work I may also speak publicly, since he himself revealed it in the
presence of a small circle of members of the Vienna group. “Do you
believe,” he remarked, “that it is such a great pleasure for me to stand
in your shadow my whole life?” To be sure I see nothing objectionable in
the fact that a younger man should frankly admit an ambition which one
might, in any case, suspect as one of the incentives of his work. But
even under the domination of such a motive a man should know how to
avoid being “unfair” as designated by the English with their fine social
tact. We Germans have only a much coarser word at our disposal to convey
this idea. How little Adler has succeeded in not being unfair is shown
by the great number of mean outbursts of anger which distort his
writings, and by the feeling of an ungovernable mania for priority which
pervades his work. At the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society we once heard
him claim for himself the priority for the viewpoints of the “unity of
the neuroses” and the “dynamic conception” of the same. This was a great
surprise for me as I had always believed that I had represented these
two principles before I had ever known Adler.[17]

This striving of Adler for a place in the sun has brought about,
however, one result, which must be considered beneficial to
psychoanalysis. When I was obliged to bring about Adler’s resignation
from the editorial staff of the Zentralblatt, after the appearance of
his irreconcilable scientific antagonisms, Adler also left the Vienna
group and founded a new society to which he first gave the tasteful name
“Society for Free Psychoanalysis.” But the outside public, unacquainted
with analysis, is evidently as little skilled in recognizing the
difference between the views of two psychoanalysts, as are Europeans in
recognizing the tints between two Chinese faces. The “free”
psychoanalysis remained in the shadow of the “official” and “orthodox”
one, and was treated only as an appendage of the latter. Then Adler took
the step for which we are thankful. He severed all connection with
psychoanalysis and named his teachings “The Individual Psychology.”
There is much space on God’s earth, and any one who can is surely
justified in tumbling about upon it uninhibited; but it is not desirable
to continue living under one roof when people no longer understand one
another and no longer get on together. Adler’s “Individual Psychology”
is now one of the many psychological movements opposed to
psychoanalysis, and its further development lies outside our interests.

Adler’s theory was, from the very beginning, a “system,” which
psychoanalysis was careful not to become. It is also an excellent
example of a “secondary elaboration” as seen, for example, in the
process which the waking thought produces in dream material.[18] In this
case instead of dream material there is the material newly acquired from
the viewpoint of the ego and brought under the familiar categories of
the same. It is then translated, changed, and as thoroughly
misunderstood as happens in the case of dream-formation. Adler’s theory
is thus characterized less by what it asserts than by what it denies. It
consequently consists of three elements of quite dissimilar value;
first, good contributions to the psychology of the ego, which are
superfluous but admissible; secondly, translations of analytical facts
into the new jargon, and, thirdly, distortions and perversions of these
facts when they do not fit into the ego presuppositions. The elements of
the first kind have never been ignored by psychoanalysis, although it
owed no special attention to them. Psychoanalysis had a greater interest
in showing that all ego strivings are mixed with libidinous components.
Adler’s theory emphasizes the counterpart to it; namely, that all
libidinous feeling contains an admixture of egotism. This would have
been a palpable gain if Adler had not made use of this assertion to
deny, every time, the libidinous feelings in favor of the impelling ego
components. His theory thus does exactly what all patients do, and what
our conscious thinking always does, it rationalizes, as Jones would say,
in order to conceal the unconscious motives. Adler is so consistent in
this, that he considers the object of evincing domination over the
woman, to be on the top, as the mainspring of the sexual act. I do not
know if he has upheld this monstrous idea in his writings.

Psychoanalysis early recognized that every neurotic symptom owes the
possibility of its existence to some compromise. It must, therefore,
also put to some good account the demands of the ego which manages the
repression, it must offer it some advantages by finding for it some
useful employment, otherwise it would suffer the same fate as the
originally defended impulses. The term “morbid gain” expresses this
state of affairs. One might even have been justified in differentiating
the primary gain for the ego which must have been active at the origin,
from a “secondary” gain which appears in connection with other
intentions of the ego, when the symptom is about to assert itself. It
has also long been known to analysis that the withdrawal of this morbid
gain, or the cessation of the same in consequence of some real change,
is one of the mechanisms in the cure of the symptom. On these
relationships which can be verified and understood without difficulty,
Adler’s theory puts the greatest emphasis. It entirely overlooks the
fact that innumerable times the ego makes a virtue out of necessity in
submitting to the most undesired symptom forced upon it, because of the
use it can make of it, _e. g._, when the ego accepts anxiety as a means
of security. Here the ego plays the absurd part of the Pierot in the
circus, who, through his gestures, wishes to convey to the spectators
the impression that all changes in the menage are taking place at his
command. But only the youngest among the spectators believe him.

For the second part of Adler’s theory psychoanalysis must stand security
as for its own possessions. For it is nothing but psychoanalytic
knowledge which the author had from all the sources opened to him during
ten years of our joint work, but which he later marked as his own after
changing the nomenclature. For instance, I myself consider “security” a
better word than “protective measure,” which I used; but cannot find in
it any new meaning. Similarly one will find in Adler’s statements a
great many long-known features if one will replace the expressions
“feigned” (fingiert) fictive and fiction, by the original words “to
fancy” and “phantasy.” This identity would be emphasized by
psychoanalysis, even if the author had not for many years participated
in our common work.

The third part of Adler’s theory, which consists in giving new
interpretations to, and in distorting the disagreeable facts of
psychoanalysis, contains that which definitely severs the actual
“Individual Psychology” from psychoanalysis. As is known the principle
of Adler’s system states that it is the object of the self-assertion of
the individual, his “will to power” in the form of the “masculine
protest,” to manifest itself domineeringly in the conduct of life, in
character formation and in the neurosis. This “masculine protest,” the
Adlerism motor, is nothing else, however, than the repression set free
from its psychological mechanism, and what is more, it is sexualized and
thus hardly in keeping with the vaunted expulsion of sexuality from its
place in the psychic life. The “masculine protest” certainly exists, but
in constituting it as the motor of the psychic life, observation has
only played the part of the springboard which one leaves in order to
uplift one’s self. Let us consider one of the most fundamental
situations of the infantile desire; namely, the observation of the
sexual act between adults by the child. When the life-history of such
persons is later subjected to analysis by a physician, it is found that
at this moment the minor spectator was seized by two feelings; one, in
the case of a boy, to put himself in the place of the active man, and
the other, the opposing feeling, to identify himself with the suffering
woman. Both strivings conjointly exhaust the pleasure that might have
resulted from this situation. Only the first feeling can come under the
head of the “masculine protest” if this idea is to retain any meaning at
all. The second feeling, whose fate Adler either ignores or does not
know, is really the one which assumes greater significance in the later
neurosis. Adler has placed himself so entirely into the jealous
confinement of the ego, that he only accounts for such emotional
feelings as are agreeable to the ego and furthered by it; but the case
of the neurosis, which opposes these strivings, lies beyond his horizon.

Adler’s most serious deviations from the reality of observation and his
deepest confusion of ideas have arisen in his attempt to correlate the
basic principle of his theory with the psychic life of the child, an
attempt which has become inevitable in psychoanalysis. The biological,
social, and physiological meaning of “masculine” and “feminine” have
here become mixed into a hopeless composition. It is quite impossible,
and it can easily be disproved by observation, that the masculine or
feminine child builds its plan of life on any original undervaluation of
the feminine sex; nor is it conceivable that a child can take as the
guiding line the wish: “I will be a real man.” In the beginning no child
has even an inkling of the significance of the difference in sex, more
likely it starts with the assumption that both sexes possess the same
(male) genital. It does not begin its sexual investigation with the
problem of sex differentiation and is far from entertaining the social
undervaluation of the woman. There are women in whose neurosis the wish
to be a man never played any part. So far as the “masculine protest” is
concerned, it can easily be traced back to a disturbance of the original
narcissism caused by the threat of castration; that is, to the first
hindrance of sexual activity. All dispute as to the psychogenesis of the
neuroses must ultimately be decided in the sphere of the childhood
neuroses. The careful analysis of a neurosis of the early years of
childhood puts an end to all mistakes in regard to the etiology of the
neuroses, and all doubts as to the part played by the sexual impulses.
That is why Adler in his criticism of Jung’s “Conflicts of the Child’s
Mind” was obliged to resort to the imputation that the material of the
case surely must have followed a uniform new tendency “from the
father.”[19]

I will not linger any longer over the biological side of Adler’s theory,
and will not examine whether the palpable inferiority of organs or the
subjective feeling of the same (one often cannot tell which) can
possibly be the basis of Adler’s system. Only permit me to remark that
this would make the neurosis a by-product of the general stunting, while
observation teaches that an excessively large number of hideous,
misshapen, crippled, and wretched creatures have failed to react to
their deficiencies by developing a neurosis. Nor will I consider the
interesting information that the sense of inferiority goes back to
infantile feelings. It shows us in what disguise the doctrine of
infantilism, so much emphasized in psychoanalysis, returns in Adler’s
Individual Psychology. On the other hand, I am obliged to emphasize how
all psychological acquisitions of psychoanalysis have been disregarded
by Adler. In his book “The Nervous Character,” the unconscious still
appears as a psychological peculiarity, but without any relation to his
system. Later, he declared, quite logically, that it was a matter of
indifference to him whether any conception be conscious or unconscious.
For the principle of repressions, Adler never evinced any understanding.
While reviewing a lecture before the Vienna Society in 1911, he said:
“On the strength of a case I wish to point out that the patient had
never repressed his libido, against which he continually tried to secure
himself.”[20] Soon thereafter at a discussion in Vienna Adler said: “If
you ask whence comes the repression, you are told: from culture. But if
you ask whence comes culture, the reply is: from the repression. So you
see it is only a question of a play on words.” A small fragment of the
sagacity used by Adler to defend his “nervous character” might have
sufficed to show him the way out of this pettifogging argument. There is
nothing mysterious about it, except that culture depends upon the acts
of repression of former generations, and that each new generation is
required to retain this culture by carrying out the same repressions. I
have heard of a child that considered itself fooled and began to cry,
because to the question: “Where do eggs come from?” it received the
answer, “Eggs come from hens,” and to the further question: “Where do
the hens come from?” the information was “From the eggs,” and yet this
was not a play upon words. The child had been told what was true.

Just as deplorable and devoid of substance is all that Adler has said
about the dream—that shibboleth of psychoanalysis. At first he
considered the dream as a turning from the masculine to the feminine
line, which simply means translating the theory of wish-fulfillment in
dreams into the language of the “masculine protest.” Later he found that
the essence of the dream lies in the fact that it enables man to realize
unconsciously what is denied him consciously. Adler should also be
credited with the priority of confounding the dream with the latent
dream-thoughts, on the cognition of which rests his idea of “prospective
tendency.” Maeder followed him in this, later on. In doing so he readily
overlooks the fact that every interpretation of the dream which really
tells nothing comprehensible in its manifest appearance rests upon the
same dream interpretation, whose assumptions and conclusions he is
disputing. Concerning resistance Adler asserts that it serves to
strengthen the patient against the physician. This is certainly correct.
It means as much as saying that it serves the resistance. But whence
this resistance originates, and how it happens that its phenomena serve
the patient’s interest, these questions, as if of no interest for the
ego, are not further discussed by Adler. The detailed mechanisms of
symptoms and phenomena, the motivation of the variety of diseases and
morbid manifestations, find no consideration at all with Adler, since
everything is equally subservient to the “masculine protest,” to the
self-assertion, and to the exaltation of the personality. The system is
finished, at the expense of an extraordinary labor of new
interpretation, yet it has not contributed a single new observation. I
believe that I have succeeded in showing that his system has nothing
whatever in common with psychoanalysis.

The picture which one derives from Adler’s system is founded entirely
upon the impulse of aggression. It has no place at all for love. One
might wonder that such a cheerless aspect of life should have received
any notice whatever; but we must not forget that humanity, oppressed by
its sexual needs, is prepared to accept anything, if only the
“overcoming of sexuality” is held out as bait.

The secession of Adler’s faction was finished before the Congress at
Weimar which took place in 1911, while the one of the Swiss School began
after this date. Strangely enough, the first indications of it were
found in some remarks by Riklin in popular articles printed in Swiss
literature, from which the general public learned, even before Riklin’s
closest colleagues, that psychoanalysis had succeeded in overcoming some
regretable mistakes which discredited it. In 1912 Jung boasted, in a
letter to me from America, that his modifications of psychoanalysis had
overcome the resistances to it in many persons, who hitherto wanted to
know nothing about it. I replied that this was nothing to boast about,
that the more he sacrificed of the hard-won truths of psychoanalysis,
the less resistances he would encounter. This modification for the
introduction of which the Swiss are so proud, again was nothing more or
less than the theoretical suppression of the sexual factor. I admit that
from the very beginning I have regarded this “progress” as a
too-far-reaching adaptation to the demands of actuality.

These two retrogressive movements, tending away from psychoanalysis,
which I will now compare, also resemble each other in the fact that they
are seeking to obtain a favorable opinion by means of certain lofty
points of view, as _sub specie æternitatis_. In the case of Adler, this
rôle is played by the relativity of all knowledge, and by the rights of
the personality to construe artificially any piece of knowledge to suit
the individual; while Jung insists on the cultural historical rights of
youth to throw off any fetters that tyrannical old age with ossified
views would forge for it. These arguments require some repudiation. The
relativity of all our knowledge is a consideration which may be used as
an argument against any other science besides psychoanalysis. This idea
originates from well-known reactionary streams of the present day,
inimical to science, and wishes to give the appearance of a superiority
to which we are not entitled. Not one of us can guess what may be the
ultimate judgment of mankind about our theoretical efforts. There are
examples to show that what was rejected by the next three generations
was corrected by the fourth and its recognition thus brought about.
There is nothing else for the individual to do than to defend, with all
his strength, his conviction based on experience after he has carefully
listened to his own criticisms and has given some attention to the
criticisms of his opponents. Let him be content to conduct his affair
honestly and not assume the office of judge, which is reserved for a
remote future. To accentuate personal arbitrariness in scientific
matters is bad; it evidently wishes to deny to psychoanalysis the value
of a science, which, to be sure, Adler has already depreciated by the
aforementioned remark. Any one who highly regards scientific thinking
will rather seek for means and methods by which to restrict, if
possible, the factor of personal and artificial arbitrariness wherever
it still plays too large a part. Besides one must remember that all
agitation in defending is out of place. Adler does not take these
arguments seriously. They are only for use against his opponents, but
they respect his own theories. They have not prevented Adler’s own
adherents from celebrating him as the Messiah, for whose appearance
waiting humanity had been prepared by so many forerunners. The Messiah
is surely no longer anything relative.

Jung’s argument _ad captandam benevolentiam_ rests on the
all-too-optimistic assumption that the progress of humanity, of
civilization, and of knowledge has always continued in an unbroken line,
as if there had never been any epigones, reactions, and restorations
after every revolution, as if there had never been races who, because of
a retrogression, had to renounce the gain of former generations. The
approach to the standpoint of the masses, the giving up of an innovation
that has proved unpopular, all these make it altogether unlikely that
Jung’s correction of psychoanalysis could lay claim to being a
liberating act of youth. Finally it is not the years of the doer that
decide it, but the character of the deed.

Of the two movements we have here considered, that headed by Adler is
undoubtedly the more important. Though radically false, it is,
nevertheless, characterized by consistency and coherence and it is still
founded on the theory of the impulse. On the other hand, Jung’s
modification has lessened the connection between the phenomena and the
impulses: besides, as its critics (Abraham, Ferenczi, Jones) have
already pointed out, it is so unintelligible, muddled, and confused,
that it is not easy to take any attitude towards it. Wherever one
touches it, one must be prepared to be told that one has misunderstood
it, and it is impossible to know how one can arrive at a correct
understanding of it. It represents itself in a peculiarly vacillating
manner, since at one time it calls itself “a quite tame deviation, not
worthy of the row which has arisen about it” (Jung), yet, at another
time, it calls itself a new salvation with which a new epoch shall begin
for psychoanalysis, in fact, a new aspect of the universe for everything
else.

When one thinks of the disagreements between the individual private and
public expressions of Jung’s utterances one is obliged to ask to what
extent this is due to his own lack of clearness and lack of sincerity.
Yet, it must be admitted that the representatives of the new theory find
themselves in a difficult position. They are now disputing things which
they themselves formerly defended and what is more, this dispute is not
based on new observations which might have taught them something fresh,
but rather on a different interpretation which causes them to see things
in a different light from that in which they saw them before. It is for
this reason that they will not give up their connection with
psychoanalysis as the representatives of which they first became known
in the world. They prefer to proclaim that psychoanalysis has changed.
At the Congress of Münich I was obliged to clear up this confusion and
did so by declaring that I could not recognize the innovation of the
Swiss School as a legitimate continuation and further development of the
psychoanalysis which had originated with me. Outside critics (like
Furtmüller) had already recognized this state of affairs and Abraham
says, quite rightly, that Jung is in full retreat away from
psychoanalysis. I am naturally entirely willing to admit that any one
has the right to think and to write what he wishes, but he has not the
right to make it out to be something different from what it really is.

Just as Adler’s researches brought something new into psychoanalysis, a
piece of the ego-psychology, and paid only too dearly for this gift by
repudiating all the fundamental analytic principles, in the same way
Jung and his adherents have based their fight against psychoanalysis
upon a new contribution to the same. They have traced in detail (what
Pfister did before them) how the material of the sexual ideas
originating in the family complex and in the incestuous object selection
can be used to represent the highest ethical and religious interests of
mankind, that is, they have explained a remarkable case of sublimation
of the erotic impelling forces and the transformation of the same into
strivings that can no longer be called erotic. All this harmonized very
well with the assumptions of psychoanalysis, and would have agreed very
well with the conception that in the dream and in the neurosis one sees
the regressive elucidations of these and all other sublimations. But the
world would have exclaimed that ethics and religion had been sexualized.
I cannot help assuming “finally” that the investigators found themselves
quite unequal to the storm they had to face. Perhaps the storm began to
rage in their own bosoms. The previous theological history of so many of
the Swiss workers is as important in their attitude to psychoanalysis as
is the socialistic record of Adler for the development of his
“psychology.” One is reminded of Mark Twain’s famous story about the
fate of his watch and to the speculative remark with which he closed it:
“And he used to wonder what became of all the unsuccessful tinkers, and
gunsmiths, and shoemakers, and blacksmiths; but nobody could ever tell
him.”

I will encroach upon the realm of parables and will assume that in a
certain society there lived a parvenu who boasted of descent from a very
noble family not locally known. But it so happened that it was proved to
him that his parents were living somewhere in the neighborhood and were
very simple people, indeed. Only one way out remained to him and he
seized upon it. He could no longer deny his parents, but he asserted
that they were very aristocratic by origin but much come down in the
world, and secured for them at some obliging office a document showing
their descent. It seems to me that the Swiss workers had been obliged to
act in a similar manner. If ethics and religion could not be sexualized,
but must be regarded as something “higher” from the very beginning, and
as their origin from the family and Œdipus complexes seemed undeniable,
then there was only one way out; namely, that these complexes
themselves, from the beginning, could not have the significance which
they appeared to express, but must have that higher “anagogic” sense (to
use Silberer’s nomenclature) with which they adapt themselves for proper
use in the abstract streams of thought of ethics and religious
mysticism.

I am quite prepared to be told once more that I have misunderstood the
contents and object of the theory of the New Zürich School, but here
wish to protest against being held responsible for those contradictions
to my theories that have arisen as a result of the publications of this
school. The burden of responsibility rests on them, not on me. In no
other way can I make comprehensible to myself the ensemble of Jung’s
innovations or grasp them in their associations. All the changes which
Jung has perpetrated upon psychoanalysis originated in the intention of
setting aside all that is objectionable in the family complexes, in
order that these objectionable features may not be found again in
religion and ethics. The sexual libido was replaced by an abstract idea,
of which it may be said that it remained equally mysterious and
incomprehensible alike to fools and to the wise. The Œdipus complex, we
are told, has only a “symbolical” sense, the mother therein representing
the unattainable which must be renounced in the interests of cultural
development. The father who is killed in the Œdipus myth represents the
“inner” father from whose influence we must free ourselves in order to
become independent. No doubt other portions of the material of sexual
conceptions will, in time, receive similarly new interpretations. In
place of the conflict between erotic strivings adverse to the ego and
the self-assertion, we are given the conflict between the “life-task”
and the “psychic laziness.” The neurotic guilty conscience corresponds
with the reproach of not having put to good account one’s life-task.
Thus a new religio-ethical system was founded which, exactly like
Adler’s, was obliged to give new interpretations, to distort or set
aside the actual results of analysis. As a matter of fact they have
caught a few cultural higher notes from the symphony of the world’s
by-gones, but once again have failed to hear the powerful melody of the
impulses.

In order to hold this system together it was necessary to draw away
entirely from the observations and technique of psychoanalysis. Now and
then the enthusiasm for the higher cause even permits a total disregard
for scientific logic, as for instance, when Jung maintains that the
Œdipus complex is not “specific” enough for the etiology of the
neuroses, and ascribed this specificity to laziness, that is, to the
most universal quality of animate and inanimate bodies! Moreover, it is
to be remarked that the “Œdipus complex” only represents a capacity on
which the psychic forces of the individual measure themselves, and is
not in itself a force, like the “psychic laziness.” The study of the
individual man has shown and always will show that the sexual complexes
are alive in him in their original sense. That is why the study of the
individual was pushed back by Jung and replaced by the judgment of the
essential facts from the study of the races. As the study of the early
childhood of every man exposed one to the danger of striking against the
original and undisguised meaning of these misinterpreted complexes, it
was, therefore, thought best to make it a rule to tarry as little as
possible at this past and to place the greatest emphasis on the return
to the conflict. Here, moreover, the essential things are not at all the
incidental and personal, but rather the general, that is to say, the
“non-fulfilment of the life-task.” Nevertheless, we know that the actual
conflict of the neurotic becomes comprehensible and solvable only if it
can be traced back into the patient’s past history, only by following
along the way that his libido took when his malady began.

How the New Zürich therapy has shaped itself under such tendencies I can
convey by means of reports of a patient who was himself obliged to
experience it.

“Not the slightest effort was made to consider the past or the
transferences. Whenever I thought that the latter were touched, they
were explained as a mere symbol of the libido. The moral instructions
were very beautiful and I followed them faithfully, but I did not
advance one step. This was more distressing to me than to the physician,
but how could I help it?—Instead of freeing me analytically, each
session made new and tremendous demands on me, on the fulfilment of
which the overcoming of the neurosis was supposed to depend. Some of
these demands were: inner concentration by means of introversion,
religious meditation, living together with my wife in loving devotion,
etc. It was almost beyond my power, since it really amounted to a
radical transformation of the whole spiritual man. I left the analysis
as a poor sinner with the strongest feelings of contrition and the very
best resolutions, but at the same time with the deepest discouragement.
All that this physician recommended any pastor would have advised, but
where was I to get the strength?”

It is true that the patient had also heard that an analysis of the past
and of the transference should precede the process. He, however, was
told that he had enough of it. But as it had not helped him, it seems to
me that it is just to conclude that the patient had not had enough of
this first sort of analysis. Not in any case has the superimposed
treatment which no longer has the slightest claim to call itself
psychoanalysis, helped. It is a matter of wonder that the men of Zürich
had need to make the long detour via Vienna to reach Bern, so close to
them, where Dubois cures neuroses by ethical encouragement in the most
indulgent fashion.[21]

The utter disagreement of this new movement with psychoanalysis
naturally shows itself also in its attitude towards repression, which is
hardly mentioned any more in the writings of Jung; in the utter
misconstruction of the dream which Adler, ignoring the dream-psychology,
confuses with the latent dream-thoughts, and also in the lack of
understanding of the unconscious. In fact this disagreement can be seen
in all the essential points of psychoanalysis. When Jung tells us that
the incest-complex is only “symbolic,” that it has “no real existence,”
that the savage feels no desire towards the old hag but prefers a young
and pretty woman, then one is tempted to assume in order to dispose of
apparent contradiction that “symbolic” and “no real existence” only
signify what is designated as “existing unconsciously.”

If one maintains that the dream is something different from the latent
dream-thoughts, which it elaborates, one will not wonder that the
patients dream of those things with which their mind has been filled
during the treatment, whether it be the “life-task” or being “above” or
“below.” Certainly the dreams of those analyzed are guidable in a
similar manner as dreams can be influenced by the application of
experimental stimuli. One may determine a part of the material that
occurs in the dream, but this changes nothing in the nature and
mechanism of the dream. Nor do I believe that the so-called
“biographical” dream occurs outside of the analysis. On the other hand,
if we analyze dreams that occurred before the treatment began, or if
attention is paid to what the dreamer adds to the stimuli supplied to
him during the treatment, or if we avoid giving him any such task, then
we can convince ourselves how far the dream is from offering tentative
solutions of the life-task. For the dream is only another form of
thinking; the understanding of this form can never be gained from the
content of its thoughts, only the consideration of the dream-work will
lead to it.

The effective refutation of Jung’s misconceptions of psychoanalysis and
his deviations from it is not difficult. Any analysis carried out in
accordance with the rules, especially any analysis of a child,
strengthens the convictions on which the theory of psychoanalysis rests,
and repudiates the new interpretations of Adler’s and Jung’s systems.
Jung himself, before he became enlightened, carried out such an analysis
of a child and published it.[22] It remains to be seen if he will
undertake a new interpretation of this case with the help of another
“uniform new tendency of the facts,” to give Adler’s expression used in
this connection.

The opinion that the sexual representation of “higher” ideas in the
dream and in the neurosis is nothing but an archaic manner of
expression, is naturally irreconcilable with the fact that these sexual
complexes prove to be in the neurosis the carriers of those quantities
of libido which have been withdrawn from the real life. If it were only
a question of sexual jargon, nothing could thereby be altered in the
economy of the libido itself. Jung himself admits this in his
“Darstellung der psychoanalytischen Theorie,” and formulates, as a
therapeutic task, that the libido investing the complexes should be
withdrawn from them. But this can never be accomplished by rejecting the
complexes and forcing them towards sublimation, but only by the most
exhaustive occupation with them, and by making them fully conscious. The
first bit of reality with which the patient has to deal is his malady
itself. Any effort to spare him this task points to an incapacity of the
physician to help him in overcoming his resistances, or to a fear on the
part of the physician as to the results of this work.

I would like to say in conclusion that Jung, by his “modifications” has
furnished psychoanalysis with a counterpart to the famous knife of
Lichtenberg. He has changed the hilt, has inserted into it a new blade,
and because the same trademark is engraved on it he requires of us that
we regard the instrument as the former one.

On the contrary, I believe I have shown that the new theory which
desires to substitute psychoanalysis signifies an abandonment of
analysis and a secession from it. Some may be inclined to fear that this
defection may be more unfortunate for the fate of psychoanalysis than
any other because it emanates from persons who once played so great a
part in the psychoanalytic movement and did so much to further it. I do
not share this apprehension.

Men are strong so long as they represent a strong idea. They become
powerless when they oppose it. Psychoanalysis will be able to bear this
loss and will gain new adherents for those lost.

I can only conclude with the wish that the fates may prepare an easy
ascension for those who found their sojourn in the underworld of
psychoanalysis uncomfortable. May it be vouchsafed to the others to
bring to a happy conclusion their works in the deep.

-----

Footnote 1:

  “On Psychoanalysis.” Five lectures given on the occasion of the
  twentieth anniversary of Clark University, Worcester, Mass., dedicated
  to Stanley Hall. Second edition, 1912. Published simultaneously in
  English in the American Journal of Psychology, March, 1910; translated
  into Dutch, Hungarian, Polish and Russian.

Footnote 2:

  Breuer and Freud, “Studien über Hysterie,” p. 15, Deuticke, 1895.

Footnote 3:

  Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, 1911, Vol. 1, p. 69.

Footnote 4:

  The Clinic of Psychiatry, Zürich.

Footnote 5:

  Havelock Ellis, “The Doctrines of the Freudian School.”

Footnote 6:

  G. Greve, “Sobre Psicologia y Psicoterapia de ciertos Estados
  angustiosos.” See Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, Vol. 1, p. 594.

Footnote 7:

  The collected publications of these two authors have appeared in book
  form: Brill, “Psychoanalysis, its Theories and Practical
  Applications,” 1912, 2d edition, 1914, Saunders, Philadelphia, and E.
  Jones’s “Papers on Psychoanalysis,” 1913, Wood and Company, New York.

Footnote 8:

  The first official recognition that psychoanalysis and dream
  interpretation received was extended to them by the Psychiatrist
  Jelgersma, rector of the University of Leyden, in his rectorship
  address February 1, 1914.

Footnote 9:

  An English translation has just appeared in the Nervous and Mental
  Disease Monograph Series, No. 23.

Footnote 10:

  Cf. “Der Wahn und die Träume” in W. Jensen’s “Gradiva.”

Footnote 11:

  Rank, “Der Künstler,” analyses of poets by Sadger, Reik, and others,
  my little monograph on a Kindheitserinnerung des Leonardo da Vinci;
  also Abraham’s “Analyses von Segantini.”

Footnote 12:

  A translation is in preparation.

Footnote 13:

  Wit and Its Relation to the Unconscious, translated by A. A. Brill,
  Moffat, Yard & Co., New York.

Footnote 14:

  “Die Psychoanalytische Methode,” 1913, Vol. 1 of the Pedagogium,
  Meumann and Messner. English Translation by Dr. C. R. Payne. Moffat,
  Yard & Co., N. Y.

Footnote 15:

  Cf. my two essays in Scientia, Vol. XIV, 1913, “Das Interesse an der
  Psychoanalyse.”

Footnote 16:

  Dreams and Myths, Wishfulfillment and Fairy Tales, Myth of the Birth
  of the Hero, in this series are translated in the Monograph Series.

Footnote 17:

  Adler’s Inferiority of Organs, translated by Jelliffe, appears as
  Monograph 24. His “Nervous Character,” translated by Glueck and Lind,
  published by Moffat, Yard & Co., N. Y.

Footnote 18:

  Cf. The Interpretation of Dreams, p. 389, translated by A. A. Brill,
  The Macmillan Co., New York, and Allen, London.

Footnote 19:

  Zentralbl., Vol. I, p. 122. See “Analytical Psychology,” Moffat, Yard
  & Co., N. Y.

Footnote 20:

  Korrespondenzbl., No. 5, Zurich, April, 1911.

Footnote 21:

  I know the objections which stand in the way of using a patient’s
  statements, and I, therefore, expressly state that my informant is as
  worthy of credence as he is capable of judging this matter. He gave me
  this information without my request, and I make use of his
  communication without asking his consent, because I cannot admit that
  any psychoanalytical technique should lay claim to the protection of
  discretion.

Footnote 22:

  Experiences Concerning the Psychic Life of the Child, translated by A.
  A. Brill, American Journal of Psychology, April, 1910.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             ADVERTISEMENTS




                             =THE JOURNAL=
                                   OF
                      =NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE=

 A AMERICAN MONTHLY JOURNAL OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY FOUNDED IN 1874

                           OFFICIAL ORGAN OF

         =THE AMERICAN NEUROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
             THE NEW YORK NEUROLOGICAL SOCIETY
                 BOSTON SOCIETY OF PSYCHIATRY AND NEUROLOGY
                     THE PHILADELPHIA NEUROLOGICAL SOCIETY AND
                         THE CHICAGO NEUROLOGICAL SOCIETY=

                                 EDITOR

                         Dr. WILLIAM G. SPILLER

                     MANAGING EDITOR AND PUBLISHER

                         Dr. SMITH ELY JELLIFFE

                 41 North Queen Street, Lancaster, Pa.
                    64 W. 56th Street, New York City

                       ADVISORY BOARD OF EDITORS

                         Dr. WILLIAM OSLER
                         Dr. CHARLES L. DANA
                         Dr. E. W. TAYLOR
                         Dr. CHAS. K. MILLS
                         Dr. M. ALLEN STARR
                         Dr. ADOLF MEYER
                         Dr. PEARCE BAILEY
                         Dr. HUGH T. PATRICK
                         Dr. JAS J. PUTNAM
                         Dr. E. E. SOUTHARD
                         Dr. FREDERICK PETERSON
                         Dr. WILLIAM A. WHITE
                         Dr. LEWELLYS F. BARKER
                         Dr. HARVEY CUSHING

                 TABLE OF CONTENTS ON PAGES II, IV and V


                            2 VOLS. PER YEAR.

        ISSUED MONTHLY      75 CENTS PER COPY      $8.00 PER YEAR

                   FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTION $9.00 PER YEAR

   Entered at the Post Office at Lancaster, Pa; as second-class matter,
  January 10, 1908, under Act of Congress of March 3, 1870. Copyright by
                      Smith Ely Jelliffe, M.D., 1916


        N.B. Consult Our Directory of America’s Leading Sanitaria

                       See Page XVIII—and following

    B. Karger, Karlstrasse 15, Berlin, Germany. H.K. Lewis, 186 Gower
 Street, London, W.C. Steiger & Co., 40 Murray St., New York. G. Stechert
  & Co., 155 West 25th Street, New York. Paul B. Hoeber, 60 E. 59th St.,
                                New York.

                  Volume 45, Published January 1st, 1917

 ORIGINAL ARTICLES
 Hyperplasia of the Pineal Body. By Howard H. Bell                   481
 Types of Neurological Cases Seen at a Base Hospital. By John Jenks  495
   Thomas
 to Rabbit as Myelitis. By Edward M. Williams                        503
 Report of Three Cases of Familial Spastic Paralysis. By C. Eugene   505
   Riggs
 Intentional Hypertonia. By Sidney I. Schwab                         510
 A Question of Epileptic Dementia with Recovery. By D. A. Thom       517
 SOCIETY PROCEEDINGS
 AMERICAN NEUROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION                                   523
 Contribution to the Treatment of Syphilis of the Nervous System (Sachs,
   Strauss, and Kaliski); Injuries to the Spinal Cord Produced by Modern
   Warfare (Collins and Craig); The Rising Tide of Disabilities
   Following Trauma and Their Relation to Our Compensation Laws (Sachs);
   (_a_) Syringoencephalia (Syringoencephalomyelia); (_b_) The Function
   of the Pyramidal Tract (Spiller); A Consideration of Some Selected
   Problems in a Year’s Neuro-surgical Service (Sachs and Schwab);
   Preventive Neurology (Dana); Notes on the Treatment of Mental
   Torticollis (Clark); Insanity—The Physiological, Morphological and
   Serological Characteristics (Ludlum and White); Preliminary Report on
   the Use of the Abderhalden Reaction in Mental Diseases (Cotton,
   White, and Stevenson); The Autolysis of Nitrogenous Compounds in the
   Blood Serum of General Paralysis and Dementia Præcox with its Bearing
   upon the Abderhalden Test (Singer and Quantz); The Histology of
   Selected Areas of the Cerebral Cortex in Dementia Præcox (Southard).
 CHICAGO NEUROLOGICAL SOCIETY                                        543
    Sinus (Royer); Case of Multiple Sclerosis with Abdominal Reflexes
                               (Patrick).
 PERISCOPE
 =American Journal of Insanity.= (Vol. LXXI, No. 1.) Typhoid Fever with
   Permanent Memory Defect; The Psychic Factors in Mental Disorder; The
   Thymus and the Pituitary in Dementia Præcox; Mixed States and
   Atypical Manic-Depressive; Behavior Chart in Mental Diseases;
   Colloidal Gold and Spinal Fluid (548).
 Hitzig on the Occasion of the Placing of the Hitzig Memorial in the
   Clinic for Mental and Nervous Disease of Halle; Complete Discussion
   of a Case of Bilateral Deficiency of the Cerebellum; Familial
   Dysostosis Beginning at the Time of Puberty; Dangerous Human Types;
   The Influence of Operative Measures in Developmental Disturbances of
   the Brain, Particularly in Epilepsy; Technique of Experiments on the
   Brain, Particularly on the Optic Thalami; Acute Paranoid Diseases;
   Adenocarcinoma of the Hypophysis and Progressive Paralysis; A Typical
   Brain Tumor, with Positive X-ray Findings; Determination of the
   Capacity of the Cortex and White Substance of the Cerebrum through
   Planimetric Measurements (551). (2. Heft.) The Forensic Significance
   of Neurasthenia; The Phases of Mania; Criminality and Exogenous
   Irritability in Congenital Mental Defect; Experimental Investigations
   of Lathyrism; Further Investigations on the Motor Speech Tracts;
   Mental Disorders in Brain Tumor, and their Relation to Diffuse Brain
   Alterations Caused by the Action of New Growths (553). (3. Heft.)
   Mental Disorders in Brain Tumors, and their Relation to the Diffuse
   Brain Alterations Caused by the Action of New Growths; The
   Pathogenesis of the Psychoses in the Light of the Abderhalden
   Theories; The Question of the Course of Posterior Root Fibers of the
   Spinal Cord; Neuroses Following Accidents Caused by Electricity;
   Pathogenesis and Therapy of Chronic Alcoholism; The Skull Capacity in
   Mental Diseases; Pathological Anatomy of Dementia Præcox; Secondary
   Degeneration of the Pyramidal Tracts in Porencephalus (554).
 Principles of Pain-Pleasure and of Reality; The Unconscious; The Theory
   of Psychoanalysis; A Plea for a Broader Standpoint in Psychoanalysis;
   Technique of Psychoanalysis; Contributions to the Psychopathology of
   Everyday Life: Their Relation to Abnormal Mental Phenomena; The
   Integrative Functions of the Nervous System Applied to Some Reactions
   in Human Behavior and their Attending Psychic Functions; A
   Manic-Depressive Episode Representing a Frank Wish-Realization
   Construction; Psychoanalytic Parallels; Psychoanalysis; The Rôle of
   the Sexual Complex in Dementia Præcox; Psycho-Genetics of Androcratic
   Evolution; Some Studies in the Psychopathology of Acute Dissociation
   of the Personality; Psychoanalysis; A Philosophy for Psychoanalysts;
   Religion and Sex; Some Freudian Contributions to the Paranoia
   Problem; Translation—Wishfulfillment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales;
   Translation—The Significance of Psychoanalysis for the Mental
   Sciences (557).
 MISCELLANY
 Ulnar Nerve Paralysis (567).
 BOOK REVIEWS
 Mentally Deficient Children: The Treatment and Training; An
   Introduction to the Study of the Endocrine Glands and Internal
   Secretions (568).
 INDEX TO VOLUME 44

              Volume III      October, 1916      Number 4

                                  The
                             Psychoanalytic
                                 Review

        =A Journal Devoted to an Understanding of Human Conduct=

                        EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY

          WILLIAM A. WHITE, M.D., and SMITH ELY JELLIFFE, M.D.


                                CONTENTS

    ORIGINAL ARTICLES
        =Art in the Insane.= C. B. BURR
        =On Somnambulism.= L. GRIMBERG
        =Retaliation Dreams.= HANSELL CRENSHAW
        =Technique of Psychoanalysis.= SMITH ELY JELLIFFE
    TRANSLATIONS
        =The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement.= SIGMUND FREUD
    SOCIETY PROCEEDINGS. ABSTRACTS. Book Reviews. Index


                  Issued Quarterly: $5.00 per Volume,
                         Single Numbers, $1.50
                             Foreign, $5.60

                             COPYRIGHT 1916
                                 by the
             NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE PUBLISHING COMPANY

                 41 NORTH QUEEN STREET, LANCASTER, PA.,
                                  and
                      64 W. 56th STREET, NEW YORK

Serial No. 12

 Entered as Second-Class Matter October 25, 1913, at the Post Office at
        Lancaster, Pennsylvania under the Act of March 3, 1879.

 ORIGINAL ARTICLES
 Symbolism. W. A. WHITE                                                1
   Technique of Psychoanalysis. S. E. Jelliffe      26, 161, 254, 394
 The Work of Alfred Adler, Considered with Especial Reference to     121
   that of Freud. J. J. Putnam
 Clinical Cases Exhibiting Unconscious Defense Reactions. F. M.      141
   Shockley
 Freud and Sociology. E. R. Groves                                   241
 The Ontogenetic Against the Phylogenetic Elements in the Psychoses  272
   of the Colored Race. A. B. Evarts
 Discomfiture and Evil Spirits. E. C. Parsons                        288
 Two Very Definite Wish-Fulfilment Dreams. C. B. Burr                292
 Art in the Insane. C. B. Burr                                       361
 On Somnambulism. L. Grimberg                                        386
 Retaliation Dreams. H. Crenshaw                                     391
 CRITICAL REVIEWS
 Frazer’s Golden Bough. L. Brink                                      43
 “Sons and Lovers”: A Freudian Appreciation. A. B. Kuttner           295
 TRANSLATIONS
 The Significance of Psychoanalysis for the Mental Sciences, O. Rank and
   H. Sachs (69, 189, 318). Process of Recovery in Schizophrenics, H.
   Bertschinger (176). The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement, S.
   Freud (406).
 ABSTRACTS
 =Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen.=
   (Vol. I.) (90.) Analysis of the Phobia of a Five-Year-Old Boy, S.
   Freud; The Position of Consanguineous Marriages in the Psychology of
   the Neurosis, K. Abraham; Sexuality and Epilepsy, A. Maeder; The
   Significance of the Father for the Fate of the Individual, C. G.
   Jung; Attempt at an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria, L. Binswanger;
   Observations on a Case of Compulsion Neurosis, S. Freud; Introjection
   and Transference, S. Ferenczi; Contributions to Dream Interpretation,
   W. Stekel; Report Concerning a Method for Producing and Observing
   Certain Symbolic Hallucinations, H. Silberer; Concerning the Neurotic
   Disposition, A. Adler; Freud’s Works from 1893 to 1909, K. Abraham;
   Report of the Austrian and German Psychoanalytic Literature up to
   1909, K. Abraham.
 =Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse.= (Vol. I, Nos. 1–2.) (215.) The Future
   of Psychoanalytic Therapy, S. Freud; The Psychic Treatment of
   Trigeminal Neuralgia, A. Adler; The Psychology of Hysterical
   Adoration of the Madonna, O. Pfister. (Vol. I, No. 3.) (216.) A
   Contribution to the Psychology of Rumor, C. G. Jung; “Wild”
   Psychoanalysis, S. Freud. (Vol. I, No. 4.) (217.) Etiology and
   Treatment of the Psychoneuroses, J. J. Putnam; Analysis of an
   Apparently Meaningless Infantile Obsession, R. Nepalleck; A Case of
   Periodic Depression of Psychogenic Origin, A. A. Brill.
 =Internationale Zeitschrift für Ärtzliche Psychoanalyse.= (Vol. II, No.
   3.) (218.) Psychoanalysis and Education, P. Häberlin; On the Theory
   of Inversion, H. Blüher; Anal Eroticism, Tendency to Anxiety and
   Obstinacy, H. von Hattingberg. (Vol. II, No. 4.) (465.) On the
   Psychological Foundation of Freudism, L. V. Karpinska; The Activity
   of Unconscious Death Wishes—A Contribution to the Understanding of
   the Tic, T. Sadger. (Vol. II, No. 5.) (469.) Transformations of the
   Affect-life, M. Weissfeld; Right and Left in Delusions, A. Stärcke;
   The Spontaneous Recovery of a Catatonic, K. Landauer. (Vol. II, No.
   6.) (—.) Further Remarks on the Technique of Psychoanalysis, S.
   Freud; The “Pleasant-Unpleasant” Principle and the “Reality”
   Principle, P. Federn; The Origin of the Interest in Money, S.
   Ferenczi.
 =Imago.= (Vol. II, No. 1.) (336.) Some Similarities in the Mental Life
   of Primitive and Neurotic People, (III) Animism, Magic and the
   Omnipotence of Thought, S. Freud; The Titan Motive in General
   Mythology, Presentation and Analysis, E. F. Lorenz; Carl Spitteler,
   H. Sachs; The True Nature of the Child Psyche. Edited by H. v.
   Hug-Hellmuth. I. Earliest Infantile Memories. H. v. Hug-Hellmuth. II.
   “From the Soul of a Child.” Theodor Reik. III. Leo N. Tolstoi,
   Childhood. Autobiographic Novel, E. F. Lorenz.
 MISCELLANEOUS ABSTRACTS
 Incest in Mormonism, T. Schroeder (223); Proxies in Mormon Polygamy, T.
   Schroeder (223); Der Sexuelle Anteil an der Theologie der Mormomen,
   T. Schroeder (223); Zur Bestimmung des psychoanalytischen
   Widerstandes, J. B. Lang (230); Eine Hypothese zur Psychologischen
   Bedeutung der Verfolgungsidee, J. B. Lang (231); Paranoide Psychosen
   im höheren Lebensalter, Seelert (232).
 SOCIETY PROCEEDINGS
 THE AMERICAN PSYCHOANALYTIC SOCIETY                                 455
 Individuality and Introversion, W. A. White; Permutations within the
   Sphere of Consciousness or the Factor of Repression and its Influence
   upon Education, T. Burrow; The Embryology of Dreams, J. T. MacCurdy;
   The Social and Sexual Behavior of Infra-Human Primates, E. J. Kempf;
   Concerning Freud’s Principle of Reality, L. E. Emerson; Is Dementia
   Præcox Properly Described as an Infantile Mode of Reaction?, H. D.
   Singer; Notes on Psychoanalytic Technic, G. L. Taneyhill; An Analysis
   of an Obsessive Doubt with a Paranoid Trend, R. W. Reed; On the Place
   of Sublimation in a Psychoanalytic Treatment, J. J. Putnam.
 BOOK REVIEWS
 The Criminal Imbecile, An Analysis of Three Remarkable Murder Cases, by
   Henry Herbert Goddard (115); Human Motives, by James Jackson Putnam
   (116); The Brain in Health and Disease, by Joseph Shaw Bolton (116);
   Text-Book of Nervous Diseases, by Curschmann and others (118); The
   New Philosophy of Henri Bergson, by Edouard LeRoy (119); Bodily
   Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear, and Rage, by Walter B. Cannon (233);
   Goethe, with Special Consideration of His Philosophy, by Paul Carus
   (234); Letters of Fyodor Michailovitch Dostoevsky to his Family and
   Friends—Tr. by Ethel Colburn Mayne (236); The Meaning of Dreams, by
   Isador H. Coriat (237); Nervous Diseases, by Robert Bing (238);
   Trattato di Psichiatria, by Leonardo Bianchi (239); The Ductless
   Glandular Diseases, by Wilhelm Falta (239); Psychology of the
   Unconscious: A Study of the Transformations and Symbolisms of the
   Libido. A Contribution to the History of the Evolution of Thought, by
   C. G. Jung. Tr. with Introduction, by Beatrice M. Hinkle (352); The
   Evolution of Early Christianity. A Genetic Study of First-Century
   Christianity in Relation to its Religious Environment, by Shirley
   Jackson Case (354); The Lost Language of Symbolism. An Inquiry into
   the Origin of Certain Letters, Words, Names, Fairy Tales, Folk Lore
   and Mythologies, by Harold Bayley (356); Die Sprache des Traumes.
   Eine Darstellung der Symbolik und Deutung des Traumes in ihren
   Beziehungen zur kranken und gesunden Seele für Ärzte und Psychologen,
   by Wilhelm Stekel (358); Man—An Adaptive Mechanism, by George W.
   Crile (476); Character and Temperament, by Joseph Jastrow (477); The
   Influence of Joy, by George Van Ness Dearborn (477).

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold or blackletter font in =equals=.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Selected papers on hysteria and other psychoneuroses
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Selected papers on hysteria and other psychoneuroses

Author: Sigmund Freud

Translator: A. A. Brill

Release date: January 17, 2025 [eBook #75132]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Company, 1909

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTED PAPERS ON HYSTERIA AND OTHER PSYCHONEUROSES ***





                      SELECTED PAPERS ON HYSTERIA
                                  AND
                          OTHER PSYCHONEUROSES

                                   BY

                          PROF. SIGMUND FREUD

                                 VIENNA


                         AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION

                                   BY

                        A. A. BRILL, PH.D., M.D.

 CHIEF OF NERVOUS DISPENSARY, BETH ISRAEL HOSPITAL; CLINICAL ASSISTANT,
 DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHIATRY AND NEUROLOGY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY; ASSISTANT
 IN MENTAL AND NERVOUS DISEASES, O. P. D., BELLEVUE HOSPITAL; ASSISTANT
           VISITING PHYSICIAN, HOSPITAL FOR NERVOUS DISEASES.


                                NEW YORK

               THE JOURNAL OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE
                           PUBLISHING COMPANY

                                  1909




                           Copyright 1909, by

     THE JOURNAL OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE PUBLISHING COMPANY.




                               CONTENTS.


                                                                   PAGE.
 TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE                                                iii
 CHAPTER.
    I. THE PSYCHIC MECHANISM OF HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA                   1
   II. THE CASE OF MISS LUCY R.                                       14
  III. THE CASE OF MISS ELISABETH V. R.                               31
   IV. THE PSYCHOTHERAPY OF HYSTERIA                                  75
    V. THE DEFENSE NEURO-PSYCHOSES. A Tentative Psychological
         Theory of Acquired Hysteria, many Phobias and Obsessions,
         and Certain Hallucinatory Psychoses                         121
   VI. ON THE RIGHT TO SEPARATE FROM NEURASTHENIA A DEFINITE
         SYMPTOM-COMPLEX AS “ANXIETY NEUROSIS”                       133
  VII. FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE DEFENSE NEUROPSYCHOSES            155
 VIII. ON PSYCHOTHERAPY                                              175
   IX. MY VIEWS ON THE RÔLE OF SEXUALITY IN THE ETIOLOGY OF THE
         NEUROSES                                                    186
    X. HYSTERICAL FANCIES AND THEIR RELATIONS TO BISEXUALITY         194




                         TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.


In the first place I wish to express my gratitude to Doctors Frederick
Peterson, William A. White, and Ernest Jones, for their many helpful
suggestions in the translation of this work. This does not, however,
imply that they are in any way responsible for the numerous barbarisms
found in the translation, for this I, alone, ask the reader’s
indulgence. For one thing, it must be borne in mind that, aside from the
subject-matter, Freud is not easy to read, even in the original. Indeed,
I feel quite certain that only those who have read the original will
best appreciate the task of the translator. But no matter how devoid of
literary excellencies this translation may be, it can at least claim one
merit, to wit, it is a faithful reproduction of the author’s thoughts.
This is really all that should be required of a translation.

The chapters contained in this book were taken from three different
volumes of the author’s works, published at different intervals within
the last fifteen years. Although the first four chapters appear in the
“Studien über Hysterie” which was published by Breuer and Freud,[1]
still only the first chapter, “The Psychic Mechanism of Hysterical
Phenomena,” was written conjointly by both authors. The authorship of
the other three chapters belongs exclusively to Freud. The remaining six
chapters of the book were taken from Freud’s Collection of Small
Articles.[2]

It was by no means an easy task to compile in a single limited volume
Freud’s theories of the actual- and psychoneuroses. Freud’s views are
not only new and revolutionary, being based on an entirely new
psychology, but unless one is thoroughly familiar with their development
one is apt to misunderstand them. To obviate this it was thought best to
collect those chapters from the author’s works which fully illustrate
his theories and at the same time show the gradual evolution of his
psychology.

That Freud’s views have undergone some changes, or rather modifications,
within the last fifteen years we readily admit; but who will blame the
surgeon for modifying or rejecting some technique of his operation, if
after years of careful work he feels justified in so doing? Surely such
an action merits applause rather than reproach. It was only after
carefully investigating for years that Freud saw fit to change some of
his views, yet nothing was really totally discarded.

It is quite unnecessary to discuss here the whys and wherefores of the
modifications in question, these are fully explained in the text. But it
will not be mal à propos to say a few words concerning the technique of
the treatment.

For reasons given in the book the author has abandoned hypnotism and
used the pressure procedure, but this in turn was given up because it
was cumbersome for both doctor and patient and proved to be utterly
needless.

The technique is as follows: The patient lies on his back on a lounge,
the physician sitting behind the patient’s head at the head of the
lounge. In this way the patient remains free from all external
influences and impressions. The object is to avoid all muscular exertion
and distraction, thus allowing thorough concentration of attention on
the patient’s own psychic activities. The patient is then asked to give
a detailed account of his troubles, after having been told before to
repeat everything that occurs to his mind, even such thoughts as may
cause him embarrassment or mortification. On listening to such a history
one invariably notices many memory gaps, both in reference to time and
causal relations. These the patient is urged to fill in by concentration
of attention on the subject in question, and by repeating all the
unintentional thoughts originating in this connection. This is the so
called method of “free association!” The patient is required to relate
all his thoughts in the order of their sequence even if they seem
irrelevant to him. He must do away with all critique and remain
perfectly passive. It is in this way that we fathom the original meaning
of the symptom. But as the thoughts which originate in this manner are
of a disagreeable and painful nature they are pushed back with the
greatest resistance. This is further enhanced by the fact that the
hysterical symptom is the symbolic expression of the realization of a
repressed wish, and serves as a gratification for the patient. He
strives very hard, unconsciously of course, to retain the symptom, as it
is the only thing left to him from his former unattainable conscious
wishes and strivings. The object of the psychanalytic treatment is to
overcome all these resistances, and to reconduct to the patient’s
consciousness the thoughts underlying the symptoms. Here lies the
greatest difficulty, for just as in the normal life and the dream, a
psychoneurotic symptom is merely a symbolic or cryptic expression of the
original repressed thoughts. Every hysterical symptom, every obsession,
and every phobia, has a definite meaning, and as was shown by
Bleuler,[3] Jung,[4] Riklin,[5] and others,[6] the same holds true for
the psychoses proper.

To discover the hidden mechanism, one must make use of the author’s
developed method of interpretation, that is, one must look for
symbolic actions, lapses in speech, memory, etc., and above all, one
must resort to the analysis of dreams, as they give the most direct
access to the unconscious. No one is really qualified to use or
judge Freud’s psychanalytic method who has not thoroughly mastered
the Traumdeutung,[7] the Psychopathologie des Alltagsleben,[8] and
the Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie,[9] and has not had
considerable experience in analyzing his own and other’s dreams and
psychopathological actions. It is especially in the Traumdeutung
that Freud has fully developed his psychanalytic technique and a
perfect knowledge of which is the sine qua non in the treatment. It
is only by following Freud in this manner that one can hope to solve
the hitherto unsolved riddles of the psychoneuroses and psychoses.

This treatment is more difficult than one can describe in a preface. It
not only presupposes a thorough knowledge of Freud but an equal
knowledge of normal and abnormal psychology. Those who have not acquired
this knowledge by reason of time or otherwise may remember the words of
the younger Pliny: _Ut enim de pictore scalptore fictore nisi artifex
indicare, ita nisi sapiens non potest perspicere sapientem_.

                                                            A. A. BRILL.




                               CHAPTER I.
           THE PSYCHIC MECHANISM OF HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA.[10]
                      (PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION.)


                                   I.

Instigated by a number of accidental observations we have investigated
for a number of years the different forms and symptoms of hysteria in
order to discover the cause and the process which provoked the phenomena
in question for the first time, in a great many cases years back. In the
great majority of cases we did not succeed in elucidating this starting
point from the mere history, no matter how detailed it might have been,
partly because we had to deal with experiences about which discussion
was disagreeable to the patients, but mainly because they really could
not recall them; often they had no inkling of the causal connection
between the occasioning process and the pathological phenomenon. It was
generally necessary to hypnotize the patients and reawaken the memory of
that time in which the symptom first appeared, and we thus succeeded in
exposing that connection in a most precise and convincing manner.

This method of examination in a great number of cases has furnished us
with results which seem to be of theoretical as well as of practical
value.

It is of theoretical value because it has shown to us that in the
determination of the pathology of hysteria the accidental moment plays a
much greater part than is generally known and recognized. It is quite
evident that in “traumatic” hysteria it is the accident which evokes the
syndrome. Moreover in hysterical crises, if patients state that they
hallucinate in each attack the same process which evoked the first
attack, here too, the causal connection seems quite clear. The state of
affairs is more obscure in the other phenomena.

Our experiences have shown us _that the most varied symptoms which pass
as spontaneous, or so to say idiopathic attainments of hysteria, stand
in just as stringent connection with the causal trauma as the
transparent phenomena mentioned_. To such causal moments we were able to
refer neuralgias as well as the different kinds of anesthesias often of
years duration, contractures and paralyses, hysterical attacks and
epileptiform convulsions which every observer has taken for real
epilepsy, petit mal and tic-like affections, persistent vomiting and
anorexia, even the refusal of nourishment, all kinds of visual
disturbances, constantly recurring visual hallucinations, and similar
affections. The disproportion between the hysterical symptom of years
duration and the former cause is the same as the one we are regularly
accustomed to see in the traumatic neurosis. Very often they are
experiences of childhood which have established more or less intensive
morbid phenomena for all succeeding years.

The connection is often so clear that it is perfectly manifest how the
causal event produced just this and no other phenomenon. It is quite
clearly determined by the cause. Thus let us take the most banal
example; if a painful affect originates while eating but is repressed,
it may produce nausea and vomiting and continue for months as a
hysterical symptom. A girl was anxiously distressed while watching at a
sick bed. She fell into a dreamy state and experienced a frightful
hallucination, and at the same time her right arm hanging over the back
of a chair became numb. This resulted in a paralysis, contracture, and
anesthesia of that arm. She wanted to pray but could find no words, but
finally succeeded in uttering an English prayer for children. Later, on
developing a very grave and most complicated hysteria, she spoke, wrote,
and understood only English, whereas her native tongue was
incomprehensible to her for a year and a half. A very sick child finally
falls asleep. The mother exerts all her will power to make no noise to
awaken it, but just because she resolved to do so she emits a clicking
sound with her tongue (“hysterical counter-will”). This was later
repeated on another occasion when she wished to be absolutely quiet,
developing into a tic which in the form of tongue clicking accompanied
every excitement for years. A very intelligent man was present while his
brother was anesthetized and his ankylosed hip stretched. At the moment
when the joint yielded and crackled he perceived severe pain in his own
hip which continued for almost a year.

In other cases the connection is not so simple, there being only as it
were a symbolic relation between the cause and the pathological
phenomenon, just as in the normal dream. Thus psychic pain may result in
neuralgia, or the affect of moral disgust may cause vomiting. We have
studied patients who were wont to make the most prolific use of such
symbolization. In still other cases such a determination is at first
sight incomprehensible, yet to this group belong the typical hysterical
symptoms such as hemianesthesia, contraction of visual field,
epileptiform convulsions and many others. The explanation of our views
on this group we have to reserve for the more detailed discussion of the
subject.

_Such observations seem to demonstrate the pathogenic analogy between
simple hysteria and traumatic neurosis and justify a broader conception
of “traumatic hysteria.”_ The active etiological factor in traumatic
neurosis is really not the insignificant bodily injury but the affect of
the fright, that is, the psychic trauma. In an analogous manner our
investigations show that the causes of many, if not of all, cases of
hysteria can be designated as psychic traumas. Every experience which
produces the painful affect of fear, anxiety, shame or of psychic pain
may act as a psychic trauma. Whether an experience becomes of traumatic
importance naturally depends on the person affected as well as on the
determination to be mentioned later. In ordinary hysteria instead of one
big trauma we not seldom find many partial traumas, grouped causes which
can be of traumatic significance only when summarized and which belong
together in so far as they form small fragments of the sorrowful tale.
In still other cases apparently indifferent circumstances gain traumatic
dignity through their connection with the real effective event or with a
period of time of special excitability which they then retain but which
otherwise would have no significance.

Nevertheless the causal connection between the provoking psychic trauma
and the hysterical phenomena does not perhaps resemble the trauma which
as the _agent provocateur_ would call forth the symptom which would
become independent and continue to exist. We have to claim still more,
namely, that the psychic trauma or the memory of the same acts like a
foreign body which even long after its penetration must continue to
influence like a new causative factor. The proof of this we see in a
most remarkable phenomenon which at the same time gives to our
discoveries a distinct practical interest.

We found, at first to our greatest surprise, _that the individual
hysterical symptoms immediately disappeared without returning if we
succeeded in thoroughly awakening the memories of the causal process
with its accompanying affect, and if the patient circumstantially
discussed the process giving free play to the affect_. Affectless
memories are almost utterly useless. The psychic process originally
rebuffed must be reproduced as vividly as possible so as to bring it
back into the _statum nascendi_ and then be thoroughly “talked over.” At
the same time if we deal with such exciting manifestations as
convulsions, neuralgias and hallucinations they appear once more with
their full intensity and then vanish forever. Functional attacks like
paralyses and anesthesias likewise disappear, but naturally without any
appreciable distinctness of their momentary aggravation.[11]

It is quite reasonable to suspect that one deals here with an
unintentional suggestion. The patient expects to be relieved of his
suffering and it is this expectation and not the discussion that is the
effectual factor. But this is not so. The first observation of this kind
in which a most complicated case of hysteria was analyzed and the
individual causal symptoms separately abrogated, occurred in the year
1881, that is in a “pre-suggestive” time. It was brought about through a
spontaneous autohypnosis of the patient and caused the examiner the
greatest surprise.

In reversing the sentence: _cessante causa cessat effectus_, we may
conclude from this observation that the causal process continues to act
in some way even after years, not indirectly by means of a chain of
causal connecting links but directly as a provoking cause, just perhaps
as in the awakened consciousness where the memory of a psychic pain may
later call forth tears. _The hysteric suffers mostly from
reminiscences._[12]


                                  II.

It would seem at first rather surprising that long-forgotten experiences
should effect so intensively, and that their recollections should not be
subject to the decay into which all our memories merge. We will perhaps
gain some understanding of these facts by the following examinations.

The blurring or loss of an affect of memory depends on a great many
factors. In the first place it is of great consequence whether there was
an energetic reaction to the affectful experience or not. By reaction we
here understand a whole series of voluntary or involuntary reflexes,
from crying to an act of revenge, through which according to experience
affects are discharged. If the success of this reaction is of sufficient
strength it results in the disappearance of a great part of the affect.
Language attests this fact of daily observation, in such expressions as
“to give vent to one’s feeling,” to be “relieved by weeping,” etc.

If the reaction is suppressed the affect remains united with the memory.
An insult retaliated, be it only in words, is differently recalled than
one that had to be taken in silence. Language also recognizes this
distinction between the psychic and physical results and designates most
characteristically the silently endured suffering as “grievance.” The
reaction of the person injured to the trauma has really no perfect
“cathartic” effect unless it is an adequate reaction like revenge. But
man finds a substitute for this action in speech through which help the
affect can well nigh be ab-reacted[13] (“abreagirt”). In other cases
talking in the form of deploring and giving vent to the torments of the
secret (confession) is in itself an adequate reflex. If such reaction
does not result through deeds, words, or in the lightest case through
weeping, the memory of the occurrence retains above all the affective
accentuation.

The ab-reaction (abreagiren), however, is not the only form of discharge
at the disposal of the normal psychic mechanism of the healthy person
who has experienced a psychic trauma. The memory of the trauma even
where it has not been ab-reacted enters into the great complex of the
association. It joins the other experiences which are perhaps
antagonistic to it and thus undergoes correction through the other
ideas. For example, after an accident the memory of the danger and
(dimmed) repetition of the fright is accompanied by the recollection of
the further course, the rescue, and the consciousness of present
security. The memory of a grievance may be corrected by a rectification
of the state of affairs by reflecting upon one’s own dignity and similar
things. Thus the normal person is able to cause a disappearance of the
accompanying affect by means of association.

In addition there appears that general blurring of impressions, that
fading of memories which we call “forgetting,” and which above all wears
out the affective ideas no longer active.

It follows from our observations that those memories which become the
causes of hysterical phenomena have been preserved for a long time with
wonderful freshness and with their perfect emotional tone. As a further
striking and a later realizable fact we have to mention that the
patients do not perhaps have the same control of these as of their other
memories of life. On the contrary, _these experiences are either
completely lacking from the memory of the patients in their usual
psychic state or at most exist greatly abridged_. Only after the
patients are questioned in the hypnotic state do these memories appear
with the undiminished vividness of fresh occurrences. Thus one of our
patients in a hypnotic state reproduced with hallucinatory vividness
throughout half a year all that excited her during an acute hysteria on
the same days of the preceding year. Her mother’s diary which was
unknown to the patient proved the faultless accuracy of the
reproduction. Another patient, partly in hypnosis and partly in
spontaneous attacks, went through with a hallucinatory distinctness all
experiences of a hysterical psychosis which she passed through ten years
before and for the greatest part of which she was amnesic until its
reappearance. She also showed with surprising integrity and sentient
force some etiologically important memories of fifteen to twenty-five
years’ duration which on their return acted with the full affective
force of new experiences.

The reason for this we can only find in the fact that in all the
aforesaid relations these memories assume an exceptional position in
reference to disappearance. _It was really shown that these memories
correspond to traumas which were not sufficiently ab-reacted to_
(“abreagirt”). On closer investigation of the reasons for this
prevention we can find at least two series of determinants through which
the reaction to the trauma was discontinued.

To the first group we add those cases in which the patient has not
reacted to psychic traumas because the nature of the trauma precluded a
reaction as in the case of an irremediable loss of a beloved person or
because social relations made the reaction impossible, or because it
concerned things which the patient wished to forget and which he
therefore intentionally inhibited and repressed from his conscious
memory. It is just those painful things which in the hypnotic state are
found to be the basis of hysterical phenomena (hysterical delirium of
saints, nuns, abstinent women, and well-bred children).

The second series of determinants is not conditioned by the content of
the memories but by the psychic states with which the corresponding
experiences in the patient have united. As a cause of hysterical
symptoms one really finds in hypnosis presentations which are
insignificant in themselves but which owe their preservation to the fact
that they originated during a severe paralyzing affect like fright or
directly in abnormal psychic conditions, as in the semi-hypnotic dreamy
states of reveries, in autohypnosis and similar states. Here it is the
nature of these conditions which make a reaction to the incident
impossible.

To be sure both determinants may unite, and as a matter of fact they
often do. This is the case when a trauma in itself effective occurs in a
state of a powerful paralyzing affect or in a transformed consciousness.
But due to the psychic trauma it may also happen that in many persons
one of these abnormal states occurs which in turn makes a reaction
impossible.

What is common to both groups of determinants is the fact that those
psychic traumas which are not rectified by reaction are also prevented
from adjustment by associative elaboration. In the first group it is due
to the resolution of the patient who wishes to forget the painful
experiences and in this way, if possible, to exclude them from
association, and in the second group the associative elaboration does
not succeed because there is no productive associative relationship
between the normal and pathological state of consciousness in which
these presentations originated. We shall soon have occasion to discuss
more fully these relationships.

Hence we can say, _that the reason why the pathogenically formed
presentations retain their freshness and affective force is because they
are not subject to the normal waste through ab-reaction and reproduction
in conditions of uninhibited association_.


                                  III.

When we discussed the conditions which, according to our experience, are
decisive in the development of hysterical phenomena from psychic
traumas, we were forced to speak of abnormal states of consciousness in
which such pathogenic presentations originate, and we had to emphasize
the fact that the recollection of the effective psychic trauma is not to
be found in the normal memory of the patient but in the hypnotized
memory. The more we occupied ourselves with these phenomena the more
certain became our convictions _that the splitting of consciousness, so
striking in the familiar classical cases of double consciousness, exists
rudimentarily in every hysteria, and that the tendency to this
dissociation, and with it the tendency towards the appearance of
abnormal states of consciousness which we comprehend as “hypnoid
states,” is the chief phenomenon of this neurosis_. In this view we
agree with Binet and with both the Janets about whose most remarkable
findings in anesthetics we have had no experience.

Hence, to the often cited axiom, “Hypnosis is artificial hysteria,” we
would like to add another: “The existence of hypnoid states is the basis
and determination of hysteria.” These hypnoid states in all their
diversities agree among themselves and with hypnosis in the fact that
their emerged presentations are very intensive but are excluded from the
associative relations of the rest of the content of consciousness. The
hypnoid states are associable among themselves, and their ideation may
thus attain various high degrees of psychic organization. In other
respects the nature of these states and the degree of their
exclusiveness differ from the rest of the conscious processes as do the
various states in hypnosis, which range from light somnolence to
somnambulism, and from perfect memory to absolute amnesia.

If such hypnoid states already exist before the manifested disease they
prepare the soil upon which the affect establishes the pathogenic
memories and their somatic resulting manifestations. This behavior
corresponds to the predisposed hysteria. But the results of our
observations show that a severe trauma (like that of a traumatic
neurosis) or a painful suppression (perhaps of a sexual affect) may
bring about a splitting of presentation groups even in persons otherwise
not predisposed. This would then be the mechanism of the psychically
acquired hysteria. Between the extremes of these two forms we have to
admit a series in which the facility of dissociation in the concerned
individuals and the magnitude of the affect of the trauma vary
inversely.

We are unable to give anything new concerning the formation of the
predisposed hypnoid states. We presume that they often develop from
“reveries” very common to the normal for which, for example, the
feminine handwork offers so much opportunity. The questions why “the
pathological associations” formed in such states are so firm and why
they exert a stronger influence on the somatic processes than other
presentations, all fall together with the problem of the effectivity of
hypnotic suggestions in general. Our experiences in this matter do not
show us anything new, on the other hand they throw light on the
contradiction between the sentence “Hysteria is a psychosis” and the
fact that among hysterics one may meet persons of the clearest
intellects, the strongest wills, greatest principles, and of the
subtlest minds. In these cases such characteristics are only true for
the waking thought of the person, for in his hypnotic state he is
alienated just as we are in the dream. Yet, whereas our dream psychoses
do not influence our waking state, the products of hypnotic states
project as hysterical phenomena into the waking state.


                                  IV.

Almost the same assertions that we have advanced in reference to the
continuous hysterical symptoms we may also repeat concerning hysterical
crises. As is known we have Charcot’s schematic description of the
“major” hysterical attack which when complete shows four phases: (1) The
epileptoid, (2) the grand movements, (3) the emotional—_attitudes
passionnelles_ (hallucinatory phase), and (4) the delirious. By
shortening or prolonging the attack and by isolating the individual
phases Charcot caused a succession of all those forms of the hysterical
attack which are really observed more frequently than the complete
_grande attaque_.

Our attempted explanation refers to the third phase, that is the
_attitudes passionnelles_. Wherever it is prominent it contains the
hallucinatory reproduction of a memory which was significant for the
hysterical onset. It is the memory of a grand trauma, the so called κατ’
ἐξοχὴν of traumatic hysteria or of a series of connected partial traumas
found at the basis of the common hysteria. Finally the attack may bring
back that occurrence which on account of its meeting with a moment of
special predisposition was raised to a trauma.

There are also attacks which ostensibly consist only of motor phenomena
and lack the passionnelle phase. If it is possible during such an attack
of general twitching, cataleptic rigidity or an _attaque de sommeil_, to
put one’s self _en rapport_ with the patient, or still better, if one
succeeds in evoking the attack in a hypnotic state, it will then be
found that here, too, the root of it is the memory of a psychic trauma,
or of a series of traumas which make themselves otherwise prominent in
an hallucinatory phase. A little girl had suffered for years from
attacks of general convulsions which could be and were taken for
epileptic. She was hypnotized for purposes of differential diagnosis and
she immediately merged into one of her attacks. On being asked what she
saw she said, “The dog, the dog is coming,” and it was really found that
the first attack of this kind appeared after she was pursued by a mad
dog. The success of the therapy then verified our diagnosis.

An official who became hysterical as a result of ill treatment on the
part of his employer suffered from attacks, during which he fell to the
floor raging furiously without uttering a word or displaying any
hallucinations. The attack was provoked in a state of hypnosis and he
then stated that he lived through the scene during which his employer
insulted him in the street and struck him with a cane. A few days later
he came to me complaining that he had the same attack, but this time it
was shown in the hypnosis that he went through the scene which was
really connected with the onset of his disease; it was the scene in the
court room when he was unable to get satisfaction for the ill treatment
which he received, etc.

The memories which appear in hysterical attacks or which can be awakened
in them correspond in all other respects to the causes which we have
found as the basis of the continuous hysterical symptoms. Like these
they refer to psychic traumas which were prevented from alleviation by
ab-reaction or by associative elaboration, like these they lack entirely
or in their essential components the memory possibilities of normal
consciousness and appear to belong to the ideation of hypnoid states of
consciousness with limited associations. Finally they are also amenable
to therapeutic proof. Our observations have often taught us that a
memory which has always evoked attacks becomes incapacitated when in a
hypnotic state it is brought to reaction and associative correction.

The motor phenomena of the hysterical attack can partly be interpreted
as the memory of a general form of reaction of the accompanying affect,
or partly as a direct motor expression of this memory (like the
fidgeting of the whole body which even infants make use of), and partly,
like the hysterical stigmata—the continuous symptoms—they are
inexplainable on this assumption.

Of special significance for the hysterical attack is the aforementioned
theory, namely, that in hysteria there are presentation groups which
come to light in hypnoid states which are excluded from the rest of the
associative process but are associable among themselves, thus
representing a more or less highly organized rudimentary second
consciousness, a _condition seconde_. A persistent hysterical symptom
therefore corresponds to a projection of this second state into a bodily
innervation otherwise controlled by the normal consciousness. A
hysterical attack gives evidence of a higher organization of this second
state, and if of recent origin it signifies a moment in which this
hypnoid consciousness gained control of the whole existence, and hence
we have an acute hysteria, but if it is a recurrent attack containing a
memory we simply have a repetition of the same. Charcot has already
given utterance to the fact that the hysterical attack must be the
rudiment of a _condition seconde_. During the attack the control of the
whole bodily innervation is transferred to the hypnoid consciousness. As
familiar experiences show, the normal consciousness is not always
repressed, it may even perceive the motor phenomena of the attack while
the psychic processes of the same escape its cognizance.

The typical course of a grave hysteria, as everybody knows, is as
follows: At first an ideation is formed in the hypnoid state which after
sufficient development gains control in a period of “acute hysteria” of
the bodily innervation and the existence of the patient thus forming
persistent symptoms and attacks, and then with the exception of some
remnants there is a recovery. If the normal personality can regain the
upper hand, all that survived the hypnoid ideation then returns in
hysterical attacks and at times it reproduces, in the personality,
states which are again amenable to influences and capable of being
affected by traumas. Frequently a sort of equilibrium then results among
the psychic groups which are united in the same person; attack and
normal life go hand in hand without influencing each other. The attack
then comes spontaneously just as memories are wont to come, it may also
be provoked just as memories may be by the laws of association. The
provocation of the attack results either through stimulating a
hysterogenic zone or through a new experience which by similarity
recalls the pathogenic experience. We hope to be able to show that there
is no essential difference between the apparently two diverse
determinants, and that in both cases the hyperesthetic memory is
touched. In other cases there is a great lability of equilibrium, the
attack appears as a manifestation of the hypnoid remnant of
consciousness as often as the normal person becomes exhausted and
incapacitated. We cannot disregard the fact that in such cases the
attack becomes denuded of its original significance and may return as a
contentless motor reaction.

It remains a task for future investigation to discover what conditions
are decisive in determining whether a hysterical individuality should
manifest itself in attacks, in persistent symptoms, or in a mingling of
both.


                                   V.

We can now understand in what manner the psychotherapeutic method
propounded by us exerts its curative effect. _It abrogates the efficacy
of the original not ab-reacted presentation of affording an outlet to
the strangulated affect through speech. It brings it to associative
correction by drawing it into normal consciousness (in mild hypnosis) or
it is done away with through the physician’s suggestion just as happens
in somnambulism with amnesia._

We maintain that the therapeutic gain obtained by applying this process
is quite significant. To be sure we do not cure the hysterical
predisposition as we do not block the way for the recurrence of hypnoid
states; moreover, in the productive stage of acute hysteria our
procedure is unable to prevent the replacement of the carefully
abrogated phenomena by new ones. But when this acute stage has run its
course and its remnants continue as persistent hysterical symptoms and
attacks, our radical method usually removes them forever, and herein it
seems to surpass the efficacy of direct suggestion as practiced at
present by psychotherapists.

If by disclosing the psychic mechanisms of hysterical phenomena we have
taken a step forward on the path so successfully started by Charcot with
his explanation and experimental imitation of hystero-traumatic
paralysis, we are well aware that in doing this we have only advanced
our knowledge in the mechanisms of hysterical symptoms and not in the
subjective causes of hysteria. We have but touched upon the etiology of
hysteria and could only throw light on the causes of the acquired forms,
the significance of the accidental moments in the neurosis.




                              CHAPTER II.
                        THE CASE OF MISS LUCY R.


Towards the end of 1892 a friendly colleague recommended to me a young
lady whom he had been treating for chronic recurrent purulent rhinitis.
It was later found that the obstinacy of her trouble was caused by a
caries of the ethmoid. She finally complained of new symptoms which this
experienced physician could no longer refer to local affections. She had
lost all perception of smell and was almost constantly bothered by one
or two subjective sensations of smell. This she found very irksome. In
addition to this she was depressed in spirits, weak, and complained of a
heavy head, loss of appetite, and an incapacity for work.

This young lady visited me from time to time during my office hours—she
was a governess in the family of a factory superintendent living in the
suburbs of Vienna. She was an English lady of rather delicate
constitution, anemic, and with the exception of her nasal trouble was in
good health. Her first statements concurred with those of her physician.
She suffered from depression and lassitude, and was tormented by
subjective sensations of smell. Of hysterical signs, she showed a quite
distinct general analgesia without tactile impairment, the fields of
vision showed no narrowing on coarse testing with the hand, the nasal
mucous membrane was totally analgesic and reflexless, tactile sensation
was absent, and the perception of this organ was abolished for specific
as well as for other stimuli, such as ammonia or acetic acid. The
purulent nasal catarrh was then in a state of improvement.

On first attempting to understand this case the subjective sensations of
smell had to be taken as recurrent hallucinations interpreting
persistent hysterical symptoms. The depression was perhaps the affect
belonging to the trauma and there must have been an episode during which
the present subjective sensations were objective. This episode must have
been the trauma, the symbols of which recurred in memory as sensations
of smell. Perhaps it would be more correct to consider the recurring
hallucinations of smell with the accompanying depression as equivalents
of hysterical attacks. The nature of recurrent hallucinations really
makes them unfit to take the part of continuous symptoms, and this
really did not occur in this rudimentarily developed case. On the other
hand it was absolutely to be expected that the subjective sensations of
smell would show such a specialization as to be able to correspond in
its origin to a very definite and real object.

This expectation was soon fulfilled, for on being asked what odor
troubled her most she stated that it was an odor of burned pastry. I
could then assume that the odor of burned pastry really occurred in the
traumatic event. It is quite unusual to select sensations of smell as
memory symbols of traumas, but it is quite obvious why these were here
selected. She was afflicted with purulent rhinitis, hence the nose and
its perceptions were in the foreground of her attention. All I knew
about the life of the patient was that she took care of two children
whose mother died a few years ago from a grave and acute disease.

As a starting point of the analysis I decided to use the “odor of burned
pastry.” I will now relate the history of this analysis. It could have
occurred under more favorable conditions, but as a matter of fact what
should have taken place in one session was extended over a number of
them. She could only visit me during my office hours, during which I
could devote to her but little of my time. One single conversation had
to be extended for over a week as her duties did not permit her to come
to me often from such a distance, so that the conversation was
frequently broken off and resumed at the next session.

On attempting to hypnotize Miss Lucy R. she did not merge into the
somnambulic state. I therefore was obliged to forego somnambulism and
the analysis was made while she was in a state not perhaps differing
much from the normal.

I feel obliged to express myself more fully about the point of the
technique of my procedure. While visiting the Nancy clinics in 1889 I
heard Dr. Liébeault, the old master of hypnotism, say, “Yes, if we had
the means to put everybody into the somnambulic state, hypnotism would
then be the most powerful therapeutic agent.” In Bernheim’s clinic it
almost seemed that such an art really existed and that it could be
learned from Bernheim. But as soon as I tried to practice it on my own
patients I noticed that at least my powers were quite limited in this
respect. Whenever a patient did not merge into the somnambulistic state
after one to three attempts I possessed no means to force him into it.
However, the percentage of somnambulists in my experience were far below
that claimed by Bernheim.

Thus I had my choice, either to forbear using the cathartic method in
most of the cases suitable for it, or to venture the attempt without
somnambulism by using hypnotic influence in light or even doubtful
cases. It made no difference of what degree (following the accepted
scales of hypnotism) the hypnotism was which did not correspond to
somnambulism, for every direction of suggestibility is independent of
the other and nothing is prejudicial towards the evocation of catalepsy,
automatic movements and similar phenomena for the purpose of
facilitating the awakening of forgotten recollections. I soon
relinquished the habit of deciding the degree of hypnotism, as in a
great number of cases it incited the patients’ resistance, and clouded
the confidence which I needed for the more important psychic work.
Moreover, in mild grades of hypnotism I soon tired of hearing, after the
assurance and command, “You will sleep, sleep now!” such protests as,
“But, Doctor, I am not sleeping.” I was then forced to bring in the very
delicate distinction, saying, “I do not mean the usual sleep, I mean the
hypnotic,—you see, you are hypnotized, you cannot open your eyes”; or,
“I really don’t want you to sleep.” I, myself, am convinced that many of
my colleagues using psychotherapy know how to get out of such
difficulties more skilfully than I; they can proceed differently. I,
however, believe that if through the use of a word one can so frequently
become embarrassed, it is better to avoid the word and the
embarrassment. Wherever the first attempt did not produce either
somnambulism or a degree of hypnotism with pronounced bodily changes, I
dropped the hypnosis and demanded only “concentration,” I ordered the
patient to lie on his back and close his eyes as a means of reaching
this “concentration.” With little effort I obtained as profound a degree
of hypnotism as was possible.

But inasmuch as I forbore using somnambulism, I perhaps robbed myself of
a preliminary stipulation without which the cathartic method seems
inapplicable. For it is based on the fact that in the altered state of
consciousness the patients have at their disposal such recollections and
recognize such connections which do not apparently exist in their normal
conscious state. Wherever the somnambulic broadening of consciousness
lacks there must also be an absence of the possibility of bringing about
a causal relation which the patient cannot give to the doctor as
something known to him, and it is just the pathogenic recollections
“which are lacking from the memory of the patients in their usual
psychic states or only exist in a most condensed state” (preliminary
communication).

My memory helped me out of this embarrassment. I, myself, saw Bernheim
adduce proof that the recollections of somnambulism are only manifestly
forgotten in the waking state and can be readily reproduced by slight
urging accompanied by hand pressure which is supposed to mark another
conscious state. He, for instance, imparted to a somnambulist the
negative hallucination that he was no more present, and then attempted
to make himself noticeable to her by the most manifold and regardless
attacks, but was unsuccessful. After the patient was awakened he asked
her what he did to her during the time that she thought he was not
there. She replied very much astonished, that she knew nothing, but he
did not give in, insisting that she would recall everything; and placed
his hand on her forehead so that she should recall things, and behold,
she finally related all that she did not apparently perceive in the
somnambulic state and about which she ostensibly knew nothing in the
waking state.

This astonishing and instructive experiment was my model. I decided to
proceed on the supposition that my patients knew everything that was of
any pathogenic significance, and that all that was necessary was to
force them to impart it. When I reached a point where to the question
“Since when have you this symptom?” or, “Where does it come from?” I
receive the answer, “I really don’t know this,” I proceeded as follows:
I placed my hand on the patient’s forehead or took her head between my
hands and said, “Under the pressure of my hand it will come into your
mind. In the moment that I stop the pressure you will see something
before you, or something will pass through your mind which you must
note. It is that which we are seeking. Well, what have you seen or what
came into your mind?”

On applying this method for the first time (it was not in the case of
Miss Lucy R.) I was surprised to find just what I wanted, and I may say
that it has since hardly ever failed me, it always showed me the way to
proceed in my investigations and enabled me to conclude all such
analyses without somnambulism. Gradually I became so bold that when a
patient would answer, “I see nothing,” or “Nothing came into my mind,” I
insisted that it was impossible. They probably had the right thought but
did not believe it and repudiated it. I would repeat the procedure as
often as they wished, and every time they saw the same thing. Indeed, I
was always right; the patients had not as yet learned to let their
criticism rest. They repudiated the emerging recollection or fancy
because they considered it as a useless intruding disturbance, but after
they imparted it, it was always shown that it was the right one.
Occasionally after forcing a communication by pressing the head three or
four times I got such answer as, “Yes, I was aware of it the first time,
but did not wish to say it,” or, “I hoped that it would not be this.”

By this method it was far more laborious to broaden the alleged narrowed
consciousness than by investigating in the somnambulic state, but it
made me independent of somnambulism and afforded me an insight into the
motives which are frequently decisive for the “forgetting” of
recollections. I am in position to assert that this forgetting is often
intentional and desired. It is always only manifestly successful.

It appeared to me even more remarkable that apparently long forgotten
numbers and dates can be reproduced by a similar process, thus proving
an unexpected faithfulness of memory.

The insignificant choice which one has in searching for numbers and
dates especially allows us to take to our aid the familiar axiom of the
theory of aphasia, namely, that recognition is a slighter accomplishment
of memory than spontaneous recollection.

Hence to a patient who is unable to recall in what year, month or day a
certain event took place, enumerate the years during which it might have
occurred as well as the names of the twelve months and the thirty-one
days of the month, and assure him that at the right number or name his
eyes will open themselves or that he will feel which number is the
correct one. In most cases the patients really decide on a definite date
and frequently enough (as in the case of Mrs. Cäcilie N.) it could be
ascertained from existing notes of that time that the date was correctly
recognized. At other times and in different patients it was shown from
the connection of the recollected facts that the dates thus found were
incontestable. A patient, for instance, after a date was found by
enumerating for her the dates, remarked, “This is my father’s birthday,”
and added “Of course I expected this episode [about which we spoke]
because it was my father’s birthday.”

I can only slightly touch upon this theme. The conclusion which I wished
to draw from all these experiences is that the pathogenic important
experiences with all their concomitant circumstances are faithfully
retained in memory, even where they seem forgotten, as when the patient
seems unable to recall them.[14]

After this long but unavoidable digression I now return to the history
of Miss Lucy R. As aforesaid, she did not merge into somnambulism when
an attempt was made to hypnotize her, but lay calmly in a degree of mild
suggestibility, her eyes constantly closed, the features immobile, the
limbs without motion. I asked her whether she remembered on what
occasion the smell perception of burned pastry originated.—“Oh, yes, I
know it well. It was about two months ago, two days before my birthday.
I was with the children (two girls) in the school room playing and
teaching them to cook, when a letter just left by the letter carrier was
brought in. From its postmark and handwriting I recognized it as one
sent to me by my mother from Glasgow and I wished to open it and read
it. The children then came running over, pulled the letter out of my
hand and exclaimed, ‘No you must not read it now, it is probably a
congratulatory letter for your birthday and we will keep it for you
until then.’ While the children were thus playing there was a sudden
diffusion of an intense odor. The children forgot the pastry which they
were cooking and it became burned. Since then I have been troubled by
this odor, it is really always present but is more marked during
excitement.”

“Do you see this scene distinctly before you?”—“As clearly as I
experienced it.”—“What was there in it that so excited you?”—“I was
touched by the affection which the children displayed towards me.”—“But
weren’t they always so affectionate?”—“Yes, but I just got the letter
from my mother.”—“I can’t understand in what way the affection of the
little ones and the letter from the mother contrasted, a thing which you
appear to intimate.”—“I had the intention of going to my mother and my
heart became heavy at the thought of leaving those dear children.”—“What
is the matter with your mother? Was she so lonesome that she wanted you,
or was she sick just then and you expected some news?”—“No, she is
delicate but not really sick, and has a companion with her.”—“Why then
were you obliged to leave the children?”—“This house had become
unbearable to me. The housekeeper, the cook, and the French maid seemed
to be under the impression that I was too proud for my position. They
united in intriguing against me and told the grandfather of the children
all sorts of things about me, and when I complained to both gentlemen I
did not receive the support which I expected. I then tendered my
resignation to the master (father of the children) but he was very
friendly, asking me to reconsider it for two weeks before taking any
definite steps. It was while I was in that state of indecision that the
incident occurred. I thought that I would leave the house but have
remained.”—“Aside from the attachment of the children is there anything
particular which attracts you to them?”—“Yes, my mother is distantly
related to their mother and when the latter was on her death bed I
promised her to do my utmost in caring for the children, that I would
not forsake them, and be a mother to them, and this promise I broke when
offering my resignation.”

The analysis of the subjective sensation of smell seemed completed. It
was once objective and intimately connected with an experience, a small
scene, in which contrary affects conflicted, sorrow at forsaking the
children, and the mortification which despite all urged her to this
decision. Her mother’s letter naturally recalled the motives of this
decision because she thought of returning to her mother. The conflict of
the affects raised this moment to a trauma and the sensation of smell
which was connected with it remained as its symbol. The only thing to be
explained was the fact that out of all the sensory perceptions of that
scene, the perception of smell was selected as the symbol, but I was
already prepared to use the chronic nasal affliction as an explanation.
On being directly questioned she stated that just at that time she
suffered from a severe coryza and could scarcely smell anything but in
her excitement she perceived the odor of burned pastry, it penetrated
the organically motived anosmia.

As plausible as this sounded it did not satisfy me; there seemed to be
something lacking. There was no acceptable reason wherefore this series
of excitements and this conflict of affects should have led to hysteria.
Why did it not all remain on a normal psychological basis? In other
words, what justified the conversion under discussion? Why did she not
recall the scenes themselves instead of the sensations connected with
them which she preferred as symbols for her recollection? Such questions
might seem superfluous and impertinent when dealing with old hysterias
in whom the mechanism of conversion was habitual, but this girl first
acquired hysteria through this trauma, or at least through this slight
distress.

From the analysis of similar cases I already knew that where hysteria is
to be newly acquired one psychic determinant is indispensible; namely,
that some presentation must intentionally be repressed from
consciousness and excluded from associative elaboration.

In this intentional repression I also find the reason for the conversion
of the sum of excitement, be it partial or total. The sum of excitement
which is not to enter into psychic association more readily finds the
wrong road to bodily innervation. The reason for the repression itself
could only be a disagreeable feeling, the incompatibility of one of the
repressible ideas with the ruling presentation-mass of the ego. The
repressed presentation then avenges itself by becoming pathogenic.

From this I concluded that Miss Lucy R. merged into that moment of
hysterical conversion, which must have been under the determinations of
that trauma which she intentionally left in the darkness and which she
took pains to forget. On considering her attachment for the children and
her sensitiveness towards the other persons of the household, there
remained but one interpretation which I was bold enough to impart to
her. I told her that I did not believe that all these things were simply
due to her affection for the children, but that I thought that she was
rather in love with her master, perhaps unwittingly, that she really
nurtured the hope of taking the place of the mother, and it was for that
reason that she became so sensitive towards the servants with whom she
had lived peacefully for years. She feared lest they would notice
something of her hope and scoff at her.

She answered in her laconic manner: “Yes, I believe it is so.”—“But if
you knew that you were in love with the master, why did you not tell me
so?”—“But I did not know it, or rather, I did not wish to know it. I
wished to crowd it out of my mind, never to think of it, and of late I
have been successful.”[15]

“Why did you not wish to admit it to yourself? Were you ashamed because
you loved a man?”—“O, no, I am not unreasonably prudish; one is
certainly not responsible for one’s own feelings. I only felt chagrined
because it was my employer in whose service I was and in whose house I
lived, and toward whom I could not feel as independent as towards
another. What is more, I am a poor girl and he is a rich man of a
prominent family, and if anybody should have had any inkling about my
feelings they would have ridiculed me.”

After this I encountered no resistances in elucidating the origin of
this affection. She told me that the first years of her life in that
house were passed uneventfully. She fulfilled her duties without
thinking about unrealizable wishes. One day, however, the serious, and
very busy and hitherto very reserved master, engaged her in conversation
about the exigencies of rearing the children. He became milder and more
cordial than usual, he told her how much he counted on her in the
bringing up of his orphaned children, and looked at her rather
peculiarly. It was in this moment that she began to love him, and gladly
occupied herself with the pleasing hopes which she conceived during that
conversation. However, as this was not followed by anything else, and
despite her waiting and persevering no other confidential heart-to-heart
talk followed, she decided to crowd it out of her mind. She quite agreed
with me that the look in connection with the conversation was probably
intended for the memory of his deceased wife. She was also perfectly
convinced that her love was hopeless.

After this conversation I expected a decided change in her condition but
for a time it did not take place. She continued depressed and moody—a
course of hydrotherapy which I ordered for her at the same time
refreshed her somewhat mornings. The odor of burned pastry did not
entirely disappear; though it became rarer and feebler it appeared only,
as she said, when she was very much excited.

The continuation of this memory symbol led me to believe that besides
the principal scene it represented many smaller side traumas and I
therefore investigated everything that might have been in any way
connected with the scene of the burned pastry. We thus passed through
the theme of family friction, the behavior of the grandfather and
others, and with that the sensation of burned odor gradually
disappeared. Just then there was a lengthy interruption occasioned by a
new nasal affliction which led to the discovery of the caries of the
ethmoid.

On her return she informed me that she received many Christmas presents
from both gentlemen as well as from the household servants, as if they
were trying to appease her and wipe away the recollection of the
conflicts of the last months. These frank advances made no impression on
her.

On questioning her on another occasion about the odor of burned pastry
she stated that it had entirely disappeared, but instead she was now
bothered by another and similar odor like the smoke of a cigar. This
odor really existed before; it was only concealed by the odor of the
pastry but now appeared by itself.

I was not very much pleased with the success of my treatment. What
occurred here is what a mere symptomatic treatment is generally blamed
for, namely, that it removes one symptom only to make room for another.
Nevertheless, I immediately set forth to remove this new memory symbol
by analysis.

This time I did not know whence this subjective sensation of smell
originated, nor on what important occasion it was objective. On being
questioned she said, “They constantly smoke at home, I really don’t know
whether the smell which I feel has any particular significance.” I then
proposed that she should try to recall things under the pressure of my
hands. I have already mentioned that her recollections were plastically
vivid, that she was a “visual.” Indeed under the pressure of my hands a
picture came into her mind—at first only slowly and fragmentarily. It
was the dining room of the house in which she waited with the children
for the arrival of the gentlemen from the factory for dinner.—“Now we
are all at the table, the gentlemen, the French maid, the housekeeper,
the children and I. It is the same as usual.”—“Just keep on looking at
that picture. It will soon become developed and specialized.”—“Yes,
there is a guest, the chief accountant, an old gentleman who loves the
children like his own grandchildren, but he dines with us so frequently
that it is nothing unusual.”—“Just have patience, keep on looking at the
picture, something will certainly happen.”—“Nothing happens. We leave
the table, the children take leave and go with us up to the second floor
as usual.”—“Well?”—“It really is something unusual, I now recognize the
scene. As the children take leave the chief accountant attempts to kiss
them, but my master jumps up and shouts at him, ‘Don’t kiss the
children!’ I then experienced a stitch in the heart, and as the
gentlemen were smoking, this odor remained in my memory.”

This, therefore, was the second, deeper seated scene causing the trauma
and leaving the memory symbol. But why was this scene so effective? I
then asked her which scene happened first, this one or the one with the
burned pastry?—“The last scene happened first by almost two
months.”—“Why did you feel the stitch at the father’s interference? The
reproof was not meant for you.”—“It was really not right to rebuke an
old gentleman in such manner who was a dear friend and a guest, it could
have been said quietly.”—“Then you were really affected by your master’s
impetuosity? Were you perhaps ashamed of him, or have you thought, ‘If
he could become so impetuous to an old friend guest over such a trifle,
how would he act towards me if I were his wife?’”—“No, that is not
it.”—“But still it was about his impetuosity?”—“Yes, about the kissing
of the children, he never liked that.” Under the pressure of my hands
there emerged a still older scene which was the real effective trauma
and which bestowed on the scene with the chief accountant the traumatic
effectivity.

A few months before a lady friend visited the house and on leaving
kissed both children on the lips. The father, who was present,
controlled himself and said nothing to the lady, but when she left he
was very angry at the unfortunate governess. He said that he held her
responsible for this kissing; that it was her duty not to tolerate it;
that she was neglecting her duties in allowing such things, and that if
it ever happened again he would entrust the education of his children to
some one else. This occurred while she believed herself loved and waited
for a repetition of that serious and friendly talk. This episode
shattered all her hopes. She thought: “If he can upbraid and threaten me
on account of such a trifle, of which I am entirely innocent, I must
have been mistaken, he never entertained any tenderer feelings towards
me, else he would have been considerate.”—It was evidently this painful
scene that came to her as the father reprimanded the chief accountant
for attempting to kiss the children.

On being visited by Miss Lucy R. two days after the last analysis I had
to ask her what pleasant things happened to her. She looked as though
transformed, she smiled and held her head aloft. For a moment I thought
that after all I probably mistook the conditions and that the governess
of the children had now become the bride of the master. But she soon
dissipated all my suppositions, saying, “Nothing new happened. You
really do not know me. You have always seen me while I was sick and
depressed. I am otherwise always cheerful. On awaking yesterday morning
my burden was gone and since then I feel well.”—“What do you think of
your chances in the house?”—“I am perfectly clear about that. I know
that I have none, and I am not going to be unhappy about it.”—“Will you
now be able to get along with the others in the house?”—“I believe so,
because most of the trouble was due to my sensitiveness.”—“Do you still
love the master?”—“Certainly I love him, but that does not bother me
much. One can think and feel as one wishes.”

I now examined her nose and found that the pain and the reflex
sensations had almost completely reappeared. She could distinguish
odors, but she was uncertain when they were very intense. What part the
nasal trouble played in the anosmia I must leave undecided.

The whole treatment extended over a period of nine weeks. Four months
later I accidentally met the patient at one of our summer resorts—she
was cheerful and stated that her health continued to be good.


                               EPICRISIS.

I would not underestimate the aforesaid case even though it only
represents a young and light hysteria presenting but few symptoms.
Moreover, it seems to me instructive that even such a slight neurotic
affliction requires so many psychic determinants, and on a more
exhaustive consideration of this history I am tempted to put it down as
an illustration of that form of hysteria which even persons not burdened
by heredity may acquire if their experiences favor it. It should be well
noted that I do not speak of a hysteria which may be independent of all
predisposition; such form does not probably exist, but we speak of such
a predisposition only after the person became hysterical, as nothing
pointed to it before this. A neuropathic disposition as commonly
understood is something different. It is determined even before the
disease by a number of hereditary burdens, or a sum of individual
psychic abnormalities. As far as I know none of these moments could be
demonstrated in the case of Miss Lucy R. Her hysteria could therefore be
called acquired and presupposes nothing except probably a very marked
susceptibility to acquire hysteria, a characteristic about which we know
hardly anything. The chief importance in such cases lies in the nature
of the trauma, to be sure in connection with the reaction of the person
to the trauma. It is an indispensable condition for the acquirement of
hysteria that there should arise a relation of incompatibility between
the ego and some of its approaching presentations. I hope to be able to
show in another place how a variety of neurotic disturbances originate
from the different procedures which the “ego” pursues in order to free
itself from that incompatibility. The hysterical form of defence, for
which a special adaptation is required, consists in converting the
excitement into physical innervation. The gain brought about by this
process is the crowding out of the unbearable presentation from the ego
consciousness, which then contains instead the physical reminiscences
produced by conversion—in our case the subjective sensation of smell—and
suffers from the affect which is more or less distinctly adherent to
these reminiscences. The situation thus produced is no longer
changeable, for changing and conversion annihilate the conflict which
helped towards the adjustment of the affect. Thus the mechanism
producing hysteria corresponds on the one hand to an act of moral faint
heartedness, on the other hand it presents itself as a protective
arrangement at the command of the ego. There are many cases in which it
must be admitted that the defense of the increased excitement through
the production of hysteria may actually have been most expedient, but
more frequently one will naturally come to the conclusion that a greater
measure of moral courage would have been an advantage to the individual.

Accordingly the real traumatic moment is that, in which the conflict
thrusts itself upon the ego and the latter decides to banish it. Such
banishment does not annihilate the opposing presentation but merely
crowds it into the unconscious. This process, occurring for the first
time, forms a nucleus and point of crystallization for the formation of
a new psychic group separated from the ego, around which, in the course
of time, everything collects in accord with the opposing presentation.
The splitting of consciousness in such cases of acquired hysteria is
thus a desired and intentional one, and is often initiated by at least
one arbitrary act. But literally, something different happens than the
individual expects, he would wish to eliminate a presentation as though
it never came to pass but only succeeds in isolating it psychically.

The traumatic moment in the history of our patient corresponds to the
scene created by the master on account of the kissing of the children.
For the time being this scene remained without any palpable effects,
perhaps it initiated the depression and sensitiveness, but I leave this
open;—the hysterical symptoms, however, commenced later in moments which
can be designated as “auxiliary,” and which may be characterized by the
fact that in them there is a simultaneous flowing together of both
separated groups just as in the broadened somnambulic consciousness. The
first of these moments in which the conversion took place in Miss Lucy
R., was the scene at the table when the chief accountant attempted to
kiss the children. The traumatic memory helped along, and she acted as
though she had not entirely banished her attachment for her master. In
other cases we find that these different moments come together and the
conversion occurs directly under the influence of the trauma.

The second auxiliary moment repeated almost precisely the mechanism of
the first. A strong impression transitorily reestablished the unity of
consciousness and the conversion takes the same route opened to it in
the first. It is interesting to note that the symptom occurring second
concealed the first so that it could not be distinctly perceived until
the second was eliminated. The reversal of the succession of events to
which also the analysis must be adapted seems to me quite remarkable. In
a whole series of cases I found that the symptoms which came later
covered the first, and only the last thing in the analysis contained the
key to the whole.

The therapy here consisted in forcing the union of the dissociated
psychic groups with the ego consciousness. It is remarkable that the
success did not run parallel with the accomplished work, the cure
resulted suddenly only after the last part was accomplished.




                              CHAPTER III.
                    THE CASE OF MISS ELISABETH V. R.


In the fall of 1892 I was requested by a friendly colleague to examine a
young lady who had suffered from pains in her legs for over two years
and who walked badly. He also added that he diagnosed the case as
hysteria, though none of the usual symptoms of the neurosis could be
found. He stated that he knew something of the family and that the last
few years had brought them much misfortune and little pleasure. At first
the father of the patient died, then the mother underwent a serious
operation for the eyes, and soon thereafter a married sister succumbed
to a chronic cardiac affection after childbirth. Our patient had taken
an active part in all the afflictions and in all the nursings of the
sick. I made no further progress into the case after I had seen the
twenty-four-year-old patient for the first time. She seemed intelligent
and psychically normal and her affliction, which interfered with her
social relations and pleasure, she bore with a happy mien, thus vividly
recalling the “belle indifference” of hysterics. She walked with the
upper part of her body bent forward, but without any support; her gait
did not correspond to any known pathological gait and it was in no way
strikingly bad. She complained of severe pains on walking, of early
fatigue in walking as well as standing, and after a brief period she
would seek rest in which the pains became diminished but they by no
means disappeared. The pain was of an indefinite nature—one could assume
it to be a painful fatigue. The seat of the pain was given as a quite
extensive but indefinitely circumscribed location on the superficial
surface of the right thigh. It was from this area that the pains
radiated and where they were of the greatest intensity. Here, too, the
skin and muscles were especially sensitive to pressure and pinching,
while needle pricks were rather indifferently perceived. The same
hyperalgesia of the skin and muscles was demonstrable, not only in this
area, but over almost the entire surface of both legs. The muscles were
perhaps more painful than the skin, but both kinds of pains were
unmistakably most pronounced over the thighs. The motor power of the
legs was not diminished, the reflexes were of average intensity and all
other symptoms were lacking, so that there was no basis for the
assumption of a serious organic affection. The disease developed
gradually during two years and changed considerably in its intensity.

I did not find it easy to determine the diagnosis, but for two reasons I
concluded to agree with my colleague. First, because it was rather
peculiar that such a highly intelligent patient should not be able to
give anything definite about the character of her pains. A patient
suffering from an organic pain, if it is not accompanied by any
nervousness will be able to describe it definitely and calmly; it may
perhaps be lancinating, appearing at certain intervals, extending from
this to that location, and in his opinion it may be evoked by this or
that influence. The neurasthenic describing his pain gives the
impression of being occupied with some difficult mental problem reaching
far beyond his powers. His features are tense and distorted as though
under the domination of a painful affect, his voice becomes shriller, he
struggles for expression, he rejects all designations that the physician
makes for his pains, even though they are undoubtedly afterwards found
as appropriate. He is ostensibly of the opinion that language is too
poor to give expression to his feelings. His sensations are something
unique, they never existed before so that they can not be exhaustively
described. He never tires of constantly adding new details and when he
has to stop he is surely controlled by the impression that he was
unsuccessful in making himself understood to the physician. All this is
due to the fact that his pains absorb his whole attention. In the case
of Miss v. R. we had just the opposite behavior and we had to conclude
from this that she attributed sufficient significance to the pain, but
that her attention was concentrated on something else of which the pains
were the accompanying phenomena, perhaps on thoughts and sensations
which were connected with the pain.

A still greater determination for the conception of the pain must
however, be found in a second moment. If we irritate a painful area in a
patient suffering from an organic disease or neurasthenia his
physiognomy will show a definite expression of discomfort or of physical
pain. Furthermore, the patient winces, refuses to be examined and
assumes a defensive attitude. With Miss v. R. when the hyperalgesic skin
or muscles of her legs were pinched or pressed her face assumed a
peculiar expression approaching nearer pleasure than pain, she cried out
and—I had to think of a pleasurable tickling—her face reddened, she
threw her head backward, closed her eyes, and her body bent backward;
all this was not very distinct but sufficiently marked so that it could
only agree with the conception that her affliction was a hysteria and
that the irritation touched a hysterogenic zone.

Her mien was not in accord with the pain which the pinching of the
muscles and skin were supposed to excite. It probably harmonized better
with the content of the thoughts which were behind the pain and which
were evoked in the patient by irritating that part of the body
associated with them. I have repeatedly observed similar significant
expressions on irritating hyperalgesic zones in unmistakable cases of
hysteria. The other gestures evidently corresponded to the slightest
indications of a hysterical attack.

We could not at that time find any explanation for the unusual
localization of the hysterogenic zone. That the hyperalgesia chiefly
concerned the muscles gave material for reflection. The most frequent
affliction causing the diffuse and local pressure sensitiveness of the
muscles is the rheumatic infiltration of the same, the common chronic
muscular rheumatism about which aptitude to mask nervous affections I
have already spoken. The consistency of the painful muscles in Miss v.
R. did not contradict this assumption, as there were many hard cords in
the muscle masses which seemed to be especially sensitive. There was
probably also an organic change in the muscles, in the assumed sense,
upon which the neurosis rested and which significance was markedly
exaggerated by the neurosis.

The therapy followed out was based on a supposition of a mixed
affection. We recommended the continuation of a systematic massage and
faradization of the sensitive muscles without regard to the pain
produced, and in order to remain in communication with the patient I
undertook the treatment of her legs by means of strong Franklin’s
sparks. To her question whether she should force herself to walk we
answered decidedly in the affirmative.

We thus attained a slight improvement. She particularly liked the
painful shocks of the influence machine and the stronger they were the
more they seemed to suppress her pains. My colleague meanwhile prepared
the soil for the psychic treatment, and when after four weeks of sham
treatment I proposed the same and gave the patient some explanations
concerning the procedures and its effects I found a ready understanding
and only slight resistances.

The work which then began became eventually the most arduous that ever
befell my lot, and the difficulty of giving an account of this work
ranks well with the obstacles that had to be overcome. For a long time,
too, I did not understand the connection between the history of the
disease and the affliction, a thing which should really have been caused
and determined by this row of events.

When one undertakes a cathartic treatment he at first asks himself
whether the patient understands the origin and cause of her suffering.
If that is so one does not need any special technique to cause her to
reproduce the history of her ailment. The interest shown in her, the
understanding which we foreshadow, the hope of recovery extended to her,
all these will induce the patient to give up her secrets. With Miss
Elisabeth it seemed probable to me right from the very beginning that
she was conscious of the reasons for her suffering, that she had only a
secret but no foreign body in consciousness. On looking at her one had
to think of the poet’s words,

              “That mask indicates a hidden meaning.”[16]

At first I could thus forego hypnosis, reserving it, however, for future
use if in the course of the confession conditions should arise for which
explanation the memory would not perhaps suffice. Thus in this first
complete analysis of a hysteria which I had undertaken, I reached a
process of treatment which later I raised into a method and employed it
consciously in the process of removing by strata the pathogenic psychic
material which we used to compare with the technique of excavating a
buried city. I at first allowed the patient to relate to me what was
known to her, paying careful attention wherever a connection remained
enigmatical or where a link in the chain of causation seemed to be
lacking. Later I penetrated into the deeper strata of memory by using
for those locations hypnotic investigation or a similar technique. The
presupposition of the whole work was naturally the expectation that a
perfect and sufficient determination could be demonstrated. The means of
the deeper investigation will soon be discussed.

The history which Miss Elisabeth gave was very dull and was woven of
manifold painful experiences. During this recital she was not in a
hypnotic state; I merely asked her to lie down and keep her eyes closed.
I however made no objection if she from time to time opened her eyes,
changed her position or sat up. Whenever she entered more deeply into a
part of her history she seemed to merge spontaneously into a condition
resembling a hypnotic state. She then remained motionless and kept her
eyes firmly closed.

I shall now reproduce the results of the superficial strata of her
memory. As the youngest of three daughters she spent her youth with her
parents, to whom she was devotedly attached, on their estate in Hungary.
Her mother’s health was frequently disturbed by an affliction of her
eyes and also by nervous conditions. It thus happened that she became
especially and devotedly attached to her jovial and broadminded father
who was wont to say that this daughter took the place of both a son and
friend with whom he could exchange his thoughts. As much as the girl
gained in mental stimulation in consequence of this intercourse it did
not escape the father that her psychic constitution deviated from that
ideal which one so much desires to see in a girl. Jocosely he called her
pert and disputatious. He warned her against being too confident in her
judgments, against her tendencies to tell the truth regardlessly to
everybody, and expressed his opinion that she would find it difficult to
get a husband. As a matter of fact she was very discontented with her
girlhood; she was filled with ambitious plans, wishing to study or
obtain a musical education, and revolted at the thought of being forced
to give up her inclination to sacrifice her freedom of judgment on
account of marriage. Meanwhile she was proud of her father, of the
regard and social position of her family, and jealously guarded
everything connected with these matters. The indifference with which she
treated her mother and older sisters, as will be shown, was considered
by her parents to be due to the blunter side of her character.

The age of the girls impelled the family to move into the metropolis,
where for a time Elisabeth enjoyed the richer and gayer life. But then
came the calamity which destroyed the happiness of the home. The father
either concealed or overlooked a chronic cardiac affection, and one day
he was brought home in an unconscious state after the first attack of
edema of the lungs. This was followed by an illness of one and a half
years, during which Elisabeth took the most prominent part in nursing
him. She slept in her father’s room, awoke at night at his call, watched
over him faithfully during the day, and forced herself to appear
cheerful while he went through a hopeless condition with amiable
resignation. The beginning of her affection must have been connected
with this time of her nursing, for she could recall that during the last
half year of this care she had to remain in bed on one occasion for a
day and a half on account of severe pain in the leg. She maintained,
however, that these pains soon passed away and excited neither worry nor
attention. As a matter of fact it was two years after the death of her
father that she began to feel sick and became unable to walk on account
of pain.

The gap which the father left in the life of this family consisting of
four women, the social solitude, the cessation of so many relations
which promised stimulation and pleasure, the increased infirmity of the
mother, all these clouded the mood of our patient, but simultaneously
stimulated a warm desire that the family might soon find a substitute
for the lost happiness and urged her to concentrate her entire devotion
and care on the surviving mother. At the end of the mourning year the
eldest sister married a talented and ambitious man of notable position,
who by his mental capacity seemed to be destined for a great future, but
who, however, very soon developed a morbid sensitiveness and egotistic
perseveration of moods, and dared to show his disregard for the old lady
in the family circle. That was more than Elisabeth could endure. She
felt herself called upon to take up the fight against her brother-in-law
whenever he gave occasion for it, while the other women took lightly the
outburst of his excited temperament. To her it was a painful
disillusionment to find that the reconstruction of the old family
happiness experienced such a disturbance. She could not forgive her
married sister because with feminine docility she strove to avoid
espousing her cause. Thus a whole series of scenes remained in
Elisabeth’s memory to which were attached a number of partially uttered
grievances against her first brother-in-law. But what she reproached him
most for was the fact that for the sake of a promotion in view he moved
with his small family to a distant city in Austria and thus increased
the lonesomeness of her mother. On this occasion Elisabeth distinctly
felt her inability and helplessness to afford her mother a substitute
for the lost happiness, and the impossibility of following out the
resolution made at the death of her father.

The marriage of the second sister seemed to promise more for the future
of the family. The second brother-in-law, although not of the same
mental calibre as the first, was a man after the heart of delicate
ladies, and his behavior reconciled Elisabeth to the matrimonial
institution and to the thought of the sacrifice connected with it. What
is more the second couple remained near her mother, and the child of
this brother-in-law and the second sister became Elisabeth’s pet.
Unfortunately the year during which the child was born was clouded by
another event. The visual affliction of the mother demanded many weeks’
treatment in a dark room, in which Elisabeth participated. Following
this an operation proved necessary and the excitement connected with
this occurred at the same time that the first brother-in-law made
preparations to move. Finally the operation, skilfully performed, proved
successful, and the three families met at a summer resort. There
Elisabeth, exhausted by the worries of the past months, had the first
opportunity to recuperate from the effects of the suffering and anxiety
that the family had undergone since the death of her father.

But during the time spent at this resort Elisabeth was attacked by the
pain and weakness. Afterwards, the pains, which had become noticeable
for a short while some time previously, manifested themselves severely
for the first time after taking a warm bath at a small watering place.
In connection with this it was thought that a long walk, really a walk
of half a day, a few days, previously, had some connection with the
onset of the pains. This readily produced the impression that Elisabeth
at first became “fatigued” and then “caught cold.”

From this time on Elisabeth became the patient in the family. Following
the advice of the physician she spent the rest of the summer in the
watering place at Gastein, whither she went with her mother, but not
without having a new worriment to think about. The second sister was
again pregnant and information as to her condition was quite
unfavorable, so that Elisabeth could hardly decide to take the journey
to Gastein. After barely two weeks at Gastein both mother and sister
were recalled as the patient at home did not feel well.

An agonizing journey, which for Elisabeth was a mixture of pain and
anxious expectations, was followed by certain signs at the home railroad
station which forebode the worst, and then on entering the chamber of
the patient they were confronted with the reality—that they arrived too
late to take leave of the dying one.

Elisabeth not only suffered from the loss of this sister whom she dearly
loved but was also grieved by the thoughts caused by her death and the
changes which it caused. The sister had succumbed to heart trouble which
was aggravated by the pregnancy.

She then conceived the thought that the heart trouble was the paternal
inheritance. It was then recalled that in her early childhood the
deceased went through an attack of chorea with a slight heart affection.
The family then blamed themselves and the physicians for permitting the
marriage. They could not spare reproaches to the unfortunate widower for
impairing the health of his wife by two successive pregnancies without
any pause. The sad thought that this happiness should terminate thus,
after the rare conditions for a happy marriage had been found,
thereafter constantly occupied Elisabeth’s mind. Moreover, she again saw
everything fail that she had planned for her mother. The widowed
brother-in-law was inconsolable and withdrew from his wife’s family. It
seemed that his own family from whom he was estranged during his short
and happy married life took advantage of the opportunity to again draw
him into their own circle. There was no way of maintaining the former
union; to live together with the mother-in-law was improper out of
regard for the unmarried sister-in-law, and inasmuch as he refused to
relinquish the child, the only legacy of the deceased, to the two
ladies, he for the first time gave them the opportunity of accusing him
of heartlessness. Finally, and that was not the least painful thing,
Elisabeth received some indefinite information concerning a disagreement
between the two brothers-in-law, the occasion for which she could only
surmise. It seemed as if the widower made some requests concerning
financial matters which the other brother-in-law considered
unjustifiable, and thought, that in view of the recent sorrow of his
mother, it was nothing but an evil extortion. This then was the history
of the young woman of ambitious and loving disposition. Resentful of her
fate, embittered over the failures of her little plans to restore the
lustre of the home; of her beloved ones, some being dead, some away, and
some estranged— without any inclination to seek refuge in the love of a
strange man, she lived thus for a year and a half nursing her mother and
her pains, separated from almost, all social intercourse.

If we forget the greater sufferings and place ourselves in this girl’s
position, we can but extend to Miss Elisabeth our hearty sympathy. But
what is the physician’s interest in this sorrowful tale; what is its
relation to her painful and her weak gait; what outlook is there for
explaining and curing this case by the knowledge which we perhaps
obtained from these psychic traumas?

For the physician this confession of the patient signified at first a
great disappointment, for to be sure it was a history composed of banal
mental shocks from which we could neither explain why the patient became
afflicted with hysteria nor how the hysteria assumed the form of the
painful abasia. It explained neither the causation nor the determination
of the hysteria in question. We could perhaps assume that the patient
had formed an association between her psychically painful impressions
and bodily pains which she accidentally perceived simultaneously, and
that now she made use in her memory of the physical sensation as a
symbol for the psychic. What motive she had for this substitution and in
what moment this came about remained unexplained. To be sure, these were
questions whose nature was not familiar to the physicians. For it was
customary to content one’s self with the information and to assume that
the patient was constitutionally hysterical and that under the intensive
pressure of any kind of excitement hysterical symptoms could develop.

Even less than for the explanation did this confession offer for the
treatment of the case. One could not conceive what beneficial influence
Miss Elisabeth could derive from recounting sad familiar family
experiences of the past years to a stranger who could give her in return
only moderate sympathy, nor could we perceive any improvement after the
confession. During the first period of the treatment the patient never
failed to repeat to her physician: “I continue to feel ill, I have the
same pains as before,” and when she accompanied this by a crafty and
malicious glance, I could perhaps recall the words which old Mr. v. R.
was wont to utter concerning his favorite daughter: “She is frequently
pert and disputatious,” but after all I had to confess that she was
right.

Had I given up the patient at this stage of the psychic treatment the
case of Miss Elisabeth v. R. would have been quite unimportant for the
theory of hysteria. Nevertheless, I continued my analysis because I felt
sure that an understanding of the causation as well as the determination
of the hysterical symptoms could be gained from the deeper strata of
consciousness.

I therefore decided to put the direct question to the broadened
consciousness of the patient, in order to find out with what psychic
impression the origin of the pain in the legs was connected.

For this purpose the patient should have been put in deep hypnosis. But
unhappily I had to realize that all my procedures in that direction
could put the patient in no other state of consciousness than that in
which she gave me her confession. Still I was very pleased that this
time she abstained from triumphantly remonstrating with the words: “You
see, I really do not sleep, I cannot be hypnotized.” In such despair I
conceived the idea of making use of the trick of pressing the head, the
origin of which I have thoroughly discussed in the preceding
contribution concerning Miss Lucy. This was done by requesting the
patient to unfailingly inform me of what came before her mind’s eye or
passed through her memory at the moment of the pressure. For a long time
she was silent, and then admitted that on my pressure she thought of an
evening in which a young man had accompanied her home from some social
affair. She also thought of the conversation that passed between them,
and her feelings on returning home to nurse her father.

With this first mention of the young man a new shaft was opened, the
content of which I now gradually brought out. We dealt here rather with
a secret, for with the exception of a mutual friend, no one knew
anything of the relation and the hopes connected with it. It concerned
the son of an old friend who was formerly one of their neighbors. The
young man having become an orphan attached himself with great devotion
to her father; he was guided in his career by his advice, and this
veneration for the father was extended to the ladies of the family.
Numerous reminiscences of repeated joint readings, exchange of thoughts
and utterances on his side marked the gradual growth of her conviction
that he loved and understood her and that a marriage with him would not
impose the sacrifice that she feared. Unhappily he was but little older
than she and as yet was far from being independent. She however firmly
resolved to wait for him.

With the serious illness of her father, and the necessity of her nursing
him their relations became less frequent. The evening which she at first
recalled marked the height of her feeling, but even then there was no
exchange of ideas between them on the subject. It was only at the urging
of her family that she consented to leave the sick bed that evening and
go to an affair where she was to meet him. She wished to hasten home
early but was forced to remain, only yielding on his promising to
accompany her home. At no time had she entertained such a tender regard
for him as during this walk, but after returning home at a late hour in
this blissful state and finding the condition of her father aggravated
she bitterly reproached herself for having sacrificed so much time for
her own amusement. It was the last time that she left her sick father
for a whole evening; her friend she saw but seldom after this. After the
death of her father he seemed to hold himself aloof out of respect for
her sorrow and then business affairs drew him into other spheres.
Gradually she came to the realization that his interest in her was
suppressed by other feelings and that he was lost to her. This failure
of her first love pained her as often as she thought of it.

In this relationship and in the scene caused by it, I was to seek the
causation of the first hysterical pain. A conflict, or a state of
incompatibility arose through the contrast between the happiness which
she had not at that time denied herself and the sad condition in which
she found her father upon her arrival home. As a result of this conflict
the erotic presentations were repressed from the associations, and the
affect connected with them was made use of in aggravating or reviving a
simultaneously (or somewhat previously) existing physical pain. It was
therefore the mechanism of a conversion for the purpose of defense as I
have shown circumstantially in another place.[17]

To be sure, we have room here for all kinds of observations. I must
assert that I was unsuccessful in demonstrating from her memory that the
conversion took place in the moment of her returning home. I therefore
investigated for similar experiences which might have occurred while she
was nursing her father, and I evoked a number of scenes, among which was
one during which she had to jump out of bed with bare feet in a cold
room to respond to the repeated calls of her father. I was inclined to
attribute to this moment a certain significance, for in addition to
complaining of pain in her legs she also complained of tormenting
sensations of coldness. Nevertheless, here, too I could not with
certainty lay hold of the scene which could be indicated as the scene of
conversion. This led me to admit that there was here some gap, when I
recalled the fact that the hysterical pains in the legs were really not
present at the time she nursed her father. From her memory she recalled
only a single attack of pain lasting a few days to which at that time
she paid no attention. I then directed my attention to the first
appearance of the pains. In this respect I was successful in awakening a
perfect memory. They came on just at the time of a relative’s visit whom
she could not receive because she was ill in bed, and who had the
misfortune to find her ill in bed on another occasion two years later.
But the search for the psychic motive of these first pains failed as
often as repeated. I believed that I could assume that these first pains
were due to a slight rheumatic attack and really had no psychic basis,
and I also discovered that this organic trouble was the model for the
later hysterical imitation, at all events that it occurred before the
scene of being accompanied home. That these mild organic pains could
continue for some time without her paying much attention to them is
quite possible when we consider the nature of the disease. The obscurity
resulting from this, namely, that the analysis pointed to a conversion
of psychic excitement into bodily pain at a time when such pain was
certainly not perceived and not recalled—this problem I hope to be able
to solve in later considerations and by other examples.[18]

With the discovery of the motive for the first conversion we began a
second more fruitful period of the treatment. In the first place very
soon afterward the patient surprised me with the statement that she now
knew why the pains always radiated from that definite location on the
right thigh and were most painful there. This is really the place upon
which her father’s leg rested every morning while she changed the
bandages of his badly swollen leg. That occurred hundreds of times, and
strange to say she did not think of this connection until today. She
thus gave me the desired explanation of the origin of an atypical
hysterogenic zone. Furthermore during our analysis her painful legs
always commenced to “join in the discussion.” I mean the following
remarkable state of affairs: The patient was as a rule free from pain
when we began our work, but as soon as I evoked some recollection by
question or by pressure of the head she at first reported some pain
usually of a very vivid nature, and then winced and placed her hand on
the painful area. This awakened pain remained constant as long as the
patient was controlled by the recollection, reaching its height when she
was about to utter the essential and critical part of her communication,
and disappearing with the last words of the statement. I gradually
learned to use this awakened pain as a compass. Whenever she was moody
or claimed to have pains I knew that she had not told me everything, and
urged a continuation of the confession until the pain was “spoken away.”
Then only did I awaken a new recollection.

During this period of ab-reaction, the patient’s condition showed such a
striking improvement both somatically and psychically that I used to
remark half jokingly that during each treatment I carried away a certain
number of pain motives, and that when I had cleaned them all out she
would be well. She soon reached a stage during which she had no pain
much of the time; she consented to walk a great deal and to give up her
hitherto condition of isolation. During the analysis I followed up now
the spontaneous fluctuations of her condition and now some fragments of
her sorrowful tale which in my opinion I had not sufficiently exhausted.
In this work I made some interesting discoveries the principles of which
I could later verify in other patients.

In the first place it was found that the spontaneous fluctuations never
occurred unless provoked associatively by the events of the day. On one
occasion she heard of an illness in the circle of her acquaintances
which recalled to her a detail in the illness of her father. On another
occasion the child of her deceased sister visited her and its
resemblance to its mother recalled many painful incidents. On still
another occasion it was a letter from her absent sister showing
distinctly the influence of the inconsiderate brother-in-law, and this
awakened a pain causing the reproduction of a family scene heretofore
not reported.

As she never reproduced the same pain motives twice we were justified in
the expectation that the stock would in time become exhausted. I never
prevented her from merging into a situation tending to evoke new
memories which had not as yet come to the surface. Thus for example I
sent her to the grave of her sister, or I urged her to go in society
where she was apt to meet her youthful friend who happened to be in the
city.

In this manner I obtained an insight into the mode of origin of a
hysteria which could be designated as monosymptomatic. I found, for
example, that the right leg became painful during our hypnosis when we
dealt with memories relating to the nursing of her father, to her young
friend, and to other memories occurring during the first period of the
pathogenic term; while the pain in the left leg came on as soon as I
evoked the memory of her lost sister, of both brothers-in-law, in brief
of any impression relating to the second half of the history. My
attention having been called to that by this constant behavior I went
further in my investigations and gained the impression that perhaps
detailization went still further and that every new psychic cause of
painful feeling might have some connection with a differently located
painful area in the legs. The original painful location on the right
thigh referred to the nursing of her father, and as the result of new
traumas the painful area then grew by apposition so that strictly
speaking we had here not one single physical symptom connected with a
multiform psychic memory complex but a multiplicity of similar symptoms
which on superficial examination seemed to be fused into one. To be sure
I have not followed out the demarcations of the individual psychic
causes corresponding to the pain zones for I found that the patient’s
attention was turned away from these relations.

Notwithstanding this I directed further interest to the mode of
construction of the whole symptom-complex of the abasia upon this
painful zone, and with this view in mind I asked such questions as this:
“What is the origin of the pains in walking and standing, or on lying?”
She answered these questions partially uninfluenced, partially under the
pressure of my hand. We thus obtained two results. In the first place
she grouped all scenes connected with painful impressions according to
their occurrence, sitting, standing, etc. Thus, for example, she stood
at the door when her father was brought home with his cardiac attack and
in her fright remained as though rooted to the spot. To this first
quotation “fright while standing” she connected more recollections up to
the overwhelming scene when she again stood as if pinned near the death
bed of her sister. The whole chain of reminiscences should justify the
connection of the pain with standing up, and could also serve as an
association proof, only one had to bear in mind the fact that in all
these occasions we must demonstrate another moment which had served to
direct the attention—and as a further result the conversion—just on the
standing, walking, sitting, etc. The explanation for this direction of
attention could hardly be sought in other connections than in the fact
that walking, standing, and lying are connected with capabilities and
conditions of those members which here bore the painful zones; namely,
the legs. We could then easily understand the connection between the
astasia-abasia and the first scene of conversion in this history.

Among the scenes which in consequence of this review had made the
walking painful one which referred to a walk she had taken in company,
at the watering place, which apparently lasted too long, stood out most
prominently. The deeper circumstances of this occurrence revealed
themselves only hesitatingly and left many a riddle unsolved. She was in
an especially good humor and gladly joined the circle of friendly
persons; it was a lovely day, not too warm, her mother remained at home;
her older sister had already departed, the younger one felt indisposed
but did not wish to mar her pleasure. The husband of the second sister
at first declared that he would remain at home with his wife, but
finally went along for her (Elisabeth’s) sake. This scene seemed to have
a great deal to do with the first appearance of the pains, for she
recalled that she returned home from the walk very fatigued and with
severe pains, she could not however say definitely whether she had
perceived the pains before this. I took for granted that if she had
suffered any pain she would have hardly resolved to enter upon this long
walk. On being questioned whence the pains originated on this walk she
answered rather indefinitely saying that the contrast between her
solitude and the married happiness of her sick sister, of which she was
constantly reminded by the behavior of her brother-in-law, was painful
to her.

Another closely related scene played a part in the connection of the
pain with sitting. It was a few days later, her sister and
brother-in-law had already departed and she found herself in an
excitable longing mood. She arose in the morning and ascended a small
hill which they were wont to visit together and which afforded the only
pretty view. There she sat down on a stone bench giving free play to her
thoughts. Her thoughts again concerned her lonesomeness, the fate of her
family, and she now frankly admitted that she entertained the eager wish
to become as happy as her sister. After this morning’s meditation she
returned home with severe pains. In the evening of the same day she took
the bath, after which the pains definitely appeared and continued
persistently.

We could further ascertain with great certainty that the pains on
walking and standing diminished in the beginning on lying down. Only
after hearing of her sister’s illness and on leaving Gastein in the
evening, spending a sleepless night in the sleeping car, and being
tormented simultaneously by the worries concerning her sister and
violent pains, it was only then that the pains appeared for the first
time while she was lying down, and throughout that time lying down was
even more painful than walking or standing.

Thus the painful sphere grew by apposition first because every new
pathogenically affecting theme occupied a new region of the legs,
second, every one of the impressionable scenes left a trace because it
produced a lasting, always more cumulative, “occupation” of the
different functions of the legs, thus connecting these functions with
the sensations of pain. There was unmistakably, however, still a third
mechanism which furthered the production of astasia-abasia. When the
patient finished the recitation of a whole series of events with the
plaint that she then perceived pain in “standing alone,” and when in
another series referring to the unfortunate attempt of bringing about
new conditions in the family she was not tired of repeating that the
painful in that was the feeling of her helplessness, the sensation that
she “could make no headway,” I had to admit that her reflections
influenced the formation of the abasia, and had to assume that she
directly sought a symbolic expression for her painfully accentuated
thoughts and had found it in the aggravation of her pains. That somatic
symptoms of hysteria could originate through such symbolization we have
already asserted in our Preliminary Communication, and in the epicrisis
to this history. I will give some examples of conclusive evidence. In
Miss Elisabeth v. R. the psychic mechanism of the symbolization was not
in the foreground, it had not produced the abasia, but everything
pointed to the fact that the already existing abasia had in this way
undergone a considerable reinforcement. Accordingly this abasia as I met
it in the stage of development was not only to be compared to a
psychically associative paralysis of function but also to a symbolic
paralysis of function.

Before I continue with the history of my patient I will add something
about her behavior during the second period of the treatment. Throughout
this whole analysis I made use of the method of evoking pictures and
ideas by pressing the head, a method therefore, which would be
inapplicable without the full cooperation and voluntary attention of the
patient. At times it was really surprising how promptly and how
infallibly the individual scenes belonging to one theme succeeded each
other in chronological order. It was as if she read from a long picture
book the pages of which passed in review before her eyes. At other times
there seemed to be inhibitions, of what kind I could not at that time
surmise. When I exerted some pressure she maintained that nothing came
into her mind. I repeated the pressure and told her to wait, but still
nothing would come. At first when such obstinacy manifested itself I
determined to discontinue the work and to try again, as the day seemed
unpropitious. Two observations, however, caused me to change my
procedure. Firstly, because such failure of this method only occurred
when I found Elisabeth cheerful and free from pain and never when she
had a bad day; secondly, because she frequently made assertions of
seeing nothing after the lapse of a long pause during which her tense
and occupied mind betrayed to me some psychic process within. I
therefore decided to assume that the method had never failed, that under
the pressure of my hands Elisabeth had each time perceived some idea or
had seen some picture but that she was not always ready to inform me of
it and attempted to repress the thing evoked. I could think of two
motives for such concealment; either Elisabeth subjected the idea that
came to her mind to a criticism to which she was not entitled, thinking
it not sufficiently important and unfit as an answer to the question, or
she feared to say it because that statement was too disagreeable to her.
I therefore proceeded as if I were perfectly convinced of the
reliability of my technique. Whenever she asserted that nothing came
into her mind, I did not let that pass. I assured her that something
must have come to her but that perhaps she was not attentive enough,
that I was quite willing to repeat the pressure. I also told her not to
entertain any doubts concerning the correctness of the idea presenting
itself to her mind, that that was not any of her concern; that it was
her duty to remain perfectly objective and to tell whatever came into
her mind, be it suitable or not, and I ended by saying that I knew well
that something did come which she concealed from me and that as long as
she would continue to do so she would not get rid of her pains. After
such urging I found that there was really no pressure that remained
unsuccessful. I then had to assume that I correctly recognized the state
of affairs, and indeed I won through this analysis perfect confidence in
my technique. It often happened that only after the third pressure did
she make a statement then added “Why I could have told you that the
first time”—“Indeed why did you not say it”—“I thought that it was not
correct:” or “I thought that I could avoid it, but it recurred each
time.” During this difficult work I began to attach a profounder
significance to the resistance which the patient showed in the
reproduction of her recollections, and I carefully compared those
occasions in which it was especially striking.

I now come to the description of the third period of our treatment. The
patient felt better, she was psychically unburdened and more capable,
but the pains were manifestly not removed, reappearing from time to time
with the old severity. The imperfect cure went hand in hand with the
imperfect analysis, as yet I did not know in what moment and through
what mechanisms the pains originated. During the reproduction of the
most manifold scenes of the second period and the observation of the
patient’s resistance towards the reproduction, I formed a definite
suspicion which I did not then dare to use as a basis for my action. An
accidental observation turned the issue. While working with the patient
one day I heard the steps of a man in the adjacent room and a rather
pleasant voice asking some questions. My patient immediately arose
requesting me to discontinue the treatment for the day because she heard
her brother-in-law who just arrived asking for her. Before this
disturbance she was free from pains, but thereafter she betrayed by her
mien and gait the sudden appearance of violent pains. This strengthened
my suspicion and I decided to elicit the decisive explanation.

I questioned her concerning the circumstances and causes of the first
appearance of the pains. Her thoughts were directed to the summer resort
in that watering place where she had been before taking the journey to
Gastein. A number of scenes were reproduced which had already been
treated less exhaustively. They recalled her frame of mind at that time,
the exhaustion following the worriment about her mother’s vision and the
nursing of her mother during the time of the operation and her final
despair at being unable as a lonesome girl to enjoy life or to
accomplish anything in life. Until then she felt strong enough to
dispense with the help of a man, but now she was controlled by a feeling
of her womanly weakness, a yearning for love in which, to put it in her
own words, “her obdurate self began to soften.” In such humor the happy
marriage of her younger sister made the profoundest impression on her.
She thought how affectionately he cared for her, how they understood
each other with a mere glance, and how sure they seemed to be of each
other. It was truly regrettable that the second pregnancy followed so
quickly the first and her sister knew that this was the cause of her
suffering but how willingly she endured it and all because he was the
cause of it. The brother-in-law did not at first wish to participate in
the walk which was so intimately connected with Elisabeth’s pain; he
preferred to remain home with his sick wife, but the latter urged him
with a glance to go because she thought that would give Elisabeth
pleasure. Elisabeth remained with him throughout the whole walk; they
spoke about the most varied and intimate things; she found herself in
thorough accord with all he said, and she became overwhelmed with the
desire to possess a man like him. This was followed by a scene a few
days later, when, on the morning after their departure, she visited the
point commanding the beautiful view which had been their favorite walk.
There she seated herself upon a stone and again dreamed of her sister’s
happiness and of a man like her brother-in-law who could engage her
affections. When she arose she had pains which again disappeared, and
only in the afternoon after having taken the warm bath did they
reappear, remaining ever since. I attempted to investigate the thoughts
which occupied her mind while taking the bath, but all I could obtain
was that the bath house recalled her absent sister because she had lived
in the same house.

For some time the state of affairs was clear to me. Absorbed in
painfully sweet recollections she was wholly unconscious of the drift of
her thoughts and continued to reproduce her reminiscences, the time in
Gastein, the worry connected with the expectations of the letter,
finally the information of her sister’s illness, the long wait until the
evening when she could first leave Gastein, the journey with its
tormenting uncertainties during a sleepless night—all these moments were
accompanied by a violent aggravation of the pain. I asked her if during
the journey she thought of the sad possibility which she afterward found
realized. She answered that she carefully avoided the thought but that
in her opinion her mother expected the worst from the very beginning.
This was followed by the reminiscences of her arrival in Vienna—the
impressions which she received from the relatives at the station, the
short journey from Vienna to the neighboring summer resort where her
sister lived, the arrival in the evening, the hasty walk through the
garden to the door of the little garden pavilion—a silence in the house,
the oppressive darkness, the fact of not having been received by the
brother-in-law. She then recalled standing before the bed seeing the
deceased, and in the moment of the awful certainty that the beloved
sister had died without having taken leave of them and without having
her last days eased through their nursing—in that very moment another
thought flashed through Elisabeth’s brain which now peremptorily
repeated itself. The thought which flashed like dazzling lightning
through the darkness was, “Now he is free again, and I can become his
wife.”

Of course, now everything was clear. The analyzer’s effort was richly
repaid. The ideas of the “defense” (abwehr) against an unbearable
presentation, the origin of hysterical symptoms through conversion of
psychic into physical excitement, the formation of a separate psychic
group by an arbitrary act, leading to the defense—all these were in that
moment palpably presented before my eyes. Thus and thus alone did things
happen here. This girl entertained an affectionate regard for her
brother-in-law against the acceptance of which into her consciousness
her whole moral being struggled. She succeeded in sparing herself the
painful consciousness that she was in love with her sister’s husband by
creating for herself instead bodily pains, and in the moment when this
certainty wished to thrust itself into her consciousness (while she
walked with him, during that morning reverie, in the bath, and before
her sister’s bed) her pains originated by means of a successful
conversion into the somatic. When she came under my care there was
already a complete isolation from her consciousness of the presentation
group referring to this love, else, I believe that she would never have
agreed to such a treatment. The resistance which she repeatedly brought
forth during the reproduction of traumatically produced scenes really
corresponded to the energy with which the unbearable presentation had
been crowded out from the association.

For the therapeutist there now came a sorry time. The effect of the
resumption of that repressed presentation was a crushing one for the
poor child. When I summed up the whole situation with these prosaic
words: “you were really for a long time in love with your
brother-in-law,” she complained of the most horrible pains at that
moment; she made another despairing effort to reject the explanation,
saying that it was not true, that I suggested it to her, it could not
be, she was incapable of such baseness, and that she would never forgive
herself for it. It was quite easy to prove to her that her own
information allowed no other interpretation, but it took a long time
before the two reasons that I offered for consolation, namely, that one
is not responsible for one’s feelings and that her behavior, her
sickness under those circumstances was sufficient proof of her moral
nature—I say it took a long time before these consolations made an
impression on her. I was now forced to pursue more than one course in
order to calm the patient. In the first place I wished to give her the
opportunity to rid herself by ab-reaction of the material long since
accumulated. We investigated the first impressions of the relations with
her brother-in-law, the beginning of those unconsciously kept
affectionate regards. We found here all those little indications and
forebodings which on a retrospective view showed a fully developed
passion. On his first visit to the house he mistook her for his destined
bride and greeted her before he greeted her older and homely sister. One
evening they entertained each other so vivaciously and seemed to
understand each other so well that the bride interrupted them with this
half serious remark: “You two, indeed, would have suited each other very
nicely.” On another occasion while in a gathering who were ignorant of
the engagement the conversation drifted to the young man, and a young
lady indiscreetly remarked about a blemish in his shape, a juvenile
joint affliction. The bride herself remained calm while Elisabeth flew
into a passion, and with an ardor which even she herself could not
afterward understand she defended the straight form of her future
brother-in-law. While we worked our way through these reminiscences it
became clear to Elisabeth that her affection for her brother-in-law had
slumbered in her for a long time, perhaps since the beginning of their
relations, and had concealed itself so long under the mask of a mere
kinsmanlike affection as only her very delicate family feeling would
allow.

This ab-reaction benefited her much but I was able to give her still
more relief by taking a friendly interest in her present state of
affairs. With this object in view I sought an interview with Mrs. v. R.
whom I found to be an intelligent and refined lady whose courage to face
life, however, was somewhat lessened through the last misfortune. From
her I learned that the accusation of rude extortion which the older
brother-in-law had brought against the widower, and which was so painful
to Elisabeth, had to be retracted on closer investigation. The character
of the young man remained untarnished, it was merely a misunderstanding,
an easily conceived difference of opinion concerning the valuation of
money that could arise between the merchant, to whom money is only a
working tool, and the official—that is all there was to this seemingly
so painful incident. I begged the mother to give Elisabeth all
explanations that she might hereafter need, and to offer her in the
future that opportunity for unburdening her mind to which I had
accustomed her.

Naturally I was also anxious to know what chance there was for the
fulfilment of the girl’s present conscious wish. Here things were less
favorable! The mother stated that for some time she had had an inkling
of Elisabeth’s affection for her brother-in-law, of course she did not
know that it existed during the lifetime of her sister. Whoever saw them
both in friendly intercourse—of late, to be sure, only seldom—could
entertain no doubt of the girl’s anxiety to please him. However, neither
she, her mother, nor the advisers of the family showed any particular
inclination to bring about a matrimonial union between the two. The
health of the young man had not been very good and had received a
setback through the death of his beloved wife, and it was not at all
certain that he had sufficiently recovered from the shock to enter into
a new matrimony. It was quite probable that this was the reason for his
reserve, perhaps also because he was not sure of his position, and
wished to avoid all obvious gossip. With such a reserve on both sides
the solution for which Elisabeth was yearning was likely to fail.

I informed the girl of everything that I had heard from her mother and
had the satisfaction of seeing her benefited by the explanation
concerning the money affair. On the other hand, I expected her to bear
calmly the uncertainties of her future which could not be set aside. The
advancing summer compelled us to bring the treatment to an end. She now
felt better, and since we had discussed the causes to which the pain
could be traced she no longer complained of pain. We both felt that the
work was done, although I thought that the ab-reaction of the suppressed
love was really not as complete as it should have been. I regarded her
as cured and urged her to continue independently the solution after the
way had been cleared, to which she agreed. She left with her mother for
a summer resort where they were to join the older sister and her family.

I still have something more to report about the further course of Miss
Elisabeth v. R.’s disease. A few weeks after our parting I received a
despairing letter from her mother informing me that at the first attempt
to draw Elisabeth into a conversation about her love affairs she became
very excited and refused to talk, and since then had suffered from
violent pains. She was very indignant at my having betrayed her
confidence and was perfectly inaccessible so that the treatment seemed a
complete failure. She wished to know what was to be done, for of me she
would hear nothing. I made no reply. It was to be expected that after
she was relieved from my discipline she would make another attempt to
reject her mother’s interference and return to her inaccessibility. I
was, however, quite certain that everything would adjust itself and that
my efforts had not been in vain. Two months later they returned to
Vienna and the colleague to whom I was grateful for the case informed me
that Elisabeth was perfectly well, and that her behavior was normal
although occasionally she had slight pains. Since then she has
repeatedly sent me similar messages, each time promising to visit me,
which she has never done. This is quite characteristic of the personal
relationship formed during such treatment. My colleague then assured me
that she could be considered cured. The relation of the brother-in-law
to the family underwent no change.

In the spring of 1894 I was informed that she would be present at a
private ball to which I could gain access. I did not let the opportunity
escape me and saw my former patient gliding along in a rapid dance.
Since then, following her own inclination, she has married a stranger.


                               EPICRISIS.

I was not always a psychotherapist but like other neuropathologists I
was educated to the use of focal diagnosis and electrical prognosis so
that even I myself am struck by the fact that the histories of the
diseases which I write read like novels and, as it were, dispense with
the serious features of the scientific character. Yet I must console
myself with the fact that the nature of the subject is apparently more
responsible for this issue than my own predilection. Focal diagnosis and
electrical reactions are really not important in the study of hysteria,
whereas a detailed discussion of the psychic processes, as one is wont
to receive it from the poet, and the application of a few psychological
formulæ, allows one to gain an insight into the course of events of
hysteria. Such histories should be considered like psychiatrical ones,
but they have the advantage over the latter in the fact that they give
the intimate connection between the history of the disease and the
morbid symptoms, a thing for which we still look in vain in the
biographies of other psychoses.

With the description of the treatment I endeavored to interweave the
explanations which I gave about the case of Miss Elisabeth v. R. and it
will perhaps be superfluous to summarize here the essential features. I
have discussed the character of the patient and the features which
repeat themselves in so many hysterics, and which we really can not
consider as degenerative. I mentioned the talent, the ambition, the
moral sensitiveness, the immense yearning for love which found its
gratification in the family, the independence of her nature reaching
beyond the womanly ideal which manifested itself largely by obstinacy,
readiness for fight, and inaccessibility. According to the information
of my colleague no hereditary taints could be shown on either side of
the family. Her mother, to be sure, suffered for years from some
indefinite neurotic depression, but her brothers and sisters, her father
and his family belonged to the even-tempered and not to the nervous.
There was no serious case of neuropsychosis in the nearest relatives.

This nature was acted upon by painful emotions, the foremost of which
was the debilitating influence of a long attendance upon her beloved
sick father.

That nursing of the sick plays such a significant rôle in the histories
of hysterias has its good reasons. A number of effective moments which
are found here are quite obvious, namely, the disturbance of the
physical health through interrupted sleep, neglect of nourishment, and
the reaction of a constantly gnawing worriment on the vegetative
functions; but the most important factor, however, is, in my estimation,
to be found elsewhere. He whose mind is occupied with the hundred
different tasks of nursing which succeed each other continuously for
weeks and months, becomes accustomed, on the one hand, to suppress all
signs of his own emotions, and on the other, his attention is soon
turned away from his own impressions because he has neither the time nor
strength to do them justice. Thus the nurse accumulates for himself an
over abundance of affective impressions which he barely perceived
clearly enough, at any rate they were not weakened by ab-reaction, that
is, he creates for himself the material for a retention hysteria. If the
patient recovers these impressions naturally become reduced in value,
but if he dies and the period of mourning comes during which only that
which refers to the deceased seems of value, the impressions waiting for
discharge appear in turn, and after a brief pause of exhaustion the
hysteria, the germ of which originated during the nursing, bursts forth.

The same subsequent discharge of traumas accumulated during nursing is
occasionally encountered where the general impression of the disease
does not ensue, and yet the mechanism of hysteria can be noticed. Thus,
I know a highly gifted but slightly nervous lady whose whole personality
suggests the hysteric though she never became a burden to the doctor and
was never obliged to interrupt the exercise of her duties. This lady had
nursed three or four of her beloved ones until their death, causing her
each time complete physical exhaustion, yet these sad duties never made
her ill. However, shortly after the death of the patient she began the
work of reproduction, bringing again to her view the scenes of the
disease and death. Each day—one might say at her leisure—she went over
again every impression, crying and consoling herself. Such adjustment
she passed through daily in conjunction with her usual duties, without,
however confusing the two activities. Everything passed before her
chronologically. Whether the memory work of one day precisely
corresponded to a day of the past I am unable to say. I presume that it
depended on the leisure which was allowed to her by the current affairs
of the household.

Aside from this “subsequent tear” which attached itself to these deaths
at short intervals, this lady periodically observed annual anniversaries
representing the time of the various catastrophes, and here her vivid
visual reproduction and her affective manifestations followed faithfully
the date. Thus, for example, I found her in tears, and on sympathetic
inquiry as to what occurred that day, she half irritably remarked,
“Nothing on that day except that Professor N. was again here and gave us
to understand that things were hopeless—at that time I had no time to
cry.” She referred to the last illness of her husband who died three
years before. It would have been very interesting to know whether she
always repeated the same scenes on these recurring anniversaries, or
whether as I suppose in the interest of my theory other details
presented themselves each time for ab-reaction. I was however, unable to
find anything definite about that; the wise and courageous woman was
ashamed of the intensity with which those reminiscences acted upon
her.[19]

I again repeat that this woman was not sick, that subsequent
ab-reaction, despite all resemblance, is still not a hysterical process;
one may ask why, after one nursing there results a hysteria and after
another none. It cannot lie in personal predisposition for the lady that
I have in mind showed it very remarkably.

I now return to Miss Elisabeth v. R. While nursing her father there
occurred for the first time an hysterical symptom in the form of a pain
in a definite location on the right thigh. The mechanism of this symptom
is fully explained on an analytical basis. It occurred in a moment
during which the ideas of her duties towards her sick father came into
conflict with the content of her erotic yearning which she then
entertained. Under vivid self reproach she decided in favor of the
former and created for herself the hysterical pain. According to the
conception explained by the theory of conversion in hysteria, the
process could be described as follows: She repressed the erotic idea
from her consciousness and changed the sum of the affect into somatic
sensations of pain. Whether this first conflict occurred only once, or
repeated itself is not clear. The latter is more probable. Quite a
similar conflict—of a higher moral significance, and even better
demonstrated by the analysis—repeated itself after years and led to the
aggravation of the same pain and to its dissemination beyond its
original limits. Again, it was an erotic idea which came into conflict
with all her moral conceptions, for her affection for her
brother-in-law, both during the life and after the death of her sister,
and the thought that she should yearn just for this man, was to her very
disagreeable. This analysis gives detailed information about this
conflict which represents the pivotal point in the history of her
malady. The patient’s affection for her brother-in-law might have begun
to germinate long ago, but in favor of its development was the physical
exhaustion through the recent nursing, and her moral exhaustion through
years of disillusionment which then began to break down her reserve and
she confessed to herself the need of the love of a man. During a
friendly intercourse continuing for weeks (in the summer resort) this
erotic inclination reached its full development simultaneously with the
pain. The analysis shows a special psychic condition of the patient at
that time, which in connection with her inclination and the pain, seems
to afford an understanding of the process in the sense of the conversion
theory.

I place reliance on the opinion that the patient’s affection for her
brother-in-law, intensive as it was, was not clearly known to her except
on certain rare occasions and then only momentarily. If that were not so
she would have become conscious of the inconsistency between this
fondness and her moral ideas and would have had to endure the same
mental agony which I saw her suffer after the analysis. Her
reminiscences gave us no information concerning such suffering. These
she spared herself and as a result the love itself did not become clear
to her. At that time, as well as during the analysis, her love for her
brother-in-law existed in the form of a foreign body in her
consciousness without entering into any relationship with her other
ideation. In reference to this love there existed the peculiar condition
of knowing and simultaneously not knowing, it was the condition of the
split off psychic group. When we assert that this love was not “clearly
known” to her we mean exactly what we say. We do not mean a lower
quality or a lesser degree of consciousness, but a separation of the
free associative thinking process from the rest of ideation.

How does it come about that such an intensively accentuated presentation
group should be kept so isolated? As a rule the rôle played by an idea
in the association really increases with the sum of its affect.

This question can be answered if we bear in mind two facts which we can
make use of as a safeguard: (1) That the hysterical pains originated
simultaneously with the formation of these separate psychic groups, (2)
that the patient exerted great resistance against the attempt to bring
about the association between the separate psychic groups and the rest
of the content of consciousness, and when the union was finally effected
she perceived excessive psychic pain. Our conception of hysteria brings
together these two moments with the fact of the splitting of
consciousness, for (2) contains the indication for the motive for the
splitting of consciousness while (1) shows the mechanism of the same.
The motive was that of defense, it was the striving of the whole ego to
agree with this presentation group and the mechanism was that of
conversion, that is, instead of psychic pains which she spared herself
there appeared physical pains. Thus a transformation occurred through
which gain the patient had escaped an unbearable psychic state, though
it was at the cost of a psychic anomaly in the form of a splitting of
consciousness and a physical suffering, pains, upon which an
astasia-abasia was constructed.

To be sure I can give no instruction as to how one can bring about such
a conversion. It is not apparently done as one intentionally does an
arbitrary action, it is a process which is executed in the individual
under the impulse of the motive of defense if an adaptation for it
exists in his organization or is brought about by temporary
modification.

One has the right to attack the theory more closely by asking what it is
that is transformed into physical pains. The cautious reply will be
something out of which psychic pains could have and should have been
formed. If we wish to venture further and attempt a kind of algebraic
formulation of the presentation mechanism we may attribute to the
presentation complex of this unconsciously remaining love a certain
amount of affect and designate the latter quantity as the thing
converted. Direct deduction of this conception would be the fact that
the “unconscious love” has through such conversion forfeited so much of
its intensity that it was reduced to a weak idea. Its existence as a
separate psychic group would only be made possible through such
weakening. Yet this present case is not suitable to afford us any
clearness in this delicate matter. It probably corresponds to an
imperfect conversion only. From other cases it seems quite probable that
perfect conversions also occur and that in these the unbearable idea
actually becomes repressed as only an idea of very little intensity
could be repressed. After an associative union has been consummated the
patients assure us that since the origin of the hysterical symptoms
their unbearable thoughts never occupied their minds.

I have stated above that on certain occasions, though only transitorily,
the patient consciously recognized the love for her brother-in-law. Such
a moment occurred when for example, at the death bed of her sister the
thought flashed through her mind, “Now he is free and I can become his
wife.” I must discuss the significance of these moments for the
conception of the whole neurosis. However, I think that the assumption
of a defense hysteria (abwehr hysterie) includes the requisite that at
least one such moment has already occurred. For consciousness does not
know in advance when such an unbearable idea will present itself. The
unbearable idea which with its appendix is later excluded for the
formation of a separate psychic group must have been originally in the
mind, otherwise no conflict would have resulted leading to its
exclusion.[20] Just such moments should be designated as “traumatic.” It
is in them that the conversion takes place which results in the
splitting of consciousness and the hysterical symptoms. Everything tends
to show that in Miss Elisabeth v. R. there were a number of such moments
(the scenes of the walking, morning meditation, bath, and at the bed of
her sister) and perhaps new moments of this kind occurred during the
treatment. The multiplicity of such traumatic moments is made possible
by the fact that an experience similar to the one which at first
initiated the unbearable idea, introduces new emotions to the separated
psychic groups and thus transitorily abolishes the success of the
conversion. The ego is forced to occupy itself with this suddenly
enforced and lighted-up idea, and then to restore the former state by
means of new conversions. Miss Elisabeth who was in constant relation
with her brother-in-law must have been particularly exposed to the
appearance of new traumas.

I must now occupy myself with the point which I have designated as a
difficulty for the understanding of the afore mentioned history. On the
analytical basis I assume that the first conversion took place in the
patient while she nursed her father, at the time when her duties as
nurse came into conflict with her erotic yearnings, and that this
process was the prototype for the later ones which led to the outbreak
of the disease in the Alpine watering place. But then we have it from
the patient’s statement that at the time of nursing and the period
following which I designated as the “first period” she had not suffered
at all from the pains and weakness. To be sure, during the illness of
her father she was once bedridden for a few days with pains in her legs,
but it is doubtful whether this attack already belonged to the hysteria.
A causal relation between these first pains and any psychic impressions
could not be demonstrated by analysis; it is possible, even probable,
that at that time we dealt with a common rheumatic muscular pain. Even
if we should assume that this first attack of pain was the result of a
hysterical conversion in consequence of the rejection of the erotic
thoughts then existing, the fact nevertheless remains that the pains
disappeared after a few days so that the patient actually behaved
differently than she did during the analysis. During the reproduction of
the so called first period all her statements concerning the illness and
death of her father, the impressions relating to her first
brother-in-law, etc., all these were accompanied by manifestations of
pain, while at the time she really experienced these impressions she
perceived no pains. Is this not a contradiction tending to considerably
diminish the confidence in the explanatory value of such an analysis?

I believe that I can explain the contradiction by assuming that the
pains—the product of the conversion—did not originate while the patient
experienced the impressions during the first period, but subsequently,
that is in the second period when the patient reproduced these
impressions in her mind. The conversion did not follow the fresh
impressions but the memories of them. I even believe that such a process
is not at all unusual in hysteria and regularly participates in creating
hysterical symptoms. Nevertheless, as such an assertion does not seem
plausible I shall attempt to make it more credible by citing other
experiences.

It once happened to me during a similar analysis that a new hysterical
symptom was formed during the treatment so that I could attempt its
removal on the day after its origin.

I will describe the essential features of the history of this patient.
They are simple but not without interest.

Miss Rosalia H., twenty-three years old, who for a number of years made
great effort to educate herself as a singer, complained that her
beautiful voice did not obey her in certain notes. There appeared
choking and tightening sensations in the throat so that the tones
sounded strained, and her teacher could therefore not allow her to
appear in public. Although this imperfection affected only her middle
notes it could not be explained to be due to a defect of her vocal
organs, for at times this disturbance was absent and her teacher was
very pleased with her, but at other times the slightest excitement,
seemingly without any provocation, evoked the choking sensation, and
prevented free expansion of the voice. It was not difficult to recognize
in this annoying sensation an hysterical conversion. Whether there
really appeared a contracture of certain muscles of the vocal chords I
have not verified.[21] In the hypnotic analysis which I undertook with
this girl I found out the following concerning her vicissitudes and her
ailments occasioned through them. She became an orphan at an early age
and was brought up at the house of an aunt who had many children of her
own, and she thus shared the life of a most unfortunate family. The
husband of this aunt, seemingly a pathological personality, abused his
wife and children in the most brutal manner and especially pained her by
his sexual preference for the servant girl in the house. This became
even more obnoxious as the children grew older. When the aunt died
Rosalia became the protectress of the orphaned children who were
harassed by their father. She took her duties seriously, fought through
all conflicts and had to exert her greatest efforts to suppress the
manifestations of her contempt for her uncle. It was then that the
choking sensation in her throat originated. Whenever she was compelled
to swallow an affront, whenever she had to remain silent on hearing a
provoking accusation she perceived a scratching in her throat, the
tightening and failure of her voice, in brief she had all the localized
sensations in her larynx and pharynx which now disturbed her in singing.
It was conceivable that she sought the possibility of making herself
independent in order to escape the excitement and painful impressions
which were daily occurrences in her uncle’s house. An efficient music
teacher took an unselfish interest in her, assuring her that her voice
entitled her to choose the profession of singing. She began secretly to
take lessons of him and because she often went for her lessons with the
choking sensation in her throat following some violent scene in the
house, a connection was formed between the singing and the hysterical
paresthesia for which a way was prepared by the sensitiveness of the
organ during singing. The apparatus of which she should have had free
control was filled with the remnants of innervation after those numerous
scenes of repressed excitement. Since then she has left the house of her
uncle, having moved to another city so as to be away from the family,
but her ailments were not benefited by it. No other hysterical symptoms
were discovered in this pretty and unusually bright girl.

I endeavored to cure this “retention hysteria” by a reproduction of all
the exciting impressions and by subsequent ab-reaction. I afforded her
the opportunity of railing against her uncle in long speeches and of
telling him the bare truth to his face, etc. The treatment benefited
her, but unfortunately she lived here under quite unfavorable
conditions. She had no luck with her relatives. She was the guest of
another uncle who treated her with friendliness, but just for that
reason she incurred the displeasure of her aunt. The latter believed
that her husband evinced too marked an interest in his niece and made it
a point of opposing the girl’s stay in Vienna. She herself in her youth
was obliged to relinquish a desire of becoming an artist and was now
jealous of her niece because she had the opportunity to develop her
talent not considering that it was not mere desire but a wish to become
independent which led her niece to take this step. Rosalia felt so
uncomfortable in the house that she for instance, did not dare to sing
or play the piano when her aunt was within hearing distance, and
carefully avoided either singing or playing anything for her aged
uncle—brother of her mother—whenever her aunt was home. While I was
endeavoring to efface the traces of the old excitements, new ones
originated through these relations with her host and finally interfered
with the success of my treatment and prematurely interrupted the cure.

One day the patient came to me with a new symptom hardly twenty-four
hours old. She complained of a disagreeable prickling sensation in the
fingertips which had manifested itself every few hours since the day
before and forced her to make very peculiar jerky movements with the
fingers. I could not see the attack, otherwise I would have guessed its
meaning on seeing the finger movements but I immediately endeavored to
trace through hypnotic analysis the causation of this symptom (it was
really a minor hysterical attack). As the whole thing only existed for a
short time I hoped to be able to explain it and quickly remove it. To my
surprise without any hesitation she reproduced in chronological order a
whole row of scenes beginning in her early childhood. All these had
perhaps the same characteristics in the fact that she had suffered an
injustice without defense, something which could make her fingers jerk,
for example, scenes like the one of being forced to hold out her hand in
school while her teacher struck it with a ruler. But they were all banal
causes the right of which to enter into the etiology of an hysterical
symptom I have already opposed. It was different, however, with one
scene of her early girlhood which was connected with the others. The bad
uncle who suffered from rheumatism asked her to massage his back. She
did not dare refuse him. He was in bed while she was doing it and
suddenly threw off the covers, jumped up, attempting to get hold of her
and throw her down. Naturally she stopped the massage and in a moment
escaped and locked herself within her own room. She evidently did not
like to recall this experience and could not say whether she had seen
anything when the man suddenly exposed himself. The sensations of the
fingers could be explained as due to the suppressed impulse to punish
him, or it might simply have originated from the fact that she was at
that time massaging him. Only after this scene did she begin to talk
about the one experienced yesterday after which the sensitiveness and
jerkiness of the fingers appeared as a recurring memory symbol. The
uncle with whom she now lived begged her to play something for him. She
sat at the piano and accompanied herself singing, believing that her
aunt was out. Suddenly she appeared in the doorway, Rosalie jumped up,
closed the piano, and flung away the sheet of music. We can guess what
memories came to her mind, and the train of thought which she tried to
ward off at that moment, for the exasperation brought on by the unjust
accusation should have really urged her to leave the house, but on
account of her illness she was forced to remain in Vienna and had no
other shelter. The movement of the fingers which I saw during the
reproduction of this scene resembled a continuous jerking as if one
literally and figuratively would reject something like throwing away a
sheet of music or rejecting an unreasonable demand.

She was quite positive in her assurance that she did not perceive the
symptom before, that it was not caused by the scenes previously related.
Was there anything else to be assumed except that the scene experienced
yesterday had in the first place awakened the recollection of a former
similar content and that then the formation of a memory symbol for the
whole group of recollections took place? The conversion was on the one
hand furnished with newly experienced affects, on the other with
recollected affects.

When we consider this state of affairs we must admit that in the origin
of hysterical symptoms such a process is the rule rather than the
exception. Whenever I seek for the determinants of such states I
frequently find not a single but a group of similar traumatic motives.
In some cases it could be ascertained that this particular symptom had
already existed for a short time after the first trauma and then
subsided, but reappeared after the next trauma and become fixed. Yet no
real distinction can be made between the temporary appearance and the
latency after the first motives. In a large majority of cases it was
also found that the first traumas had left no symptoms, while a later
trauma of the same kind produced a symptom for the origin of which the
cooperation of the former motives could not be dispensed with and for
the solution of which it really required a consideration of all the
motives. Translating this into the language of the conversion theory we
will say that this undeniable fact of the summation of the traumas and
the erstwhile latency of the symptoms simply means that the conversion
can be brought about from a fresh as well as from a remembered affect,
and this assumption fully explains the contradiction which seems to
exist in the history and analysis of Miss Elisabeth v. R.

There is no question that normal persons carry in their consciousness in
considerable numbers the continuation of ideas with unadjusted affects.
The theory which I just asserted merely approximates the behavior of
hysteria to the normal. It is apparently reduced to a quantitative
moment; it is simply a question of how many such affective strains an
organization can endure. Even a hysterical person will be able to retain
a certain amount in an unadjusted state, but if through a summation of
similar motives it increases beyond the individual’s endurance, the
impetus for conversion is formed. It is therefore no singular theory but
almost a postulate to say that the formation of hysterical symptoms may
also be brought about at the cost of recollected affects.

I have now occupied myself with the motive and mechanism of this case of
hysteria, it still remains to discuss the determination of the
hysterical symptoms. Why should just the pains in the legs be selected
to represent the psychic pains? The circumstances of the case point to
the fact that this somatic pain was not created by the neurosis but was
merely utilized, aggravated, and retained by it. I will add that in most
of the cases of hysterical algias into which I have been able to gain an
insight the conditions were similar, that is, there was to begin with
always a real organically founded pain. It is always the most common,
the most widespread pains of humanity that seem to be most frequently
called upon to play a part in hysteria. Among the most common are the
periosteal and neuralgic pains of the teeth, headaches which originate
from so many different sources, and not in a lesser degree the so often
mistaken rheumatic pains of the muscles. The first attack of pain which
Miss Elisabeth v. R. had while she nursed her father, I consider to have
been organically determined, for I received no information when I
investigated for its psychic motive, and I admit that I am inclined to
attribute differential diagnostic significance to my methods of evoking
hidden memories if they are carefully applied. This original rheumatic
pain[22] became in the patient the memory symbol for her painful psychic
emotions, and as far as I can see, for more than one reason. First and
principally because it existed in consciousness almost simultaneously
with the other excitements, and second because it was or could be
connected in many ways with the ideation of that time. At all events it
was perhaps a remote consequence of the nursing, of her want of
exercise, and the poor nutrition entailed by her duties as nurse. But
this hardly became clear to the patient and what is more important is
the fact that she had to perceive it during significant moments of the
nursing, as for example, when she jumped out of bed in the cold room to
respond to her father’s call. Even more decisive for the direction taken
by the conversion must have been the other manner of associative
connection, namely, the fact that for many days one of her painful legs
came in contact with the swollen leg of her father during the changing
of bandages. The location on the right leg distinguished by this contact
remained henceforth the focus and starting point of the pains, an
artificial hysterogenic zone the origin of which can be plainly seen in
this case.

If any one should be surprised at the associative connection between
physical pain and psychic affect, thinking it to be too manifold and
artificial, I should answer that such surprise is just as unfair as to
be surprised over the fact “that just the richest in the world possess
most money.” Where prolific connections do not exist there is naturally
no formation of hysterical symptoms, and conversion does not find its
way. I can also state that in reference to determinations the case of
Miss Elisabeth v. R. belongs to the simpler ones. In the case of Mrs.
Cäcilie M.[23] particularly, I had to solve the most intricate knots of
this kind.

I have already discussed in the history of the case how the
astasia-abasia of our patient was built up on those pains after the
conversion had taken definite direction. But there, too, I have
expressed the opinion that the patient has created or aggravated the
disturbance of function through symbolization. For her dependence and
helplessness to change anything in the circumstances she found a somatic
expression in the astasia-abasia, and the expressions “to make no
headway,” “to have no support,” etc., formed the bridge for this new act
of conversion. I will endeavor to support this conception by other
examples.

Conversion on the basis of coincidence in otherwise existing associative
connections seems to exert the slightest claims on the hysterical
predisposition; on the other hand conversion through symbolization seems
to require a higher grade of hysterical modification, a fact also
demonstrated in Miss Elisabeth in the later stages of her hysteria. The
prettiest examples of symbolization I have observed in Mrs. Cäcilie
M.,[24] whom I can call my most difficult and most instructive case. I
have already mentioned that this history does not unfortunately lend
itself to detailed reproduction.

Among other things Mrs. Cäcilie also suffered from a most violent facial
neuralgia which appeared suddenly two or three times during the year and
persisted for from five to ten days, resisting every remedy, and ceased
as if cut off. It limited itself to the second and third branches of the
trigeminus, and as there was undoubtedly an excess of urates in the
urine, and as a not very “clear acute rheumatism” played a certain part
in the patient’s history it was reasonable to assume that we dealt with
a gouty neuralgia. This opinion was also shared by the consulting
physicians who saw every attack. The neuralgia was treated with the
methods in vogue, such as electric pencilling, alkaline waters and
purgatives, but it always remained uninfluenced until it was convenient
to make room for another symptom. In former years—the neuralgia was
fifteen years old—the teeth were accused of preserving it and were
condemned to extraction, and one fine morning under narcosis the
execution of seven of the culprits took place. That did not run so
smoothly as the teeth were so firm that most of the roots were left
behind. This cruel operation was followed by neither temporary nor
permanent relief. At that time the neuralgia raged for months. Even
while under my care whenever she had neuralgia the dentist was called
and he always declared he found diseased roots. He commenced to get
ready for such work but usually he was soon interrupted, for the
neuralgia suddenly ceased and with it the desire for the dentist. During
the intervals the teeth did not ache at all. One day just while another
attack was raging I put the patient into a hypnotic condition and placed
an energetic interdiction on the pains, and from that moment they
ceased. I then began to doubt the genuineness of this neuralgia.

About a year after this hypnotic remedial success the condition of Mrs.
Cäcilie M. took a new and surprising turn. There suddenly appeared other
states than those that had been characteristic of the last years, but
after some reflection the patient declared that all these conditions had
existed in her before and were really scattered over the long period of
her disease (thirty years). Indeed a surprising abundance of hysterical
incidents were unrolled which the patient was able to localize correctly
in the past and soon the frequently very entangled thought connections
which determined the sequence of these incidents became recognizable. It
was like a series of pictures with an explanatory text. Pitres, on
describing his délire ecmnésique must have had in mind a similar case.
The way such a hysterical condition belonging to the past was reproduced
was most remarkable. In the first place while the patient was in the
best of condition there appeared a pathological mood of special coloring
which was regularly mistaken by the patient and was referred to a banal
occurrence of the last hours. This increasing obnubilation of
consciousness was followed by hysterical symptoms, such as
hallucinations, pains, convulsions, and long declamations, and finally
an event of the past attached itself to this hallucinatory manifestation
which could explain the initial mood and determine the occasional
symptoms. With this last part of the attack lucidity returned, the
ailments disappeared as if by magic and good health again existed—until
the next attack which was half a day later. Usually I was called at the
height of this condition. I produced hypnosis, evoked a reproduction of
the traumatic events, and by artificial aid I curtailed the attack.
Having gone through with the patient many hundreds of such cycles, I
obtained the most instructive explanations concerning the determinants
of hysterical symptoms. The joint observation with Breuer of this
remarkable case was also the chief motive for the publication of our
“Preliminary Communication.”

In this connection it finally came to the reproduction of the facial
neuralgia which I myself had still treated as actual attacks. I was
desirous of knowing whether we would find here a psychic causation. When
I attempted to evoke the traumatic scene, the patient soon imagined
herself in a period during which she felt marked psychic sensitiveness
against her husband. She related a conversation with him and a remark
that he made which aggravated her very much. She then suddenly grasped
her cheek, crying aloud with pain, and said, “That was like a slap in
the face”—with this both the attack and the pain came to an end. There
is no doubt that here, too, we dealt with a symbolization. She had felt
as if she really received a slap in the face. Now everybody will ask how
the sensation of “a slap in the face” can lead to the manifestations of
a trigeminal neuralgia, to its limiting itself to the second and third
branch, and to its being aggravated on opening the mouth and mastication
(not by talking!).

The following day the neuralgia reappeared, but this time it could be
solved by the reproduction of another scene the content of which equally
showed a supposed insult. This process continued for nine days; from the
result it seemed that for years, aggravations, especially through words,
produced new attacks of this facial neuralgia by way of symbolization.

But finally we also succeeded in reproducing the first attack of the
neuralgia which occurred more than fifteen years before. Here there was
no symbolization but a conversion through coincidence. It was a painful
sight which recalled to her mind a reproach and this caused her to
repress another series of thoughts. We have here, then, a case of
conflict and defense, and the origin of the neuralgia in this moment
could not be explained if we do not wish to assume that she then
suffered from slight toothache or facial pains, a thing not improbable,
as she was then in the first months of pregnancy.

The result of the explanation showed that this neuralgia became the mark
of a definite psychic excitement through the usual road of conversion
but that afterward it could be awakened through associative
reminiscences of thoughts and symbolic conversions. It was really the
same procedure as encountered in Miss Elisabeth v. R.

I will now introduce another example which will illustrate the efficacy
of symbolization under other determinants. On one occasion Mrs. Cäcilie
M. was tormented by a violent pain in her right heel, experiencing
stinging sensations which made walking impossible. The analysis
conducted us to a time when the patient was in a foreign institution.
For eight days she lay in her room, and for the first time the house
physician was to take her to the dining room. The pain came on while the
patient took the physician’s arm on leaving the room. It disappeared
during the reproduction of this scene while she remarked that at that
time she feared lest she would not make the “proper impression” on this
strange society[25] (“rechte Auftreten”).

This seems a striking, almost comical example for the origin of
hysterical symptoms through symbolization by means of an expression of
speech. But a closer investigation of the circumstances of that moment
will favor another conception. The patient at that time suffered from
pain in her feet on account of which she remained in bed, and we can
only assume that the fear which obsessed her on taking the first steps
produced from the simultaneously existing pains the one symbolically
appropriate symptom in the right heel so as to form it into a psychic
algia and to particularly fit it for long duration.

Notwithstanding the fact that the mechanism of symbolization in these
examples seems to be crowded to second rank, that which certainly
corresponds to the rule, I have still other examples at my disposal
which seem to demonstrate the origin of hysterical symptoms through
symbolization only. One of the best is the following example which again
refers to Mrs. Cäcilie M. At the age of fifteen she once lay in bed
watched by her austere grandmother. The girl suddenly cried out
complaining of having perceived a pain in the forehead between the eyes
which thereafter continued for weeks. On analyzing this pain, which was
reproduced after almost thirty years, she stated that her grandmother
gazed at her so “piercingly” that it seemed as if her look penetrated
deeply into her brain. She was really afraid of being looked upon
suspiciously by this old lady. On reproducing this thought she burst
into loud laughter and the pain ceased. Here I find nothing other than
the mechanism of symbolization which in a way stands midway between the
mechanism of auto-suggestion and that of conversion.

The study of Mrs. Cäcilie M. gave me the opportunity to gather a
collection of such symbolizations. A whole series of physical sensations
which were otherwise looked upon as organically determined were of a
psychic origin, or at least furnished with a psychic interpretation. A
certain number of her experiences were accompanied by a piercing
sensation in the region of the heart (“I felt a stitch in my heart”).
The piercing headache of hysteria was undoubtedly, in her case, to be
interpreted as thought pains (“something sticks in my head”), and it
disappeared each time when the problem in question was solved. The
sensation of the hysterical aura in the throat, when it manifested
itself during an aggravation, ran parallel with the thought, “I have to
swallow that.” There was a whole series of parallel running sensations
and ideas in which it was now the sensation evoking the idea as an
interpretation and now the idea which produced the sensation by
symbolization, and not seldom it remained obscure which was the primary
element of the two.

In no other patient was I able to find such a prolific application of
symbolization. To be sure, Mrs. Cäcilie M. was a person of quite unusual
and of a special artistic temperament whose highly developed sense for
form manifested itself in very beautiful poems. I maintain, however,
that if a hysteria creates through symbolization a somatic sensation for
the emotionally accentuated presentation, it is due less to individual
and arbitrary things than one supposes. When during an offending
harangue she takes literally such phrases as “stitch in the heart” or
“slap in the face,” and perceives them as real occurrences she practices
no facetious misuse but only revives the sensations to which this phrase
thanks its existence. For how does it happen that in speaking of an
aggrieved person we use such expressions as “he experienced a ‘stitch in
his heart,’” if the mortification was not actually accompanied by a
precordial sensation that could be so interpreted and recognized? Is it
not probable that the phrase “to swallow something” applied to an
unreturned insult really originates from the sensation of innervation
appearing in the pharynx when one forces back his speech thus preventing
a reaction to the insult? All these sensations and innervations belong
to the “expression of the emotions,” which as Darwin taught us,
originally consisted of sensible and expedient actions; at present most
of them may be so weakened that their expression in speech seems to us
like a figurative transformation, but very probably all this was once
meant literally, and hysteria is justified in reconstructing the
original literal sense for its stronger innervation. Indeed, perhaps it
is improper to say that it creates such sensations through
symbolization, perhaps it has not taken the usage of speech as a model,
but both originated from a common source.[26]




                              CHAPTER IV.
                     THE PSYCHOTHERAPY OF HYSTERIA.


In our “Preliminary Communication” we have stated that while
investigating the etiology of hysterical symptoms we have also
discovered a therapeutic method which we consider of practical
significance. “We found, at first to our very greatest surprise, that
the individual hysterical symptoms immediately disappeared without
returning if we succeeded in thoroughly awakening the memories of the
causal process with its accompanying affect, and if the patient
circumstantially discussed the process giving free play to the affect”
(p. 4).

We furthermore attempted to explain how our psychotherapeutic method
acts. “It does away with the effects of the original not ab-reacted to
ideas by affording an outlet to the suppressed affect through speech. It
brings it into associative correction by drawing it into normal
consciousness (in mild hypnosis), or it is done away with through the
physician’s suggestion just as happens in somnambulism with amnesia” (p.
13).

Although the essential features of this method have been enumerated in
the preceding pages, a repetition is unavoidable, and I shall now
attempt to show connectedly how far reaching this method is, its
superiority over others, its technique, and its difficulties.


                                   I.

I, for my part, may state that I can adhere to the “Preliminary
Communication,” but I must confess that after continuous occupation for
years with the problems therein touched, I was confronted with new
views, as a result of which the former material underwent at least a
partial change in grouping and conception. It would be unjust to impute
too much of the responsibility for this development to my honored
friend, J. Breuer. I therefore take the weight of responsibility upon
myself.

In attempting to use Breuer’s method of treating hysterical symptoms in
a great number of patients by investigation and ab-reaction in hypnosis,
I encountered two obstacles, the pursuit of which led me to change the
technique as well as the conception. (1) Not all persons were
hypnotizable who undoubtedly showed hysterical symptoms, and in whom
there most probably existed the same psychic mechanism. (2) I had to
question what essentially characterizes hysteria, and in what it differs
from other neuroses.

How I overcame the first difficulty, and what it taught me, I will show
later. I will first state what position I have taken in my daily
practice towards the second problem. It is very difficult to examine a
case of neurosis before it has been subjected to a thorough analysis,
such as would result only through the application of Breuer’s method.
But before we have such a thorough knowledge we are obliged to decide
upon the diagnosis and kind of treatment. Hence the only thing remaining
for me was to select such cases for the cathartic method which could,
for the time being, be diagnosed as hysteria, and which showed some or
many stigmata, or the characteristic symptoms of hysteria. Yet it
sometimes happened that in spite of the diagnosis of hysteria the
therapeutic results were very poor, and even the analysis revealed
nothing of importance. At other times I attempted to treat cases which
no one took for hysteria by Breuer’s method, and I found that I could
influence them, and even cure them. Such, for example, was my experience
with obsessions, the real obsessions of Westphal’s type, cases which did
not show a single feature of hysteria. Thus the psychic mechanism
revealed in the “Preliminary Communication” could not be pathognomonic
of hysteria. Nor could I for the sake of this mechanism throw so many
neuroses into the same pot with hysteria. From all the investigated
doubts I finally seized upon a plan to treat all the other neuroses in
question just like hysteria, to investigate the etiology and the form of
psychic mechanisms, and to leave the diagnosis of hysteria to be
dependent upon the result of this investigation.

It thus happened that, proceeding from Breuer’s methods, I occupied
myself mostly with the etiology and the mechanism of the neuroses. After
a relatively brief period I was fortunate in obtaining useful results. I
then became cognizant of the fact that if we may speak of a reason for
the acquirement of neuroses the etiology must be sought for in the
sexual moments. This agrees with the fact that, generally speaking,
various sexual moments may also produce various pictures of neurotic
disease. Similarly we now venture to employ the etiology for the
characteristics of the neuroses, and build up a sharp line of
demarcation between the morbid pictures of the neuroses. If the
etiological characters constantly agreed with the clinical ones, this
was justified.

In this way it was found that neurasthenia really corresponds to a
monotonous morbid picture in which, as shown by the analysis, “psychic
mechanisms” play no part. From neurasthenia we sharply distinguished the
compulsion neurosis (Zwangsneurose), [obsessions, doubts, impulses], the
neurosis of the genuine obsessions, in which we can recognize a
complicated psychic mechanism, an etiology resembling the one of
hysteria, and a far reaching possibility of an involution by
psychotherapy. On the other hand it seemed to me undoubtedly imperative
to separate from neurasthenia a neurotic symptom-complex which depends
on a totally divergent, strictly speaking, on a contrary etiology. The
partial symptoms of this complex have been recognized by E. Hecker[27]
as having a common character. They are either symptoms, or equivalents,
or rudiments of anxiety manifestations, and it is for that reason that
this complex, so different from neurasthenia, was called by me anxiety
neurosis. I maintain that it originates from an accumulation of physical
tension which is in turn of a sexual origin. This neurosis, too, has no
psychic mechanism, but regularly influences the psychic life, so that
among its regular manifestations we have anxious expectation, phobias,
hyperesthesias to pain, and other symptoms. This anxiety neurosis, as I
take it, certainly corresponds in part to the neurosis called
hypochondria, which in some features resembles hysteria and
neurasthenia. Yet in none of the earlier works can I consider the
demarcation of this neurosis as correct, and moreover, I find that the
usefulness of the name hypochondria is impaired by its close relation to
the symptom of “nosophobia.”

After I had thus constructed for myself the simple picture of
neurasthenia, anxiety neuroses, and obsessions, I turned my attention to
the commonly occurring cases of neuroses which enter into the diagnosis
of hysteria. I now said to myself that it would not do to mark a
neurosis as hysterical on the whole, merely because its symptom complex
evinced some hysterical signs. I could readily explain this practice by
the fact that hysteria is the oldest, the most familiar, and the most
striking neurosis under consideration, but still it was an abuse which
allowed the placing of many features of perversion and degeneration
under the caption of hysteria. Whenever a hysterical symptom, such as
anesthesia or a characteristic attack, could be discovered in a
complicated case of psychic degeneration, the whole thing was called
“hysteria,” and hence one could naturally find united under this same
trade mark the worst and most contradictory features. As certain as this
diagnosis was incorrect it is also certain that our classification must
be made from the neurotic standpoint, and as we know neurasthenia,
anxiety neurosis, and similar conditions in the pure state, there is no
need of overlooking them in combination.

It seemed therefore that the following conception was more warrantable.
The neuroses usually occurring are generally to be designated as
“mixed.” Neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis can be found without effort
in pure forms, and most frequently in young persons. Pure cases of
hysteria and compulsion neurosis “Zwangsneurose” (obsessions, doubts,
impulses) are rare, they are usually combined with an anxiety neurosis.
This frequent occurrence of mixed neuroses is due to the fact that their
etiological moments are frequently mixed, now only accidentally, and now
in consequence of a causal relation between the processes which give
rise to the etiological moments of the neuroses. This can be sustained
and proven in the individual cases without any difficulty. But it
follows from this that it is hardly possible to take hysteria out of
connection with the sexual neuroses, that hysteria as a rule presents
only one side, one aspect of the complicated neurotic case, and that
only, as it were, in the borderline case can it be found and treated as
an isolated neurosis. In a series of cases we can perhaps say a potiori
fit denominatio.

I shall now examine the cases reported to see whether they speak in
favor of my conception of the clinical dependence of hysteria. Breuer’s
patient, Anna O.,[28] seems to contradict this and exemplifies a pure
hysterical disease. Yet this case which became so fruitful for the
knowledge of hysteria was never considered by its observer under the
guise of a sexual neurosis, and hence cannot at present be utilized as
such. When I began to analyze the second patient, Mrs. Emmy v. N., the
idea of a sexual neurosis on a hysterical basis was far from my mind. I
had just returned from the Charcot school, and considered the connection
of hysteria with the sexual theme as a sort of insult—just as my
patients were wont to do. But when I today review my notes on this case
there is absolutely no doubt that I have to consider it as a severe case
of anxiety neurosis with anxious expectations and phobias, which was due
to sexual abstinence and was combined with hysteria.

The third case, Miss Lucy R., could perhaps be called the first
borderline case of pure hysteria. It is a short episodic hysteria based
on an unmistakably sexual etiology. It corresponds to an anxiety
neurosis in an over-ripe, amorous girl, whose love was too rapidly
awakened through a misunderstanding. Yet the anxiety neurosis could
either not be demonstrated or had escaped me. Case IV, Katharina,[29] is
really a model of what I have called virginal anxiety; it is a
combination of an anxiety neurosis and hysteria, the former produces the
symptoms, while the latter repeats them and works with them. At all
events, it is a typical case of many juvenile neuroses called
“hysteria.” Case V, Miss Elisabeth v. R., was again not investigated as
a sexual neurosis. I could only suspect that there was a spinal
neurasthenia at its basis but I could not confirm it. I must, however,
add that since then pure hysterias have become still rarer in my
experience. That in grouping together these four cases of hysteria I
could disregard in the discussion the decisive factors of sexual
neuroses was due to the fact that they were older cases in which I had
not as yet carried out the purposed and urgent investigation for the
neurotic sexual subsoil. Moreover the reason for my reporting four
instead of twelve cases of hysteria, the analysis of which would have
confirmed our claims of psychic mechanism for hysterical phenomena, is
due to one circumstance, namely that the analysis of these cases would
have simultaneously revealed them as sexual neuroses, though surely no
diagnostician would have denied them the name “hysteria.” However, the
discussion of such sexual neuroses would have overstepped the limits of
our joint publication.

I do not wish to be misunderstood and give the impression that I refuse
to accept hysteria as an independent neurotic affection, that I conceive
it only as a psychic manifestation of the anxiety neurosis, that I
ascribe to it “ideogenous” symptoms only, and that I attribute the
somatic symptoms, like hysterogenic points and anesthesias, to the
anxiety neurosis. None of these statements are true. I believe that
hysteria, purified of all admixtures, can be treated independently in
every respect except in therapy. For in the treatment we deal with a
practical purpose, namely, we have to do away with the whole diseased
state, and even if the hysteria occurs in most cases as a component of a
mixed neurosis, the case merely resembles a mixed infection where the
task is to preserve life, and not merely to combat the effect of one
inciting cause of the disease.

I, therefore, find it important to separate the hysterical part in the
pictures of the mixed neuroses from neurasthenia, anxiety neurosis,
etc., for after this separation I can express concisely the therapeutic
value of the cathartic method. I would venture to assert
that—principally—it can readily dispose of any hysterical symptom,
whereas, as can be easily understood, it is perfectly powerless in the
presence of neurasthenic phenomena, and can only seldom, and through
detours, influence the psychic results of the anxiety neurosis. Its
therapeutic efficacy in the individual case will depend on whether or
not the hysterical components of the morbid picture can claim a
practical and significant position in comparison to the other neurotic
components.

Another limitation placed on the efficacy of the cathartic method we
have already mentioned in our “Preliminary Communication.” It does not
influence the causal determinations of hysteria, and hence it can not
prevent the origin of new symptoms in the place of those removed. Hence,
on the whole, I must claim a prominent place for our therapeutic method
in the realm of the therapy of neuroses, but I would caution against
attaching any importance to it, or putting it into practice outside of
this connection. As I am unable to give here a “Therapy of Neuroses” as
would be required by the practicing physician, the preceding statements
are put on a level with the deferred reference to a later communication;
still, for purposes of discussion and elucidation, I can add the
following remarks:

1. I do not claim that I have actually removed all the hysterical
symptoms which I have undertaken to influence by the cathartic method,
but I believe that the obstacles were due to the personal circumstances
of the cases, and not to the general principles. In passing sentence,
these cases of failure may be left out of consideration, just as the
surgeon puts aside all cases who die as a result of narcosis,
hemorrhage, accidental sepsis, etc., when deciding upon a new technique.
I will again consider the failures of such origin in my later
discussions on the difficulties and drawbacks of this method.

2. The cathartic method does not become valueless simply because it is
symptomatic and not causal. For a causal therapy is really in most cases
only prophylactic; it stops the further progress of the injury, but it
does not necessarily remove the products which have already resulted
from it. To do this it requires, as a rule, a second agent, and in cases
of hysteria the cathartic method is really unsurpassable for such
purposes.

3. Where the period of hysterical production, or the acute hysterical
paroxysm, has subsided, and the only remnant manifestations left are
hysterical symptoms, the cathartic method fulfills all indications, and
achieves a full and lasting success. Such a favorable constellation for
the therapy does not seldom result on the basis of the sexual life, in
consequence of the marked fluctuations in the intensity of the sexual
desire and the complications of the required determination for a sexual
trauma. Here the cathartic method accomplishes all that is required of
it, for the physician can not resolve to change a hysterical
constitution. He must rest content if he can remove the disease for
which such a constitution shows a tendency, and which can arise through
the assistance of external determinants. He must be satisfied if the
patient will again become capacitated. Moreover, he can have some hopes
for the future, if the possibility of a relapse be considered, for he
knows the main character of the etiology of the neuroses, namely, that
their origin is mostly over-determined, and that many moments must unite
to produce this result. He can hope that this union will not take place
very soon, if individual etiological moments remain in force.

It may be argued that in such subsided cases of hysteria the remaining
symptoms would spontaneously disappear without anything else, but this
can be answered by the fact that such spontaneous cures very often
terminate neither rapidly nor fully, and that the cure will be
extraordinarily advanced by the treatment. Whether the cathartic
treatment cures only that which is capable of spontaneous recovery, or
incidentally also, that which would not cease spontaneously, that
question may surely be left open for the present.

4. Where we encounter an acute hysteria during the most acute production
of hysterical symptoms, and the consecutive overwhelming of the ego by
the morbid products (hysterical psychosis), even the cathartic method
will change little the expression and course of the disease. One finds
himself in the same position to the neurosis as the doctor to an acute
infectious disease. For some time past, now beyond the reach of
influence, the etiological moments exerted a sufficient amount of
effect, which becomes manifest after overcoming the interval of
incubation. The affection can not be warded off, it has to run its
course, but meanwhile one must bring about the most favorable conditions
for the patient. If during such an acute period one can remove the
morbid products, the newly formed hysterical symptoms, it may be
expected that their places will be taken by new ones. The physician will
not be spared the depressing impression of fruitless effort, the
enormous expenditure of exertion, and the disappointment of the
relatives, to whom the idea of the necessary duration of time of an
acute neurosis is hardly as familiar as in the analogous case of an
acute infectious disease; these, and many other things, will probably
make most impossible the consequent application of the cathartic method
in the assumed case. Nevertheless, it still remains to be considered
whether, even in an acute hysteria, the frequent removal of the morbid
products does not exercise a curative influence by supporting the normal
ego which is occupied with the defense, and thus preventing it from
merging into a psychosis or into ultimate confusion.

That the cathartic method can accomplish something, even in an acute
hysteria, and that it can even reduce the new productions of the morbid
symptoms quite practically and noticeably, is undoubtedly evident from
the case of Anna O., in which Breuer first learned to exercise this
process.[30]

5. Where we deal with chronic progressive hysterias with moderate or
continued productions of hysterical symptoms, we learn to regret the
lack of a causally effective therapy, but we also learn to value the
indications of the cathartic method as a symptomatic remedy. We then
deal with an injury produced by an etiology which continues to act
chronically. We have to strengthen the capacity for resistance of the
nervous system of our patient, and we must bear in mind that the
existence of an hysterical symptom signifies a weakening of resistance
of the nervous system, and represents a predisposing moment. From the
mechanism of monosymptomatic hysteria we know that a new hysterical
symptom generally originates as an addition to and as an analogy of one
already in existence. The location once penetrated represents the weak
spot which can be penetrated again. The split off psychic group plays
the part of the provoking crystal from which a formerly omitted
crystallization emerges with great facility. To remove the already
existing symptoms, to do away with the psychic alterations lying at
their basis, is the return to the patients the full measure of their
resistance capacity, with which they are successfully able to resist the
noxious influences. One can do a great deal for the patient by such long
continued watchfulness and occasional “chimney-sweeping.”

6. I still have to mention the apparent contradiction arising between
the admission that not all hysterical symptoms are psychogenic, and the
assertion that they can all be removed by psychotherapeutic procedures.
The solution lies in the fact that some of these non-psychogenic
symptoms, though they represent morbid symptoms, as, for instance, the
stigmata, should nevertheless not be designated as affections, and hence
it cannot be practically noticed even if they remain after the treatment
is finished. Other symptoms of a similar nature seem to be taken along
indirectly by the psychogenic symptoms, for indirectly they really
depend on some psychic causation.


I shall now mention those difficulties and inconveniences of our
therapeutic method which are not evident from the preceding histories,
or from the following remarks concerning the technique of the method.—I
will rather enumerate and indicate than carry them out. The process is
toilsome and wearisome for the physician, it presupposes a profound
interest for psychological incidents, as well as a personal sympathy for
the patient. I could not conceive myself entering deeply into the
psychic mechanism of a hysteria in a person who appeared to me common
and disagreeable, and who would not, on closer acquaintanceship, be able
to awaken in me human sympathy; whereas I can well treat a tabetic or a
rheumatic patient regardless of such personal liking. Not less are the
requisites on the patient’s side. The process is especially inapplicable
below a certain niveau of intelligence. It is rendered extremely
difficult wherever there is any tinge of weakmindedness. It requires the
full consent and the attention of the patients, but, above all, their
confidence, for the analysis regularly leads to the inmost and most
secretly guarded psychic processes. A large proportion of the patients
suitable for such treatment withdraw from the physician as soon as they
become cognizant whither his investigations tend; to them the physician
remains a stranger. In others who have determined to give themselves up
to the physician and bestow their confidence upon him, something usually
voluntarily given but never demanded, in all those, I say, it is hardly
avoidable that the personal relation to the physician should not become
unduly prominent, at least for some time. Indeed, it seems as if such an
influence exerted by the physician is a condition under which alone a
solution of the problem is made possible. I do not believe that it makes
any essential difference in this condition whether we make use of
hypnosis or have to avoid or substitute it. Yet fairness demands that we
emphasize the fact that although these inconveniences are inseparable
from our method, they, nevertheless, cannot be charged to it. It is much
more evident that they are formed in the preliminary states of the
neurosis to be cured, and that they then attach themselves to every
medical activity which intensively concerns itself with the patient, and
produce in him a psychic change. I could see no harm or danger in the
application of hypnosis even in those cases where it was used
excessively. The causes for the harm produced lay elsewhere and deeper.
When I review the therapeutic efforts of those years since the
communications of my honored teacher and friend, J. Breuer, gave me the
cathartic method, I believe that I have more often produced good than
harm, and brought about some things which could not have been produced
by any other therapeutic means. On the whole it was, as expressed in the
“Preliminary Communication,” “a distinct therapeutic gain.”

I must mention still another gain in the application of this method. No
severe case of complicated neurosis, with either an excessive or slight
tinge of hysteria can better be explained than by subjecting it to an
analysis by Breuer’s method. In making this analysis I find that
whatever shows the hysterical mechanism disappears first, while the rest
of the manifestations I meanwhile learn to interpret and refer to their
etiology. I thereby gained the essential factors indicated by the
instrument of the therapy of the neurosis in question. When I think of
the usual differences between my opinion of a case of neurosis before
and after such an analysis, I am almost tempted to maintain that the
analysis is indispensable for the knowledge of a neurotic disease. I
have furthermore made it a practice of applying the cathartic
psychotherapy in conjunction with a rest cure, which when required is
changed to a full Weir-Mitchell treatment. This advantage lies in the
fact that, on the one side I avoid the very disturbing intrusion of new
psychic impressions produced during psychotherapy; on the other hand, I
exclude the monotony of the Weir-Mitchell treatment, during which the
patient not seldom merges into harmful reveries. One might expect that
the very considerable psychic labor often imposed upon the patient
during the cathartic cure, and the excitement resulting from the
reproduction of traumatic events, would run counter to the sense of the
Weir-Mitchell rest cure, and would prevent the successes which one is
wont to obtain from it. But the contrary happens; through the
combination of the Breuer and the Weir-Mitchell therapy, we obtain all
the physical improvements which we expect from the latter, and such
marked psychic improvement as never occurs in the rest cure without
psychotherapy.


                                  II.

I will now add to my former observations that in attempting to use
Breuer’s method in greater latitude I met this difficulty—although the
diagnosis was hysteria, and the probabilities spoke in favor of the
prevalence of the psychic mechanism described by us, yet a number of
patients could not be put into the hypnotic state. The hypnosis was
necessary to broaden consciousness so as to find the pathogenic
reminiscences which do not exist in the ordinary consciousness. I,
therefore, was forced to either give up such patients, or to bring about
this broadening by other means.

The reason why one person is hypnotizable and another not I could no
more explain than others, and hence I could not start on a causal way
towards the removal of the difficulties. I also observed that in some
patients the obstacle was still more marked, as they even refused to
submit to hypnosis. The idea then occurred to me that both cases might
be identical, and that in both it might merely be an unwillingness.
Those who entertain a psychic inhibition against hypnotism are not
hypnotizable, it makes no difference whether they utter their
unwillingness or not. It is not fully clear to me whether I can firmly
adhere to this conception or not.

It was, therefore, important to avoid hypnotism and yet to obtain the
pathogenic reminiscences. This I attained in the following manner:

On asking my patients during our first interview whether they remembered
the first motive for the symptom in question, some said that they knew
nothing, while others thought of something which they designated as an
indistinct recollection, yet were unable to pursue it. I then followed
Bernheim’s example of awakening the apparently forgotten impressions
obtained during somnambulism (see the case of Miss Lucy). I urged them
by assuring them that they did know it, and that they will recall it,
etc., and thus some thought of something, while in others the
recollections went further. I became still more pressing, I ordered the
patient to lie down and voluntarily shut his eyes so as to “concentrate”
his mind, causing thereby at least a certain similarity to hypnosis, and
I then discovered that without any hypnosis there emerged new and
retrospective reminiscences which probably belonged to our theme.
Through such experiences I gained the impression that through urging
alone it would really be possible to bring to light the definitely
existing pathogenic series of ideas; and as this urging necessitated
much exertion on my part, and showed me that I had to overcome a
resistance, I, therefore, formulated this whole state of affairs into
the following theory: _Through my psychic work I had to overcome a
psychic force in the patient which opposed the pathogenic idea from
becoming conscious_ (remembered). It then became clear to me that this
must really be the same psychic force which assisted in the origin of
the hysterical symptom, and at that time prevented the pathogenic idea
from becoming conscious. What kind of effective force could here be
assumed, and what motive could have brought it into activity? I could
easily formulate an opinion, for I already had some complete analyses at
my disposal in which I found examples of pathogenic, forgotten, and
repressed ideas. From these I could judge the general character of such
ideas. They were altogether of a painful nature, adapted to provoke the
affects of shame, reproach, of psychic pain, and the feeling of injury;
they were altogether of that kind which one would not like to experience
and prefers to forget.

From all these the thought of defense resulted as if simultaneously.
Indeed, it is generally admitted by all psychologists that the
assumption of a new idea (assumption in the sense of belief, judgment of
reality), depends on the mode and drift of the ideas already united in
the ego. For the process of the censor, to which the newly formed ideas
are subjected, special technical names have been created. An idea
entered into the ego of the patient which proved to be unbearable and
evoked a power of repulsion on the part of the ego, the purpose of which
was a defense against this unbearable idea. This defense actually
succeeded, and the idea concerned was crowded out of consciousness and
out of the memory, so that its psychic trace could not apparently be
found. Yet this trace must have existed. When I made the effort to
direct the attention to it, I perceived as a resistance the same force
which showed itself as repulsion in the genesis of the symptom. If I
could now make it probable that the idea became pathogenic in
consequence of the exclusion and repression, the chain would seem
complete. In many epicrises of our histories, and in a small work
concerning the defense neuropsychoses (1894), I have attempted to
indicate the psychological hypotheses with the help of which this
connection also—the fact of conversion—can be made clear.

Hence, a psychic force, the repugnance of the ego, has originally
crowded the pathogenic idea from the association, and now opposes its
return into the memory. The not knowing of the hysterics was really
a—more or less conscious—not willing to know, and the task of the
therapeutist was to overpower this resistance of association by psychic
labor. Such accomplishment is, above all, brought about by “urging,”
that is, by applying a psychic force in order to direct the attention of
the patient on the desired traces of ideas. It does not, however, stop
here, but as I will show, it assumes new forms in the course of the
analysis, and calls to aid more psychic forces.

I shall, above all, still linger at “the urging.” One cannot go very far
with such simple assurances as, “You do know it, just say it,” or “It
will soon come to your mind.” After a few sentences the thread breaks,
even in the patient who is in a state of concentration. We must not,
however, forget that we deal everywhere here with a quantitative
comparison, with the struggle between motives of diverse force and
intensity. The urging of the strange and inexperienced physician does
not suffice for the “association resistance” in a grave hysteria. One
must resort to more forceful means.

In the first place I make use of a small technical artifice. I inform
the patient that I will in the next moment exert pressure on his
forehead, I assure him that during this pressure he will see some
reminiscence in the form of a picture, or some thought will occur to
him, and I oblige him to communicate to me this picture or this thought,
no matter what it may be. He is not supposed to hold it back because he
may perhaps think that it is not the desired or the right thing, or
because it is too disagreeable to say. There should be neither criticism
nor reserve on account of affect or disregard. Only thus could we find
the things desired, and only thus have we unfailingly found them. I then
exert pressure for a few seconds on the forehead of the patient lying in
front of me, and after stopping the pressure, I ask in a calm tone, as
if any disappointment is out of the question, “What have you seen?” or,
“What occurred to your mind?”

This method[31] taught me a great deal and led me to the goal every
time. Of course I know that I can substitute this pressure on the
forehead by any other sign, or any other physical influence, but as the
patient lies before me the pressure on the forehead, or the grasping of
his head between my two hands, is the most suggestive and most
convenient thing that I could undertake for this end. To explain the
efficacy of this artifice, I may perhaps say that it corresponds to a
“momentary reinforced hypnosis”; but the mechanism of hypnosis is so
enigmatical to me that I would not like to refer to it as an
explanation. I rather think that the advantage of the process lies in
the fact that through it I dissociate the attention of the patient from
his conscious quest and reflection, in brief, from everything upon which
his will can manifest itself. This resembles the process of staring at a
crystal globe, etc. The fact, that under the pressure of my hand there
always appears that which I am looking for, teaches that the supposedly
forgotten pathogenic ideas always lie ready, “close by,” being
attainable through easily approachable associations, and all that is
necessary is to clear away some obstacle. This obstacle again seems to
be the person’s will, and different persons learn to discard their
premeditations, and to assume a perfectly objective attitude toward the
psychic processes within them.

It is not always a “forgotten” reminiscence which comes to the surface
under the pressure of the hand; in the rarest cases the real pathogenic
reminiscences can be superficially discovered. More frequently an idea
comes to the surface which is a link between the starting idea and the
desired pathogenic one of the association chain, or it is an idea
forming the starting point of a new series of thoughts and
reminiscences, at the end of which the pathogenic idea exists. The
pressure, therefore, has really not revealed the pathogenic idea, which,
if torn from its connections without any preparation, would be
incomprehensible; but it has shown the way to it, and indicated the
direction towards which the investigation must proceed. The idea which
is at first awakened through the pressure may correspond to a familiar
reminiscence which was never repressed. If the connection becomes torn
on the road to the pathogenic idea, all that is necessary for the
reproduction of a new orientation and connection is a repetition of the
procedure, that is, of the pressure.

In still other cases the pressure of the hand awakens a reminiscence
well known to the patient, which appearance, however, causes him
surprise because he had forgotten its relation to the starting idea. In
the further course of the analysis this relation becomes clear. From all
these results of the pressure one receives a delusive impression of a
superior intelligence external to the patient’s consciousness, which
systematically holds a large psychic material for definite purposes, and
has provided an ingenious arrangement for its return into consciousness.
I presume, however, that this unconscious second intelligence is really
only apparent.

In every complicated analysis one works repeatedly, nay continuously,
with the help of this procedure (pressure on the forehead), which leads
us from the place where the patient’s conscious reconductions become
interrupted, showing us the way over reminiscences which remained known,
and calling our attention to connections which have merged into
forgetfulness. It also evokes and connects memories which have for years
been withdrawn from the association, but can still be recognized as
memories; and finally, as the highest performance of reproduction, it
causes the appearance of thoughts which the patient never wishes to
recognize as his own, which he does not remember, although he admits
that they are inexorably demanded by the connection, and is convinced
that just these ideas cause the termination of the analysis and the
cessation of the symptoms.

I will now attempt to give a series of examples showing the excellent
achievements of this procedure. I treated a young lady who suffered for
six years from an intolerable and protracted nervous cough, which
apparently was nurtured by every common catarrh, but must have had its
strong psychic motives. Every other remedy had long since shown itself
to be powerless, and I therefore attempted to remove the symptom by
psychoanalysis. All that she could remember was that the nervous cough
began at the age of fourteen while she boarded with her aunt. She
remembered absolutely no psychic excitement during that time, and did
not believe that there was a motive for her suffering. Under the
pressure of my hand, she at first recalled a large dog. She then
recognized the memory picture; it was her aunt’s dog which was attached
to her, and used to accompany her everywhere, and without any further
aid it occurred to her that this dog died and that the children buried
it solemnly; and on the return from this funeral her cough appeared. I
asked her why she began to cough, and after helping her with the
pressure, the following thought occurred to her: “Now I am all alone in
this world; no one loves me here; this animal was my only friend, and
now I have lost it.” She then continued her story. “The cough
disappeared when I left my aunt, but reappeared a year and a half
later.”—“What was the reason for it?”—“I do not know.”—I again exerted
some pressure on the forehead, and she recalled the news of her uncle’s
death during which the cough again manifested itself, and also recalled
a train of thought similar to the former. The uncle was apparently the
only one in the family who sympathized with and loved her. That was,
therefore, the pathogenic idea: “People do not love her; everybody else
is preferred; she really does not deserve to be loved,” etc. To the idea
of love there clung something which caused a marked resistance to the
communication. The analysis was interrupted before this explanation.


Some time ago I attempted to relieve an elderly lady of her anxiety
attacks, which considering their characteristic qualities, were hardly
adapted to such influence. Since her menopause she had become extremely
religious, and always received me as if I were the Devil. She was always
armed with a small ivory crucifix which she hid in her hand. Her attacks
of anxiety, which bore the hysterical character, could be traced to her
early girlhood, and were supposed to have originated from the
application of an iodine preparation used to reduce a moderate swelling
of the thyroid. I naturally repudiated this origin, and sought to
substitute it by another which was in better harmony with my views
concerning the etiology of neurotic symptoms. To the first question for
an impression of her youth which would stand in causal connection to the
attacks of anxiety, there appeared under the pressure of my hand the
reminiscence of reading a so called devotional book wherein piously
enough there was some mention of the sexual processes. The passage in
question made an impression on this girl, which was contrary to the
intention of the author. She burst into tears and flung the book away.
That was before the first attack of anxiety. A second pressure on the
forehead of the patient evoked the next reminiscence, it referred to her
brother’s teacher who showed her great respect, and for whom she
entertained a warmer feeling. This reminiscence culminated in the
reproduction of an evening in her parents’ home, during which they all
sat around the table with the young man, and delightfully enjoyed
themselves in a lively conversation. During the night following this
evening she was awakened by the first attack of anxiety which surely had
more to do with some resistance against a sensual feeling than perhaps
with the coincidently used iodine. In what other way could I have
succeeded in revealing in this obstinate patient, prejudiced against me
and every worldly remedy, such a connection contrary to her own opinion
and assertion?


On another occasion I had to deal with a young happily married woman,
who as early as in the first years of her girlhood, was found every
morning for some time in a state of lethargy, with rigid members, opened
mouth, and protruding tongue. Similar attacks, though not so marked,
recurred at the present time on awakening. A deep hypnosis could not be
produced, so that I began my investigation in a state of concentration,
and assured her during the first pressure that she would see something
that would be directly connected with the cause of her condition during
her childhood. She acted calmly and willingly, she again saw the
residence in which she had passed her early girlhood, her room, the
position of her bed, the grandmother who lived with them at the time,
and one of her governesses whom she dearly loved. There was then a
succession of small, quite indifferent scenes, in these rooms, and among
these persons, the conclusion of which was the leave taking of the
governess who married from the home. I did not know what to start with
these reminiscences; I could not bring about any connection between them
and the etiology of the attacks. To be sure the various circumstances
were recognized as having occurred at the same time at which the attacks
first appeared.

Before I could continue the analysis, I had occasion to talk to a
colleague, who, in former years, was my patient’s family physician. From
him I obtained the following explanation: At the time that he treated
the mature and physically very well developed girl for these first
attacks, he was struck by the excessive affection in the relations
between her and her governess. He became suspicious and caused the
grandmother to watch these relations. After a short while the old lady
informed him that the governess was wont to pay nightly visits to the
child’s bed, and that quite regularly after such visits the child was
found in the morning in an attack. She did not hesitate to bring about
the quiet removal of this corruptress of youth. The children, as well as
the mother, were made to believe that the governess left the house in
order to get married.

The treatment, which was above all successful, consisted in informing
the young woman of the explanations given to me.


Occasionally the explanations, which one obtains by the pressure
procedure, follow in very remarkable form, and under circumstances which
make the assumption of an unconscious intelligence appear even more
alluring. Thus I recall a lady who suffered for years from obsessions
and phobias, and who referred the origin of her trouble to her
childhood, but could mention nothing to which it could have been
attributed. She was frank and intelligent, and evinced only a very
slight conscious resistance. I will add here that the psychic mechanism
of obsessions is very closely related to that of hysterical symptoms,
and that the technique of the analysis in both is the same.

On asking the lady whether she had seen or recalled anything under the
pressure of my hand, she answered, “Neither, but a word suddenly
occurred to me.”—“A single word?”—“Yes, but it is too foolish.”—“Just
tell it.”—“Teacher.”—“Nothing more?”—“No.” I exerted pressure a second
time, and again a single word flashed through her mind: “Shirt.”—I now
observed that we have dealt with a new mode of replying, and by repeated
pressure I evoked the following apparently senseless series of words:
Teacher—shirt—bed—city—wagon. I asked, “What does all that mean?” She
reflected for a moment, and it then occurred to her that “it can only
refer to this one incident which now comes to my mind. When I was ten
years old my older sister of twelve had an attack of frenzy one night,
and had to be bound, put in a wagon and taken to the city. I remember
distinctly that it was the teacher who overpowered her and accompanied
her to the asylum.”—We then continued this manner of investigation, and
received from our oracle another series of words which, though we could
not altogether interpret, could nevertheless be used as a continuation
of this story, and as an appendix to a second. The significance of this
reminiscence was soon clear. The reason why her sister’s illness made
such an impression on her was because they both shared a common secret.
They slept in the same room, and one night they both submitted to a
sexual assault by a certain man. In discovering this sexual trauma of
early youth, we revealed not only the origin of the first obsession but
also the trauma which later acted pathogenically.—The peculiarity of
this case lies only in the appearance of single catch words which we had
to elaborate into sentences, for the irrelevance and incoherence found
in these oracle like uttered words adhere to all ideas and scenes which
generally occur as a result of pressure. On further investigation it is
regularly found that the seemingly disconnected reminiscences are
connected by close streams of thought, and that they lead quite directly
to the desired pathogenic moment.

With pleasure do I therefore recall a case of analysis in which my
confidence in the results of pressure was splendidly justified. A very
intelligent, and apparently very happy, young woman consulted me for
persistent pain in her abdomen which yielded to no treatment. I found
that the pain was situated in the abdominal wall and was due to palpable
muscular hardening, and I ordered local treatment.

After months I again saw the patient who said that “the former pain
disappeared after following the treatment and remained away a long time,
but now it has reappeared as a nervous pain. I recognize it by the fact
that I do not perceive it now on motion as before, but only during
certain hours, as for example, in the morning on awakening, and during
certain excitements.” The patient’s diagnosis was quite correct. It was
now important to discover the cause of this pain, but in this she could
not assist me in her uninfluenced state. When, in a state of
concentration and under the pressure of my hand, I asked her whether
anything occurred to her, or whether she saw anything, she began to
describe her visual pictures. She saw something like a sun with rays,
which I naturally had to assume to be a phosphene produced by pressure
on the eyes. I expected that the useful pictures would follow, but she
continued to see stars of a peculiar pale blue light, like moonlight,
etc., and I believed that she merely saw glittering, shining, and
twinkling spots before the eyes. I was already prepared to add this
attempt to the failures, and I was thinking how I could quietly withdraw
from this affair, when my attention was called to one of the
manifestations which she described. She saw a big black cross which was
inclined, the edges of which were surrounded by a subdued moonlike light
in which all the pictures thus far seen were shining, and upon the arm
there flickered a little flame that was apparently no longer a
phosphene. I continued to listen. She saw numerous pictures in the same
light, peculiar signs resembling somewhat sanscrit. She also saw figures
like triangles, among which there was one big triangle, and again the
cross. I now thought of an allegorical interpretation, and asked, “What
does this cross mean?”—“It is probably meant to interpret pain,” she
answered. I argued, saying, that “by cross one usually understands a
moral burden,” and asked her what was hidden behind that pain. She could
not explain that and continued looking. She saw a sun with golden rays
which she interpreted as God, the primitive force; she then saw a
gigantic lizard which she examined quizzically but without fear; then a
heap of snakes, then another sun but with mild silvery rays, and in
front of it, between her own person and this source of light, there was
a barrier which concealed from her the center of the sun.

I knew for some time that we dealt here with allegories, and I
immediately asked for an explanation of the last picture. Without
reflecting she answered: “The sun is perfection, the ideal, and the
barrier represents my weaknesses and failings which stand between me and
the ideal.”—“Indeed, do you reproach yourself? Are you dissatisfied with
yourself?”—“Yes.”—“Since when?”—“Since I became a member of the
Theosophical Society and read the writings edited by it. I have always
had a poor opinion of myself.” “What was it that made the last strongest
impression upon you?”—“A translation from the sanscrit which now appears
in serial numbers.” A minute later I was initiated into her mental
conflicts, and into her self reproaches. She related a slight incident
which gave occasion for a reproach, and in which, as a result of an
inciting conversion, the former organic pain at first appeared.—The
pictures which I had at first taken for phosphenes were symbols of
occultistic streams of thought, perhaps plain emblems from the title
pages of occultistic books.


I have thus far so warmly praised the achievements of the pressure
procedure, and have so entirely neglected the aspect of the defense or
the resistance, that I certainly must have given the impression that by
means of this small artifice one is placed in position to become master
of the psychic resistances against the cathartic cure. But to believe
this would be a gross mistake. Such advantages do not exist in the
treatment so far as I can see; here, as everywhere else, great change
requires much effort. The pressure procedure is nothing but a trick
serving to surprise for awhile the defensive ego, which in all graver
cases recalls its intentions and continues its resistance.

I need only recall the various forms in which this resistance manifested
itself. In the first place, the pressure experiment usually fails the
first or second time. The patient then expresses himself disappointed,
saying, “I believed that some idea would occur to me, but I only thought
so; as attentive as I was nothing came.” Such attitudes assumed by the
patient are not yet to be counted as a resistance; we usually answer to
that, “You were really too anxious, the second time things will come.”
And they really come. It is remarkable how completely the patients—even
the most tractable and the most intelligent—can forget the agreement
which they have previously entered into. They have promised to tell
everything that occurs to them under the pressure of the hand, be it
closely related to them or not, and whether it is agreeable to them to
say it or not; that is, they are to tell everything without any choice,
or influence by critique or affect. Yet they do not keep their promise,
it is apparently beyond their powers. The work repeatedly stops, they
continue to assert that this time nothing came to their mind. One needs
not believe them, and one must always assume, and also say, that they
hold back something because they believe it to be unimportant, or
perceive it as painful. One must insist, repeat the pressure, and assume
an assured attitude until one really hears something. The patient then
adds, “I could have told you that the first time.”—“Why did you not say
it?”—“I could not believe that that could be it. Only after it returned
repeatedly have I decided to tell it;” or, “I had hoped that it would
not be just that, that I could spare myself from saying it, but only
after it could not be repressed have I noticed that I could not avoid
it.”—Thus the patient subsequently betrays the motives of a resistance
which he did not at first wish to admit. He apparently could not help
offering resistances.

It is remarkable under what subterfuges these resistances are frequently
hidden. “I am distracted today”; “the clock or the piano playing in the
next room disturbs me,” they say. I became accustomed to answer to that,
“Not at all, you simply struck against something that you do not
willingly wish to say. That does not help you at all. Just stick to
it.”—The longer the pause between the pressure of my hand and the
utterance of the patient, the more suspicious I become, and the more is
it to be feared that the patient arranges what comes to his mind, and
distorts it in the reproduction. The most important explanations are
frequently ushered in as superfluous accessories, just as the princes of
the opera who are dressed as beggars. “Something now occurred to me, but
it has nothing to do with it. I only tell it to you because you wish to
know everything.” With this introduction we usually obtain the long
desired solution. I always listen when I hear a patient talk so lightly
of an idea. That the pathogenic idea should appear of so little
importance on its reappearance is a sign of the successful defense. One
can infer from this of what the process of defense consisted. Its object
was to make a weak out of a strong idea, that is, to rob it of its
affect.

Among other signs the pathogenic memories can also be recognized by the
fact that they are designated by the patient as unessential, and yet are
only uttered with resistance. There are also cases where the patient
seeks to disavow the recollections, even while they are being
reproduced, with such remarks as these: “Now something occurred to me,
but apparently you talked it into me;” or, “I know what you expect to
this question, you surely think that I thought of this and that.” An
especially clever way of shifting is found in the following expression:
“Now something really occurred to me, but it seems to me as if I added
it, and that it is not a reproduced thought.”—In all these cases I
remain inflexibly firm, I admit none of these distinctions, but explain
to the patient that these are only forms and subterfuges of the
resistance against the reproduction of a recollection which in spite of
all we are forced to recognize.

One generally experiences less trouble in the reproduction of pictures
than thoughts. Hysterical patients who are usually visual are easier to
manage than patients suffering from obsessions. Once the picture emerges
from the memory we can hear the patient state that as he proceeds to
describe it, it proportionately fades away and becomes indistinct; the
patient wears it out, so to speak, by transforming, it into words. We
then orient ourselves through the memory picture itself in order to find
the direction towards which the work should be continued. We say to the
patient, “Just look again at the picture, has it disappeared?”—“As a
whole, yes, but I still see this detail.”—“Then this must have some
meaning, you will either see something new, or this remnant will remind
you of something.” When the work is finished the visual field becomes
free again, and a new picture can be called forth; but at other times
such a picture, in spite of its having been described, remains
persistently before the inner eye of the patient, and I take this as a
sign that he still has something important to tell me concerning its
theme. As soon as this has been accomplished, the picture disappears
like a wandering spirit returning to rest.

It is naturally of great value for the progress of the analysis to carry
our point with the patient, otherwise we have to depend on what he
thinks is proper to impart. It, therefore, will be pleasant to hear that
the pressure procedure never failed except in a single case which I
shall discuss later, but which I can now characterize by the fact that
there was a special motive for the resistance. To be sure, it may happen
under certain conditions that the procedure may be applied without
bringing anything to light; as, for example, we may ask for the further
etiology of a symptom when the same has already been exhausted; or, we
may investigate for the psychic genealogy of a symptom, perhaps a pain,
which really was of somatic origin. In these cases the patient equally
insists that nothing occurred to him, and he is right. We should strive
to avoid doing an injustice to the patient by making it a general rule
not to lose sight of his features while he calmly lies before us during
the analysis. One can then learn to distinguish, without any difficulty,
the psychic calm in the real non appearance of a reminiscence from the
tension and emotional signs under which the patient labors in trying to
disavow the emerging reminiscences for the purpose of defense. The
differential diagnostic application of the pressure procedure is really
based on such experiences.

We can see, therefore, that even with the help of the pressure procedure
the task is not an easy one. The only advantage gained is the fact that
we have learned from the results of this method in what direction to
investigate, and what things we have to force upon the patient. For some
cases that suffices, for the question is really to find the secret, and
tell it to the patient, so that he is usually then forced to relinquish
his resistance. In other cases more is necessary; here the surviving
resistance of the patient manifests itself by the fact that the
connections become torn, the solutions do not appear, and the recalled
pictures come indistinctly and incompletely. On reviewing, at a later
period, the earlier results of an analysis, we are often surprised at
the distorted aspects of all the occurrences and scenes which we have
snatched from the patient by the pressure procedure. It usually lacks
the essential part, the relations to the person or to the theme, and for
that reason the picture remained incomprehensible. I will now give one
or two examples showing the effects of such a censoring during the first
appearance of the pathogenic memories. The patient sees the upper part
of a female body on which a loose covering fits carelessly, only much
later he adds to this torso the head, and thereby betrays a person and a
relationship. Or, he relates a reminiscence of his childhood about two
boys whose forms are very indistinct, and to whom a certain
mischievousness was attributed. It required many months and considerable
progress in the course of the analysis before he again saw this
reminiscence and recognized one of the children as himself and the other
as his brother. What means have we now at our disposal to overcome this
continued resistance?

We have but few, yet we have almost all those by which one person exerts
a psychic influence on the other. In the first place we must remember
that psychic resistance, especially of long continuance, can only be
broken slowly, gradually, and with much patience. We can also count on
the intellectual interest which manifests itself in the patient after a
brief period of the analysis. On explaining and imparting to him the
knowledge of the marvelous world of psychic processes, which we have
gained only through such analysis, we obtain his collaboration, causing
him to view himself with the objective interest of the investigator, and
we thus drive back the resistance which rests on an affective basis. But
finally—and this remains the strongest motive force—after the motives
for the defense have been discovered, we must make the attempt to reduce
or even substitute them by stronger ones. Here the possibility of
expressing the therapeutic activity in formulæ ceases. One does as well
as he can as an explainer where ignorance has produced timorousness, as
a teacher, as a representative of a freer and more superior
world-conception, and as confessor, who through the continuance of his
sympathy and his respect, imparts, so to say, absolution after the
confession. One endeavors to do something humane for the patient in so
far as the range of one’s own personality and the measure of sympathy
which one can set apart for the case allows. It is an indispensable
prerequisite for such psychic activities to have approximately
discovered the nature of the case and the motives of the defense here
effective. Fortunately the technique of the urging and the pressure
procedure take us just so far. The more we have solved such enigmas the
easier will we discover new ones, and the earlier will we be able to
manage the actual curative psychic work. For it is well to bear in mind
that although the patient can rid himself of an hysterical symptom only
after reproducing and uttering under emotion its causal pathogenic
impressions, yet the therapeutic task merely consists in inducing him to
do it, and once the task has been accomplished there remains nothing for
the doctor to correct or abolish. All the contrary suggestions necessary
have already been employed during the struggle carried on against the
resistance. The case may be compared to the unlocking of a closed door,
where, as soon as the door knob has been pressed downward, no other
difficulties are encountered in opening the door.

Among the intellectual motives employed for the overcoming of the
resistance one can hardly dispense with one affective moment, that is,
the personal equation of the doctor, and in a number of cases, this
alone will be able to break the resistance. The conditions here do not
differ from those found in any other branch of medicine, and one should
not expect any therapeutic method to fully disclaim the assistance of
this personal moment.


                                  III.

In view of the discussions in the preceding section concerning the
difficulty of my technique, which I have unreservedly exposed,—I have
really collected them from my most difficult cases, though it will often
be easier work—in view then of this state of affairs everybody will wish
to ask whether it would not be more suitable, instead of all these
tortures, to apply oneself more energetically to hypnosis, or to limit
the application of the cathartic method to only such cases as can be
placed in deep hypnosis. To the latter proposition I should have to
answer that the number of patients available for my skill would shrink
considerably; but to the former advice I will advance the supposition
that even where hypnosis could be produced the resistance would not be
very much lessened. My experiences in this respect are not particularly
extensive, so that I am unable to go beyond this supposition, but
wherever I achieved a cathartic cure in the hypnotic state I found that
the work devolved upon me was not less than in the state of
concentration. I have only recently finished such a treatment during
which course I caused the disappearance of a hysterical paralysis of the
legs. The patient merged into a state, psychically very different from
the conscious, and somatically distinguished by the fact that she was
unable to open her eyes or rise without my ordering her to do so; and
still I never had a case showing greater resistance than this one. I
placed no value on these physical signs, and toward the end of the ten
months’ treatment they really became imperceptible. The condition of the
patient during our work has therefore lost nothing of its psychic
peculiarities, such as the ability to recall the unconscious and its
very peculiar relation to the person of the physician. To be sure, in
the history of Mrs. Emmy v. N. I have described an example of a
cathartic cure accomplished in a profound somnambulism in which the
resistance played almost no part. But nothing that I obtained from this
woman would have required any special effort; I obtained nothing that
she could not have told me in her waking state after a longer
acquaintanceship and some esteem. The real causes of her disease, which
were surely identical with the causes of her relapses after my
treatment, I have never found—it was my first attempt in this
therapy—and when I once asked her accidentally for a reminiscence which
contained a fragment of the erotic, I found her just as resistant and
unreliable in her statements as any one of my later non-somnambulic
patients. This patient’s resistance, even in the somnambulic state,
against other requirements and exactions I have already discussed in her
history. Since I have witnessed cases who, even in deep somnambulism
were absolutely refractory therapeutically despite their obedience in
everything else, I really became skeptical as to the value of hypnosis
for the facilitation of the cathartic treatment. A case of this kind I
have reported in brief,[32] and could still add others.


In our discussion thus far, the idea of resistance has thrust itself to
the foreground. I have shown how, in the therapeutic work, one is led to
the conception that hysteria originates through the repression of an
unbearable idea from a motive of defense, that the repressed idea
remains as a weak (mildly intensive) reminiscence, and that the affect
snatched from it is used for a somatic innervation, that is, conversion
of the excitement. By virtue of its repression the idea becomes the
cause of morbid symptoms, that is pathogenic. A hysteria showing this
psychic mechanism may be designated by the name of “defense hysteria,”
but both Breuer and myself have repeatedly spoken of two other kinds of
hysterias which we have named hypnoid and retention hysteria. The first
to reveal itself to us was really the hypnoid-hysteria, for which I can
mention no better example than Breuer’s case of Miss Anna O.[33] For
this form of hysteria Breuer gives an essentially different psychic
mechanism than for the form which is characterized by conversion. Here
the idea becomes pathogenic through the fact that it is conceived in a
peculiar psychic state, having remained from the very beginning external
to the ego. It therefore needs no psychic force to keep it away from the
ego, and it need not awaken any resistance when, with the help of the
somnambulic psychic authority, it is initiated into the ego. The history
of Anna O. really shows no such resistance.

I held this distinction as so essential that it has readily induced me
to adhere to the formation of the hypnoid-hysteria. It is however
remarkable that in my own experience I encountered no genuine
hypnoid-hysteria, whatever I treated changed itself into a defense
hysteria. Not that I have never dealt with symptoms which manifestly
originated in separated conscious states, and therefore were excluded
from being accepted into the ego. I found this also in my own cases, but
I could show that the so called hypnoid state owed its separation to the
fact that a split off psychic group originated before, through defense.
In brief, I cannot suppress the suspicion that hypnoid and defense
hysteria meet somewhere at their roots, and that the defense is the
primary thing; but I know nothing about it.

Equally uncertain is at present my opinion concerning the retention
hysteria in which the therapeutic work is also supposed to follow
without any resistance. I had a case which I took for a typical
retention hysteria, and I was pleased over the anticipation of an easy
and certain success; but this success did not come as easy as the work
really was. I therefore presume, and again with all caution appropriate
to ignorance, that in retention hysteria, too, we can find at its basis
a fragment of defense which has thrust the whole process into hysteria.
Let us hope that new experiences will soon decide whether I am running
into the danger of one-sidedness and error in my tendency to spread the
conception of defense for the whole of hysteria.


Thus far I have dealt with the difficulties and technique of the
cathartic method, I would now like to add a few indications showing how
one makes an analysis with technique. For me this is a very interesting
theme, but I do not expect that it will excite similar interest in
others who have not practiced such analyses. Properly speaking we shall
again deal with the technique, but this time with those difficulties
concerning which the patient cannot be held responsible, and which must
in part be the same in a hypnoid and a retention hysteria as well as in
the defense hysteria which I have in mind as a model. I start on this
last fragment of discussion with the expectation that the psychic
peculiarities revealed here might sometime attain a certain value as raw
material for an intellectual dynamics.

The first and strongest impression which one gains through such an
analysis is surely the fact that the pathogenic psychic material,
apparently forgotten and not at the disposal of the ego, playing no rôle
in the association and in memory, still lies ready in some manner and in
proper and good order. All that is necessary is to remove the
resistances blocking the way. Barring that, everything is known as we
know anything else, the proper connections of the individual ideas among
themselves and with the nonpathogenic are frequently recalled and are
present; they have been produced in their time and retained in memory.
The pathogenic psychic material appears as the property of an
intelligence which is not necessarily inferior to the normal ego. The
semblance of a second personality is often most delusively produced.
Whether this impression is justified, whether the arrangements of the
psychic material resulting after the adjustment is not transferred back
into the time of the disease, these are questions which I do not like to
consider in this place. One cannot easily and intuitively describe the
experiences resulting from these analyses as if he placed himself in the
position, which one can only take a survey of after their disappearance.

The condition is usually not so simple as one represents it in special
cases, as, for example, in a single case in which a symptom originates
through a serious trauma. We frequently deal not with a single
hysterical symptom but with a number of the same which are partially
independent of one another and partially connected. We must not expect a
single traumatic reminiscence whose nucleus is a single pathogenic idea,
but we must be ready to assume a series of partial traumas and a
concatenation of pathogenic streams of thought. The monosymptomatic
traumatic hysteria is, as it were, an elementary organism, it is a
single being in comparison to the complicated structure of a grave
hysterical neurosis as is generally encountered.

The psychic material of such hysteria presents itself as a
multidimensional formation of at least triple stratification. I hope to
be able to soon justify this figurative expression. First of all there
is a nucleus of such reminiscences (either experiences or streams of
thought) in which the traumatic moment culminated, or in which the
pathogenic idea has found its purest formation. Around this nucleus we
often find an incredibly rich mass of other memory material which we
have to elaborate by the analysis in the triple arrangement mentioned
before. In the first place, there is an unmistakable linear
chronological arrangement which takes place within every individual
theme. As an example of this I can only cite the arrangements in
Breuer’s analysis of Anna O. The theme is that of becoming deaf, of not
hearing,[34] which then becomes differentiated according to seven
determinants, and under each heading there were from ten to one hundred
single reminiscences in chronological order. It was as if one should
take up an orderly kept record. In the analysis of my patient, Emmy v.
N., there were similar if not so many memory sub-divisions; they formed
quite a general event in every analysis. They always occurred in a
chronological order which was as definitely reliable as the serial
sequences of the days of the week or the names of the months in
psychically normal individuals. They increased the work of the analysis
through the peculiarity of reversing the series of their origin in the
reproduction; the freshest and the most recent occurrence of the
accumulation occurred first as a “wrapper,” and that with which the
series really began gave the impression of the conclusion.

The grouping of similar reminiscences in a multiplicity of linear
stratifications, as represented in a bundle of documents, in a package,
etc., I have designated as the formation of a theme. These themes now
show a second form of arrangement. I cannot express it differently than
by saying that they are concentrically stratified around the pathogenic
nucleus. It is not difficult to say what determines these strata, and
according to what decreasing or increasing magnitude this arrangement
follows. They are layers of equal resistance tending towards the
nucleus, accompanied by zones of similar alteration of consciousness
into which the individual themes extend. The most peripheral layers
contain those reminiscences (or fascicles) of the different themes which
can readily be recalled and were always perfectly conscious. The deeper
one penetrates the more difficult it becomes to recognize the emerging
reminiscences until one strikes those near the nucleus which the patient
disavows, even at the reproduction.

As we shall hear later it is the peculiarity of the concentric
stratification of the pathogenic psychic material which gives to the
course of such an analysis its characteristic features. We must now
mention the third and most essential arrangement concerning which a
general statement can hardly be made. It is the arrangement according to
the content of thought, the connection through the logical thread
reaching to the nucleus which might in each case correspond to a
special, irregular, and manifoldly devious road. This arrangement has a
dynamic character in contradistinction to both morphological
stratifications mentioned before. Whereas, in a spacially formed scheme
the latter would be represented by rigid, arched, and straight lines,
the course of the logical concatenation would have to be followed with a
wand, over the most tortuous route, from the superficial into the deep
layers and back, generally, however, progressing from the peripheral to
the central nucleus, and touching thereby all stations; that is, its
movement is similar to the zigzag movement of the knight in the solution
of a chess problem.

I will still adhere for a moment to the last comparison in order to call
attention to a point in which it does not do justice to the qualities of
the thing compared. The logical connection corresponds not only to a
zigzag-like devious line, but rather to a ramifying and especially to a
converging system of lines. It has a junction in which two or more
threads meet only to proceed thence united, and, as a rule, many threads
running independently, or here and there connected by by-paths, open
into the nucleus. To put it in different words, it is very remarkable
how frequently a symptom is manifoldly determined, that is,
over-determined.

I will introduce one more complication, and then my effort to illustrate
the organization of the pathogenic psychic material will be achieved. It
can happen that we may deal with more than one single nucleus in the
pathogenic material, as, for example, when we have to analyze a second
hysterical outbreak having its own etiology but which is still connected
with the first outbreak of an acute hysteria which has been overcome
years before. It can readily be imagined what strata and streams of
thought must be added in order to produce a connection between the two
pathogenic nuclei.

I will still add a few observations to the picture obtained of the
organization of the pathogenic material. We have said of this material
that it behaves like a foreign body, and that the therapy also acts like
the removal of a foreign body from the living tissues. We are now in
position to consider the shortcomings of this comparison. A foreign body
does not enter into any connection with the layers of tissue surrounding
it, although it changes them and produces in them a reactive
inflammation. On the other hand, our pathogenic psychic group does not
allow itself to be cleanly shelled out from the ego, its outer layers
radiate in all directions into the parts of the normal ego, and really
belong to the latter as much as to the pathogenic organization. The
boundaries between both become purely conventional in the analysis,
being placed now here, now there, and in certain locations no
demarcation is possible. The inner layers become more and more estranged
from the ego without showing a visible beginning of the pathogenic
boundaries. The pathogenic organization really does not behave like a
foreign body, but rather like an infiltration. The infiltrate must, in
this comparison, be assumed to be the resistance. Indeed, the therapy
does not consist in extirpating something—psychotherapy cannot do that
at present—but it causes a melting of the resistance, and thus opens the
way for the circulation into a hitherto closed territory.

(I make use here of a series of comparisons all of which have only a
very limited resemblance to my theme, and do not even agree among
themselves. I am aware of that, and I am not in danger of
over-estimating their value; but, as it is my intention to illustrate
the many sides of a most complicated and not as yet depicted idea, I
therefore take the liberty of dealing also in the following pages with
comparisons which are not altogether free from objections.)

If, after a thorough adjustment, one could show to a third party the
pathogenic material in its present recognized, complicated and
multidimensional organization, he would justly propound the question,
“How could such a camel go through the needle’s eye?” Indeed, one does
not speak unjustly of a “narrowing of consciousness.” The term gains in
sense and freshness for the physician who accomplishes such an analysis.
Only one single reminiscence can enter into the ego consciousness; the
patient occupied in working his way through this one sees nothing of
that which follows, and forgets everything that has already wedged its
way through. If the conquest of this one pathogenic reminiscence strikes
against impediments, as for example, if the patient does not yield the
resistance against it, but wishes to repress or distort it, the strait
is, so to speak, blocked; the work comes to a standstill, it cannot
advance, and the one reminiscence in the breach confronts the patient
until he takes it up into the breadth of his ego. The whole spacially
extended mass of the pathogenic material is thus drawn through a narrow
fissure and reaches consciousness as if disjointed into fragments or
strips, and it is the task of the psychotherapist to recompose it into
the conjectured organization. He who desires still more comparisons may
think here of a Chinese puzzle.

If one is about to begin an analysis in which one may expect such an
organization of the pathogenic material, the following results of
experience may be useful: _It is perfectly hopeless to attempt to make
any direct headway towards the nucleus of the pathogenic organization._
Even if it could be guessed the patient would still not know what to
start with the explanation given to him, nor would it change him
psychically.

There is nothing left to do but follow up the periphery of the
pathogenic psychic formation. One begins by allowing the patient to
relate and recall what he knows, during which one can already direct his
attention, and through the application of the pressure procedure slight
resistances may be overcome. Whenever a new way is opened through
pressure it can be expected that the patient will continue it for some
distance without any new resistance.

After having worked for a while in such manner a coöperating activity is
usually manifested in the patient. A number of reminiscences now occur
to him without any need of questioning or setting him a task. A way has
thus been opened into an inner strata, within which the patient now
spontaneously disposes of the material of equal resistance. It is well
to allow him to reproduce for a while without being influenced; of
course, he is unable to reveal important connections, but he may be
allowed to clear things within the same stratum. The things which he
thus reproduces often seem disconnected, but they give up the material
which is later revived by the recognized connections.

One has to guard here in general against two things. If the patient is
checked in the reproduction of the inflowing ideas, something is apt to
be “buried” which must be uncovered later with great effort. On the
other hand one must not overestimate his “unconscious intelligence,” and
one must not allow it to direct the whole work. If I should wish to
schematize the mode of labor, I could perhaps say that one should
himself undertake the opening of the inner strata and the advancement in
the radial direction, while the patient should take care of the
peripheral extension.

The advancement is brought about by the fact that the resistance is
overcome in the manner indicated above. As a rule, however, one must at
first solve another problem. One must obtain a piece of a logical thread
by which direction alone one can hope to penetrate into the interior.
One should not expect that the voluntary information of the patient, the
material which is mostly in the superficial strata, will make it easy
for the analyzer to recognize the locations where it enters into the
deep, and to which points the desired connections of thought are
attached. On the contrary, just this is cautiously concealed, the
assertion of the patient sounds perfect and fixed in itself. One is at
first confronted, as it were, by a wall which shuts off every view, and
gives no suggestion of anything hidden behind it.

If, however, one views with a critical eye the assertion obtained from
the patient without much effort and resistance, one will unmistakably
discover in it gaps and injuries. Here the connection is manifestly
interrupted and is scantily completed by the patient by an expression
conveying quite insufficient information. Here one strikes against a
motive which in a normal person would be designated as flimsy. The
patient refuses to recognize these gaps when his attention is called to
them. The physician, however, does well to seek under these weak points
access to the material of the deeper layers and to hope to discover just
here the threads of the connections which he traces by the pressure
procedure. One, therefore, tells the patient, “You are mistaken, what
you assert can have nothing to do with the thing in question; here we
will have to strike against something which will occur to you under the
pressure of my hand.”

The hysterical stream of thought, even if it reaches into the
unconscious, may be expected to show the same logical connections and
sufficient causations as those that would be formed in a normal
individual. A looseness of these relationships does not lie within the
sphere of influence of the neurosis. If the association of ideas of
neurotics, and especially of hysterics, makes a different impression, if
the relation of the intensities of different ideas does not seem to be
explainable here on psychological determinants alone, we know that such
manifestations are due to the existence of concealed unconscious
motives. Such secret motives may be expected wherever such a deviation
in the connection, or a transgression from the normally justified
causations can be demonstrated.

To be sure one must free himself from the theoretical prejudice that one
has to deal with abnormal brains of dégénerés and deséquilibrés, in whom
the freedom of overthrowing the common psychological laws of the
association of ideas is a stigma, or in whom a preferred idea without
any motive may grow intensively excessive, and another without
psychological motives may remain indestructible. Experience shows the
contrary in hysteria; as soon as the hidden—often unconsciously
remaining—motives have been revealed and brought to account there
remains nothing in the hysterical thought connection that is enigmatical
and anomalous.

Thus by tracing the breaches in the first statements of the patient,
which are often hidden by “false connections,” one gets hold of a part
of the logical thread at the periphery, and thereafter continues the
route by the pressure procedure.

Very seldom do we succeed in working our way into the inner strata by
the same thread, usually it breaks on the way when the pressure fails,
giving up either no experience, or one which cannot be explained or be
continued despite all efforts. In such a case we soon learn how to
protect ourselves from the obvious confusion. The expression of the
patient must decide whether one really reached an end or encountered a
case needing no psychic explanation, or whether it is the enormous
resistance that halts the work. If the latter cannot soon be overcome,
it may be assumed that the thread has been followed into a strata which
is as yet impenetrable. One lets it fall in order to grasp another
thread which may, perhaps, be followed up just as far. If one has
followed all the threads into this strata, if the knottings have been
reached through which no single isolated thread can be followed, it is
well to think of seizing anew the resistances on hand.

One can readily imagine how complicated such a work may become. By
constantly overcoming the resistance, one pushes his way into the inner
strata, gaining knowledge concerning the accumulative themes and passing
threads found in this layer; one examines as far as he can advance with
the means at hand, and by means of the pressure procedure he gains first
information concerning the content of the next strata.

The threads are dropped, taken up again, and followed up until they
reach the juncture; they are always retrieved, and by following a memory
fascicle one reaches some by-way which finally opens again. In this
manner it is possible to leave the work, layer by layer, and advance
directly on the main road to the nucleus of the pathogenic organization.
Thus the fight is won but not finished. One has to follow up the other
threads and exhaust the material; but now the patient helps again
energetically, for his resistance has mostly been broken.

In these later stages of the work it is of advantage if one can surmise
the connection and tell it to the patient before it has been revealed.
If the conjecture is correct the course of the analysis is accelerated,
but even an incorrect hypothesis helps, for it urges the patient to
participate and elicits from him energetic refutation, thus revealing
that he surely knows better.

One, thereby, becomes astonishingly convinced, _that it is not possible
to press upon the patient things which he apparently does not know, or
to influence the results of the analysis by exciting his expectations_.
I have not succeeded a single time in altering or falsifying the
reproductions of memory or the connections of events by my predictions;
had I succeeded it surely would have been revealed in the end by a
contradiction in the construction. If anything occurred as I predicted,
the correctness of my conjecture was always attested by numerous
trustworthy reminiscences. Hence, one must not fear to express his
opinion to the patient concerning the connections which are to follow;
it does no harm.

Another manifestation which can be repeatedly observed refers to the
patient’s independent reproductions. It can be asserted that not a
single reminiscence comes to the surface during such an analysis which
has no significance. An interposition of irrelevant memory pictures
having no connection with the important associations does not really
occur. An exception not contrary to the rule may be postulated for those
reminiscences which, though in themselves unimportant, are indispensable
as intercalations, since the associations between two related
reminiscences passed through them only.—As mentioned above, the period
during which a reminiscence abides in the pass of the patient’s
consciousness is directly proportionate to its significance. A picture
which does not disappear requires further consideration; a thought which
cannot be abolished must be followed further. A reminiscence never
recurs if it has been adjusted, a picture spoken away cannot be seen
again. However, if that does happen it can be definitely expected that
the second time the picture will be joined by a new content of thought,
that the idea will contain a new inference which will show that no
perfect adjustment has taken place. On the other hand, a recurrence of
different intensities, at first vaguely then quite plainly, often
occurs, but it does not, however, contradict the assertion just
advanced.

If the object of the analysis is to remove a symptom (pains, symptoms
like vomiting, sensations and contractures) which is capable of
aggravation or recurrence, the symptom shows during the work the
interesting and not undesirable phenomenon of “joining in the
discussion.” The symptom in question reappears, or appears with greater
intensity, as soon as one penetrates into the region of the pathogenic
organization containing the etiology of this symptom, and it continues
to accompany the work with characteristic and instructive fluctuations.
The intensity of the same (let us say of a nausea) increases the deeper
one penetrates into its pathogenic reminiscence; it reaches its height
shortly before the latter has been expressed, and suddenly subsides or
disappears completely for a while after it has been fully expressed. If
through resistance the patient delays the expression, the tension of the
sensation of nausea becomes unbearable, and, if the expression cannot be
forced, vomiting actually sets in. One thus gains a plastic impression
of the fact that the vomiting takes the place of a psychic action (here
that of speaking) just as was asserted in the conversion theory of
hysteria.

The fluctuation of intensity on the part of the hysterical symptom
recurs as often as one of its new and pathogenic reminiscences is
attacked; the symptom remains, as it were, all the time the order of the
day. If it is necessary to drop for awhile the thread upon which this
symptom hangs, the symptom, too, merges into obscurity in order to
emerge again at a later period of the analysis. This play continues
until, through the completion of the pathogenic material, there occurs a
definite adjustment of this symptom.

Strictly speaking the hysterical symptom does not behave here
differently than a memory picture or a reproduced thought which is
evoked by the pressure of the hand. Here, as there, the adjustment
necessitates the same obsessing obstinacy of recurrence in the memory of
the patient. The difference lies only in the apparent spontaneous
appearance of the hysterical symptom, whereas one readily recalls having
himself provoked the scenes and ideas. But in reality the memory symbols
run in an uninterrupted series from the unchanged memory remnants of
affectful experiences and thinking-acts to the hysterical symptoms.

The phenomenon of “joining in the discussion” of the hysterical symptom
during the analysis carries with it a practical inconvenience to which
the patient should be reconciled. It is quite impossible to undertake
the analysis of a symptom in one stretch or to divide the pauses in the
work in such a manner as to precisely coincide with the resting point in
the adjustment. Furthermore, the interruption which is categorically
dictated by the accessory circumstances of the treatment, like the late
hour, etc., often occurs in the most awkward locations, just when some
critical point could be approached or when a new theme comes to light.
These are the same inconveniences which every newspaper reader
experiences in reading the daily fragments of his newspaper romance,
when, immediately after the decisive speech of the heroine, or after the
report of a shot, etc., he reads, “To be continued.” In our case the
raked-up but unabolished theme, the at first strengthened but not yet
explained symptom, remains in the patient’s psyche, and troubles him
perhaps more than before.

But the patient must understand this as it cannot be differently
arranged. Indeed, there are patients who during such an analysis are
unable to get rid of the theme once touched; they are obsessed by it
even during the interval between the two treatments, and as they are
unable to advance alone with the adjustment, they suffer more than
before. Such patients, too, finally learn to wait for the doctor,
postponing all interest which they have in the adjustment of the
pathogenic material for the hours of the treatment, and they then begin
to feel freer during the intervals.


The general condition of the patient during such an analysis seems also
worthy of consideration. For a while it remains uninfluenced by the
treatment expressing the former effective factors. But then a moment
comes in which the patient is seized, and his interest chained and from
that time his general condition becomes more and more dependent on the
condition of the work. Whenever a new explanation is gained and an
important contribution in the chain of the analysis is reached, the
patient feels relieved and experiences a presentiment of the approaching
deliverance; but at each standstill of the work, at each threatening
entanglement, the psychic burden which oppresses him grows, and the
unhappy sensation of his incapacity increases. To be sure, both
conditions are only temporary, for the analysis continues disdaining to
boast of a moment of wellbeing, and continues regardlessly over the
period of gloominess. One is generally pleased if it is possible to
substitute the spontaneous fluctuations in the condition of the patient
by such as one himself provokes and understands, just as one prefers to
see in place of the spontaneous discharge of the symptoms that order of
the day which corresponds to the condition of the analysis.

Usually the deeper one penetrates into the above described layers of the
psychic structure the more obscure and difficult the work will at first
become. But once the nucleus is reached light ensues, and there is no
more fear that a marked gloom will be cast over the condition of the
patient. However, the reward of the labor, the cessation of the symptoms
of the disease can only be expected when the full analysis of every
individual symptom has been accomplished; indeed where the individual
symptoms are connected through many junctures one is not even encouraged
by partial successes during the work. By virtue of the great number of
existing causal connections every unadjusted pathogenic idea acts as a
motive for the complete creation of the neurosis, and only with the last
word of the analysis does the whole picture of the disease disappear,
just as happens in the behavior of the individual reproduced
reminiscence.

If a pathogenic reminiscence or a pathogenic connection which was
previously withdrawn from the ego consciousness is revealed by the work
of the analysis and inserted into the ego, one can observe in the
psychic personality which was thus enriched the many ways in which it
gives utterance to its gain. Especially does it frequently happen that
after the patients have been painstakingly forced to a certain
knowledge, they say: “Why I have known that all the time, I could have
told you that before.” Those who have more insight recognize this
afterwards as a self deception and accuse themselves of ungratefulness.
In general the position that the ego takes towards the new acquisition
depends upon the strata of the analysis from which the latter
originates. Whatever belongs to the outermost layers is recognized
without any difficulty, for it always remained in the possession of the
ego, and the only thing that was new to the ego was its connection with
the deeper layers of the pathogenic material. Whatever is brought to
light from these deeper layers also finds appreciation and recognition,
but frequently only after long hesitation and reflection. Of course,
visual memory pictures are here more difficult to deny than
reminiscences of mere streams of thought. Not very seldom the patient
will at first say, “It is possible that I thought of that, but I cannot
recall it,” and only after a longer familiarity with this supposition
recognition will appear. He then recalls and even verifies by sight
associations that he once really had this thought. During the analysis I
make it a point of holding the value of an emerging reminiscence
independent of the patient’s recognition. I am not tired of repeating
that we are obliged to accept everything that we bring to light with our
means. Should there be anything unreal or incorrect in the material thus
revealed, the connection will later teach us to separate it. I may add
that I rarely ever have occasion to subsequently withdraw the
recognition from a reminiscence which I had preliminarily admitted. In
spite of the deceptive appearance of an urgent contradiction, whatever
came to the surface finally proved itself correct.

Those ideas which originate in the deepest layer, and from the nucleus
of the pathogenic organization, are only with the greatest difficulty
recognized by the patient as reminiscences. Even after everything is
accomplished, when the patients are overcome by the logical force and
are convinced of the curative effect accompanying the emerging of this
idea—I say even if the patients themselves assume that they have thought
“so” and “so” they often add, “but to recall, that I have thought so, I
cannot.” One readily comes to an understanding with them by saying that
these were unconscious thoughts. But how should we note this state of
affairs in our own psychological views? Should we pay no heed to the
patient’s demurring recognition which has no motive after the work has
been completed; should we assume that it was really a question of
thoughts which never occurred, and for which there is only a possibility
of existence so that the therapy would consist in the consummation of a
psychic act which at that time never took place? It is obviously
impossible to state anything about it, that is, to state anything
concerning the condition of the pathogenic material previous to the
analysis, before one has thoroughly explained his psychological views
especially concerning the essence of consciousness. It is a fact worthy
of reflection that in such analyses one can follow a stream of thought
from the conscious into the unconscious (that is, absolutely not
recognized as a reminiscence) thence draw it for some distance through
the consciousness, and again see it end in the unconscious; and still
this variation of the psychic elucidation would change nothing in it, in
its logicalness, and in a single part of its connection. Should I then
have this stream of thought freely before me, I could not conjecture
what part was, and what part was not recognized by the patient as a
reminiscence. In a measure I see only the points of the stream of
thought merging into the unconscious, just the reverse of that which has
been claimed for our normal psychic processes.


I still have another theme to treat which plays an undesirably great
part in the work of such a cathartic analysis. I have already admitted
the possibility that the pressure procedure may fail and despite all
assurance and urging it may evoke no reminiscences. I also stated that
two possibilities are to be considered, there is really nothing to evoke
in the place where we investigate—that can be recognized by the
perfectly calm expression of the patient—or, we have struck against a
resistance to be overcome only at some future time. We are confronted
with a new layer into which we cannot as yet penetrate, and this can
again be read from the drawn and psychic exertion of the patient’s
expression. A third cause may be possible which also indicates an
obstacle, not as to the purport, but externally. This cause occurs when
the relation of the patient to the physician is disturbed, and signifies
the worst obstacle that can be encountered. One may consider that in
every more serious analysis.

I have already alluded to the important rôle falling to the personality
of the physician in the creation of motives which are to overcome the
psychic force of the resistance. In not a few cases, especially in women
and where we deal with the explanation of erotic streams of thought, the
cooperation of the patient becomes a personal sacrifice which must be
recompensed by some kind of a substitute of love. The great effort and
the patient friendliness for the physician suffice as such substitutes.
If this relation of the patient to the physician is disturbed the
readiness of the patient fails; if the physician desires information
concerning the next pathogenic idea, the patient is confronted by the
consciousness of the unpleasantness which has accumulated in her against
the physician. As far as I have discovered this obstacle occurs in three
principal cases:

1. In personal estrangement, if the patient believes herself slighted,
disparaged and insulted, or if she hears unfavorable accounts concerning
the physician and his methods of treatment. This is the least serious
case. The obstacle can readily be overcome by discussion and
explanation, although the sensitiveness and the suspicion of hysterics
can occasionally manifest itself in unsuspected dimensions.

2. If the patient is seized with the fear that she becomes too
accustomed to her physician, that in his presence she loses her
independence and could even become sexually dependent upon him; this
case is more significant because it is less determined individually. The
occasion for this obstacle lies in the nature of the therapeutic
distress. The patient has now a new motive to resist which manifests
itself, not only in a certain reminiscence but at each attempt of the
treatment. Whenever the pressure procedure is started the patient
usually complains of headache. Her new motive for the resistance remains
to her for the most part unconscious, and she manifests it by a newly
created hysterical symptom. The headache signifies the aversion towards
being influenced.

3. If the patient fears lest the painful ideas emerging from the content
of the analysis would be transferred to the physician. This happens
frequently, and, indeed, in many analyses it is a regular occurrence.
The transference to the physician occurs through false connections.[35]
I must here give an example. The origin of a certain hysterical symptom
in one of my hysterical patients was the wish she entertained years ago
which was immediately banished into the unconscious, that the man with
whom she at that time conversed would heartily grasp her and force a
kiss on her. After the ending of a session such a wish occurred to the
patient in reference to me. She was horrified and spent a sleepless
night, and at the next session, although she did not refuse the
treatment she was totally unfit for the work. After I had discovered the
obstacle and removed it, the work continued. The wish that so frightened
the patient appeared as the next pathogenic reminiscence, that is, as
the one now required by the logical connection. It came about in the
following manner: The content of the wish at first appeared in the
patient’s consciousness without the recollection of the accessory
circumstances which would have transferred this wish into the past. By
the associative force prevailing in consciousness the existing wish
became connected with my own person, with which the patient could
naturally occupy herself, and in this mesalliance—which I call a false
connection—the same affect became reawakened which originally urged the
patient to banish this clandestine wish. As soon as I discovered this I
could presuppose every similar claim on my personality to be another
transference and false connection. It is remarkable how the patient
falls a victim to deception on every new occasion.

No analysis can be brought to an end if one does not know how to meet
the resistances resulting from the causes mentioned. The way can be
found if one bears in mind that the new symptom produced after the old
model should be treated like the old symptoms. In the first place it is
necessary to make the patient conscious of the obstacle. In one of my
patients, in whom the pressure symptoms suddenly failed and I had cause
to assume an unconscious idea like the one mentioned in 2, I met it for
the first time with an unexpected attack. I told her that there must
have originated some obstacle against the continuation of the treatment
and that the pressure procedure has at least the power to show her the
obstacle, and then pressed her head. She then said, surprisingly, “I see
you sitting here on the chair, but that is nonsense, what can that
mean?”—But now I could explain it.

In another patient the obstacle did not usually show itself directly on
pressure, but I could always demonstrate it by taking the patient back
to the moment in which it originated. The pressure procedure never
failed to bring back this moment. By discovering and demonstrating the
obstacle, the first difficulty was removed, but a greater one still
remained. The difficulty lay in inducing the patient to give information
where there was an obvious personal relation and where the third person
coincided with the physician. At first I was very much annoyed about the
increase of this psychic work until I had learned to see the lawful part
of this whole process, and I then also noticed that such a transference
does not cause any considerable increase in the work. The work of the
patient remained the same, she perhaps had to overcome the painful
affect of having entertained such a wish, and it seemed to be the same
for the success whether she took this psychic repulsion as a theme of
the work in the historical case or in the recent case with me. The
patients also gradually learned to see that in such transferences to the
person of the physician they generally dealt with a force or a deception
which disappeared when the analysis was accomplished. I believe,
however, that if I should have delayed in making clear to them the
nature of the obstacle, I would have given them a new, though a milder,
hysterical symptom for another spontaneously developed.


I now believe that I have sufficiently indicated how such analyses
should be executed, and the experiences connected with them. They
perhaps make some things appear more complicated than they are, for many
things really result by themselves during such work. I have not
enumerated the difficulties of the work in order to give the impression
that in view of such requirements it pays for the physician and patient
to undertake a cathartic analysis only in the rarest cases. I allow my
medical activities to be inflected by the contrary suppositions.—To be
sure I am unable to formulate the most definite indications for the
application of the here discussed therapeutic method without entering
into the valuation of the more significant and more comprehensive theme
of the therapy of the neuroses in general. I have often compared the
cathartic psychotherapy to surgical measures, and designated my cures as
psychotherapeutic operations; the analogies follow the opening of a pus
pocket, the curetting of a carious location, etc. Such an analogy finds
its justification, not so much in the removal of the morbid as in the
production of better curative conditions for the issue of the process.

When I promised my patients help and relief through the cathartic
method, I was often obliged to hear the following objections: “You say,
yourself, that my suffering has probably to do with my own relation and
destinies. You cannot change any of that. In what manner, then, can you
help me?” To this I could always answer: “I do not doubt at all that it
would be easier for destiny than for me to remove your sufferings, but
you will be convinced that much will be gained if we succeed in
transforming your hysterical misery into everyday unhappiness, against
which you will be better able to defend yourself with a restored nervous
system.”




                               CHAPTER V.
                      THE DEFENSE NEURO-PSYCHOSES.
A TENTATIVE PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF ACQUIRED HYSTERIA, MANY PHOBIAS AND
            OBSESSIONS, AND CERTAIN HALLUCINATORY PSYCHOSES.


After an exhaustive study of many nervous patients afflicted with
phobias and obsessions a tentative explanation of these symptoms urged
itself upon me. This helped me afterwards happily to divine the origin
of such morbid ideas in new and other cases, and I therefore believe it
worthy of reporting and further examination. Simultaneously with this
“psychological theory of phobias and obsessions,” the examination of
these patients resulted in a contribution to the theory of hysteria, or
rather in an alteration of the same, which seems to imply an important
and common character to hysteria as well as the mentioned neuroses.
Furthermore, I had the opportunity to look into the psychological
mechanism of a form of indubitable psychic disease and found that my
attempted observation shows an intelligible connection between these
psychoses and the two neuroses mentioned. At the conclusion of this
theme I will describe the supporting hypothesis which I have used in all
three cases.


                                   I.

I am beginning with that alteration which seems to be necessary for the
theory of the hysterical neuroses.

That the symptom-complex of hysteria as far as it can be understood,
justifies the assumption of a splitting of consciousness with the
formation of separate psychic groups, has attained general recognition
since P. Janet, J. Breuer, and others have given out their interesting
work. Less understood are the opinions concerning the origin of this
splitting of consciousness and concerning the rôle played by this
character in the structure of the hysterical neuroses.

According to Janet’s[36] theory, the splitting of consciousness is a
primary feature of the hysterical alteration. It is due to a congenital
weakness of the capacity for psychic synthesis, and to a narrowing of
the “field of consciousness” (champ du conscience) which as a psychic
stigma proves the degeneration of hysterical individuals.

In contradistinction to Janet’s views, which in my opinion admit the
most manifold objections, are those advocated by J. Breuer in our joint
communication. According to Breuer, the “basis and determination” of
hysteria is the occurrence of peculiar dream-like conscious states with
a narrowed association capacity, for which he proposes the name “hypnoid
states.” The splitting of consciousness is secondary and acquired, and
originates because the ideas emerging in the hypnoid states are isolated
from associative communication with the rest of consciousness.

I can now demonstrate two other extreme forms of hysteria in which it is
impossible to show that the splitting of consciousness is primary in the
sense of Janet. In the first of these forms I could repeatedly show that
the splitting of the content of consciousness was an arbitrary act of
the patient, that is, it was initiated through an exertion of the will
which motive can be stated. I naturally do not maintain that the patient
intended to produce a splitting of his consciousness; the patient’s
intention was different, but instead of attaining its aim it provoked a
splitting of consciousness.

In the third form of hysteria, as we have demonstrated by
psychic-analysis of intelligent patients, the splitting of consciousness
plays only an insignificant and perhaps really no rôle. This includes
those cases in which there had been no reaction to the traumatic
stimulus and which were then adjusted and cured by ab-reaction. They are
the pure retention hysterias.

In connection with the phobias and obsessions I have only to deal here
with the second form of hysteria which for reasons to be presently
explained I will designate as defense hysteria and thus distinguish it
from the hypnoid and retention hysterias. Preliminarily I am able to
call my cases of defense hysteria “acquired” hysterias for they show
neither marked hereditary taints nor any degenerative disfigurements.

In those patients whom I have analyzed there existed psychic health
until the moment in which a case of incompatibility occurred in their
ideation, that is, until there appeared an experience, idea, or feeling
which evoked such a painful affect that the person decided to forget it
because he did not trust his own ability to remove the resistance
between the unbearable ideas and his ego.

Such incompatible ideas originate in the feminine sex on the basis of
sexual experiences and feelings. With all desired precision the patients
recall their efforts of defense, their intention “to push it away,” not
to think of it, to repress it. As appropriate examples I can easily cite
the following cases from my own experience: A young lady reproached
herself because, while nursing her sick father, she thought of a young
man who made a slight erotic impression on her; a governess fell in love
with her employer and decided to crowd it out of her mind because it was
incompatible with her pride, etc.

I am unable to maintain that the exertion of the will, in crowding such
thoughts out of one’s mind, is a pathological act, nor am I able to
state whether and how, the intentional forgetting succeeds in those
persons who remain well under the same psychic influences. I only know
that in the patients whom I analyzed such “forgetting” was unsuccessful
and led to either a hysteria, obsession, or a hallucinatory psychosis.
The ability to produce, by the exertion of the will one of these states
all of which are connected with the splitting of consciousness, is to be
considered as the expression of a pathological disposition, but it need
not necessarily be identified with personal or hereditary
“degeneration.”

Over the road leading from the patient’s exertion of the will to the
origin of a neurotic symptom I formed a conception which in the current
psychological abstractions may be thus expressed: The task assumed by
the defensive ego to treat the incompatible idea as “non arrivée” can
not be directly accomplished. The memory trace as well as the affect
adhering to the idea are here and can not be exterminated. The task can
however, be brought to an approximate solution if it is possible to
change the strong idea into a weak one and to take away the affect or
sum of excitement which adheres to it. The weak idea will then exert
almost no claims on the association work; but the separated sum of
excitement must be utilized in another direction.

Thus far the processes are the same in hysteria, in phobias and
obsessions, but from now on their ways part. The unbearable idea in
hysteria is rendered harmless because the sum of excitement is
transformed into physical manifestations, a process for which I would
like to propose the term conversion.

The conversion may be total or partial, and follows that motor or
sensory innervation which is either ultimately or more loosely connected
with the traumatic experience. In this way the ego succeeds in freeing
itself from opposition but instead it becomes burdened with a memory
symbol which remains in consciousness as an unadjusted motor
innervation, or as a constantly recurring hallucinatory sensation
similar to a parasite. It thus remains fixed until a conversion takes
place in the opposite direction. The memory symbol of the repressed idea
does not perish, but from now on forms the nucleus for a second psychic
group.

I will follow up this view of the psycho-physical processes in hysteria
with a few more words. If such a nucleus for an hysterical splitting is
once formed in a “traumatic moment” it then increases in other moments
which might be designated as “auxiliary traumatic” as soon as a newly
formed similar impression succeeds in breaking through the barrier
formed by the will and in adding new affects to the weakened idea, and
in forcing for a while the associative union of both psychic groups
until a new conversion produces defense. The condition thus attained in
hysteria in regard to the distribution of the excitement, proves to be
unstable in most cases. As shown by the familiar contrast of the attacks
and the persistent symptoms, the excitement which was pushed on a false
path (in the bodily innervation) now and then returns to the idea from
which it was discharged and forces the person to associative elaboration
or to adjustment in hysterical attacks. The effect of Breuer’s cathartic
method consists in the fact that it consciously reconducts the
excitement from the physical into the psychic spheres and then forces an
adjustment of the contradiction through intellectual work, and a
discharge of the excitement through speech.

If the splitting of consciousness in acquired hysteria is due to an act
of volition we can explain with surprising simplicity the remarkable
fact that hypnosis regularly broadens the narrowed consciousness of
hysteria, and causes the split off psychic groups to become accessible.
For we know that it is peculiar to all sleep-like states to remove that
distribution of excitement which depends on the “will” of the conscious
personality.

We accordingly recognize that the characteristic moment of hysteria is
not the splitting of consciousness but the ability of conversion, and as
an important part of the hitherto unknown disposition of hysteria we can
mention the psycho-physical adaptation for the transference of a great
sum of excitement into bodily innervation.

The adaptation does not in itself exclude psychic health, and leads to
hysteria only in event of a psychic incompatibility or accumulation of
excitement. With this turn, we—Breuer and I—come near to the familiar
definitions of hysteria of Oppenheim[37] and Strümpel,[38] and deviate
from Janet,[39] who assigns to the splitting of consciousness too great
a rôle in the characteristics of hysteria. The description here given
can lay claim to the fact that it explains the connection between the
conversion and the hysterical splitting of consciousness.


                                   II

In a predisposed person if there is no adaptation for conversion, and
still for the purpose of defense a separation of the unbearable idea
from its affect is undertaken, the affect must then remain in the
psychic sphere. The weakened idea remains apart from all association in
consciousness, but its freed affect attaches itself to other not in
themselves unbearable ideas, which on account of this “false” connection
become obsessions. This is in brief the psychological theory of the
obsessions and phobias concerning which I have spoken above.

I will now state what parts demanded in this theory can be directly
demonstrated and what parts I have supplemented. Besides the end product
of the process, the obsession, we can in the first place directly
demonstrate the source from which the affect in the false connection
originates. In all cases that I have analyzed it was the sexual life
that has furnished a painful affect of precisely the same character as
the one attached to the obsession. It is not theoretically excluded that
this affect could not occasionally originate in other spheres, but I
must say that thus far I have found no other origin. Moreover, one can
readily understand that it is precisely the sexual life which furnishes
the most manifold occasions for the appearance of unbearable ideas.

Moreover, the exertion of the will, the attempt at defence, upon which
this theory lays stress is demonstrated by the most unequivocal
utterances of the patients. At least in a number of cases the patients
themselves inform us that the phobia or obsession appeared only after
the exertion of the will manifestly gained its point. “Something very
disagreeable happened to me once and I have exerted all my power to push
it away, not to think of it. When I have finally succeeded I have gotten
the other thing instead, which I have not lost since.” With these words
a patient verified the main points of the theory here developed.

Not all who suffer from obsessions are so clear concerning the origin of
the same. As a rule when we call the patient’s attention to the original
idea of a sexual nature we receive the following answer: “It could not
have come from that. Why I have not thought much about it. For a moment
I was frightened, then I distracted myself and since then it has not
bothered me.” In this, so frequent objection, we have the proof that the
obsession represents a compensation or substitute for the unbearable
sexual idea, and that it has taken its place in consciousness.

Between the patient’s exertion of the will which succeeds in repressing
the unacceptable sexual idea and the appearance of the obsession, which
though in itself of little intensity, is here furnished with
inconceivably strong affect, there is a yawning gap which the theory
here developed will fill. The separation of the sexual idea from its
affect and the connection of the latter with another suitable but not
unbearable idea—these are processes which take place unconsciously which
we can only presume but not prove by any clinico-psychological analysis.
Perhaps it would be more correct to say that these are not really
processes of a psychic nature but physical processes of which the
psychic result so presents itself that the expressions “separation of
the idea from its affect and false connection of the latter,” seem
actual occurrences.

Besides the cases evincing in turn the sexual unbearable idea and the
obsession we find a series of others in which there are simultaneously
obsessions and painfully accentuated sexual ideas. It will not do very
well to call the latter “sexual obsessions”; they lack the essential
character of obsessions in proving themselves fully justified, whereas
the painfulness of the ordinary obsession is a problem for the doctor as
well as the patient. From the amount of insight that could be obtained
in such cases, it seems that we deal here with a continued defense
against sexual ideas which are constantly renewed, a work heretofore not
accomplished.

As long as the patients are aware of the sexual origin of their
obsessions they often conceal them. If they complain they generally
express surprise that this affect underlies the symptoms, at being
afraid, and at having certain impulses, etc. To the experienced
physician, however, the affect appears justified and intelligible; he
finds the striking part only in the connection of such an affect with an
idea unworthy of it. In other words the affect of the obsession appears
to him as one dislocated or transposed, and if he has accepted the
observations here laid down he can in a great many cases of obsessions
attempt a retranslation into the sexual.

Any idea which either through its character may be combinable with an
affect of such quality or which bears a certain relation to the
unbearable by virtue of which it seems fit as a substitute for the same,
may be used for the secondary connection of the freed affect. Thus, for
example, freed anxiety, the sexual origin of which can not be recalled,
attaches itself to the common primary phobias of man for animals,
thunderstorms, darkness, etc., or to things which are unmistakably in
some way associated with the sexual, such as urination, defecation,
pollutions and infections.

The advantage gained by the ego in the transposition of the affect for
the purpose of defense is considerably less than in the hysterical
conversion of psychic excitement into somatic innervation. The affect
under which the ego has suffered remains now as ever unchanged and
undiminished, but the unbearable idea is suppressed and excluded from
memory. The repressed ideas again form the nucleus of a second psychic
group which I believe can be accessible without having recourse to
hypnotism. That in the phobias and obsessions there appear none of the
striking symptoms which in hysteria accompany the formation of an
independent psychic group, is due to the fact that in the former case
the whole transformation remains in the psychic sphere and the somatic
innervation experiences no change.

What I have here said concerning obsessions I will explain by some
examples which are probably of a typical nature:

1. A young girl suffers from obsessive reproaches. If she reads anything
in the journal about false coiners she conceives the thought that she
too, made counterfeit money; if a murder was anywhere committed by an
unknown assassin she anxiously asked herself whether she had not
committed this crime. At the same time she is perfectly aware of the
absurdity of these obsessive reproaches. For a time the consciousness of
her guilt gained such a power over her that her judgment was suppressed,
and she accused herself before her relatives and physician of having
really committed all these crimes (Psychosis through simple
aggravation—overwhelming psychosis—Uberwältigungspsychose). A thorough
examination revealed the source of the origin of this guilty conscience.
Accidentally incited by a sensual feeling she allowed herself to be
allured by a friend to masturbate. She practiced it for years with the
full consciousness of her wrong doing, and under the most violent but
useless self reproaches.—The girl was cured after a few months’
treatment and strict watching.

2. Another girl suffered from the fear of getting sudden desires of
micturition and of being forced to wet herself. This began after such a
desire had really forced her to leave a concert hall during the
performance. This phobia had gradually caused her to become quite
incapable of any enjoyment and social relationship. She felt secure only
when she knew that there was a toilet in the neighborhood to which she
could repair unobserved. An organic suffering which might have justified
this lack of confidence of the control of the bladder was excluded. At
home among quiet surroundings and during the night there was no such
desire to micturate. Detailed examination showed that the desire to
micturate appeared for the first time under the following conditions: A
gentleman to whom she was not indifferent took a seat in the concert
hall not far from her. She began to think and to picture to herself how
she would sit near him as his wife. In this erotic revery she
experienced that physical feeling which must be compared to erection in
the man, and which in her—I do not know whether it is general—ended in a
slight desire to micturate. She now became extremely frightened over her
otherwise accustomed sexual sensation because she had determined to
overcome this as well as every desire, and in the next moment the affect
transposed itself to the accompanying desire to micturate and forced her
to leave the hall after a very painful struggle. In her life she was so
prudish that she experienced an intensive horror for all things sexual,
and could not conceive the thought of ever marrying; on the other hand
she was sexually so hyperesthetic that during every erotic revery, which
she gladly allowed herself, there appeared sensual feeling. The erection
was always accompanied by the desire to micturate, and up to the time of
the scene in the concert hall it had made no impression on her. The
treatment led to an almost complete control of the phobia.

3. A young woman who had only one child after five years of married life
complained of obsessive impulses to throw herself from the window or
balcony, and of fears lest at the sight of a sharp knife she might kill
her child. She admitted that the marriage relations were seldom
practised and then only with caution against conception; but she added
that she did not miss this as she was not of a sensual nature. I then
ventured to tell her that at the sight of a man she conceives erotic
ideas, and that she therefore lost confidence in herself and imagined
herself a depraved person fit for anything. The retranslation of the
obsession into the sexual was successful; weeping, she soon admitted her
long concealed marital misery, and then mentioned painful ideas of an
unchanged sexual character such as the often recurring sensation of
something forcing itself under her skirts.

I have made use of such experiences in the therapy of phobias and
obsessions, and despite the patient’s resistances I have redirected the
attention to the repressed sexual ideas, and wherever feasible I have
blocked the sources from which the same originated. To be sure I cannot
maintain that all phobias and obsessions originate in the manner here
revealed; first, my experience, in proportion to the abundance of these
neuroses, embraces only a limited amount, and second, I, myself, know
that these “psychasthenic” symptoms (according to Janet’s designation)
are not all of the same value.[40] Thus, for instance, there are pure
hysterical phobias. But I believe that the mechanism of the
transposition of the affect will be demonstrated in the greater part of
the phobias and obsessions, and I must assert that these neuroses, which
are found just as often isolated as combined with hysteria and
neurasthenia, are not to be thrown together with the ordinary
neurasthenia for which fundamental symptom a psychic mechanism is not
all to be assumed.


                                  III.

In both cases thus far considered the defense of the unbearable idea was
brought about by the separation of the same from its affect; the idea
though weakened and isolated remained in consciousness. There exists,
however, a far more energetic and more successful form of defense
wherein the ego misplaces the unbearable idea with its affect, and
behaves as though the unbearable idea had never approached the ego. But
at the moment when this is brought about the person suffers from a
psychosis which can only be classified as an “hallucinatory confusion.”
A single example will explain this assertion. A young girl gives her
first impulsive love to a man who she firmly believed reciprocated her
love. As a matter of fact she was mistaken; the young man had other
motives for visiting her. It was not long before she was disappointed;
at first she defended herself against it by converting hysterically the
corresponding experience, and thus came to believe that he would come
some day to ask her in marriage; but in consequence of the imperfect
conversion and the constant pressure of new painful impressions, she
felt unhappy and ill. She finally expects him with the greatest tension
on a definite day, it is the day of a family reunion. The day passes but
he does not come. After all the trains on which he could have come have
passed she suddenly merged into an hallucinatory confusion. She thought
that he did come, she heard his voice in the garden, and hastened down
in her night gown to receive him. For two months after she lived in a
happy dream, the content of which was that he was there, that he was
always with her, and that everything was as before (before the time of
the painfully defended disappointment). The hysteria and depression were
thus conquered; during her sickness she never mentioned anything about
the last period of doubt and suffering; she was happy as long as she was
left undisturbed, and frenzied only when a regulation of her environment
prevented her from accomplishing something which she thought quite
natural as a result of her blissful dream. This psychosis,
unintelligible as it was in its time, was revealed ten years later
through hypnotic analysis.

The fact to which I call attention is this: That the content of such an
hallucinatory psychosis consists in directly bringing into prominence
that idea which was threatened by the motive of the disease. One is
therefore justified in saying that through its flight into the psychosis
the ego defended the unbearable idea; the process through which this has
been brought about withdraws itself from self perception as well as from
the psychological-clinical analysis. It is to be considered as the
expression of a higher grade of pathological disposition, and can
perhaps be explained as follows: The ego tears itself away from the
unbearable idea, but as it hangs inseparably together with a part of
reality, the ego while accomplishing this performance also detaches
itself wholly or partially from reality. The latter is, in my opinion
the condition under which hallucinatory vividness is decreed to
particular ideas, and hence after very successful defense the person
finds himself in a hallucinatory confusion.

I have but very few analyses of such psychoses at my disposal; but I
believe that we deal with a very frequently employed type of psychic
illness. For analogous examples such as the mother who becoming sick
after the loss of her child continues to rock in her arms a piece of
wood, or the jilted bride who in full dress expects her bridegroom, can
be seen in every insane asylum.

It will perhaps not be superfluous to mention that the three forms of
defense here considered, and hence the three forms of disease to which
this defense leads may be united in the same person. The simultaneous
occurrence of phobias and hysterical symptoms, so frequently observed in
praxis, really belongs to those moments which impede a pure separation
of hysteria from other neuroses and urge the formation of the “mixed
neuroses.” To be sure the hallucinatory confusion is not frequently
compatible with the continuation of hysteria and not as a rule with
obsessions; but on the other hand it is not rare that a defense
psychosis should episodically break through the course of a hysteria or
mixed neurosis.


In conclusion I will mention in few words the subsidiary idea of which I
have made use in this discussion of the defense neuroses. It is the idea
that there is something to distinguish in all psychic functions (amount
of affect, sum of excitement), that all qualities have a quantity though
we have no means to measure the same—it is something that can be
increased, diminished, displaced, and discharged, and that extends over
the memory traces of the ideas perhaps like an electric charge over the
surface of the body.

This hypothesis, which also underlies our theory of “ab-reaction”
(“Preliminary Communication”), can be used in the same sense as the
physicist uses the assumption of the current of electric fluid. It is
preliminarily justified through its usefulness in the comprehension and
elucidation of diverse psychic states.




                              CHAPTER VI.
ON THE RIGHT TO SEPARATE FROM NEURASTHENIA A DEFINITE SYMPTOM-COMPLEX AS
                           “ANXIETY NEUROSIS”
                            (ANGSTNEUROSE).


It is difficult to assert anything of general validity concerning
neurasthenia as long as this term is allowed to express all that for
which Beard used it. I believe that neuropathology can only gain by an
attempt to separate from the actual neurosis all those neurotic
disturbances the symptoms of which are on the one hand more firmly
connected among themselves than to the typical neurasthenic symptoms,
such as headache, spinal irritation, dyspepsia with flatulence and
constipation, and which on the other hand show essential differences
from the typical neurasthenic neurosis in their etiology and mechanism.
If we accept this plan we will soon gain quite a uniform picture of
neurasthenia. We will soon be able to differentiate—sharper than we have
hitherto succeeded—from the real neurasthenia the different
pseudoneurasthenias, such as the organically determined nasal reflex
neurosis, the neurotic disturbances of cachexias and arteriosclerosis,
the early stages of progressive paralysis, and of some psychoses.
Furthermore, following the proposition of Moebius, some status nervosi
of hereditary degenerates will be set aside and we will also find
reasons for ascribing some of the neuroses which are now called
neurasthenia to melancholia, especially those of an intermittent or
periodic nature. But we force the way into the most marked changes if we
decide to separate from neurasthenia that symptom-complex which I shall
hereafter describe and which especially fulfills the conditions
formulated above. The symptoms of this complex are clinically more
related to one another than to the real neurasthenic symptoms, that is,
they frequently appear together and substitute one another in the course
of the disease, and both the etiology as well as the mechanism of this
neurosis differs basically from the etiology and the mechanism of the
real neurasthenia which remains after such a separation.

I call this symptom-complex “anxiety neurosis” (Angstneurose) because
the sum of its components can be grouped around the main symptom of
anxiety, because each individual symptom shows a definite relation to
anxiety. I believed that I was original in this conception of the
symptoms of anxiety neurosis until an interesting lecture by E.
Hecker[41] fell into my hands. In this lecture I found the description
of the same interpretation with all the desired clearness and
completeness. To be sure, Hecker does not separate the equivalents or
rudiments of the attack of anxiety from neurasthenia as I intend to do;
but this is apparently due to the fact that neither here nor there has
he taken into account the diversity of the etiological determinants.
With the knowledge of the latter difference every obligation to
designate the anxiety neurosis by the same name as the real neurasthenia
disappears, for the only object of arbitrary naming is to facilitate the
formulation of general assertions.


            I. CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS.

What I call “anxiety neurosis” can be observed in complete or
rudimentary development, either isolated or in combination with other
neuroses. The cases which are in a measure complete, and at the same
time isolated, are naturally those which especially corroborate the
impression that the anxiety neurosis possesses clinical independence. In
other cases we are confronted with the task of selecting and separating
from a symptom-complex which corresponds to a “mixed neurosis,” all
those symptoms which do not belong to neurasthenia, hysteria, etc., but
to the anxiety neurosis.

The clinical picture of the anxiety neurosis comprises the following
symptoms:

1. _General Irritability._—This is a frequent nervous symptom, common as
such to many nervous states. I mention it here because it constantly
occurs in the anxiety neurosis and is of theoretical significance. For
increased irritability always points to an accumulation of excitement or
to an inability to bear accumulation, hence to an absolute or relative
accumulation of excitement. The expression of this increased
irritability through an auditory hyperesthesia is especially worth
mentioning; it is an over sensitiveness for noises, which symptom is
certainly to be explained by the congenital intimate relationship
between auditory impressions and fright. Auditory hyperesthesia is
frequently found as a cause of insomnia, of which more than one form
belongs to anxiety neurosis.

2. _Anxious Expectation._—I can not better explain the condition that I
have in mind, than by this name and by some appended examples. A woman,
for example, who suffers from anxious expectation thinks of
influenza-pneumonia whenever her husband who is afflicted with a
catarrhal condition has a coughing spell; and in her mind she sees a
passing funeral procession. If on her way home she sees two persons
standing together in front of her house she can not refrain from the
thought that one of her children fell out of the window; if she hears
the bell ring she thinks that someone is bringing her mournful tidings,
etc.; yet in none of these cases is there any special reason for
exaggerating a mere possibility.

The anxious expectation naturally reflects itself constantly in the
normal, and embraces all that is designated as “uneasiness and a
tendency to a pessimistic conception of things,” but as often as
possible it goes beyond such a plausible uneasiness, and it is
frequently recognized as a part of constraint even by the patient
himself. For one form of anxious expectation, namely, that which refers
to one’s own health, we can reserve the old name of hypochondria.
Hypochondria does not always run parallel with the height of the general
anxious expectation; as a preliminary stipulation it requires the
existence of paresthesias and annoying somatic sensations. Hypochondria
is thus the form preferred by the genuine neurasthenics whenever they
merge into the anxiety neurosis, a thing which frequently happens.

As a further manifestation of anxious expectation we may mention the
frequent tendency observed in morally sensitive persons to pangs of
conscience, scrupulosity, and pedantry, which varies as it were, from
the normal to its aggravation as doubting mania.

Anxious expectation is the most essential symptom of the neurosis; it
also clearly shows a part of its theory. It can perhaps be said that we
have here a quantum of freely floating anxiety which controls the choice
of ideas by expectation and is forever ready to unite itself with any
suitable ideation.

3. This is not the only way in which the anxiousness, usually latent but
constantly lurking in consciousness, can manifest itself. On the
contrary it can also suddenly break into consciousness without being
aroused by the issue of an idea, and thus provoke an attack of anxiety.
Such an attack of anxiety consists of either the anxious feeling alone
without any associated idea, or of the nearest interpretation of the
termination of life, such as the idea of “sudden death” or threatening
insanity; or the feeling of anxiety becomes mixed with some paresthesia
(similar to the hysterical aura); or finally the anxious feeling may be
combined with a disturbance of one or many somatic functions, such as
respiration, cardiac activity, the vasomotor innervation, and the
glandular activity. From this combination the patient renders especially
prominent now this and now the other moment. He complains of
“heartspasms,” “heavy breathing,” “profuse perspiration,” “inordinate
appetite,” etc., and in his description the feeling of anxiety is put to
the background or it is rather vaguely described as “feeling badly,”
“uncomfortably,” etc.

4. What is interesting and of diagnostic significance is the fact that
the amount of admixture of these elements in the attack of anxiety
varies extraordinarily, and that almost any accompanying symptom can
alone constitute the attack as well as the anxiety itself. Accordingly
there are rudimentary attacks of anxiety, and equivalents for the attack
of anxiety, probably all of equal significance in showing a profuse and
hitherto little appreciated richness in forms. A more thorough study of
these larvated states of anxiety (Hecker) and their diagnostic division
from other attacks ought soon to become the necessary work for the
neuropathologist.

I now add a list of those forms of attacks of anxiety with which I am
acquainted. There are attacks:

(_a_) With disturbances of heart action, such as palpitation with
transitory arrythmia, with longer continued tachycardia up to grave
states of heart weakness, the differentiation of which from organic
heart affection is not always easy; among such we have the pseudo-angina
pectoris, a delicate diagnostic sphere!

(_b_) With disturbances of respiration, many forms of nervous dyspnoea,
asthma-like attacks, etc. I assert that even these attacks are not
always accompanied by conscious anxiety;

(_c_) Of profuse perspiration, often nocturnal;

(_d_) Of trembling and shaking which may readily be mistaken for
hysterical attacks;

(_e_) Of inordinate appetite, often combined with dizziness;

(_f_) Of attack-like appearing diarrhoea;

(_g_) Of locomotor dizziness;

(_h_) Of so called congestions, embracing all that was called vasomotor
neurasthenia; and,

(_i_) Of paresthesias (These are seldom without anxiety or a similar
discomfort).

5. Very frequently the nocturnal frights (pavor nocturnus of adults)
usually combined with anxiety, dyspnoea, perspiration, etc., is nothing
other than a variety of the attack of anxiety. This disturbance
determines a second form of insomnia in the sphere of the anxiety
neurosis. Moreover I became convinced that even the pavor nocturnus of
children evinces a form belonging to the anxiety neurosis. The
hysterical tinge and the connection of the fear with the reproduction of
appropriate experience or dream, makes the pavor nocturnus of children
appear as something peculiar, but it also occurs alone without a dream
or a recurring hallucination.

6. “_Vertigo._”—This in its lightest forms is better designated as
“dizziness,” assumes a prominent place in the group of symptoms of
anxiety neurosis. In its severer forms the “attack of vertigo,” with or
without fear, belongs to the gravest symptoms of the neurosis. The
vertigo of the anxiety neurosis is neither a rotatory dizziness nor is
it confined to certain planes or lines like Menier’s vertigo. It belongs
to the locomotor or coordinating vertigo, like the vertigo in paralysis
of the ocular muscles; it consists in a specific feeling of discomfort
which is accompanied by sensations of a heaving ground, sinking legs, of
the impossibility to continue in an upright position, and at the same
time there is a feeling that the legs are as heavy as lead, they shake,
or give way. This vertigo never leads to falling. On the other hand, I
would like to state that such an attack of vertigo may also be
substituted by a profound attack of syncope. Other fainting-like states
in the anxiety neurosis seem to depend on a cardiac collapse.

The vertigo attack is frequently accompanied by the worst kind of
anxiety and is often combined with cardiac and respiratory disturbances.
Vertigo of elevations, mountains and precipices, can also be frequently
observed in anxiety neurosis; moreover, I do not know whether we are
still justified in recognizing a vertigo “a stomacho laeso.”

7. On the basis of the chronic anxiousness (anxious expectation) on the
one hand, and the tendency to vertiginous attacks of anxiety on the
other, there develop two groups of typical phobias; the first refers to
the general physiological menaces, while the second refers to
locomotion. To the first group belong the fear for snakes,
thunderstorms, darkness, vermin, etc., as well as the typical moral
overscrupulousness, and the forms of doubting mania. Here the available
fear is merely used to strengthen those aversions which are
instinctively implanted in every man. But usually a compulsively acting
phobia is formed only after a reminiscence is added to an experience in
which this fear could manifest itself; as, for example, after the
patient has experienced a storm in the open air. To attempt to explain
such cases as mere continuations of strong impressions is incorrect.
What makes these experiences significant and their reminiscences durable
is after all only the fear which could at that time appear and can also
appear today. In other words such impressions remain forceful only in
persons with “anxious expectations.”

The other group contains agoraphobia with all its accessory forms, all
of which are characterized by their relation to locomotion. As a
determination of the phobia we frequently find a precedent attack of
vertigo; I do not think that it can always be postulated. Occasionally,
after a first attack of vertigo without fear, we see that though
locomotion is always accompanied by the sensation of vertigo, it remains
possible without any restrictions, but as soon as fear attaches itself
to the attack of vertigo, locomotion fails, under the conditions of
being alone, narrow streets, etc.

The relation of these phobias to the phobias of obsessions, which
mechanism I discussed above,[42] is as follows: The agreement lies in
the fact that here as there, an idea becomes obsessive through its
connection with an available affect. The mechanism of transposition of
the affect therefore holds true for both kinds of phobias. But in
phobias of the anxiety neurosis this affect is (1) a monotonous one, it
is always one of anxiety; (2) it does not originate from a repressed
idea, and on psychological analysis it proves itself not further
reducible, nor can it be attacked through psychotherapy. The mechanism
of substitution does not therefore hold true for the phobias of anxiety
neurosis.

Both kinds of phobias (or obsessions) often occur side by side, though
the atypical phobias which depend on obsessions need not necessarily
develop on the basis of anxiety neurosis. A very frequent, ostensibly
complicated mechanism appears if the content of an original simple
phobia of anxiety neurosis is substituted by another idea, the
substitution is then subsequently added to the phobia. The “protective
measures” originally employed in combatting the phobia are most
frequently used as substitutions. Thus, for example, from the effort to
provide oneself with counter evidence that one is not crazy, contrary to
the assertion of the hypochondriacal phobia, there results a reasoning
mania. The hesitations, doubts, and the many repetitions of the folie du
doute originate from the justified doubt concerning the certainty of
one’s own stream of thoughts, for, through the compulsive like idea one
is surely conscious of so obstinate a disturbance, etc. It may therefore
be claimed that many syndromes of compulsion neurosis, like folie du
doute and similar ones, can clinically, if not notionally be attributed
to anxiety neurosis.[43]

8. The digestive functions in anxiety neurosis are subject to very few
but characteristic disturbances. Sensations like nausea and sickly
feeling are not rare, and the symptom of inordinate appetite alone or
with other congestions, may serve as a rudimentary attack of anxiety. As
a chronic alteration analogous to the anxious expectations one finds a
tendency to diarrhea which has occasioned the queerest diagnostic
mistakes. If I am not mistaken it is this diarrhea to which Moebius[44]
has recently called attention in a small article. I believe, moreover,
that Peyer’s[45] reflex diarrhea which he attributes to a disease of the
prostate is nothing other than the diarrhea of anxiety neurosis. The
deceptive reflex relation is due to the fact that the same factors which
are active in the origin of such prostatic affections also come into
play in the etiology of anxiety neurosis.

The behavior of the gastro-intestinal function in anxiety neurosis shows
a sharp contrast to the influence of this same function in neurasthenia.
Mixed cases often show the familiar “fluctuations between diarrhea and
constipation.” The desire to urinate in anxiety neurosis is analogous to
the diarrhea.

9. The paresthesias which accompany the attack of vertigo or anxiety are
interesting because they associate themselves into a firm sequence,
similar to the sensations of the hysterical aura. But in contrast to the
hysterical aura I find these associated sensations atypical and
changeable. Another similarity to hysteria is shown by the fact that in
anxiety neurosis a kind of conversion[46] into bodily sensations, as for
example into rheumatic muscles, takes place which otherwise can be
overlooked at one’s pleasure. A large number of so called rheumatics,
who are moreover demonstrable as such, really suffer from an anxiety
neurosis. Besides this aggravation of the sensation of pain I have
observed in a number of cases of anxiety neurosis a tendency towards
hallucinations which could not be explained as hysterical.

10. Many of the so called symptoms which accompany or substitute the
attack of anxiety also appear in a chronic manner. They are then still
less discernible, for the anxious feeling accompanying them appears more
indistinct than in the attack of anxiety. This especially holds true for
the diarrhea, vertigo, and paresthesias. Just as the attack of vertigo
can be substituted by an attack of syncope, so can the chronic vertigo
be substituted by the continuous feeling of feebleness, lassitude, etc.


          II. THE OCCURRENCE AND ETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS.

In some cases of anxiety neurosis no etiology can readily be
ascertained. It is noteworthy that in such cases it is seldom difficult
to demonstrate a marked hereditary taint.

Where we have reason to assume that the neurosis is acquired we can find
by careful and laborious examination that the etiologically effective
moments are based on a series of injuries and influences from the sexual
life. These at first appear to be of a varied nature but easily display
the common character which explains their homogeneous effect on the
nervous system. They are found either alone or with other banal injuries
to which a reinforcing effect can be attributed. This sexual etiology of
anxiety neurosis can be demonstrated so preponderately often that I
venture for the purpose of this brief communication to set aside all
cases of a doubtful or different etiology.

For the more precise description of the etiological determinations under
which anxiety neurosis occurs, it will be advisable to treat separately
those occurring in men and those occurring in women. Anxiety neurosis
appears in women—disregarding their predisposition—in the following
cases:

(_a_) As virginal fear or anxiety in adults. A number of unequivocal
observations showed me that an anxiety neurosis, which is almost
typically combined with hysteria, can be evoked in maturing girls, at
the first encounter with the sexual problem, that is at the sudden
revelation of the things hitherto veiled, by either seeing the sexual
act, or by hearing or reading something of that nature;

(_b_) As fear in the newly married. Young women who remain anesthetic
during the first cohabitation not seldom merge into an anxiety neurosis
which disappears after the anesthesia is displaced by the normal
sensation. As most young women remain undisturbed through such a
beginning anesthesia, the production of this fear requires determinants
which I will mention;

(_c_) As fear in women whose husbands suffer from ejaculatio precox or
from diminished potency; and,

(_d_) In those whose husbands practice coitus interruptus or reservatus.
These cases go together, for on analyzing a large number of examples one
can easily be convinced that they only depend on whether the woman
attained gratification during coitus or not. In the latter case one
finds the determinant for the origin of anxiety neurosis. On the other
hand the woman is spared from the neurosis if the husband afflicted by
ejaculatio precox can repeat the congress with better results
immediately thereafter. The congressus reservatus by means of the condom
is not injurious to the woman if she is quickly excited and the husband
is very potent; in other cases the noxiousness of this kind of
preventive measure is not inferior to the others. Coitus interruptus is
almost regularly injurious; but for the woman it is injurious only if
the husband practices it regardlessly, that is, if he interrupt coitus
as soon as he comes near ejaculating without concerning himself about
the determination of the excitement of his wife. On the other hand if
the husband waits until his wife is gratified, the coitus has the same
significance for the latter as a normal one; but then the husband
becomes afflicted with an anxiety neurosis. I have collected and
analyzed a number of cases which furnished the material for the above
statements.

(_e_) As fear in widows and intentional abstainers, not seldom in
typical combination with obsessions; and,

(_f_) As fear in the climacterium during the last marked enhancement of
the sexual desire.

The cases (_c_), (_d_), and (_e_), contain the determinants under which
the anxiety neurosis originates in the female sex, most frequently and
most independently, of hereditary predisposition. I will endeavor to
demonstrate in these—curable, acquired—cases of anxiety neurosis that
the discovered sexual injuries really represent the etiological moments
of the neurosis. But before proceeding I will mention the sexual
determinants of anxiety neurosis in men. I would like to formulate the
following groups, every one of which finds its analogy in women:

(_a_) Fear of the intentional abstainers; this is frequently combined
with symptoms of defense (obsessions, hysteria). The motives which are
decisive for intentional abstinence carry along with them the fact that
a number of hereditarily burdened eccentrics, etc., belong to this
category.

(_b_) Fear in men with frustrated excitement (during the engagement
period), persons who out of fear for the consequences of sexual
relations satisfy themselves with handling or looking at the woman. This
group of determinants which can moreover be transferred to the other
sex—engagement periods, relations with sexual forbearance—furnish the
purest cases of the neurosis.

(_c_) Fear in men who practice coitus interruptus. As observed above,
coitus interruptus injures the woman if it is practiced regardless of
the woman’s gratification; it becomes injurious to the man, if in order
to bring about the gratification in the woman be voluntarily controls
the coitus by delaying the ejaculation. In this manner we can understand
why it is that in couples who practice coitus interruptus it is usually
only one of them who becomes afflicted. Moreover the coitus interruptus
only rarely produces in man a pure anxiety neurosis, usually it is a
mixture of the same with neurasthenia.

(_d_) Fear in men in the senium. There are men who show a climacterium
like women, and merge into an anxiety neurosis at the time when their
potency diminishes and their libido increases.

Finally I must add two more cases holding true for both sexes:

(_e_) Neurasthenics merge into anxiety neurosis in consequence of
masturbation as soon as they refrain from this manner of sexual
gratification. These persons have especially made themselves unfit to
bear abstinence.

What is important for the understanding of the anxiety neurosis is the
fact that any noteworthy development of the same occurs only in men who
remain potent, and in non-anesthetic women. In neurasthenics, who on
account of masturbation have markedly injured their potency, anxiety
neurosis as a result of abstinence occurs but rarely and limits itself
usually to hypochondria and light chronic dizziness. The majority of
women are really to be considered as “potent”; a real impotent, that is,
a real anesthetic woman, is also inaccessible to anxiety neurosis, and
bears strikingly well the injuries cited.

How far we are perhaps justified in assuming constant relations between
individual etiological moments and individual symptoms from the complex
of anxiety neurosis, I do not care to discuss here.

(_f_) The last of the etiological determinants to be mentioned seems, in
the first place, really not to be of a sexual nature. Anxiety neurosis
originates in both sexes through the moment of overwork, exhaustive
exertion, as for instance, after sleepless nights, nursing the sick, and
even after serious illnesses.


The main objection against my formulation of a sexual etiology of the
anxiety neurosis will probably be to the purport that such abnormal
relations of the sexual life can be found so very often that wherever
one will look for them they will be found near at hand. Their
occurrence, therefore, in the cases cited of anxiety neurosis does not
prove that the etiology of the neurosis was revealed in them. Moreover,
the number of persons practicing coitus interruptus, etc., is
incomparably greater than the number of those who are burdened with
anxiety neurosis, and the overwhelming number of the first are quite
well in spite of this injury.

To this I can answer that we certainly ought not to expect a rarely
occurring etiological moment in the conceded enormous frequency of the
neurosis, and especially anxiety neurosis; furthermore, that it really
fulfills a postulate of pathology if on examining an etiology the
etiological moments can be more frequently demonstrated than their
effects, for, for the latter still other determinants (predisposition,
summation of the specific etiology, reinforcement through other banal
injuries) could be demanded; and furthermore, that the detailed analysis
of suitable cases of anxiety neurosis show quite unequivocally the
significance of the sexual moment. I shall, however, here confine myself
to the etiological moment of coitus interruptus, and I will render
prominent obvious individual experiences.

1. As long as the anxiety neurosis in young women is not yet constituted
but appears in fragments which again spontaneously disappear, it can be
shown that every such turn of the neurosis depends on a coitus with lack
of gratification. Two days after this influence, and in persons of
little resistance the day after, there regularly appears the attack of
anxiety or vertigo to which all the other symptoms of the neurosis
attach themselves, only to separate again on rarer marriage relations.
An unexpected journey of the husband, a sojourn in the mountains causing
a separation of the married couple, does good; the benefit from a course
of gynecological treatment is due to the fact that during its
continuation the marriage relations are stopped. It is noteworthy that
the success of a local treatment is only transitory, the neurosis
reappears while in the mountains if the husband joins his wife for his
own vacation, etc. If, in a not as yet constituted neurosis, a physician
aware of this etiology causes a substitution of the coitus interruptus
by normal relations there results a therapeutic proof of the assertion
here formulated. The anxiety is removed and does not return unless there
be a new or similar cause.

2. In the anamnesis of many cases of anxiety neurosis we find in both
men and women a striking fluctuation in the intensity of the appearances
in both the coming and going of the whole condition. This year was
almost wholly good, the following was terrible, etc.; on one occasion
the improvement occurred after a definite treatment which, however,
failed to produce a response at the next attack. If we inform ourselves
about the number and the sequence of the children, and compare this
marriage chronicle with the peculiar course of the neurosis, the result
of the simple solution shows that the periods of improvement or well
being corresponded with the pregnancies of the woman during which,
naturally, the occasions for preventive relations were unnecessary. The
treatment which benefited the husband, be it Father Kneip’s or the
hydrotherapeutic institute, was the one which he has taken after he
found his wife was pregnant.

3. From the anamnesis of the patients we often find that the symptoms of
the anxiety neurosis are relieved at a certain time by another neurosis,
perhaps a neurasthenia which has supplanted it. It can then be regularly
demonstrated that shortly before this change of the picture there
occurred a corresponding change in the form of a sexual injury.

Whereas such experiences, which can be augmented at pleasure, plainly
obtrude upon the physician the sexual etiology for a certain category of
cases, other cases which would have otherwise remained incomprehensible
can at least without gainsaying be solved and classified by the key of
the sexual etiology. We refer to those numerous cases in which
everything exists that has been found in the former category, such as
the appearance of anxiety neurosis on the one hand, and the specific
moment of the coitus interruptus on the other, but yet something else
slips in, namely, a long interval between the assumed etiology and its
effect, and perhaps other etiological moments of a non-sexual nature. We
have here, for example, a man who was seized with an attack of
palpitation on hearing of his father’s death, and who since that time
suffered from an anxiety neurosis. The case cannot be understood, for up
to that time this man was not nervous. The death of the father, well
advanced in years, did not occur under any peculiar circumstances, and
it must be admitted that the natural expected death of an aged father
does not belong to those experiences which are wont to make a healthy
adult sick. The etiological analysis will perhaps seem clearer if I add
that out of regard for his wife this man practiced coitus interruptus
for eleven years. At all events the manifestations are precisely the
same as those appearing in other persons after a short sexual injury of
this nature, and without the intervention of another trauma. The same
judgment may be pronounced in the case of a woman who merges into an
anxiety neurosis after the death of her child, or in the case of the
student who becomes disturbed by an anxiety neurosis while preparing for
his final state examination. I find that here, as there, the effect is
not explained by the reported etiology. One must not necessarily
“overwork” himself studying, and a healthy mother is wont to react to
the death of her child with normal grief. But, above all, I would expect
that the overworked student would acquire a cephalasthenia, and the
mother in our example a hysteria. That both became afflicted with
anxiety neurosis causes me to attach importance to the fact that the
mother lived for eight year in marital coitus interruptus, and that the
student entertained for three years a warm love affair with a
“respectable” girl whom he was not allowed to impregnate.

These examples tend to show that where the specific sexual injury of the
coitus interruptus is in itself unable to provoke an anxiety neurosis it
at least predisposes to its acquisition. The anxiety neurosis then comes
to light as soon as the effect of another banal injury enters into the
latent effect of the specific moment. The former can quantitatively
substitute the specific moment but not supplant it qualitatively. The
specific moment always remains that which determines the form of
neurosis. I hope to be able to prove to a greater extent this
proposition for the etiology of the neurosis.

Furthermore, the last discussions contain the, not in itself, improbable
assumption that a sexual injury like coitus interruptus asserts itself
through summation. The time required before the effect of this summation
becomes visible depends upon the predisposition of the individual and
the former burdening of his nervous system. The individuals who bear
coitus interruptus manifestly without disadvantage really become
predisposed by it to the disturbance—anxiety neurosis—which can at any
time burst forth spontaneously or after a banal, otherwise inadequate,
trauma, just as the chronic alcoholic finally develops a cirrhosis or
another disease by summation, or under the influence of a fever he
merges into a delirium.


            III. ADDENDA TO THE THEORY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS.

The following discussions claim nothing but the value of a first
tentative experiment, which judgment should not influence the acceptance
of the facts mentioned above. The estimation of this “Theory of Anxiety
Neurosis” is rendered still more difficult by the fact that it merely
corresponds to a fragment of a more comprehensive representation of the
neuroses.

The facts hitherto expressed concerning the anxiety neurosis already
contain some starting points for an insight into the mechanism of this
neurosis. In the first place it contains the assumption that we deal
with an accumulation of excitement, and then the very important fact
that the anxiety underlying the manifestations of the neurosis is not of
psychic derivation. Such, for example, would exist if we found as a
basis for the anxiety neurosis a justified fright happening once or
repeatedly which has since supplied the source of the preparedness for
the anxiety neurosis. But this is not the case; a former fright can
perhaps cause a hysteria or a traumatic neurosis but never an anxiety
neurosis. As the coitus interruptus is rendered so prominent among the
causes of anxiety neurosis I have thought at first that the source of
the continuous anxiety was perhaps the repeated fear during the sexual
act lest the technique will fail and conception follow. But I have found
that this state of mind of the man or woman during the coitus
interruptus plays no part in the origin of anxiety neurosis, that the
women who are really indifferent to the possibilities of conception are
just as exposed to the neurosis as those who are trembling at the
possibility of it, it all depends on which person suffers the loss of
sexual gratification.

Another starting point presents itself in the as yet unmentioned
observation that in a whole series of cases the anxiety neurosis goes
along with the most distinct diminution of the sexual libido or the
psychic desire, so that on revealing to the patients that their
affliction depends on “insufficient gratification,” they regularly reply
that this is impossible as just now their whole desire is extinguished.
The indications that we deal with an accumulation of excitement, that
the anxiety which probably corresponds to such accumulated excitement is
of somatic origin, so that somatic excitement becomes accumulated, and
furthermore, that this somatic excitement is of a sexual nature, and
that it is accompanied by a decreased psychic participation in the
sexual processes—all these indications, I say, favor the expectation
that the mechanism of the anxiety neurosis is to be found in the
deviation of the somatic sexual excitement from the psychic, and in the
abnormal utilization of this excitement occasioned by the former.

This conception of the mechanism of anxiety neurosis will become clearer
if one accepts the following view concerning the sexual process in man.
In the sexually mature male organism, the somatic sexual excitement
is—probably continuously—produced, and this becomes a periodic stimulus
for the psychic life. To make our conceptions clearer we will add that
this somatic sexual excitement manifests itself as a pressure on the
wall of the seminal vesicle which is provided with nerve endings. This
visceral excitement thus becomes continuously increased, but not before
attaining a certain height is it able to overcome the resistances of the
intercalated conduction as far as the cortex, and manifest itself as
psychic excitement. Then the group of sexual ideas existing in the
psyche becomes endowed with energy and results in a psychic state of
libidinous tension which is accompanied by an impulse to remove this
tension. Such psychic unburdening is possible only in one way which I
wish to designate as specific or adequate action. This adequate action
for the male sexual impulse consists of a complicated spinal reflex-act
which results in the unburdening of those nerve endings, and of all
psychically formed preparations for the liberation of this reflex.
Anything else except the adequate action would be of no avail, for after
the somatic sexual excitement has once reached the liminal value, it
continuously changes into psychic excitement; that must by all means
occur which frees the nerve endings from their heavy pressure, and thus
abolish the whole somatic excitement existing at the time and allow the
subcortical conduction to reestablish its resistance.

I will desist from presenting in a similar manner more complicated cases
of the sexual process. I will merely formulate the statement that this
scheme can essentially be transferred to the woman despite the problem
of the perplexity, artificial retardation, and stunting of the female
sexual impulse. In the woman, too, it can be assumed that there is a
somatic sexual excitement and a state in which this excitement becomes
psychic, evoking libido and the impulse to specific action which is
accompanied by the sensual feeling. But we are unable to state what
analogy there may be in the woman to the unburdening of the seminal
vesicles.

We can bring into the bounds of this representation of the sexual
process the etiology of actual neurasthenia as well as of the anxiety
neurosis. Neurasthenia always originates whenever the adequate (action)
unburdening is replaced by a less adequate one, like the normal coitus
under the most favorable conditions, by a masturbation or spontaneous
pollution; while anxiety neurosis is produced by all moments which
impede the psychic elaboration of the somatic sexual excitement. The
manifestations of anxiety neurosis are brought about by the fact that
the somatic sexual excitement diverted from the psyche expends itself
subcortically in not at all adequate reactions.

I will now attempt to test the etiological determinants suggested before
in order to see whether they show the common character formulated by me.
As the first etiological moment for the man, I have mentioned
intentional abstinence. Abstinence consists in foregoing the specific
action which results from the libido. Such foregoing may have two
consequences, namely that the somatic excitement accumulates, and then,
what is more important, is the fact that it becomes diverted to another
route where there is more chance for discharge than through the psyche.
It will then finally diminish the libido and the excitement will
manifest itself subcortically as anxiety. Where the libido does not
become diminished, or the somatic excitement is expended in pollutions,
or where it really becomes exhausted in consequence of repulsion,
everything else except anxiety neurosis is formed. In this manner
abstinence leads to anxiety neurosis. But abstinence is also the active
process in the second etiological group of frustrated excitement. The
third case, that of the considerate coitus reservatus, acts through the
fact that it disturbs the psychic preparedness for the sexual discharge
by establishing beside the subjugation of the sexual affect, another
distracting psychic task. Through this psychic distraction, too, the
libido gradually disappears and the further course is then the same as
in the case of abstinence. The anxiety in old age (climacterium of men)
requires another explanation. Here the libido does not diminish, but
just as in the climacterium of women, such an increase takes place in
the somatic excitement that the psyche shows itself relatively
insufficient for the subjugation of the same.

The subsummation of the etiological determinants in the woman, under the
aspect mentioned, does not afford any greater difficulties. The case of
the virginal fear is especially clear. Here the group of ideas with
which the somatic sexual excitement should combine are not as yet
sufficiently developed. In anesthetically newly married the anxiety
appears only if the first cohabitations awakened a sufficient amount of
somatic excitement. Where the local signs of such excitability (like
spontaneous feelings of excitement, desire to micturate, etc.) are
lacking, the anxiety, too, stays away. The case of ejaculatio precox or
coitus interruptus is explained similarly to that in the man by the fact
that the libido gradually disappears in the psychically ungratified act,
whereas the excitement thereby evoked is subcortically expended. The
formation of an estrangement between the somatic and psychic in the
discharge of the sexual excitement succeeds quicker in the woman than in
the man and is more difficult to remove. The case of widowhood or
voluntary abstinence, as well as the case of climacterium adjusts itself
in the woman as in the man, but in the case of abstinence there surely
is in addition the intentional repression of the sexual ideas, for an
abstinent woman struggling with temptation must often decide to suppress
it. The abhorrence perceived by an elderly woman during her menopause
against the immensely increased libido can have a similar effect.

The two etiological determinants mentioned last can also be classified
without any difficulty.

The tendency to anxiety of the masturbator who becomes neurasthenic is
explained by the fact that these persons so easily merge into the state
of abstinence after they have for long been accustomed to afford a
discharge, to be sure an incorrect one, for every little quantity of
somatic excitement. Finally the last case, the origin of anxiety
neurosis through a severe illness, overwork, exhaustive nursing, etc.,
in addition to the efficacy of coitus interruptus readily permits a free
interpretation. Through deviation the psyche becomes here insufficient
for the subjugation of the somatic sexual excitement, a task which
continuously devolves upon it. We know how deeply the libido can sink
under the same conditions, and we have here a nice example of a neurosis
which although not of a sexual etiology still evinces a sexual
mechanism.

The conception here developed represents the symptoms of anxiety
neurosis in a measure as a substitute for the omitted specific action to
the sexual excitement. As a further corroboration of this I recall that
also in normal coitus the excitement expends itself in respiratory
acceleration, palpitation, perspiration, congestion, etc. In the
corresponding attack of anxiety of our neurosis we have before us the
dyspnoea, the palpitation, etc., of the coitus in an isolated and
aggravated manner.

It can still be asked why the nervous system merges into a peculiar
affective state of anxiety under the circumstances of psychic inadequacy
for the subjugation of the sexual excitement? A hint to the answer is as
follows: The psyche merges into the affect of fear when it perceives
itself unable to adjust an externally approaching task (danger) by
corresponding reaction; it merges into the neurosis of anxiety when it
finds itself unable to equalize the endogenously originated (sexual)
excitement. The psyche, therefore, behaves as if projecting this
excitement externally. The affect and the neurosis corresponding to it
stand in close relationship to each other; the first is the reaction to
an exogenous, the latter the reaction to an analogous endogenous
excitement. The affect is a rapidly passing state, the neurosis is
chronic because the exogenous excitement acts like a stroke happening
but once, while the endogenous acts like a constant force. The nervous
system reacts in the neurosis against an inner source of excitement just
as it does in the corresponding affect against an analogous external
one.


                  IV. THE RELATIONS TO OTHER NEUROSES.

A few observations still remain to be mentioned on the relations of the
anxiety neurosis to the other neuroses in reference to occurrence and
inner relationship.

The purest cases of anxiety neurosis are also usually the most
pronounced. They are found in potent young individuals with a uniform
etiology, and where the disease is not of long standing.

To be sure, the symptoms of anxiety are found more frequently as a
simultaneous and common occurrence with those of neurasthenia, hysteria,
compulsive ideas, and melancholia. If on account of such clinical
mixtures one hesitates in recognizing anxiety neurosis as an independent
unity, he will also have to abandon the laboriously acquired separation
of hysteria and neurasthenia.

For the analysis of the “mixed neuroses” I can advocate the following
proposition: Where a mixed neurosis exists, an involvement of many
specific etiologies can be demonstrated.

Such a multiplicity of etiological moments determining a mixed neurosis
can only come about accidentally, if the activities of a newly formed
injury are added to those already existing. Thus, for example, a woman
who was at all times a hysteric begins to practice coitus reservatus at
a certain period of her married life, and adds an anxiety neurosis to
her hysteria; a man who had masturbated and become neurasthenic, becomes
engaged and excites himself with his fiancée so that a fresh anxiety
neurosis allies itself to his neurasthenia.

The multiplicity of etiological moments in other cases is not
accidental, one of them has brought the other into activity. Thus a
woman, with whom her husband practices coitus reservatus without regard
to her gratification, finds herself forced to finish the tormenting
excitement following such an act with masturbation, as a result of which
she shows an anxiety neurosis with symptoms of neurasthenia. Under the
same noxiousness another woman has to contend with lewd pictures against
which she wishes to defend herself, and in this way the coitus
interruptus will cause her to acquire obsessions along with the anxiety
neurosis. Finally a third woman, as a result of coitus interruptus loses
her affection for her husband and forms another which she secretly
guards, and as a result she evinces a mixture of hysteria and anxiety
neurosis.

In a third category of mixed neuroses the connection of the symptoms is
of a still more intimate nature, as the same etiological determinants
regularly and simultaneously evoke both neuroses. Thus, for example, the
sudden sexual explanation which we have found in virginal fear always
produces hysteria, too; most causes of intentional abstinence connect
themselves in the beginning with actual obsessions; and it seems to me
that the coitus interruptus of men can never provoke a pure anxiety
neurosis, but always a mixture of the same with neurasthenia, etc.

It follows from this discussion that the etiological determinants of the
occurrence must moreover be distinguished from the specific etiological
moments of neurasthenia. The first moments, as for example the coitus
interruptus, masturbation, and abstinence, are still ambiguous, and can
each produce different neuroses; and it is only the etiological moments
abstracted from them, like the inadequate unburdening, psychic
insufficiency, and defense with substitution, that have an unambiguous
and specific relation to the etiology of the individual great neuroses.

In its intrinsic property, anxiety neurosis shows the most interesting
agreements and differences when compared with the other great neuroses,
particularly when compared with neurasthenia and hysteria. With
neurasthenia it shares one main character, namely, that the source of
excitement, the cause of the disturbance, lies in the somatic rather
than in the psychic sphere as in the case of hysteria and compulsion
neurosis. For the rest we can recognize a kind of contrast between the
symptoms of neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis, which can be expressed in
the catchwords, accumulation and impoverishment of excitement. This
contrast does not hinder the two neuroses from combining with each
other, but shows itself in the fact that the most extreme forms in both
cases are also the purest.

When compared with hysteria anxiety neurosis shows in the first place a
number of agreements in the symptomatology the valuation of which is
still unsettled. The appearance of the manifestations as persistent
symptoms or attacks, the aura-like grouped paresthesias, the
hyperesthesias and pressure points can be found in certain substitutes
for the anxiety attack, as in dyspnoea and palpitation, the aggravation
of the perhaps organically determined pains (by conversion)—these and
other joint features lead to the supposition that some things which are
ascribed to hysteria can with full authority be fastened to anxiety
neurosis. But if we enter into the mechanism of both neuroses, as far as
it can at present be penetrated, we find aspects which make it appear
that the anxiety neurosis is really the somatic counterpart to hysteria.
Here as there we have accumulation and excitement—on which is perhaps
based the similarity of the aforementioned symptoms—; here as there we
have a psychic insufficiency which results from abnormal somatic
processes; and here as there we have instead of a psychic elaboration a
deviation of the excitement into the somatic. The difference only lies
in the fact that the excitement, in which displacement the neurosis
manifests itself, is purely somatic (somatic sexual excitement) in
anxiety neurosis, while in hysteria it is psychic (evoked through a
conflict). Hence it is not surprising that hysteria and anxiety neurosis
lawfully combine with each other, as in the “virginal fear” or in the
“sexual hysteria,” and that hysteria simply borrows a number of symptoms
from anxiety neurosis, etc. This intimate relationship between anxiety
neurosis and hysteria furnishes us with a new argument for demanding the
separation of anxiety neurosis from hysteria, for if this be denied, one
will also be unable to maintain the so painstakingly acquired
distinction between neurasthenia and hysteria, so indispensable for the
theory of the neuroses.




                              CHAPTER VII.
          FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE DEFENSE NEUROPSYCHOSES.


Under the caption of “Defense Neuropsychoses” I have comprised hysteria,
obsessions, as well as certain cases of acute hallucinatory
confusion.[47] All these affections evince one common aspect in the fact
that their symptoms originated through the psychic mechanism of
(unconscious) defense, that is, through the attempt to repress an
unbearable idea which appeared in painful contrast to the ego of the
patient. I was also able to explain and exemplify by cases reported in
the preceding chapters in what sense this psychic process of “defense”
or “repression” is to be understood. I have also discussed the laborious
but perfectly reliable method of psychoanalysis of which I make use in
my examinations, and which at the same time serves as a therapy.

My experiences during the last two years have strengthened my
predilection for making the defense the essential point in the psychic
mechanism of the mentioned neuroses, and on the other hand have
permitted me to give a clinical foundation to the psychological theory.
To my surprise I have discovered some simple but sharply circumscribed
solutions for the problem of the neuroses which I shall provisionally
briefly report in the following pages. It would be inconsistent with
this manner of reporting to add to the assertions the required proofs,
but I hope to be able to fulfill this obligation in a comprehensive
discussion.


                I. THE “SPECIFIC” ETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA.

That the symptoms of hysteria become comprehensible only through a
reduction to “traumatically” effective experiences, and that these
psychic traumas refer to the sexual life has already been asserted by
Breuer and me in former publications. What I have to add today as a
uniform result of thirteen analyzed cases of hysteria concerns, on the
one hand, the nature of these sexual traumas, and on the other, the
period of life in which they occurred. An experience occurring at any
period of life, touching in any way the sexual life, and then becoming
pathogenic through the liberation and suppression of a painful affect is
not sufficient for the causation of hysteria. It must on the contrary
belong to the sexual traumas of early childhood (the period of life
before puberty), and its content must consist in a real irritation of
the genitals (coitus-like processes).

This specific determination of hysteria—sexual passivity in pre-sexual
periods—I have found fulfilled in all analyzed cases of hysteria (among
which were two men). To what extent the determination of the accidental
etiological moment diminishes the requirement of the hereditary
predisposition needs only be intimated. We can, moreover, understand the
disproportionately greater frequency of hysteria in the female sex, as
even in childhood this sex is more subject to sexual assaults.

The objection most frequently advanced against this result may be to the
purport, that sexual assaults on little children occur too frequently to
give an etiological value to its verification, or that such experiences
must remain ineffectual just because they concern a sexually undeveloped
being; and that one must moreover be careful not to obtrude upon the
patient through the examination such alleged reminiscences or believe in
the romances which they themselves fabricate. To the latter objections I
hold out the request that no one should really judge with great
certainty this obscure realm unless he has made use of the only method
which can clear it up (the method of psychoanalysis for bringing to
consciousness the hitherto unconscious[48]). The essential point in the
first doubts is settled by the observation that it really is not the
experiences themselves that act traumatically, but their revival as
reminiscences after the individual has entered into sexual maturity.

My thirteen cases of hysteria were throughout of the graver kind, they
were all of long duration, and some had undergone a lengthy and
unsuccessful asylum treatment. Every one of the infantile traumas which
the analysis revealed for these severe cases had to be designated as
marked sexual injuries; some of them were indeed abominable. Among the
persons who were guilty of such serious abuse we have in the first place
nurses, governesses, and other servants to whom children are left much
too carelessly, then in regrettable frequency come the teachers; but in
seven of the thirteen cases we dealt with innocent childish offenders,
mostly brothers who for years entertained sexual relations with their
younger sisters. The course of events always resembled some of the cases
which could with certainty be tracked, namely, that the boy had been
abused by a person of the feminine sex, thus awakening in him
prematurely the libido, and that after a few years he repeated in sexual
aggression on his sister the same procedures to which he himself was
subjected.

I must exclude active masturbation from the list of sexual injuries of
early childhood as being pathogenic for hysteria. That it is so very
frequently found associated with hysteria is due to the fact that
masturbation in itself is more frequently the result of abuse or
seduction than one supposes. It not seldom happens that both members of
a childish pair later in life become afflicted by defense neuroses, the
brother by obsessions and the sister by hysteria, which naturally gives
the appearance of a familial neurotic predisposition. This
pseudo-heredity is now and then solved in a surprising manner. I have
had under observation a brother, sister, and a somewhat older cousin.
The analysis which I have undertaken with the brother showed me that he
suffered from reproaches for being the cause of his sister’s malady; he
himself was corrupted by his cousin, concerning whom it was known in the
family that he fell a victim to his nurse.

I can not definitely state up to what age sexual damage occurs in the
etiology of hysteria, but I doubt whether sexual passivity can cause
repression after the eighth and tenth year unless qualified for it by
previous experiences. The lower limit reaches as far as memory in
general, that is, to the delicate age of one and one half or two years!
(two cases). In a number of my cases the sexual trauma (or the number of
traumas) occurred during the third and fourth year of life. I myself
would not lend credence to this peculiar discovery if it were not for
the fact that the later development of the neurosis furnished it with
full trustworthiness. In every case there are a number of morbid
symptoms, habits and phobias which are only explainable by returning to
those youthful experiences, and the logical structure of the neurotic
manifestation makes it impossible to reject the faithfully retained
memories of childhood. Except through psychoanalysis it is of no avail
to ask a hysterical patient about these infantile traumas; their remains
can only be found in the morbid symptoms and not in conscious memory.

All the experiences and excitements which prepare the way for, or
occasion the outburst of, hysteria in the period of life after puberty
evidently act through the fact that they awaken the memory remnants of
those infantile traumas which do not become conscious but lead to the
liberation of affect and repression. It is quite in harmony with this
rôle of the later traumas not to be subject to the strict limitation of
the infantile traumas, but that both in intensity and quality they can
vary from an actual sexual assault to a mere approximation of the
sexual, such as perceiving the sexual acts of others, or receiving
information concerning sexual processes.[49]

In my first communication on the defense neuropsychoses I failed to
explain how the exertion of a hitherto healthy individual to forget such
traumatic happenings would result in the real intentional repression,
and thus open the door for the defense neurosis. It can not depend on
the nature of the experience, as other persons remain unaffected despite
the same motives. Hysteria cannot therefore be fully explained by the
effect of the trauma, and we are forced to admit that the capacity for
hysteria already existed before the trauma.

This indefinite hysterical predisposition can now wholly or partially be
substituted by the posthumous effect of the infantile sexual trauma. The
“repression” of the memory of a painful sexual experience of maturer
years can take place only in persons in whom this experience can bring
into activity the memory remnants of an infantile trauma.[50]

The prerequisite of obsessions is also a sexual infantile experience,
but of a different nature than that of hysteria. The etiology of both
defense neuropsychoses now shows the following relation to the etiology
of both simple neuroses, neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis. As I have
shown above, both the latter neuroses are the direct results of the
sexual noxas alone, while both defense neuroses are the direct results
of sexual noxas which acted before the appearance of sexual maturity,
that is, they are the results of the psychic memory remnants of these
noxas. The actual causes producing neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis
simultaneously play the rôle of inciting causes of the defense neuroses,
and on the other hand, the specific causes of the defense neuroses, the
infantile traumas, may simultaneously prepare the soil for the later
developing neurasthenia. Finally it not seldom happens that the
existence of a neurasthenia or anxiety neurosis is only preserved by
continued recollection of an infantile trauma rather than by actual
sexual injuries.


         II. THE ESSENCE AND MECHANISM OF COMPULSION NEUROSIS.

Sexual experiences of early childhood have the same significance in the
etiology of the compulsion neurosis as in hysteria, still we no longer
deal here with sexual passivity but with pleasurably accomplished
aggressions, and with pleasurably experienced participation in sexual
acts, that is, we deal here with sexual activity. It is due to this
difference in the etiological relations that the masculine sex seems to
be preferred in the compulsion neurosis.

In all my cases of compulsion neurosis I have found besides a subsoil of
hysterical symptoms which could be traced to a pleasurable action of
sexual passivity from a precedent scene. I presume that this coincidence
is a lawful one, and that premature sexual aggression always presupposes
an experience of seduction. But I am unable to present as yet a complete
description of the etiology of the compulsion neurosis. I only believe
that the final determination as to whether a hysteria or compulsion
neurosis should originate on the basis of infantile traumas depends on
the temporal relation of the development of the libido.

The essence of the compulsion neurosis may be expressed in the following
simple formula: Obsessions are always transformed _reproaches_ returning
from consciousness which always refer to a pleasurably accomplished
sexual action of childhood. In order to elucidate this sentence it will
be necessary to describe the typical course of compulsion neurosis.

In a first period—period of childish immorality—the events containing
the seeds of the later neurosis take place. In the earliest childhood
there appear at first the experiences of sexual seduction which later
makes the repression possible, and this is followed by the actions of
sexual aggressions against the other sex which later manifest themselves
as actions of reproach.

This period is brought to an end by the appearance of the—often self
ripened—sexual “maturity.” A reproach then attaches itself to the memory
of that pleasurable action, and the connection with the initial
experience of passivity makes it possible—often only after conscious and
recollected effort—to repress it and replace it by a primary symptom of
defense. The third period, that of apparent healthiness but really of
successful defense, begins with the symptoms of scrupulousness, shame
and diffidence.

The next period, the disease is characterized by the return of the
repressed reminiscences, hence, by the failure of the defense; but it
remains undecided whether the awakening of the same is more frequently
accidental and spontaneous, or whether it appears in consequence of
actual sexual disturbances, that is, as additional influences of the
same. But the revived reminiscences and the reproaches formed from them
never enter into consciousness unchanged, but what becomes conscious as
an obsession and obsessive affect and substitutes the pathogenic memory
in the conscious life, are compromise formations between the repressed
and the repressing ideas.

In order to describe clearly and probably convincingly the processes of
repression, the return of the repression, and the formation of the
pathological ideas of compromise, we would have to decide upon very
definite hypotheses concerning the substratum of the psychic occurrence
and consciousness. As long as we wish to avoid it we will have to rest
content with the following rather figuratively understood observations.
Depending on whether the memory content of the reproachful action alone
forces an entrance into consciousness or whether it takes with it the
accompanying reproachful affect, we have two forms of compulsion
neurosis. The first represents the typical obsessions, the content of
which attracts the patient’s attention; only an indefinite displeasure
is perceived as an affect, whereas, for the content of the obsession the
only suitable affect would be one of reproach. The content of the
obsession is doubly distorted when compared to the content of the
infantile compulsive act. First, something actual replaces the past
experience, and second, the sexual is substituted by an analogous
non-sexual experience. These two changes are the results of the constant
tendency to repression still in force which we will attribute to the
“ego.” The influence of the revived pathogenic memory is shown by the
fact that the content of the obsession is still partially identical with
the repressed, or can be traced to it by a correct stream of thought.
If, with the help of the psychoanalytic method, we reconstruct the
origin of one individual obsession we find that one actual impression
instigated two diverse streams of thought, and that the one which passed
over the repressed memory, though incapable of consciousness and
correction, proves to be just as correctly formed logically as the
other. If the results of the two psychic operations disagree, the
contradiction between the two may never be brought to logical
adjustment, but as a compromise between the resistance and the
pathological result of thought an apparently absurd obsession enters
into consciousness beside the normal result of the thought. If both
streams of thought yield the same result, they reinforce each other so
that the normally gained result of thought now behaves psychically like
an obsession. Wherever neurotic compulsion manifests itself psychically
it originates from repression. The obsessions have, as it were, a
psychical course of compulsion which is due, not to their own validity,
but to the source from which they originate, or to the source which
furnishes a part of their validity.

A second form of compulsion neurosis results if the repressed reproach
and not the repressed content of memory forces a replacement in the
conscious psychic life. Through a psychic admixture, the affect of the
reproach can change itself into any other affect of displeasure, and if
this occurs there is nothing to hinder the substituting affect from
becoming conscious. Thus, the reproach (of having performed in childhood
some sexual actions) may be easily transformed into shame (if some one
else becomes aware of it), into hypochondriacal anxiety (because of the
physical harmful consequences of those reproachful acts), into social
anxiety (fearing punishment from others), into religious anxiety, into
delusions of observation (fear of betraying those actions to others),
into fear of temptations (justified distrust in one’s own moral ability
of resistance), etc. Besides, the memory content of the reproachful
action may also be represented in consciousness, or it may be altogether
concealed, which makes the diagnosis very difficult. Many cases which on
superficial examination are taken as ordinary (neurasthenic)
hypochondria often belong to this group of compulsive affects; the very
frequently so called “periodic neurasthenia” or “periodic melancholia”
especially seem to be explained by compulsive affects or obsessions, a
recognition not unimportant therapeutically.

Beside these compromise symptoms which signify the return of the
repression and hence a failure of the originally achieved defense, the
compulsion neurosis forms a series of other symptoms of a totally
different origin. The ego really tries to defend itself against those
descendants of the initial repressed reminiscence, and in this conflict
of defense it produces symptoms which may be comprehended as “secondary
defense.” These are throughout “protective measures” which have
performed good service in the struggle carried on against the obsessions
and the obsessing affects. If these helps in the conflict of the defense
really succeed in repressing anew the symptoms of return obtruding
themselves on the ego, the compulsion then transmits itself on the
protective measures themselves and produces a third form of the
“compulsion neurosis,” the compulsive action. These are never primary,
they never contain anything else but a defense, never an aggression.
Psychic analysis shows that despite their peculiarity they can always be
fully explained by reduction to the compulsive reminiscence which they
oppose.[51]

The secondary defense of the obsessions can be brought about by a
forcible deviation to other thoughts of possibly contrary content;
hence, in case of success there is a compulsive reasoning, regularly
concerning abstract and transcendental subjects, because the repressed
ideas always occupied themselves with the sensuous. Or the patient tries
to become master of every compulsive idea through logical labor and by
appealing to his conscious memory; this leads to compulsive thinking and
examination and to doubting mania. The priority of the perception before
the memory in these examinations at first induce and then force the
patient to collect and preserve all objects with which he comes in
contact. The secondary defense against the compulsive affects results in
a greater number of defensive measures which are capable of being
transformed into compulsive actions. These can be grouped according to
their tendency. We may have measures of penitence (irksome ceremonial
and observation of numbers), of prevention (diverse phobias,
superstition, pedantry, aggravation of the primary symptom of
scrupulousness), measures of fear of betrayal (collecting papers and
shyness), and measures of becoming unconscious (dipsomania). Among these
compulsive acts and impulses the phobias play the greatest part as
limitations of the patient’s existence.

There are cases in which we can observe how the compulsion becomes
transferred from the idea or affect to the measure, and other cases in
which the compulsion oscillates between the returning symptoms of
secondary defense. But there are also cases in which no obsessions are
really formed, but the repressed reminiscence immediately becomes
replaced by the apparent primary defensive measure. Here that stage is
attained at a bound which otherwise ends the course of the compulsion
neurosis only after the conflict of the defense. Grave cases of this
affection end either with a fixation of ceremonial actions, general
doubting mania, or in an existence of eccentricity conditioned by
phobias.

That the obsessions and everything derived from them are not believed is
probably due to the fact that the defense symptom of scrupulousness was
formed during the first repression and gained compulsive validity. The
certainty of having lived morally throughout the whole period of the
successful defense makes it impossible to give credence to the reproach
which the obsession really involves. Only transitorily during the
appearance of a new obsession, and now and then in melancholic
exhaustive states of the ego do the morbid symptoms of the return also
enforce the belief. The “compulsion” of the psychic formations here
described has in general nothing to do with the recognition through
belief, and is not to be mistaken for that moment which is designated as
“strength” or “intensity” of an idea. Its main characteristic lies in
its inexplicableness through psychic activities of conscious ability,
and this character undergoes no change whether the idea to which the
compulsion is attached is stronger or weaker, more or less intensively
“elucidated,” “supplied with energy,” etc.

The reason for the unassailableness of the obsession or its derivative
is due only to its connection with the repressed memory of early
childhood, for as soon as we succeed in making it conscious, for which
the psychotherapeutic methods already seem quite sufficient, the
compulsion, too, becomes detached.


              III. ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF CHRONIC PARANOIA.

For some length of time I entertained the idea that paranoia also—or the
group of cases belonging to paranoia—is a defense psychosis, that is,
like hysteria and obsessions it originates from the repression of
painful reminiscences, and that the form of its symptoms is determined
by the content of the repression. A special way or mechanism of
repression must be peculiar to paranoia perhaps just as in hysteria
which brings about the repression by way of conversion into bodily
innervation, and perhaps like obsessions in which a substitution is
accomplished (displacement along certain associative categories). I
observed many cases which seemed to favor this interpretation, but I had
not found any which demonstrated it until a few months ago when, through
the kindness of Dr. J. Breuer, I subjected to psychoanalysis, with
therapeutic aims, an intelligent woman of 32, whom no one will be able
to refuse to designate as a chronic paranoiac. I report here some
explanations gained in this work, because I have no prospects of
studying paranoia except in very isolated examples, and because I think
it possible that these observations may instigate a psychiatrist for
whom conditions are more favorable, to give due justice to the moment of
defense in the present animated discussion on the nature and psychic
mechanism of paranoia. It is of course far from my thoughts to wish to
show from the following single observation anything but that this case
is a defense psychosis, and that in the group of “paranoia” there may be
still others of a similar nature.

Mrs. P. thirty-two years old, married three years. She is the mother of
a two-year-old child, and does not descend from nervous parents; but her
sister and brother whom I know, are also neurotic. It was doubtful
whether she was not transitorily depressed and mistaken in her judgment
in the middle of her twentieth year. During the last years she was
healthy and capacitated until she evinced the first symptoms of the
present illness, six months after the birth of her child. She became
secluded and suspicious, showing a disinclination towards social
relations with the relatives of her husband, and complained that the
neighbors in the little town now behaved towards her in a rather
impolite and regardless manner. Gradually these complaints grew in
intensity, she thought that there was something against her, though she
had no notion what it could be. But there was no doubt that all the
relatives and friends denied her respect, and did everything to
aggravate her. She was trying very hard to find out whence this came but
could not discover anything. Some time later she complained that she was
watched, that her thoughts were guessed, and that everything that
happened in her house was known. One afternoon she suddenly conceived
the thought that she was watched during the evening while undressing.
Since then she applied while undressing the most complicated
precautionary measures. She slipped into her bed in the darkness and
undressed only under cover. As she avoided all social relations, and
took but little nourishment, and was very depressed, she was sent in the
summer of 1895 to a hydrotherapeutic institute. There new symptoms
appeared and reinforced those already existing. As early as the spring,
while she was alone with the servant girl, she suddenly perceived a
sensation in her lap, and thought that the servant girl then had an
unseemly thought. This sensation became more frequent in the summer, it
was almost continuous, and she felt her genitals “as if one feels a
heavy hand.” She then began to see pictures which frightened her; they
were hallucinations of female nakedness, especially an exposed woman’s
lap with hair; occasionally she also saw male genitals. The picture of
the hairy lap and the organic sensation in the lap usually came
conjointly. The pictures became very aggravating, as she regularly
perceived them when she was in the company of a woman, and the thought
accompanying them was that she sees the woman in an indecent exposure,
and that in the same moment the woman sees the same picture of her (!)
Simultaneously with these visual hallucinations, which, after their
first appearance in the asylum, disappeared again for many months, she
began to be troubled with voices which she did not recognize and could
not explain. When she was in the street she heard, “This is Mrs. P.—Here
she goes.—Where does she go?”. Every one of her movements and actions
were commented upon. Occasionally she heard threats and reproaches. All
these symptoms became worse when she was in society, or even in the
street; she therefore hesitated about going out; she also stated that
she experienced nausea for food, and as a result she became reduced in
vitality.

I obtained this from her when she came under my care in the winter of
1895. I present this case in detail in order to make the impression that
we really deal here with a very frequent form of chronic paranoia, which
diagnosis will agree with the details of the symptoms and their behavior
to be mentioned later. At that time she either concealed from me the
delusions for the interpretation of the hallucinations or they really
had not as yet occurred. Her intelligence was undiminished. It was
reported to me as peculiar that she had a number of rendezvous with her
brother who lived in the neighborhood, in order to confide something to
him, but this she never told him. She never spoke about her
hallucinations, and towards the end she did not say much about the
aggravations and persecutions from which she suffered. What I have to
report about this patient concerns the etiology of the case and the
mechanism of the hallucinations. I discovered the etiology by applying
Breuer’s method exactly as in hysteria, for the investigation and
removal of the hallucinations. I started with the presupposition that
just as in the two other defense neuroses known to me this paranoia must
contain unconscious thoughts and repressed reminiscences which have to
be brought to consciousness, in the same manner as in the others, by
overcoming a certain resistance. The patient immediately corroborated
this expectation by behaving during the analysis exactly like a
hysteric, and under attention to the pressure of my hand she reproduced
thoughts which she could not remember having had, which she at first
could not understand, and which contradicted her expectations. The
occurrence of important unconscious ideas was therefore also
demonstrated in a case of paranoia, and I could hope to reconduct the
compulsion of paranoia to repression. It was only peculiar that the
assertions which originated in the unconscious were usually heard
inwardly or hallucinated by her as her voices.

Concerning the origin of the visual hallucinations, or at least the
vivid pictures, I discovered the following: The picture of the female
lap occurred almost always together with the organic sensation in the
lap. The latter, however, was more constant and often occurred without
the picture.

The first pictures of feminine laps appeared in the hydrotherapeutic
institute a few hours after she had actually seen a number of women
naked in the bath house. They were therefore only simple reproductions
of a real impression. It may be assumed that these impressions repeated
themselves because something of great interest was connected with them.
She stated that she was at that time ashamed of these women, and that
since she recalled it she is ashamed of having been seen naked. Having
been obliged to look upon this shame as something compulsive, I
concluded that according to the mechanism of defense an experience must
have here been repressed in which she was not ashamed, and I requested
her to allow those reminiscences to emerge which belonged to the theme
of shame. She promptly reproduced a series of scenes from her
seventeenth to her eighth year, during which while bathing before her
mother, her sister, and her physician she was ashamed of her nakedness.
This series, however, reached back to a scene in her sixth year when she
undressed in the children’s room before going to sleep without feeling
ashamed of her brother who was present. On questioning her it was found
that there were a number of such scenes, and that for years the brothers
and sisters were in the habit of showing themselves naked to one another
before retiring. I now understood the significance of the sudden thought
of being watched on going to sleep. It was an unchanged fragment of the
old reproachful reminiscence, and she was now trying to make up in shame
what she lost as a child.

The supposition that we dealt here with an amour of childhood so
frequent in the etiology of hysteria was strengthened by the further
progress of the analysis which also showed simultaneous solutions for
individual frequently recurring details in the picture of paranoia. The
beginning of her depression commenced at the time of a disagreement
between her husband and her brother on account of which the latter no
longer visited her. She was always much attached to this brother and
missed him very much at this time. Besides this she spoke about a moment
in the history of her disease during which for the first time
“everything became clear,” that is, during which she became convinced
that her assumption about being generally despised and intentionally
annoyed was true. She gained this assurance during a visit of her
sister-in-law, who in the course of conversation dropped the words, “If
such a thing should happen to me I would not mind it.” Mrs. P. at first
took this utterance unsuspectingly, but when her visitor left her it
seemed to her that these words contained a reproach meaning that she was
in the habit of taking serious matters lightly, and since that hour she
was sure that she was a victim of common slander. On asking her why she
felt justified in referring those words to herself she answered that the
tone in which her sister-in-law spoke convinced her of it—to be sure
subsequently—This is really a characteristic detail of paranoia. I now
urged her to recall her sister-in-law’s conversation before the accusing
utterance, and it was found that she related that in her father’s home
there were all sorts of difficulties with the brothers, and added the
wise remark, “In every family many things happen which one would rather
keep under cover, and that if such a thing should happen to her she
would take it lightly.” Mrs. P. had to acknowledge that her depression
was connected with the sentences before the last utterance. As she
repressed both sentences which could recall her relations with her
brother, and retained only the last meaningless one, she was forced to
connect with it the feeling of being reproached by her sister-in-law;
but, inasmuch as the contents of this sentence offered absolutely no
basis for such assumption she disregarded it and laid stress on the tone
with which the words were pronounced. It is probably a typical
illustration for the fact that the misinterpretations of paranoia depend
on repression.

In a most surprising manner it also explains her peculiar behavior in
making appointments with her brother and then refusing to tell him
anything. Her explanation was that she thought that if she only looked
at him he must understand her suffering, as he knew the cause of it. As
this brother was really the only person who could know anything about
the etiology of her disease it followed that she acted from a motive
which, though she did not consciously understand, seemed perfectly
justified as soon as a new sense was put on it from the unconscious.

I then succeeded in causing her to reproduce different scenes the
culminating points of which were the sexual relations with her brother
at least from her sixth to her tenth year. During this work of
reproduction the organic sensation in the lap “joined in the
discussion,” precisely as regularly observed in the analysis of memory
remnants of hysterical patients. The picture of a naked female lap (but
now reduced to childish proportions and without hair) immediately
appeared or stayed away in accordance with the occurrence of the scene
in question in full light or in darkness. The disgust for eating, too,
was explained by a repulsive detail of these actions. After we had gone
through this series, the hallucinatory sensations and pictures
disappeared without having thus far returned.[52]

I have thus learned that these hallucinations were nothing other than
fragments from the content of the repressed experiences of childhood,
that is, symptoms of the return of the repressed material.

I now turned to the analysis of the voices. Here it must before all be
explained why such indifferent remarks as, “Here goes Mrs. P.—She now
looks for apartments, etc.” could be so painfully perceived, and how
these harmless sentences managed to become distinguished by
hallucinatory enforcement. To begin with, it was clear that these
“voices” could not be hallucinatory reproduced reminiscences like the
pictures and sensations, but rather thoughts which “became loud.”

She heard the voices for the first time under the following
circumstances. With great tension she read the pretty story, “The
Heiterethei” by O. Ludwig, and noticed that while reading she was
preoccupied with incoming thoughts. Immediately after she took a walk on
the highway and suddenly while passing a peasant’s cottage the voices
told her, “That is how the house of the Heiterethei looked! Here is the
well, and here is the bush! How happy she was in all her poverty!” The
voices then repeated whole paragraphs of what she had just read, but it
remained incomprehensible why house, bush, and well of the Heiterethei,
and just such indifferent and most irrelevant passages of the romance
should have obtruded themselves upon her attention with pathological
strength. The analysis showed that while reading she at the same time
entertained extraneous thoughts, and that she was excited by totally
different passages of the book. Against this material analogy between
the couple of the romance and herself and her husband, the reminiscence
of intimate things of her married life and family secrets, against all
these there arose a repressive resistance because they were connected
with her sexual shyness by very simple and demonstrable streams of
thought, and finally resulted in the awakening of old experiences of
childhood. In consequence of the censorship exercised by the repression
the harmless and idyllic passages connected with the objectionable ones
by contrast and vicinity, became reinforced in consciousness, enabling
them to become audible. For example, the first repressed thought
referred to the slander to which the secluded heroine was subjected by
her neighbors. She readily found in this an analogy to herself. She,
too, lived in a small place, had no intercourse with anybody and
considered herself despised by her neighbors. The suspicion against the
neighbors was founded on the fact that in the beginning of her married
life she was obliged to content herself with a small apartment. The wall
of the bedroom, near which stood the nuptial bed of the young couple,
adjoined the neighbors’ room. With the beginning of her marriage there
awakened in her a great sexual shyness. This was apparently due to an
unconscious awakening of some reminiscences of childhood of having
played husband and wife. She was very careful lest the neighbors might
hear through the adjacent wall either words or noises and this shyness
changed into suspicion against the neighbors.

The voices therefore owed their origin to the repression of thoughts
which in the last analysis really signified reproaches on the occasion
of an experience analogous to the infantile trauma; they were
accordingly symptoms of the return of the repression, but at the same
time they were results of a comparison between the resistance of the ego
and the force of the returning repression which in this case produce a
distortion beyond recognition. On other occasions when analyzing voices
in Mrs. P. the distortion was less marked, still the words heard always
showed a character of diplomatic uncertainty. The annoying allusion was
generally deeply hidden, the connection of the individual sentences was
masked by a strange expression, unusual forms of speech, etc.,
characteristics generally common to the auditory hallucinations of
paranoiacs, and in which I noticed the remnant of the compromise
distortion. The expression, “There goes Mrs. P., she is looking for
apartments in the street,” signified, for example, the threat that she
will never recover, for I promised her that after the treatment she
would be able to return to the little city where her husband was
employed. She rented temporary quarters in Vienna for a few months.

On some occasions Mrs. P. also perceived more distinct threats, for
example, concerning the relatives of her husband, the restrained
expression of which still continued to contrast with the grief which
such voices caused her. Considering all that we otherwise know of
paranoiacs I am inclined to assume a gradual relaxation of that
resistance which weakens the reproaches so that finally the defense
fails completely and the original reproach, the insulting word, which
one wanted to save himself returns in unchanged form. I do not, however,
know whether this is a constant course, whether the censor of the
expressions of reproach can not from the beginning stay away, or persist
to the end.

It is left for me to utilize the explanations gained in this case of
paranoia for the comparison of paranoia with compulsion neurosis. Here,
as there, the repression was shown to be the nucleus of the psychic
mechanism, and in both cases the repression is a sexual experience of
childhood. The origin of every compulsion in this paranoia is in the
repression, and the symptoms of paranoia allow a similar classification
as the one found justified in compulsion neurosis. Some symptoms also
originate from the primary defense among which are all delusions of
distrust, suspicion and persecution by others. In the compulsion
neurosis the initial reproach became repressed through the formation of
the primary symptom of defense, self-distrust, moreover, the reproach
was recognized as justified, and for the purpose of adjustment the
validity acquired by the scrupulousness during the normal interval now
guards against giving credence to the returning reproach in the form of
an obsession. By the formation of the defense symptom of distrust in
others, the reproach in paranoia is repressed in a way which may be
designated as projection; the reproach is also deprived of recognition,
and as a retaliation there is no protection against the returning
reproaches contained in the delusions.

The other symptoms in my case of paranoia are therefore to be designated
as symptoms of the return of the repression, and as in the compulsion
neurosis they show the traces of the compromise which alone permits an
entrance into consciousness. Such are the delusions of being observed
while undressing, the visual hallucinations, the perceptual
hallucinations and the hearing of voices. The memory content existing in
the delusion mentioned is almost unchanged and appears only uncertain
through utterance. The return of the repression into visual pictures
comes nearer to the character of hysteria than to the character of
compulsion neurosis; still, hysteria is wont to repeat its memory
symbols without modification, whereas the paranoiac memory hallucination
undergoes a distortion similar to those in compulsion neurosis. An
analogous modern picture takes the place of the one repressed (instead
of a child’s lap it was the lap of a woman upon which the hairs were
particularly distinct because they were absent in the original
impression). Quite peculiar to paranoia but no further elucidated in
this comparison is the fact that the repressed reproaches return as loud
thoughts, this must yield to a double distortion: (1) a censor, which
either leads to a replacement through other associated thoughts or to a
concealment by indefinite expressions, and (2) the reference to the
modern which is merely analogous to the old.

The third group of symptoms found in compulsion neurosis, the symptoms
of the secondary defense, cannot exist as such in paranoia, for no
defense asserts itself against the returning symptoms which really find
credence. As a substitute for this we find in paranoia another source of
symptom formation; the delusions (symptoms of return) reaching
consciousness through the compromise demand a great deal of the thinking
work of the ego until they can be unconditionally accepted. As they
themselves are not to be influenced the ego must adapt itself to them,
and hence the combining delusional formation, the delusion of
interpretation which results in the transformation of the ego,
corresponds here to the symptoms of secondary defense of compulsion
neurosis. In this respect my case was imperfect as it did not at that
time show any attempt at interpretation, this only appeared later. I do
not doubt, however that if psychoanalysis were also applied to that
stage of paranoia, another important result would be established. It
would probably be found that even the so called weakness of memory in
paranoiacs is purposeful, that is, it depends on the repression and
serves its purpose. Subsequently even those nonpathogenic memories which
stand in opposition to the transformation of the ego become repressed
and replaced; this the symptoms of return imperatively demand.




                             CHAPTER VIII.
                         ON PSYCHOTHERAPY.[53]


  _Gentlemen_:

It is almost eight years since, at the request of your deceased
chairman, Prof. v. Reder, I had the pleasure of speaking in your midst
on the subject of hysteria. Shortly before (1895) I had published the
“Studien über Hysterie” together with Dr. J. Breuer, and on the basis of
a new knowledge for which we are thankful to this investigator, I have
attempted to introduce a new way of treating the neurosis. Fortunately,
I can say that the endeavors of our “Studies” have met with success, and
that the ideas which they advocate concerning the effects of psychic
traumas through the restraint of affects and the conception of the
hysterical symptom as a result of a displacement of excitement from the
psychic to the physical—ideas for which we have created the terms
“ab-reaction” and “conversion”—are today generally known and understood.
At least in German-speaking countries there are no descriptions of
hysteria which do not to a certain extent take cognizance of them, and
no colleague who does not at least partially follow this theory. And yet
as long as they were new these theories and these terms must have
sounded strange enough!

I can not say the same thing about the therapeutic procedure which we
have proposed to our colleagues together with our theory. It still
struggles for recognition. This may have its special reasons. The
technique of the procedure was at that time still rudimentary. I was
unable to give those indications to the medical reader of the book which
would enable him to perform such a treatment. But surely there were
other causes of a general nature. To many physicians psychotherapy even
today appears as a product of modern mysticism, and in comparison to our
physico-chemical remedies the application of which is based on
physiological insight, psychotherapy appears quite unscientific and
unworthy of the interest of a natural philosopher. You will therefore
allow me to present to you the subject of psychotherapy, and to point
out to you what part of this verdict can be designated as unjust or
erroneous.

In the first place let me remind you that psychotherapy is not a modern
therapeutic procedure. On the contrary it is one of the oldest remedies
used in medicine. In Lëwenfeld’s instructive work (Lehrbuch der gesamten
Psychotherapie) you can find the methods employed in primitive and
ancient medicine. Most of them were of a psychotherapeutic nature. In
order to cure a patient he was transferred into a state of “credulous
expectation” which acts in a similar manner even today. Even after the
doctors found other remedial agents psychotherapeutic endeavors never
disappeared from this or that branch of medicine.

Secondly, I call your attention to the fact that we doctors really can
not abandon psychotherapy if only because another very much to be
considered party in the treatment—namely the patient—has no intention of
abandoning it. You know how much we owe to the Nancy school (Liébault,
Bernheim) for these explanations. Without our intention, an independent
factor from the patient’s psychic disposition enters into the activity
of every remedial agent introduced by the doctor, acting mostly in a
favorable sense but often also in an inhibiting sense. We have learned
to apply to this factor the word “suggestion,” and Moebius taught us
that the failures of some of our remedies are to be ascribed to the
disturbing influences of this very powerful moment. You doctors, all of
you, constantly practice psychotherapy, even when you do not know it, or
do not intend it, but it has one disadvantage, you leave entirely to the
patient the psychic factor of your influence. It then becomes
uncontrollable, it can not be divided into doses and can not be
increased. Is it not a justified endeavor of the doctor to become master
of this factor, to make use of it intentionally, to direct and enforce
it? It is nothing other than that, that scientific psychotherapy expects
of you.

In the third place, gentlemen, I wish to refer you to the well known
experience, namely, that certain maladies and particularly the
psychoneuroses, are more accessible to psychic influences than to any
other medications. It is no modern talk but a dictum of old physicians
that these diseases are not cured by the drug, but by the doctor, to
wit, by the personality of the physician in so far as it exerts a
psychic influence. I am well aware, gentlemen, that you like very much
the idea which the aesthete Vischer, in his parody on Faust (Faust, der
Tragödie, III Teil) endowed with a classical expression: “I know that
the physical often acts on the moral.”

But would it not be more adequate and frequently more correct to
influence the moral part of the person with the moral, that is, with
psychic means?

There are many ways and means of psychotherapy. All methods are good
which produce the aim of the therapy. Our usual consolation, “You will
soon be well again,” with which we are so generous to our patients,
corresponds to one of the psychotherapeutic methods, only that on
gaining a profounder insight into the neuroses we are not forced to
limit ourselves to this consolation alone. We have developed the
technique of hypnotic suggestion, of psychotherapy through diversion,
through practice, and through the evocation of serviceable affects. I do
not disdain any of them, and would practice them all under suitable
conditions. That I have in reality restricted myself to a single
therapeutic procedure, to the method called by Breuer “cathartic,” which
I prefer to call “analytic,” is simply due to subjective motives which
guided me. Having participated in the elaboration of this therapy I feel
it a personal duty to devote myself to its investigation, and to the
final development of its technique. I maintain that the analytic method
of psychotherapy is one which acts most penetratingly, and carries
farthest; through it one can produce the most prolific changes in the
patient. If I relinquish for a moment the therapeutic point of view, I
can assert that it is the most interesting, and that it alone teaches us
something concerning the origin and the connection of the morbid
manifestations. Owing to insights which it opens for us into the
mechanism of the psychic malady, it can even lead us beyond itself, and
show us the way to still other kinds of therapeutic influences.

Allow me now to correct some errors, and furnish some explanations
concerning this cathartic or analytic method of psychotherapy.

(_a_) I notice that this method is often mistaken for the hypnotic
suggestive treatment. I notice this by the fact that quite frequently
colleagues whose confidant I am not by any means, send patients to me,
refractory patients of course, with the request that I should hypnotize
them. Now, for eight years I have not practiced hypnotism (individual
cases excluded) as a therapeutic aim, and hence I used to return the
patients with the advice that he who relies on hypnosis should do it
himself. In truth, the greatest possible contrast exists between the
suggestive and the analytic technique, that contrast which the great
Leonardo da Vinci has expressed for the arts in the formulæ per via di
porre and per via di levare. Said Leonardo, “the art of painting works
per via di levare, that is to say, places little heaps of paint where
they have not been before on the uncolored canvas; sculpturing, on the
other hand, goes per via di levare, that is to say, it takes away from
the stone as much as covers the surface of the statue therein
contained.” Quite similarly, gentlemen, the suggestive technique acts
per via di porre, it does not concern itself about the origin, force,
and significance of the morbid symptoms, but puts on something, to wit,
the suggestion which it expects will be strong enough to prevent the
pathogenic idea from expression. On the other hand the analytic therapy
does not wish to put on anything, or introduce anything new, but to take
away, and extract, and for this purpose it concerns itself with the
genesis of the morbid symptoms, and the psychic connection of the
pathogenic idea the removal of which is its aim. This manner of
investigation has considerably furthered our understanding. I have so
early given up the technique of suggestion, and with it hypnosis,
because I despaired of making the suggestion as strong and persistent as
would be necessary for a lasting cure. In all grave cases I noticed that
the suggestions which were put on crumbled off again, and then the
disease, or one replacing it, reappeared. Besides, I charge this
technique with concealing from us the psychic play of forces, for
example, it does not permit us to recognize the resistance with which
the patients adhere to their malady, with which they also strive against
the recovery, and which alone can give us an understanding of their
behavior in life.

(_b_) It seems to me that a very widespread mistake among my colleagues
is the idea that the technique of the investigation for the causes of
the disease and the removal of the manifestations by this investigation
is easy and self-evident. I concluded this from the fact that of the
many who interest themselves in my therapy and express a definite
opinion on the same, no one has yet asked me how I do it. There can only
be one reason for it, they believe there is nothing to ask, that it is a
matter of course. I occasionally also hear with surprise that in this or
that division of the hospital a young interne is requested by his chief
to undertake a “psychoanalysis” with a hysterical woman. I am convinced
that he would not entrust him with the examination of an extirpated
tumor without previously assuring himself that he is acquainted with the
histological technique. Likewise I am informed that this or that
colleague has made appointments with a patient for psychic treatment,
whereas I am certain that he does not know the technique of such a
treatment. He must, therefore, expect that the patient will bring him
her secrets, or he seeks salvation in some kind of a confession or
confidence. I should not wonder if the patient thus treated would rather
be harmed than benefited. The mental instrument is really not at all
easy to play. On such occasions I can not help but think of the speech
of a world-renowned neurotic, who really never came under a doctor’s
treatment, and only lived in the fancy of the poet. I mean Prince Hamlet
of Denmark. The king has sent the two courtiers, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern, to investigate him and rob him of his secret. While he
defended himself, pipes were brought on the stage. Hamlet took a pipe
and requested one of his tormentors to play on it, saying that it is as
easy to play as lying. The courtier hesitated because he knew no touch
of it, and as he could not be moved to attempt to play the pipe, Hamlet
finally burst forth: “Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make
of me! You would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you
would pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music, excellent
voice, in this little organ, yet you cannot make it speak. ’Sblood! do
you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what
instrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me.”
(Act III, Scene 2.)

(_c_) You will have surmised from some of my observations that the
analytic cure contains qualities which keep it away from the ideal of a
therapy. Tuto, cito, iucunde; the investigation and examination does not
really mean rapidity of success, and the allusion to the resistance has
prepared you for the expectation of inconveniences. Certainly the
psychoanalytic method lays high claims on the patient as well as the
physician. From the first it requires the sacrifice of perfect candor,
it takes up much of his time, and is therefore also expensive; for the
physician it also means the loss of much time, and due to the technique
which he has to learn and practice, it is quite laborious. I even find
it quite justified to employ more suitable remedies as long as there is
a prospect to achieve something with them. It comes to this point only:
if we gain by the more laborious and cumbersome procedure considerably
more than by the short and easy one, the first is justified despite
everything. Just think, gentlemen, by how much the Finsen therapy of
lupus is more inconvenient and expensive than the formerly used
cauterization and scraping, and yet it means a great progress, merely
because it achieves more, it actually cures the lupus radically. I do
not really wish to carry through the comparison, but psychoanalysis can
claim for itself a similar privilege. In reality I could develop and
test my therapeutic method in grave and in the gravest of cases only; my
material at first consisted of patients who tried everything
unsuccessfully, and had spent years in asylums. I hardly gained enough
experience to be able to tell you how my therapy behaves in those
lighter, episodically appearing diseases which we see cured under the
most diverse influences, and also spontaneously. The psychoanalytic
method was created for patients who are permanently incapacitated, and
its triumph is to make a gratifying number of such, permanently
capacitated. Against this success all expense is insignificant. We can
not conceal from ourselves what we were wont to disavow to the patient,
namely, that the significance of a grave neurosis for the individual
subjected to it is not less than any cachexia or any of the generally
feared maladies.

(_d_) In view of the many practical limitations which I have encountered
in my work, I can hardly definitely enumerate the indications and
contraindications of this treatment. However, I will attempt to discuss
with you a few points:

1. The former value of the person should not be overlooked in the
disease, and you should refuse a patient who does not possess a certain
degree of education, and whose character is not in a measure reliable.
We must not forget that there are also healthy persons who are good for
nothing, and that if they only show a mere touch of the neurosis, one is
only too much inclined to blame the disease for incapacitating such
inferior persons. I maintain that the neurosis does not in any way stamp
its bearer as a dégéneré, but that frequently enough it is found in the
same individual associated with the manifestations of degeneration. The
analytic psychotherapy is therefore no procedure for the treatment of
neuropathic degeneration, on the contrary it is limited by it. It is
also not to be applied in persons who are not prompted by their own
suffering to seek the treatment, but subject themselves to it by order
of their relatives. The characteristic feature upon which the usefulness
of the psychoanalytic treatment depends, the educability, we will still
have to consider from another point of view.

2. If one wishes to take a safe course he should limit his selection to
persons of a normal state, for, in psychoanalytic procedures, it is from
the normal that we seize upon the morbid. Psychoses, confusional states,
and marked (I might say toxic) depressions, are unsuitable for analysis,
at least as it is practiced today. I do not think it at all impossible
that with the proper changes in the procedure it will be possible to
disregard this contraindication, and thus claim a psychotherapy for the
psychoses.

3. The age of the patient also plays a part in the selection for the
psychoanalytic treatment. Persons near or over the age of fifty lack, on
the one hand, the plasticity of the psychic processes upon which the
therapy depends—old people are no longer educable—and on the other hand,
the material which has to be elaborated, and the duration of the
treatment is immensely increased. The earliest age limit is to be
individually determined; youthful persons, even before puberty, are
excellent subjects for influence.

4. One should not attempt psychoanalysis when it is a question of
rapidly removing a threatening manifestation, as, for example, in the
case of an hysterical anorexia.

You have now gained the impression that the sphere of application of the
analytic psychotherapy is a very limited one, for you really heard me
enumerate nothing but contraindications. Nevertheless, there remain
sufficient cases and morbid states, such as all chronic forms of
hysteria with remnant manifestations, the extensive realms of compulsive
states, abulias, etc., on which this therapy can be tried.

It is pleasing that particularly the worthiest and highest developed
persons can thus be most helped. Where the analytic psychotherapy has
accomplished but little one can cheerfully assert that any other
treatment would have certainly resulted in nothing.

(_e_) You will surely wish to ask me about the possibility of doing harm
through the application of psychoanalysis. To this I will reply that if
you will judge justly you will meet this procedure with the same
critical good-feeling as you have met our other therapeutic methods, and
doing this you will have to agree with me that a rationally executed
analytic treatment entails no dangers for the patient. One who, like a
layman, is accustomed to ascribe to the treatment everything occurring
during the disease, will probably judge differently. It is really not so
long since our hydrotherapeutic asylums met with similar opposition.
Thus one who was advised to go to such an asylum became thoughtful
because he had an acquaintance who entered the asylum as nervous and
there become insane. As you surmise we deal with cases of initial
general paresis who in the first stages could still be sent to
hydrotherapeutic asylums, and who there merged into the irresistible
course leading to manifest insanity. For the layman the water was the
cause and author of this sad transformation. Where it is a question of
unfamiliar influences, even doctors are not free from such mistaken
judgment. I recall having once attempted to treat a woman by
psychotherapy who passed a great part of her existence by alternating
between mania and melancholia. I began to treat her at the end of a
melancholia and everything seemed to go well for two weeks, but in the
third week she was again merging into a mania. It was surely a
spontaneous alteration of the morbid picture, for two weeks is no time
in which anything can be accomplished by psychotherapy, but the
prominent—now deceased—physician who saw the case with me could not
refrain from remarking that this decline must have been due to the
psychotherapy. I am quite convinced that he would have been more
critical under different conditions.

(_f_) In conclusion, gentlemen, I must say to myself that it will not do
to lay claim to your attention so long in favor of the analytic
psychotherapy without telling you of what this treatment consists, and
on what it is based. To be sure I can only indicate it as I have to be
brief. This therapy is founded on the understanding that unconscious
ideas—or rather the unconsciousness of certain psychic processes—are the
main causes of a morbid symptom. We share this conviction with the
French school (Janet) which moreover by gross schematization reduces the
hysterical symptom to an unconscious idée fixe. Do not fear now that we
will thus merge too far into the obscurest philosophy. Our unconscious
is not quite the same as that of the philosophers and what is more, most
philosophers wish to know nothing of the “psychical unconscious.” But if
you will put yourselves in our position, you will understand that the
interpretation of this unconscious, in patients’ psychic life, into the
conscious, must result in a correction of their deviation from the
normal, and in an abrogation of the compulsion controlling their psychic
life. For the conscious will reaches as far as the conscious psychic
processes and every psychic compulsion is substantiated by the
unconscious. You need never fear that the patient will be harmed by the
emotion produced in the entrance of his unconscious into consciousness,
for you can theoretically readily understand that the somatic and
affective activity of the emotion which became conscious can never
become as great as those of the unconscious. For we only control all our
emotions by directing upon them our highest psychic activities which are
connected with consciousness.

We can still choose another point of view for the understanding of the
psychoanalytic treatment. The revealing and interpreting of the
unconscious takes place under constant resistance on the part of the
patient. The emerging of the unconscious is connected with displeasure
and owing to this displeasure it is continuously repulsed by the
patient. It is upon this conflict in the patient’s psychic life that you
encroach, and if you succeed in prevailing upon him to accept something,
for motives of better insight, which he has thus far repulsed
(repressed) on account of the automatic adjustment of displeasure, you
have achieved in him a piece of educational work. For it is really an
education if you can induce a person to leave his bed early in the
morning despite his unwillingness to do so. As such an after training
for the overcoming of inner resistances you can conceive the
psychoanalytic treatment in quite a general manner. But in no sphere of
the nervous patients is such an after training so essential as in the
psychic elements of their sexual life. For nowhere have culture and
education produced as much harm as here, and it is here, as experience
will show you, that the controlling etiologies of the neuroses are
found. The other etiological element, the constitutional contribution,
is really given to us as something immutable. But this gives rise to an
important demand on the doctor. Not only must he be of unblemished
character—“morality is really a matter of course” as the principal
person in Th. Vischer’s “Auch Einer” used to say—but he must have
overcome in his own personality the mixture of lewdness and prudishness
with which so many others are wont to meet the sexual problems.

This is perhaps the place for another observation. I know that the
emphasis which I laid on the sexual rôle in the origin of the
psychoneuroses has become widely known. But I also know that restriction
and nearer determinations are of little use with the great public; the
multitude has little room in its memory, and generally retains from a
statement the bare nucleus, thus creating for itself an easily
remembered extreme. The same might also have happened to some physicians
when the faint notion that they have of my theory is that I trace back
the neurosis in the last place to sexual privation. Of such there is
surely no dearth under the vital conditions of our society. But if that
supposition were true would it not seem obvious that in order to avoid
the roundabout way of the psychic treatment and tend directly towards
the cure, we should directly recommend sexual participation as the
remedy? I really do not know what could induce me to suppress these
conclusions if they were justified. But the state of affairs is
different. The sexual need or privation is merely one of the factors
playing a part in the mechanism of the neurosis, and if it alone existed
the result would not be a disease but a dissipation. The other equally
indispensable factor, which one is only too ready to forget, is the
sexual repugnance of neurotics, their inability to love; it is that
psychic feature which I have designated as “repression.” It is only from
the conflict between the two strivings that the neurotic malady
originates, and it is for this reason that the advice for sexual
participation in the psychoneuroses can really only seldom be designated
as good.

Allow me to conclude with this guarded remark. Let us hope that with an
interest for psychotherapy, purified of all hostile prejudice, you will
help us to do some good in the treatment of the severe cases of
psychoneuroses.




                              CHAPTER IX.
 MY VIEWS ON THE RÔLE OF SEXUALITY IN THE ETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES.[54]


I am of the opinion that my theory on the etiological significance of
the sexual moment in the neuroses can be best appreciated by following
its development. I will by no means make any effort to deny that it
passed through an evolution during which it underwent a change. My
colleagues can find the assurance in this admission that this theory is
nothing other than the result of continued and painstaking experiences.
In contradistinction to this whatever originates from speculation can
certainly appear complete at one go and continue unchanged.

Originally the theory had reference only to the morbid pictures
comprehended as “neurasthenia,” among which I found two types which
occasionally appeared pure, and which I described as “actual
neurasthenia” and “anxiety neurosis.” For it was always known that
sexual moments could play a part in the causation of these forms, but
they were found neither regularly effective, nor did one think of
conceding to them a precedence over other etiological influences. I was
above all surprised at the frequency of coarse disturbances in the vita
sexualis of nervous patients. The more I was in quest of such
disturbances, during which I remembered that all men conceal the truth
in things sexual, and the more skilful I became in continuing the
examination despite the incipient negation, the more regularly such
disease-forming moments were discovered in the sexual life, until it
seemed to me that they were but little short of universal. But one must
from the first be prepared for similar frequent occurrences of sexual
irregularities under the stress of the social relations of our society,
and one could therefore remain in doubt as to what part of the deviation
from the normal sexual function is to be considered as a morbid cause. I
could therefore only place less value on the regular demonstration of
sexual noxas than on other experiences which appeared to me to be less
equivocal. It was found that the form of the malady, be it neurasthenia
or anxiety neurosis, shows a constant relation to the form of the sexual
injury. In the typical cases of neurasthenia we could always demonstrate
masturbation or accumulated pollutions, while in anxiety neurosis we
could find such factors as coitus interruptus, “frustrated excitement,”
etc. The moment of insufficient discharge of the generated libido seemed
to be common to both. Only after this experience, which is easy to gain
and very often confirmed, had I the courage to claim for the sexual
influences a prominent place in the etiology of the neurosis. It also
happened that the mixed forms of neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis
occurring so often, showed the admixture of the etiologies accepted for
both, and that such a bipartition in the form of the manifestations of
the neurosis seemed to accord well with the polar characters of
sexuality (male and female).

At the same time, while I assigned to sexuality this significance in the
origin of the simple neurosis, I still professed for the psychoneuroses
(hysteria and obsessions) a purely psychological theory in which the
sexual moment was no differently considered than any other emotional
sources. Together with J. Breuer, and in addition to observations which
he has made on his hysterical patients fully a decade before, I have
studied the mechanism of the origin of hysterical symptoms by the
awakening of memories in hypnotic states. We obtained information which
permitted us to cross the bridge from Charcot’s traumatic hysteria to
the common non-traumatic hysteria. We reached the conception that the
hysterical symptoms are permanent results of psychic traumas, and that
the amount of affect belonging to them was pushed away from conscious
elaboration by special determinations, thus forcing an abnormal road
into bodily innervation. The terms “strangulated affect,” “conversion,”
and “ab-reaction,” comprise the distinctive characteristics of this
conception.

In the close relations of the psychoneuroses to the simple neuroses,
which can go so far that the diagnostic distinction is not always easy
for the unpracticed, it could happen that the cognition gained from one
sphere has also taken effect in the other. Leaving such influences out
of the question, the deep study of the psychic traumas also leads to the
same results. If by the “analytic” method we continue to trace the
psychic traumas from which the hysterical symptoms are derived, we
finally reach to experiences which belong to the patient’s childhood,
and concern his sexual life. This can be found even in such cases where
a banal emotion of a non-sexual nature has occasioned the outburst of
the disease. Without taking into account these sexual traumas of
childhood we could neither explain the symptoms, find their
determination intelligible, nor guard against their recurrence. The
incomparable significance of sexual experiences in the etiology of the
psychoneuroses seems therefore firmly established, and this fact remains
until today one of the main supports of the theory.

If we represent this theory by saying that the course of the life long
hysterical neurosis lies in the sexual experiences of early childhood
which are usually trivial in themselves, it surely would sound strange
enough. But if we take cognizance of the historical development of the
theory, and transfer the main content of the same into the sentence:
hysteria is the expression of a special behavior of the sexual function
of the individual, and that this behavior was already decisively
determined by the first effective influences and experiences of
childhood, we will perhaps be poorer in a paradox but richer in a motive
for directing our attention to a hitherto very neglected and most
significant aftereffect of infantile impressions in general.

As I reserve the question whether the etiology of hysteria (and
compulsion neurosis) is to be found in the sexual infantile experiences
for a later more thorough discussion, I now return to the construction
of the theory expressed in some small preliminary publications in the
years 1895–1896.[55] The bringing into prominence of the assumed
etiological moments permitted us at the time to contrast the common
neuroses which are maladies with an actual etiology, with the
psychoneuroses which etiology was in the first place to be sought in the
sexual experiences of remote times. The theory culminates in the
sentence: In a normal vita sexualis no neurosis is possible.

If I still consider today this sentence as correct it is really not
surprising that after ten years labor on the knowledge of these
relations I passed a good way beyond my former point of view, and that I
now think myself in a position to correct by detailed experience the
imperfections, the displacements, and the misconceptions, from which
this theory then suffered. By chance my former rather meagre material
furnished me with a great number of cases in which infantile histories,
sexual seduction by grown-up persons or older children, played the main
rôle. I overestimated the frequency of these (otherwise not to be
doubted) occurrences, the more so because I was then in no position to
distinguish definitely the deceptive memories of hysterical patients
concerning their childhood, from the traces of the real processes,
whereas, I have since then learned to explain many a seduction fancy as
an attempt at defense against the reminiscence of their own sexual
activity (infantile masturbation). The emphasis laid on the “traumatic”
element of the infantile sexual experience disappeared with this
explanation, and it remained obvious that the infantile sexual
activities (be they spontaneous or provoked) dictate the course of the
later sexual life after maturity. The same explanation which really
corrects the most significant of my original errors perforce also
changed the conception of the mechanism of the hysterical symptoms.
These no longer appeared as direct descendants of repressed memories of
sexual infantile experiences, but between the symptoms and the infantile
impressions there slipped in the fancies (confabulations of memory) of
the patients which were mostly produced during the years of puberty and
which on the one hand, are raised from and over the infantile memories,
and on the other, are immediately transformed into symptoms. Only after
the introduction of the element of hysterical fancies did the structure
of the neurosis and its relation to the life of the patient become
transparent. It also resulted in a veritable surprising analogy between
these unconscious hysterical fancies and the romances which became
conscious as delusions in paranoia.

After this correction the “infantile sexual traumas” were in a sense
supplanted by the “infantilism of sexuality.” A second modification of
the original theory was not remote. With the accepted frequency of
seduction in childhood there also disappeared the enormous emphasis of
the accidental influences of sexuality to which I wished to shift the
main rôle in the causation of the disease without, however, denying
constitutional and hereditary moments. I even hoped to solve thereby the
problem of the selection of the neurosis, that is, to decide by the
details of the sexual infantile experience, the form of the
psychoneurosis into which the patient may merge. Though with reserve I
thought at that time that passive behavior during these scenes results
in the specific predisposition for hysteria, while active behavior
results in compulsion neurosis. This conception I was later obliged to
disclaim completely though some facts of the supposed connection between
passivity and hysteria, and activity and compulsion neurosis, can be
maintained to some extent. With the disappearance of the accidental
influences of experiences, the elements of constitution and heredity had
to regain the upper hand, but differing from the view generally in vogue
I placed the “sexual constitution” in place of the general neuropathic
predisposition. In my recent work, “Three Contributions to the Sexual
Theory.”[56] I have attempted to discuss the varieties of this sexual
constitution, the components of the sexual impulse in general, and its
origin from the contributory sources of the organism.

Still in connection with the changed conception of the “sexual infantile
traumas,” the theory continued to develop in a course which was already
indicated in the publications of 1894–1896. Even before sexuality was
installed in its proper place in the etiology, I had already stated as a
condition for the pathogenic efficaciousness of an experience that the
latter must appear to the ego as unbearable and thus evoke an exertion
for defense. To this defense I have traced the psychic splitting—or as
it was then called the splitting of consciousness—of hysteria. If the
defense succeeded, the unbearable experience with its resulting affect
was expelled from consciousness and memory; but under certain conditions
the thing expelled which was now unconscious, developed its activity,
and with the aid of the symptoms and their adhering affect it returned
into consciousness, so that the disease corresponded to a failure of the
defense. This conception had the merit of entering into the play of the
psychic forces, and hence approximate the psychic processes of hysteria
to the normal instead of shifting the characteristic of the neurosis
into an enigmatic and no further analyzable disturbance.

Further inquiries among persons who remained normal furnished the
unexpected result, that the sexual histories of their childhood need not
differ essentially from the infantile life of neurotics, and that
especially the rôle of seduction is the same in the former, so the
accidental influences receded still more in comparison to the moments of
“repression” (which I began to use instead of “defense”). It really does
not depend on the sexual excitements which an individual experiences in
his childhood but above all on his reactions towards these experiences,
and whether these impressions responded with “repression” or not. It
could be shown that spontaneous sexual manifestations of childhood were
frequently interrupted in the course of development by an act of
repression. The sexual maturity of neurotic individuals thus regularly
brings with it a fragment of “sexual repression” from childhood which
manifests itself in the requirements of real life. Psychoanalyses of
hysterical individuals show that the malady is the result of the
conflict between the libido and the sexual repression, and that their
symptoms have the value of a compromise between both psychic streams.

Without a comprehensive discussion of my conception of repression I
could not explain any further this part of the theory. It suffices to
refer here to my “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory,” where I
have made an attempt to throw some light on the somatic processes in
which the essence of sexuality is to be sought. I have stated there that
the constitutional sexual predisposition of the child is more
irregularly multifarious than one would expect, that it deserves to be
called “polymorphous-perverse,” and that from this predisposition the so
called normal behavior of the sexual functions results through a
repression of certain components. By referring to the infantile
character of sexuality, I could form a simple connection among normal,
perversions, and neurosis. The normal resulted through the repression of
certain partial impulses and components of the infantile predisposition,
and through the subordination of the rest under the primacy of the
genital zones for the service of the function of procreation. The
perversions corresponded to disturbances of this connection due to a
superior compulsive like development of some of the partial impulses,
while the neurosis could be traced to a marked repression of the
libidinous strivings. As almost all perversive impulses of the infantile
predisposition are demonstrable as forces of symptom formation in the
neurosis, in which, however, they exist in a state of repression, I
could designate the neurosis as the “negative” of the perversion.

I think it worth emphasizing that with all changes my ideas on the
etiology of the psychoneuroses still never disavowed or abandoned two
points of view, to wit, the estimation of sexuality and infantilism. In
other respects we have in place of the accidental influences the
constitutional moments, and instead of the pure psychologically intended
defense we have the organic “sexual repression.” Should anybody ask
where a cogent proof can be found for the asserted etiological
significance of sexual factors in the psychoneuroses, and argue that
since an outburst of these diseases can result from the most banal
emotions, and even from somatic causes, a specific etiology in the form
of special experiences of childhood must therefore be disavowed; I
mention as an answer for all these arguments the psychoanalytic
investigation of neurotics as the source from which the disputed
conviction emanates. If one only makes use of this method of
investigation he will discover that the symptoms represent the whole or
a partial sexual manifestation of the patient from the sources of the
normal or perverse partial impulses of sexuality. Not only does a good
part of the hysterical symptomatology originate directly from the
manifestations of the sexual excitement, not only are a series of
erogenous zones in strengthening infantile attributes raised in the
neurosis to the importance of genitals, but even the most complicated
symptoms become revealed as the converted representations of fancies
having a sexual situation as a content. He who can interpret the
language of hysteria can understand that the neurosis only deals with
the repressed sexuality. One should, however, understand the sexual
function in its proper sphere as circumscribed by the infantile
predisposition. Where a banal emotion has to be added to the causation
of the disease, the analysis regularly shows that the sexual components
of the traumatic experience, which are never missing, have exercised the
pathogenic effect.

We have unexpectedly advanced from the question of the causation of the
psychoneuroses to the problem of its essence. If we wish to take
cognizance of what we discovered by psychoanalysis we can only say that
the essence of these maladies lies in disturbances of the sexual
processes, in those processes in the organism which determine the
formation and utilization of the sexual libido. We can hardly avoid
perceiving these processes in the last place as chemical, so that we can
recognize in the so called actual neuroses the somatic effects of
disturbances in the sexual metabolism, while in the psychoneuroses we
recognize besides the psychic effects of the same disturbances. The
resemblance of the neuroses to the manifestations of intoxication and
abstinence following certain alkaloids, and to Basedow’s and Addison’s
diseases, obtrudes itself clinically without any further ado, and just
as these two diseases should no more be described as “nervous diseases,”
so will the genuine “neuroses” soon have to be removed from this class
despite their nomenclature.

Everything that can exert harmful influences in the processes serving
the sexual function therefore belongs to the etiology of the neurosis.
In the first place we have the noxas directly affecting the sexual
functions insofar as they are accepted as injuries by the sexual
constitution which is changeable through culture and breeding. In the
second place, we have all the different noxas and traumas which may also
injure the sexual processes by injuring the organism as a whole. But we
must not forget that the etiological problem in the neuroses is at least
as complicated as in the causation of any other disease. One single
pathogenic influence almost never suffices, it mostly requires a
multiplicity of etiological moments reinforcing one another, and which
can not be brought in contrast to one another. It is for that reason
that the state of neurotic illness is not sharply separated from the
normal. The disease is the result of a summation, and the measure of the
etiological determinations can be completed from any one part. To seek
the etiology of the neurosis exclusively in heredity or in the
constitution would be no less one sided than to attempt to raise to the
etiology the accidental influences of sexuality alone, even though the
explanations show that the essence of this malady lies only in a
disturbance of the sexual processes of the organism.




                               CHAPTER X.
       HYSTERICAL FANCIES AND THEIR RELATIONS TO BISEXUALITY.[57]


The delusional formations of paranoiacs containing the greatness and
sufferings of their own ego, which manifest themselves quite typically
in almost monotonous forms are universally familiar. Furthermore,
through numerous communications we became acquainted with the peculiar
organizations by means of which certain perverts put into operation
their sexual gratifications, be it in fancy or reality. On the other
hand it may sound rather novel to some to hear that quite analogous
psychic formations regularly appear in all psychoneuroses, especially in
hysteria, and that these so called hysterical fancies show important
relations to the causation of the neurotic symptoms.

Of the same source and of the normal prototype are all these fantastic
creations, so called reveries of youth, which have already gained a
certain consideration in the literature, though not a sufficient
one.[58] They are perhaps equally frequent in both sexes; in girls and
women they seem to be wholly of an erotic nature, while in men they are
of an erotic or ambitious nature. Yet even in men the significance of
the erotic moment is not to be put in the second place, for on examining
more closely the reveries of men we generally learn that all these
heroic acts are accomplished, that all these successes are acquired in
order to please a woman and to be preferred to other men.[59] These
fancies are wish gratifications which emanate from privation and
longing. They are justly named “day dreams” for they give the key for
the understanding of night dreams in which the nucleus of the dream
formation is produced by just such complicated, disfigured day fancies
which are misunderstood by the conscious psychic judgment.[60]

These day dreams are garnished with great interest, are cautiously
nurtured, and coyly guarded, as if they were numbered among the most
intimate estates of personality. On the street, however, the day dreamer
can be readily recognized by a sudden, as if absent minded smile, by
talking to himself, or by a running-like acceleration of his gait
wherein he designates the acme of the imaginary situation.

All hysterical attacks which I have been thus far able to examine proved
to be such involuntary incursions of day dreams. Observation leaves no
doubt that such fancies may exist as unconscious or conscious and
whenever they become unconscious they may also become pathogenic, that
is, they may express themselves in symptoms and attacks. Under favorable
conditions it is possible for consciousness to seize such unconscious
fancies. One of my patients whose attention I have called to her fancies
narrated that once while in the street she suddenly found herself in
tears, and rapidly reflecting over the cause of her weeping the fancy
became clear to her. She fancied herself in delicate relationship with a
piano virtuoso familiar in the city, but whom she did not know
personally. In her fancy she bore him a child (she was childless), and
he then deserted her, leaving her and her child in misery. At this
passage of the romance she burst into tears.

The unconscious fancies are either from the first unconscious, having
been formed in the unconscious, or what is more frequently the case they
were once conscious fancies, day dreams, and were then intentionally
forgotten, merging into the unconscious by “repression.” Their content
then either remained the same or underwent a transformation, so that the
present unconscious fancy represents a descendant of the once conscious
one. The unconscious fancy stands in a very important relation to the
sexual life of the person, it is really identical with that fancy which
helped it towards sexual gratification during a period of masturbation.
The masturbating act (in the broader sense the onanistic) then consisted
of two parts, the evocation of the fancy, and the active performance of
self gratification at the height of the same. This combination is
familiarly in itself a soldering.[61] Originally this action was a
purely auto-erotic undertaking for the pleasure obtained from a certain
so called erogenous part of the body. Later this action blended with a
wish presentation from the sphere of the object loved, and served for a
partial realization of the situation in which this fancy culminated. If,
then, the person forgoes in this manner the masturbo-fantastic
gratification, the action remains undone, the fancy, however, changes
from a conscious to an unconscious one. If no other manner of sexual
gratification occurs, if the person remains abstinent and does not
succeed in sublimating his libido, that is, in diverting the sexual
excitement to a higher aim, we then have the conditions for the
refreshment of the unconscious fancy; it grows exuberantly and with all
the force of the desire for love at least a fragment of its content
becomes a morbid symptom.

The unconscious fancies are then the nearest psychical first steps of a
whole series of hysterical symptoms. The hysterical symptoms are nothing
other than unconscious fancies brought to light by “conversion,” and
insofar as they are somatic symptoms they are frequently enough taken
from the spheres of the sexual feelings and motor innervations which
originally accompanied the former still conscious fancies. In this way
the disuse of onanism is really made retrograde, and the final aim of
the whole pathological process, the restoration of the primary sexual
gratification, though it never becomes perfect, in a manner always
achieves a certain approximation.

The interest of him who studies hysteria turns directly from the
symptoms to the fancies from which the former originate. The technique
of psychoanalysis gives the means of finding out from the symptoms the
unconscious fancies, and then of bringing them back to the patient’s
consciousness. In this way it was found that the unconscious fancies of
hysterics perfectly correspond in content to the consciously performed
gratification situations of perverts. Those who lack examples of such
nature need only recall the historical managements of the Roman Caesars
whose frenzies were naturally only conditioned by the unrestricted
fullness of the fancy creators. The delusional formations of paranoiacs
are of the same nature, they are fancies which directly become
conscious, and which are borne by the masochistic-sadistic components of
the sexual impulse. Complete counterparts of these can also be found in
certain unconscious fancies of hysterics. It is a familiar, practically
significant fact that hysterics express their fancies not as symptoms
but in conscious realization, and in this way they feign and commit
murders, assaults, and sexual aggressions.

All that can be found out about the sexuality of the psychoneurotic can
be ascertained by the psychoanalytic examination which leads from the
obtrusive symptoms to the hidden unconscious fancies; herein, too, is
the fact, the communication of which will be put in the foreground of
this short preliminary publication.

Probably in view of the difficulties which prevent the effort of the
unconscious fancies from expressing themselves, the relation between the
fancies to the symptoms is not simple but rather manifoldly
complicated.[62] As a rule, that is, in a fully developed and a long
standing neurosis, a symptom does not correspond to an individual
unconscious fancy, but to a number of such, and indeed it is not
arbitrary but in lawful combination. To be sure in the beginning of the
disease all these complications are not developed.

For the sake of general interest I pass over the connection of this
communication and insert a series of formulæ which strive to
progressively exhaust the nature of hysteria. They do not contradict one
another but correspond partly to more complete and sharper conceptions,
and partly to the use of different points of view.

1. The hysterical symptom is the memory symbol of certain efficacious
(traumatic) impressions and experiences.

2. The hysterical symptom is the compensation by conversion for the
associative return of the traumatic experience.

3. The hysterical symptom—like all other psychic formations—is the
expression of a wish realization.

4. The hysterical symptom is the realization of an unconscious fancy
serving as a wish fulfilment.

5. The hysterical symptom serves as a sexual gratification, and
represents a part of the sexual life of the individual (corresponding to
one of the components of his sexual impulse).

6. The hysterical symptom, in a fashion, corresponds to the return of
the sexual gratification which was real in infantile life but had been
repressed since then.

7. The hysterical symptom results as a compromise between two opposing
affects or impulse incitements, one of which strives to bring to
realization a partial impulse, or a component of the sexual
constitution, while the other strives to suppress the same.

8. The hysterical symptom may undertake the representation of diverse
unconscious non-sexual incitements, but can not lack the sexual
significance.

It is the seventh among these determinations which expresses most
exhaustively the essence of the hysterical symptom as a realization of
an unconscious fancy, and it is the eighth which properly designates the
significance of the sexual moment. Some of the preceding formulæ are
contained as first steps in this formula.

In view of these relations between symptoms and fancies one can readily
reach from the psychoanalysis of the symptoms to the knowledge of the
components of the sexual impulse controlling the individual, just as I
have shown in the “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory.” But in
some cases this examination gives rather unexpected results. It shows
that many symptoms can not be solved by one unconscious sexual fancy or
by a series of fancies in which the most significant and most primitive
is of a sexual nature, but in order to solve the symptom two sexual
fancies are required, one of the masculine and one of the feminine
character, so that one of these fancies arises from a homosexual
impulse. The axiom pronounced in formula seven is in no way effected by
this novelty, so that a hysterical symptom necessarily corresponds to a
compromise between a libidinous and a repressed emotion, but besides
that, it can correspond to a union of two libidinous fancies of contrary
sex characters.

I refrain from giving examples for this axiom. Experience has taught me
that short analyses compressed into the form of an abstract can never
make the demonstrable impression for which they were intended. The
communication of fully analyzed cases must be reserved for another
place.

I therefore content myself in formulating the axiom and in elucidating
its significance:

9. An hysterical symptom is the expression, on the one hand, of a
masculine, and on the other hand of a feminine unconscious sexual fancy.

I expressly observe that I am unable to adjudge to this axiom the
similar general validity that I claimed for the other formulæ. As far as
I can see it is met neither in all symptoms of a single case, nor in all
cases. On the contrary it is not difficult to find cases in which the
contrary sexual emotions have found separate symptomatic expression, so
that the symptoms of hetero- and homosexuality can be as sharply
distinguished from each other as the fancies hidden behind them.
Nevertheless, the relation claimed in the ninth formula occurs
frequently enough, and wherever it is found it is of sufficient
significance to merit a special formulation. It seems to me to signify
the highest stage of complexity to which the determination of hysterical
symptoms can reach, and can only be expected in a long standing neurosis
and where a great amount of organization has occurred.[63]

The demonstrable bisexual significance of hysterical symptoms occurring
in many cases is indeed an interesting proof for the assertion
formulated by me that the supposed bisexual predisposition of man can be
especially recognized in psychoneurotics by means of psychoanalysis.[64]
Quite an analogous process from the same sphere is that in which the
masturbator in his conscious fancies attempts to live through in his
imagination the fancied situations of both the man and the woman. Other
counterparts are found in certain hysterical crises in which the
patients play both rôles lying at the basis of sexual fancies; thus, for
example, one of the cases under my observation presses his garments to
his body with one arm (as woman), and with the other arm he attempts to
tear them off (as man). This contradictory simultaneity determines most
of the incomprehensibility of the situation otherwise so plastically
represented in the attack, and is excellently suited for the concealment
of the effective unconscious fancy.

In psychoanalytical treatment it is very important to be prepared for
the bisexual significance of a symptom. It should not be at all
surprising or misleading when a symptom remains apparently undiminished
in spite of the fact that one of its sexual determinants is already
solved. Perhaps it is still supported by the unsuspected contrary
sexual. Furthermore, during the treatment of such cases we can observe
how the patient makes use of this convenience. During the analysis of
the one sexual significance he continually switches his thoughts into
the sphere of the contrary significance just as if onto a neighboring
track.

-----

Footnote 1:

  Studien über Hysterie von Jos. Breuer und Sigm. Freud. Leipzig und
  Wien, Franz Deuticke, 1895. 2nd ed., 1909.

Footnote 2:

  Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre, Vols. I. and II. Leipzig
  und Wien, Deuticke, 1906, and 1909.

Footnote 3:

  Bleuler, Freudsche Mechanismen in der Symptomatologie der Psychosen,
  Psychiatrisch-Neurolog. Wochenschrift, 1906, Nrs. 35 and 36.

Footnote 4:

  Jung, The Psychology of Dementia Præcox, Nervous and Mental Disease
  Monograph Series, Nr. 3.

Footnote 5:

  Riklin, Psychiatrisch-Neurolog. Wochenschrift, 1905, Nr. 46.

Footnote 6:

  Brill, Psychological Factors in Dementia Præcox, Journal of Abnormal
  Psychology, Vol. III, Nr. 4, and A Case of Schizophrenia, American
  Journal of Insanity, Vol. LXVI, No. 1.

Footnote 7:

  Freud, Deuticke, 1909.

Footnote 8:

  Freud, Karger, 1907.

Footnote 9:

  Freud, Deuticke, 1905.

Footnote 10:

  Written in collaboration with Dr. Joseph Breuer.

Footnote 11:

  The possibility of such a therapy was clearly recognized by Delboeuf
  and Binet, as is shown by the accompanying quotations: Delboeuf, Le
  magnétisme animal, Paris, 1889: “On s’expliquerait des lors comment le
  magnétiseur aide à guérison. Il remet le sujet dans l’état où le mal
  s’est manifesté et combat par la parole le même mal, mais renaissant.”
  (Binet, Les altérations de la personnalité, 1892, p. 243): “...
  peut-être verra-t-on qu’en reportant le malade par un artifice mental,
  au moment même ou le symptome a apparu pour la premiere fois, on rend
  ce malade plus docile a une suggestion curative.” In the interesting
  book of Janet, L’Automatism Psychologique, Paris, 1889, we find the
  description of a cure brought about in a hysterical girl by a process
  similar to our method.

Footnote 12:

  We are unable to distinguish in this preliminary contribution what
  there is new in this content and what can be found in such other
  authors as Moebius and Strümpel who present similar views on hysteria.
  The greatest similarity to our theoretical and therapeutical
  accomplishments we accidentally found in some published observations
  of Benedict which we shall discuss hereafter.

Footnote 13:

  The German abreagiren has no exact English equivalent. It will
  therefore be rendered throughout the text by “ab-react,” the literal
  meaning is to react away from or to react off. It has different shades
  of meaning, from defense reaction to emotional catharsis, which can be
  discerned from the context.

Footnote 14:

  As an example of the technique mentioned above, that is, of
  investigating in a non-somnambulic state or where consciousness is not
  broadened, I will relate a case which I analyzed recently. I treated a
  woman of thirty-eight who suffered from an anxiety neurosis
  (agoraphobia, fear of death, etc.). Like many patients of that type
  she had a disinclination to admit that she acquired this disease in
  her married state and was quite desirous of referring it back to early
  youth. She informed me that at the age of seventeen when she was in
  the street of her small city she had the first attack of vertigo,
  anxiety, and faintness, and that these attacks recurred at times up to
  a few years ago when they were replaced by her present disease. I
  thought that the first attacks of vertigo, in which the anxiety was
  only blurred, were hysterical and decided to analyze the same. All she
  knows is that she had the first attack when she went out to make
  purchases in the main street of her city.—“What purchases did you wish
  to make?”—“Various things, I believe it was for a ball to which I was
  invited.”—“When was the ball to take place?”—“I believe two days
  later.”—“Something must have happened a few days before this which
  excited you, and which made an impression on you.”—“But I don’t know,
  it is now twenty-one years.”—“That does not matter, you will recall
  it. I will exert some pressure on your head and when I stop it you
  will either think of or see something which I want you to tell me.” I
  went through this procedure, but she remained quiet.—“Well, has
  nothing come into your mind?”—“I thought of something, but that can
  have no connection with it.”—“Just say it.”—“I thought of a young girl
  who is dead, but she died when I was eighteen, that is, a year
  later.”—“Let us adhere to this. What was the matter with your
  friend?”—“Her death affected me very much, because I was very friendly
  with her. A few weeks before another young girl died, which attracted
  a great deal of attention in our city, but then I was only seventeen
  years old.”—“You see, I told you that the thought obtained under the
  pressure of the hands can be relied upon. Well now, can you recall the
  thought that you had when you became dizzy in the street?”—“There was
  no thought, it was vertigo.”—“That is quite impossible, such
  conditions are never without accompanying ideas. I will press your
  head again and you will think of it. Well, what came to your mind?”—“I
  thought, ‘now I am the third.’”—“What do you mean?”—“When I became
  dizzy I must have thought, now I will die like the other two.”—“That
  was then the idea, during the attack you thought of your friend, her
  death must have made a great impression on you.”—“Yes, indeed, I
  recall now that I felt dreadful when I heard of her death, to think
  that I should go to a ball while she lay dead, but I anticipated so
  much pleasure at the ball and was so occupied with the invitation that
  I did not wish to think of this sad event.” (Notice here the
  intentional repression from consciousness which caused the
  reminiscences of her friend to become pathogenic.)

  The attack was now in a measure explained, but I still needed the
  occasional moment which just then provoked this recollection, and
  accidentally I formed a happy supposition about it.—“Can you recall
  through which street you passed at that time?”—“Surely, the main
  street with its old houses, I can see it now.”—“And where did your
  friend live?”—“In the same street. I had just passed her house and was
  two houses farther when I was seized with the attack.”—“Then it was
  the house which you passed that recalled your dead friend, and the
  contrast which you then did not wish to think about that again took
  possession of you.”

  Still I was not satisfied, perhaps there was something else which
  provoked or strengthened the hysterical disposition in a hitherto
  normal girl. My suppositions were directed to the menstrual
  indisposition as an appropriate moment, and I asked, “Do you know when
  during that month you had your menses?”—She became indignant: “Do you
  expect me to know that? I only know that I had them then very rarely
  and irregularly. When I was seventeen I only had them once.”—“Well let
  us enumerate the days, months, etc., so as to find when it
  occurred.”—She with certainty decided on a month and wavered between
  two days preceding a date which accompanied a fixed holiday.—Does that
  in any way correspond with the time of the ball?—She answered quietly:
  “The ball was on this holiday. And now I recall that I was impressed
  by the fact that the only menses which I had had during the year
  occurred just when I had to go to the ball. It was the first
  invitation to a ball that I had received.”

  The combination of the events can now be readily constructed and the
  mechanism of this hysterical attack readily viewed. To be sure the
  result was gained after painstaking labor. It necessitated on my side
  full confidence in the technique and individual directing ideas in
  order to reawaken such details of forgotten experiences after
  twenty-one years in a sceptical and awakened patient. But then
  everything agreed.

Footnote 15:

  A better description of this peculiar state in which one knows
  something and at the same time does not know it, I could never obtain.
  It can apparently be understood only if one has found himself in such
  a state. I have at my disposal a very striking recollection of this
  kind which I can vividly see. If I make the effort to recall what
  passed through my mind at that time my output seems very poor. I saw
  at that time something which was not at all appropriate to my
  expectations, and what I saw did not in the least divert me from my
  definite purpose, whereas this perception ought to have done away with
  my purpose. I did not become conscious of this contradiction nor did I
  remark the affect of the repulsion to which it was undoubtedly due
  that this perception did not attain any psychic validity. I was struck
  with that form of blindness in seeing eyes, which one admires so much
  in mothers towards their daughters, in husbands towards their wives,
  and in rulers towards their favorites.

Footnote 16:

  It will be shown that, notwithstanding, I erred.

Footnote 17:

  Die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen, Neurologisches Centralblatt, 1 June, 1894.

Footnote 18:

  I can neither exclude nor prove that this pain, especially of the
  thighs, was of a neurasthenic nature.

Footnote 19:

  To my surprise I once discovered that such subsequent
  ab-reaction—through other impressions than nursing—may form the
  content of an otherwise enigmatic neurosis. It was the case of a
  pretty girl of nineteen, Miss Matilda H. whom I first saw with an
  incomplete paralysis of the legs, and months afterward I was again
  called because her character had changed. She was depressed and tired
  of living, entertaining lack of consideration for her mother, and was
  irritable and inapproachable. The whole picture of the patient did not
  seem to me to be that of an ordinary melancholia. She could easily be
  put into a somnambulic state, and I made use of this peculiarity to
  impart to her each time commands and suggestions to which she listened
  in her profound sleep and responded with profuse tears, but which,
  however, caused but little change in her condition. One day while
  hypnotized she became talkative and informed me that the reason for
  her depression was the breaking of her betrothal many months before.
  She stated that on closer acquaintance with her fiance the things
  displeasing to her and her mother became more and more evident. On the
  other hand, the material advantages of the engagement were too
  tangible to make the decision of a rupture easy, thus, both of them
  hesitated for a long time. She then merged into a condition of
  indecision in which she allowed everything to pass apathetically, and
  finally her mother pronounced for her the decisive “no.” Shortly
  after, she awoke as from a dream and began to occupy herself fervently
  with the thoughts about the broken betrothal, she began to weigh the
  pros and cons, a process which she continued for some time. At present
  she continues to live in that time of doubt, and entertains daily the
  moods and the thoughts which would have been appropriate for that day.
  The irritability against her mother could only be explained if we took
  into consideration the circumstances that existed on that decisive
  day. Next to this thought activity she found her present life a mere
  phantom just like a dream. I did not again succeed in getting the girl
  to talk—I continued my exhortations during deep somnambulism. I saw
  her each time burst into tears without however receiving any answer
  from her. But one day, it was near the anniversary of the engagement,
  the whole state of depression disappeared. This was attributed to my
  great hypnotic cure.

Footnote 20:

  It is different in a hypnoid-hysteria. Here the content of the
  separate psychic groups may never have been in the ego consciousness.

Footnote 21:

  I had under my observation another case in which a contracture of the
  masseters made it impossible for the artist to sing. The young lady in
  question through painful experiences in the family was forced to go on
  the stage. While in Rome rehearsing, in great excitement she suddenly
  perceived the sensation of being unable to close her opened mouth and
  sank fainting to the floor. The physician who was called closed her
  jaws forcibly, but the patient since that time was unable to open her
  jaws more than a finger’s breadth and had to give up her newly chosen
  profession. When she came under my care many years later, the motives
  for that excitement were apparently over for some time, for massage in
  a light hypnosis sufficed to open her mouth widely. The lady has since
  sung in public.

Footnote 22:

  But perhaps spinal neurasthenic?

Footnote 23:

  See Studien über Hysterie, p. 57, footnote.

Footnote 24:

  l. c.

Footnote 25:

  The literal translation of Auftreten is to press down by treading.

Footnote 26:

  In conditions of profounder psychic changes we apparently find a
  symbolic stamp (mark) of the more artificial usage of language in the
  form of emblematic pictures and sensations. There was a time in Mrs.
  Cäcilie M. during which every thought was changed into an
  hallucination, and which solution frequently afforded great humor. She
  at that time complained to me of being troubled by the hallucination
  that both her physicians, Breuer and I, were hanged in the garden on
  two nearby trees. The hallucination disappeared after the analysis
  revealed the following origin: The evening before Breuer refused her
  request for a certain drug. She then placed her hopes on me but found
  me just as inflexible. She was angry at both of us, and in her affect
  she thought, “They are worthy of each other, the one is a pendant of
  the other!”

Footnote 27:

  E. Hecker, Centralblatt für Nervenheilkunde, Dec., 1893.

Footnote 28:

  See Breuer und Freud, Studien über Hysterie. Deuticke, Leipzig und
  Wien, 1895, p. 15.

Footnote 29:

  See Breuer und Freud, Studien über Hysterie. Deuticke, Leipzig und
  Wien, 1895, p. 106.

Footnote 30:

  See Breuer und Freud, Studien über Hysterie. Deuticke, Leipzig und
  Wien, 1895, p. 15.

Footnote 31:

  As mentioned in the preface the author has long since discarded this
  pressure procedure.—Translator’s note.

Footnote 32:

  See Breuer und Freud, Studien über Hysterie. Deuticke, Leipzig und
  Wien, 1895, p. 85.

Footnote 33:

  l. c., p. 15.

Footnote 34:

  See Breuer und Freud, Studien über Hysterie. Deuticke, Wien und
  Leipzig, 1895, p. 28.

Footnote 35:

  See Breuer und Freud, Studien über Hysterie. Deuticke, Leipzig und
  Wien, 1895, p. 55.

Footnote 36:

  État mental des hystériques, Paris, 1893 and 1894. Quelques
  définitions récentes de l’hystérie, Arch. de Neurol., 1893, XXXV-VI.

Footnote 37:

  Oppenheim: Hysteria is an exaggerated expression of emotion. But the
  “expression of emotion” represents that amount of psychic excitement
  which normally experiences conversion.

Footnote 38:

  Strümpel: The disturbance of hysteria lies in the psycho-physical,
  there where the physical and psychical are connected with each other.

Footnote 39:

  Janet, in the second chapter of his spirited essay “Quelques
  definitions,” etc., has treated the objection that the splitting of
  consciousness belongs also to the psychoses and the so called
  psychaesthenia, but in my opinion he has not satisfactorily solved it.
  It is essentially this objection which urged him to call hysteria a
  form of degeneration. But through no characteristic is he able to
  separate sufficiently the hysterical splitting of consciousness from
  the psychopathic, etc.

Footnote 40:

  The group of typical phobias, for which agoraphobia is a prototype,
  cannot be reduced to the psychic mechanisms here developed.
  Furthermore the mechanism of agoraphobia deviates in one decisive
  point from that of the real obsessions and from phobias based on such.
  Here there is no repressed idea from which the affect of fear has been
  separated. The fear of this phobia has another origin.

Footnote 41:

  E. Hecker, Über larvierte und abortive Angstzustände bei Neurasthenie,
  Centralblatt für Nervenheilkunde, December, 1893.—Anxiety is made
  particularly prominent among the chief symptoms of neurasthenia by
  Kaan, Der neurasthenische Angstaffekt bei Zwangsvorstellungen und der
  primordiale Grübelzwang, Wien, 1893.

Footnote 42:

  Die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen, Neurol. Centralbl., 1894, Nr. 10 u. 11.

Footnote 43:

  Obsession et phobies, Révue neurologique, 1895.

Footnote 44:

  Moebius, Neuropathologische Beiträge, 1894, 2. Heft.

Footnote 45:

  Peyer, Die nervösen Affektionen des Darmes, Wiener Klinik, Jänner,
  1893.

Footnote 46:

  Freud, Abwehr-Neuropsychosen.

Footnote 47:

  Neurologisches Centralblatt, 1896, Nr. 10.

Footnote 48:

  I myself surmise that the so frequently fabricated assaults of
  hysterical persons are obsessional confabulations emanating from the
  memory traces of infantile traumas.

Footnote 49:

  In an article on the anxiety neurosis (Neurologisches Centralblatt,
  1895, Nr. 2) I stated that “an anxiety neurosis which can almost
  typically be combined with hysteria can be evoked in maturing girls at
  the first encounter with the sexual problem.” I know today that the
  occasion in which such virginal anxiety breaks out does not really
  correspond to the first encounter with sexuality, but that in such
  persons there was in childhood a precedent experience of sexual
  passivity which memory was awakened at the “first encounter.”

Footnote 50:

  A psychological theory of the repression ought also to inform us why
  only ideas of a sexual content can be repressed. It may be formulated
  as follows: It is known that ideas of a sexual content produce
  exciting processes in the genitals resembling the actual sexual
  experience. It may be assumed that this somatic excitement becomes
  transformed into psychic. As a rule the activity referred to is much
  stronger at the time of the occurrence than at the recollection of the
  same. But if the sexual experience takes place during the time of
  sexual immaturity and the recollection of the same is awakened during
  or after maturity, the recollection then acts disproportionately more
  exciting than the previous experience, for puberty has in the mean
  time incomparably increased the reactive capacity of the sexual
  apparatus. But such an inverse proportion seems to contain the
  psychological determination of repression. Through the retardation of
  the pubescent maturity in comparison with the psychic function, the
  sexual life offers the only existing possibility for that inversion of
  the relative efficacy. The infantile traumas subsequently act like
  fresh experiences, but they are then unconscious. Deeper psychological
  discussions I will have to postpone for another time. I moreover call
  attention to the fact that the here considered time of “sexual
  maturity” does not coincide with puberty, but occurs before the same
  (eight to ten years).

Footnote 51:

  One example instead of many: An eleven-year-old boy has obsessively
  arranged for himself the following ceremonial before going to bed: He
  could not fall asleep unless he related to his mother most minutely
  all experiences of the day; not the smallest scrap of paper or any
  other rubbish was allowed in the evening on the carpet of his bedroom.
  The bed had to be moved close to the wall, three chairs had to stand
  in front of it, and the pillows had to lie in just such a position. In
  order to fall asleep he had to kick with both legs a number of times,
  and then had to lie on the side. This was explained as follows: Years
  before while putting this pretty boy to sleep, the servant girl made
  use of this opportunity to lay over him and assault him sexually. When
  this reminiscence was later awakened by a recent experience it made
  itself known to consciousness by the compulsion in the above mentioned
  ceremonial which sense could really be surmised and the details
  verified by psychoanalysis. The chairs before the bed which was close
  to the wall—so that no one could have access to it; the arrangement of
  the pillows in a definite manner—so that they should be differently
  arranged than they were on that evening; the motion with the legs—to
  kick away the person lying on him; sleeping on the side—because during
  that scene he lay on his back; the detailed confession to his
  mother—because in consequence of the prohibition of his seductress he
  concealed from his mother this and other sexual experiences; finally,
  keeping the floor of his bedroom clean—because this was the main
  reproach which he had to hear from his mother up to that time.

Footnote 52:

  When the meagre success of this treatment was later removed by an
  exacerbation, she did not again see the offensive pictures of strange
  genitals, but she had the idea that strangers saw her genitals as soon
  as they were behind her.

Footnote 53:

  Lecture delivered before the Vienna Medic. Doktorenkollegium, on
  December 12, 1904.

Footnote 54:

  From Löwenfeld, “Sexualleben und Nervenleiden,” IV ed., 1906.

Footnote 55:

  See Chapter VII, and Zur Aetiologie der Hysterie, Wiener, Klinische
  Rundschau, 1896.

Footnote 56:

  An English translation in preparation.

Footnote 57:

  Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft, herausgegeben von Hirschfeld, I,
  1908.

Footnote 58:

  Compare Breuer and Freud Studien über Hysterie, 1895. P. Janet,
  Névroses et ideés fixes, I (Les rêveries subconscientes), 1898.
  Havelock Ellis, Sexual Impulse and Modesty (German by Kötscher), 1900.
  Freud, Traumdeutung, 1906, 2d ed., 1909. A. Pick, Über pathologische
  Träumerei und ihre Beziehungen zur Hysteria, Jahrbuch für Psychiatrie
  und Neurologie, XIV, 1896.

Footnote 59:

  H. Ellis similarly expresses himself, l. c., p. 185.

Footnote 60:

  Compare Freud, Traumdeutung, 2d ed., p. 302.

Footnote 61:

  Compare Freud, Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory, 1895.

Footnote 62:

  The same thing holds true for the relation between the “latent”
  thoughts of the dream and the elements of the manifest content of the
  dream. See the Chapter on the “Work of the Dream” in the author’s
  Traumdeutung.

Footnote 63:

  Indeed J. Sadger, who recently discovered this sentence in question,
  independently by psychoanalysis, claims for it a general validity (Die
  Bedeutung der psychoanalytische Methode nach Freud, Centralbl. f.
  Nerv. u. Psych., Nr. 229.)

Footnote 64:

  Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

   10 the so called χατ’ εξοχὴν of     the so called κατ’ ἐξοχὴν of
      traumatic hysteria or of a       traumatic hysteria or of a
      series of                        series of

   65 scenes like the one of being     scenes like the one of being
      forced to hold our her hand in   forced to hold out her hand in

  123 be identified with personel or   be identified with personal or
      hereditary “degeneration.”       hereditary “degeneration.”

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTED PAPERS ON HYSTERIA AND OTHER PSYCHONEUROSES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The future of an illusion
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The future of an illusion

Author: Sigmund Freud

Editor: Ernest Jones

Translator: W. D. Robson-Scott

Release date: August 31, 2025 [eBook #76774]

Language: English

Original publication: Edinburgh: Horace Liverwright and the institute of psycho-analysis, 1928

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION ***





                       THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION


              THE INTERNATIONAL PSYCHO-ANALYTICAL LIBRARY

                         EDITED BY ERNEST JONES

                                 No. 15




                       THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION


                       SIGMUND FREUD, M.D., LL.D.

                               TRANSLATED
                                   BY
                           W. D. ROBSON-SCOTT

                     PUBLISHED BY HORACE LIVERIGHT
                  AND THE INSTITUTE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS
                               MCMXXVIII




   _Printed in Great Britain by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_




                           TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


I wish to express my thanks to the Editor and to Mr. James Strachey for
reading through this translation and making many helpful suggestions.

                                                             W. D. R.-S.




                               CHAPTER I


When one has lived for long within a particular culture[1] and has often
striven to discover its origins and the path of its development, one
feels for once the temptation to turn one’s attention in the other
direction and to ask what further fate awaits this culture and what
transformations it is destined to undergo. But one soon finds that the
value of such an enquiry is diminished from the outset by several
considerations. Above all, by the fact that there are only a few people
who can survey human activity in all its ramifications. Most people have
been compelled to restrict themselves to a single, or to a few, spheres
of interest; but the less a man knows of the past and the present the
more unreliable must his judgement of the future prove. And further it
is precisely in the matter of this judgement that the subjective
expectations of the individual play a part that is difficult to assess;
for these prove to be dependent on purely personal factors in his own
experience, on his more or less hopeful attitude to life, according as
temperament, success or failure has prescribed for him. And finally one
must take into account the remarkable fact that in general men
experience the present naïvely, so to speak, without being able to
estimate its content; they must first place it at a distance, _i.e._ the
present must have become the past before one can win from it points of
vantage from which to gauge the future.

Footnote 1:

  The German word _Kultur_ has been translated sometimes as ‘culture’
  and sometimes as ‘civilization’, denoting as it does a concept
  intermediate between these and at times inclusive of both.—ED.

And so he who yields to the temptation to deliver an opinion on the
probable future of our culture will do well to remind himself of the
difficulties just indicated, and likewise of the uncertainty that
attaches quite universally to every prophecy. It follows from this that
in hasty flight from so great a task I shall seek out the small tract of
territory to which my attention has hitherto been directed, as soon as I
have defined its position in general.

Human culture—I mean by that all those respects in which human life has
raised itself above animal conditions and in which it differs from the
life of the beasts, and I disdain to separate culture and
civilization—presents, as is well known, two aspects to the observer. It
includes on the one hand all the knowledge and power that men have
acquired in order to master the forces of nature and win resources from
her for the satisfaction of human needs; and on the other hand it
includes all the necessary arrangements whereby men’s relations to each
other, and in particular the distribution of the attainable riches, may
be regulated. The two tendencies of culture are not independent of each
other, first, because the mutual relations of men are profoundly
influenced by the measure of instinctual satisfaction that the existing
resources make possible; secondly, because the individual can himself
take on the quality of a piece of property in his relation to another,
in so far as this other makes use of his capacity for work or chooses
him as sexual object; and thirdly, because every individual is virtually
an enemy of culture, which is nevertheless ostensibly an object of
universal human concern. It is remarkable that little as men are able to
exist in isolation they should yet feel as a heavy burden the sacrifices
that culture expects of them in order that a communal existence may be
possible. Thus culture must be defended against the individual, and its
organization, its institutions and its laws, are all directed to this
end; they aim not only at establishing a certain distribution of
property, but also at maintaining it; in fact, they must protect against
the hostile impulses of mankind everything that contributes to the
conquest of nature and the production of wealth. Human creations are
easy to destroy, and science and technical skill, which have built them
up, can also be turned to their destruction.

So one gets the impression that culture is something which was imposed
on a resisting majority by a minority that understood how to possess
itself of the means of power and coercion. Of course it stands to reason
that these difficulties are not inherent in the nature of culture
itself, but are conditioned by the imperfections of the cultural forms
that have so far been developed. Indeed it is not difficult to point out
these defects. While mankind has made solid advances in the conquest of
nature and may expect to make still greater ones, no certain claim can
be established for a corresponding advance in the regulation of human
affairs, and probably at every period, as again now, many men have asked
themselves whether this fragment that has been acquired by culture is
indeed worth defending at all. One might suppose that a reorganization
of human relations should be possible, which, by abandoning coercion and
the suppression of the instincts, would remove the sources of
dissatisfaction with culture, so that undisturbed by inner conflict men
might devote themselves to the acquisition of natural resources and to
the enjoyment of the same. That would be the golden age, but it is
questionable if such a state of affairs can ever be realized. It seems
more probable that every culture must be built up on coercion and
instinctual renunciation; it does not even appear certain that without
coercion the majority of human individuals would be ready to submit to
the labour necessary for acquiring new means of supporting life. One
has, I think, to reckon with the fact that there are present in all men
destructive, and therefore anti-social and anti-cultural, tendencies,
and that with a great number of people these are strong enough to
determine their behaviour in human society.

This psychological fact acquires a decisive significance when one is
forming an estimate of human culture. One thought at first that the
essence of culture lay in the conquest of nature for the means of
supporting life, and in eliminating the dangers that threaten culture by
the suitable distribution of these among mankind, but now the emphasis
seems to have shifted away from the material plane on to the psychical.
The critical question is whether and to what extent one can succeed,
first, in diminishing the burden of the instinctual sacrifices imposed
on men; secondly, in reconciling them to those that must necessarily
remain; and thirdly, in compensating them for these. It is just as
impossible to do without government of the masses by a minority as it is
to dispense with coercion in the work of civilization, for the masses
are lazy and unintelligent, they have no love for instinctual
renunciation, they are not to be convinced of its inevitability by
argument, and the individuals support each other in giving full play to
their unruliness. It is only by the influence of individuals who can set
an example, whom the masses recognize as their leaders, that they can be
induced to submit to the labours and renunciations on which the
existence of culture depends. All is well if these leaders are people of
superior insight into what constitute the necessities of life, people
who have attained the height of mastering their own instinctual wishes.
But the danger exists that in order not to lose their influence they
will yield to the masses more than these will yield to them, and
therefore it seems necessary that they should be independent of the
masses by having at their disposal means of enforcing their authority.
To put it briefly, there are two widely diffused human characteristics
which are responsible for the fact that the organization of culture can
be maintained only by a certain measure of coercion: that is to say, men
are not naturally fond of work, and arguments are of no avail against
their passions.

I know what objections will be brought against these arguments. It will
be said that the character of the masses, here delineated, which is
supposed to prove that one cannot dispense with coercion in the work of
civilization, is itself only the result of defective cultural
organization, through which men have become embittered, revengeful and
unapproachable. New generations, brought up kindly and taught to have a
respect for reason, who have experienced the benefits of culture early
in life, will have a different attitude towards it; they will feel it to
be their very own possession, and they will be ready on its account to
make the sacrifice in labour and in instinctual renunciation that is
necessary for its preservation. They will be able to do without coercion
and will differ little from their leaders. If no culture has so far
produced human masses of such a quality, it is due to the fact that no
culture has yet discovered the plan that will influence men in such a
way, and that from childhood on.

It may be doubted whether it is possible at all, or at any rate just
now, in the present stage of our conquest of nature, to establish a
cultural organization of this kind; it may be asked where the throng of
superior, dependable and disinterested leaders, who are to act as
educators of the future generations, are to come from; and one may be
appalled at the stupendous amount of force that will be unavoidable if
these intentions are to be carried out. But one cannot deny the grandeur
of this project and its significance for the future of human culture. It
is securely based on a piece of psychological insight, on the fact that
man is equipped with the most varied instinctual predispositions, the
ultimate course of which is determined by the experiences of early
childhood. But the limitations of man’s capacity for education set
bounds to the efficacy of such a cultural transformation. One may
question whether and in what degree it would be possible for another
cultural milieu to efface the two characteristics of human masses that
make the guidance of men’s affairs so very difficult. The experiment has
not yet been made. Probably a certain percentage of mankind—owing to
morbid predisposition or too great instinctual vigour—will always remain
asocial, but if only one can succeed in reducing to a minority the
majority that is to-day hostile to culture, one will have accomplished a
great deal, perhaps indeed everything that can be accomplished.

I should not like to give the impression that I have wandered far away
from the chosen path of my enquiry. I will therefore expressly assert
that it is far from my intention to estimate the value of the great
cultural experiment that is at present in progress in the vast country
that stretches between Europe and Asia. I have neither the special
knowledge nor the capacity to decide on its practicability, to test the
expediency of the methods employed, or to measure the width of the
inevitable gulf between intention and execution. What is there in course
of preparation eludes investigation, for which it is not ready; for this
our long consolidated culture presents the material.




                               CHAPTER II


We have glided unawares out of the economic plane over into the
psychological. At first we were tempted to seek the essence of culture
in the existing material resources and in the arrangements for their
distribution. But with the discovery that every culture is based on
compulsory labour and instinctual renunciation, and that it therefore
inevitably evokes opposition from those affected by these demands, it
became clear that the resources themselves, the means of acquiring them,
and the arrangements for their distribution could not be its essential
or unique characteristic; for they are threatened by the rebelliousness
and destructive passions of the members of the culture. Thus in addition
to the resources there are the means of defending culture: the coercive
measures, and others that are intended to reconcile men to it and to
recompense them for their sacrifices. And these last may be described as
the psychical sphere of culture.

For the sake of a uniform terminology we will describe the fact that an
instinct cannot be satisfied as ‘frustration’, the means by which this
frustration is secured as ‘prohibition’, and the condition produced by
the prohibition as ‘privation’. Then the next step is to distinguish
between privations that do affect everybody and those that do not, those
that merely affect groups, classes, or even individuals. The former are
the oldest; with the prohibitions that cause them culture began, who
knows how many thousands of years ago, to detach itself from the
primordial animal condition of mankind. To our surprise we have found
that they are still operative, that they still form the kernel of the
hostility to culture. The instinctual wishes that suffer under them are
born anew with every child; there is a class of men, the neurotics, who
react already to this first group of frustrations by an asocial
attitude. Such instinctual wishes are those of incest, of cannibalism,
and of murder. It seems strange to classify these, in repudiating which
all men seem to be at one, with those others, about whose permissibility
or impermissibility in our culture there is so vigorous a dispute; but
psychologically one is justified in doing this. Nor is the attitude of
culture to these oldest instinctual wishes the same in each case;
cannibalism alone seems to be proscribed by everyone, and—to other than
analytic observation—completely overcome; the strength of the incest
wishes can still be perceived behind the prohibition; and under certain
conditions murder is still practised, indeed enjoined, by our culture.
It is possible that cultural developments lie before us, in which yet
other wish-gratifications, which are to-day entirely permissible, will
appear just as disagreeable as those of cannibalism do now.

Already in these earliest instinctual renunciations a psychological
factor is involved, which remains of great importance for everything
that follows. It is not true to say that the human mind has undergone no
development since the earliest times and that in contrast to the
advances of science and technical skill it is still the same to-day as
at the beginning of history. We can point out one of these advances
here. It is in accordance with the course of our development that
external compulsion is gradually internalized, in that a special mental
function, man’s super-ego, takes it under its jurisdiction. Every child
presents to us the model of this transformation; it is only by that
means that it becomes a moral and social being. This strengthening of
the super-ego is a highly valuable psychological possession for culture.
Those people in whom it has taken place, from being the foes of culture,
become its supporters. The greater their number in a cultural community,
the more secure it is and the more easily can it dispense with external
coercion. Now the degree of this internalization differs widely in the
case of each instinctual prohibition. As far as the earliest demands of
culture, already mentioned, are concerned, the process of
internalization seems to have been to a great extent accomplished, if we
leave out of account the unwelcome exception of the neurotics. But the
case is altered when we turn to the other instinctual claims. One notes
with surprise and concern that a majority of men obey the cultural
prohibitions in question only under the pressure of external force, in
fact only where the latter can assert itself and for as long as it is an
object of fear. This also holds good for those so-called moral cultural
demands, which in the same way apply to everyone. The greater part of
what one experiences of man’s moral untrustworthiness is to be explained
in this connection. There are innumerable civilized people who would
shrink from murder or incest, and who yet do not hesitate to gratify
their avarice, their aggressiveness and their sexual lusts, and who have
no compunction in hurting others by lying, fraud and calumny, so long as
they remain unpunished for it; and no doubt this has been so for many
cultural epochs.

If we turn to those restrictions that only apply to certain classes of
society, we encounter a state of things which is glaringly obvious and
has always been recognized. It is to be expected that the neglected
classes will grudge the favoured ones their privileges and that they
will do everything in their power to rid themselves of their own surplus
of privation. Where this is not possible a lasting measure of discontent
will obtain within this culture, and this may lead to dangerous
outbreaks. But if a culture has not got beyond the stage in which the
satisfaction of one group of its members necessarily involves the
suppression of another, perhaps the majority—and this is the case in all
modern cultures,—it is intelligible that these suppressed classes should
develop an intense hostility to the culture; a culture, whose existence
they make possible by their labour, but in whose resources they have too
small a share. In such conditions one must not expect to find an
internalization of the cultural prohibitions among the suppressed
classes; indeed they are not even prepared to acknowledge these
prohibitions, intent, as they are, on the destruction of the culture
itself and perhaps even of the assumptions on which it rests. These
classes are so manifestly hostile to culture that on that account the
more latent hostility of the better provided social strata has been
overlooked. It need not be said that a culture which leaves unsatisfied
and drives to rebelliousness so large a number of its members neither
has a prospect of continued existence, nor deserves it.

The extent to which cultural rules have been internalized—to express it
popularly and unpsychologically: the moral level of the members—is not
the only psychical asset to be considered if one is estimating the value
of a culture. In addition there is its heritage of ideals and artistic
creations, that is to say, of the satisfactions they both yield.

One will be only too readily inclined to include among the psychical
possessions of a culture its ideals, that is, its judgements of what are
its loftiest and its most ambitious accomplishments. It seems at first
as if these ideals would determine the achievements of the cultural
group; but the actual process would seem to be that the ideals are
modelled on the first achievements that the co-operation of internal
ability and external circumstances made possible, and that now these
first achievements are merely held fast by the ideal as examples to be
followed. The satisfaction the ideal gives to the members of the culture
is thus of a narcissistic nature, it is based on pride in what has
already been successfully achieved. To make this satisfaction complete
the culture compares itself with others which have applied themselves to
other tasks and have developed other ideals. On the strength of these
differences every culture claims the right to despise the rest. In this
way cultural ideals become a source of discord and enmity between
different cultural groups, as can be most clearly seen among nations.

The narcissistic satisfaction provided by the cultural ideal is also one
of the forces that effectively counteract the hostility to culture
within the cultural group. It can be shared not only by the favoured
classes, which enjoy the benefits of this culture, but also by the
suppressed, since the right to despise those that are outside it
compensates them for the wrongs they suffer in their own group. True,
one is a miserable plebeian, tormented by obligations and military
service, but withal one is a Roman citizen, one has one’s share in the
task of ruling other nations and dictating their laws. This
identification of the suppressed with the class that governs and
exploits them is, however, only a part of a larger whole. Thus the
former can be attached affectively to the latter; in spite of their
animosity they can find their ideals in their masters. Unless such
relations, fundamentally of a satisfying kind, were in existence, it
would be impossible to understand how so many cultures have contrived to
exist for so long in spite of the justified hostility of great masses of
men.

Different in kind is the satisfaction that art yields to the members of
a cultural group. As a rule it remains inaccessible to the masses, who
are engaged in exhausting labour and who have not enjoyed the benefits
of individual education. As we have long known, art offers substitutive
gratifications for the oldest cultural renunciations, still always most
deeply felt, and for that reason serves like nothing else to reconcile
men to the sacrifices they have made on culture’s behalf. On the other
hand, works of art promote the feelings of identification, of which
every cultural group has so much need, in the occasion they provide for
the sharing of highly valued emotional experiences. And when they
represent the achievements of a particular culture, thus in an
impressive way recalling it to its ideals, they also subserve a
narcissistic gratification.

No mention has yet been made of what is perhaps the most important part
of the psychical inventory of a culture: that is to say, its—in the
broadest sense—religious ideas; in other words, the use of which will be
justified later, its illusions.




                              CHAPTER III


Wherein lies the peculiar value of religious ideas?

We have spoken of the hostility to culture, produced by the pressure it
exercises and the instinctual renunciations that it demands. If one
imagined its prohibitions removed, then one could choose any woman who
took one’s fancy as one’s sexual object, one could kill without
hesitation one’s rival or whoever interfered with one in any other way,
and one could seize what one wanted of another man’s goods without
asking his leave: how splendid, what a succession of delights, life
would be! True, one soon finds the first difficulty: everyone else has
exactly the same wishes, and will treat one with no more consideration
than one will treat him. And so in reality there is only one single
person who can be made unrestrictedly happy by abolishing thus the
restrictions imposed by culture, and that is a tyrant or dictator who
has monopolized all the means of power; and even he has every reason to
want the others to keep at least one cultural commandment: thou shalt
not kill.

But how ungrateful, how short-sighted after all, to strive for the
abolition of culture! What would then remain would be the state of
nature, and that is far harder to endure. It is true that nature does
not ask us to restrain our instincts, she lets us do as we like; but she
has her peculiarly effective mode of restricting us: she destroys us,
coldly, cruelly, callously, as it seems to us, and possibly just through
what has caused our satisfaction. It was because of these very dangers
with which nature threatens us that we united together and created
culture, which, amongst other things, is supposed to make our communal
existence possible. Indeed, it is the principal task of culture, its
real _raison d’être_, to defend us against nature.

One must confess that in many ways it already does this tolerably well,
and clearly as time goes on it will be much more successful. But no one
is under the illusion that nature has so far been vanquished; few dare
to hope that she will ever be completely under man’s subjection. There
are the elements, which seem to mock at all human control: the earth,
which quakes, is rent asunder, and buries man and all his works; the
water, which in tumult floods and submerges all things; the storm, which
drives all before it; there are the diseases, which we have only lately
recognized as the attacks of other living creatures; and finally there
is the painful riddle of death, for which no remedy at all has yet been
found, nor probably ever will be. With these forces nature rises up
before us, sublime, pitiless, inexorable; thus she brings again to mind
our weakness and helplessness, of which we thought the work of
civilization had rid us. It is one of the few noble and gratifying
spectacles that men can offer, when in the face of an elemental
catastrophe they awake from their muddle and confusion, forget all their
internal difficulties and animosities, and remember the great common
task, the preservation of mankind against the supremacy of nature.

For the individual, as for mankind in general, life is hard to endure.
The culture in which he shares imposes on him some measure of privation,
and other men occasion him a certain degree of suffering, either in
spite of the laws of this culture or because of its imperfections. Add
to this the evils that unvanquished nature—he calls it Fate—inflicts on
him. One would expect a permanent condition of anxious suspense and a
severe injury to his innate narcissism to be the result of this state of
affairs. We know already how the individual reacts to the injuries that
culture and other men inflict on him: he develops a corresponding degree
of resistance against the institutions of this culture, of hostility
towards it. But how does he defend himself against the supremacy of
nature, of fate, which threatens him, as it threatens all?

Culture relieves him of this task: it performs it in the same way for
everyone. (It is also noteworthy that pretty well all cultures are the
same in this respect.) It does not cry a halt, as it were, in its task
of defending man against nature; it merely pursues it by other methods.
This is a complex business; man’s seriously menaced self-esteem craves
for consolation, life and the universe must be rid of their terrors, and
incidentally man’s curiosity, reinforced, it is true, by the strongest
practical motives, demands an answer.

With the first step, which is the humanization of nature, much is
already won. Nothing can be made of impersonal forces and fates; they
remain eternally remote. But if the elements have passions that rage
like those in our own souls, if death itself is not something
spontaneous, but the violent act of an evil Will, if everywhere in
nature we have about us beings who resemble those of our own
environment, then indeed we can breathe freely, we can feel at home in
face of the supernatural, and we can deal psychically with our frantic
anxiety. We are perhaps still defenceless, but no longer helplessly
paralysed; we can at least react; perhaps indeed we are not even
defenceless, we can have recourse to the same methods against these
violent supermen of the beyond that we make use of in our own community;
we can try to exorcise them, to appease them, to bribe them, and so rob
them of part of their power by thus influencing them. Such a
substitution of psychology for natural science provides not merely
immediate relief, it also points the way to a further mastery of the
situation.

For there is nothing new in this situation. It has an infantile
prototype, and is really only the continuation of this. For once before
one has been in such a state of helplessness: as a little child in one’s
relationship to one’s parents. For one had reason to fear them,
especially the father, though at the same time one was sure of his
protection against the dangers then known to one. And so it was natural
to assimilate and combine the two situations. Here, too, as in
dream-life, the wish came into its own. The sleeper is seized by a
presentiment of death, which seeks to carry him to the grave. But the
dream-work knows how to select a condition that will turn even this
dreaded event into a wish-fulfilment: the dreamer sees himself in an
ancient Etruscan grave, into which he has descended, happy in the
satisfaction it has given to his archæological interests. Similarly man
makes the forces of nature not simply in the image of men with whom he
can associate as his equals—that would not do justice to the
overpowering impression they make on him—but he gives them the
characteristics of the father, makes them into gods, thereby following
not only an infantile, but also, as I have tried to show, a phylogenetic
prototype.

In the course of time the first observations of law and order in natural
phenomena are made, and therewith the forces of nature lose their human
traits. But men’s helplessness remains, and with it their father-longing
and the gods. The gods retain their threefold task: they must exorcise
the terrors of nature, they must reconcile one to the cruelty of fate,
particularly as shown in death, and they must make amends for the
sufferings and privations that the communal life of culture has imposed
on man.

But within these there is a gradual shifting of the accent. It is
observed that natural phenomena develop of themselves from inward
necessity; without doubt the gods are the lords of nature: they have
arranged it thus and now they can leave it to itself. Only occasionally,
in the so-called miracles, do they intervene in its course, as if to
protest that they have surrendered nothing of their original sphere of
power. As far as the vicissitudes of fate are concerned, an unpleasant
suspicion persists that the perplexity and helplessness of the human
race cannot be remedied. This is where the gods are most apt to fail us;
if they themselves make fate, then their ways must be deemed
inscrutable. The most gifted people of the ancient world dimly surmised
that above the gods stands Destiny and that the gods themselves have
their destinies. And the more autonomous nature becomes and the more the
gods withdraw from her, the more earnestly are all expectations
concentrated on the third task assigned to them and the more does
morality become their real domain. It now becomes the business of the
gods to adjust the defects and evils of culture, to attend to the
sufferings that men inflict on each other in their communal life, and to
see that the laws of culture, which men obey so ill, are carried out.
The laws of culture themselves are claimed to be of divine origin, they
are elevated to a position above human society, and they are extended
over nature and the universe.

And so a rich store of ideas is formed, born of the need to make
tolerable the helplessness of man, and built out of the material offered
by memories of the helplessness of his own childhood and the childhood
of the human race. It is easy to see that these ideas protect man in two
directions; against the dangers of nature and fate, and against the
evils of human society itself. What it amounts to is this: life in this
world serves a higher purpose; true, it is not easy to guess the nature
of this purpose, but certainly a perfecting of human existence is
implied. Probably the spiritual part of man, the soul, which in the
course of time has so slowly and unwillingly detached itself from the
body, is to be regarded as the object of this elevation and exaltation.
Everything that takes place in this world expresses the intentions of an
Intelligence, superior to us, which in the end, though its devious ways
may be difficult to follow, orders everything for good, that is, to our
advantage. Over each one of us watches a benevolent, and only apparently
severe, Providence, which will not suffer us to become the plaything of
the stark and pitiless forces of nature; death itself is not
annihilation, not a return to inorganic lifelessness, but the beginning
of a new kind of existence, which lies on the road of development to
something higher. And to turn to the other side of the question, the
moral laws that have formed our culture govern also the whole universe,
only they are upheld with incomparably more force and consistency by a
supreme judicial court. In the end all good is rewarded, all evil
punished, if not actually in this life, then in the further existences
that begin after death. And thus all the terrors, the sufferings, and
the hardships of life are destined to be obliterated; the life after
death, which continues our earthly existence as the invisible part of
the spectrum adjoins the visible, brings all the perfection that perhaps
we have missed here. And the superior wisdom that directs this issue,
the supreme goodness that expresses itself thus, the justice that thus
achieves its aim—these are the qualities of the divine beings who have
fashioned us and the world in general; or rather of the one divine being
into which in our culture all the gods of antiquity have been condensed.
The race that first succeeded in thus concentrating the divine qualities
was not a little proud of this advance. It had revealed the father
nucleus which had always lain hidden behind every divine figure;
fundamentally it was a return to the historical beginnings of the idea
of God. Now that God was a single person, man’s relations to him could
recover the intimacy and intensity of the child’s relation to the
father. If one had done so much for the father, then surely one would be
rewarded—at least the only beloved child, the chosen people, would be.
More recently, pious America has laid claim to be ‘God’s own country’,
and for one of the forms under which men worship the deity the claim
certainly holds good.

The religious ideas that have just been summarized have of course gone
through a long process of development, and have been held in various
phases by various cultures. I have singled out one such phase of
development, which more or less corresponds to the final form of our
contemporary Christian culture in the west. It is easy to see that not
all the parts of this whole tally equally well with each other, that not
all the questions that press for an answer receive one, and that the
contradiction of daily experience can only with difficulty be dismissed.
But such as they are, these ideas—religious, in the broadest sense of
the word—are prized as the most precious possession of culture, as the
most valuable thing it has to offer its members; far more highly prized
than all our devices for winning the treasures of the earth, for
providing men with sustenance, or for preventing their diseases, and so
forth; men suppose that life would be intolerable if they did not accord
these ideas the value that is claimed for them. And now the question
arises: what are these ideas in the light of psychology; whence do they
derive the esteem in which they are held; and further, in all
diffidence, what is their real worth?




                               CHAPTER IV


An enquiry that proceeds uninterruptedly, like a monologue, is not
altogether without its dangers. One is too easily tempted to push aside
thoughts that would interrupt it, and in exchange one is left with a
feeling of uncertainty which one will drown in the end by
over-decisiveness. I shall therefore imagine an opponent who follows my
arguments with mistrust, and I shall let him interject remarks here and
there.

I hear him saying: ‘You have repeatedly used the expressions “culture
creates these religious ideas”, “culture places them at the disposal of
its members”, which sounds strange to me somehow. I could not say why
myself, but it does not sound so natural as to say that culture has made
regulations about distributing the products of labour or about the
rights over women and children.’

I think, nevertheless, that one is justified in expressing oneself thus.
I have tried to show that religious ideas have sprung from the same need
as all the other achievements of culture: from the necessity for
defending itself against the crushing supremacy of nature. And there was
a second motive: the eager desire to correct the so painfully felt
imperfections of culture. Moreover, there is something particularly
apposite in saying that culture gives the individual these ideas, for he
finds them at hand, they are presented to him ready-made; he would not
be in a position to find them by himself. It is the heritage of many
generations which he enters into and which he takes over as he does the
multiplication table, geometry, etc. There is certainly a distinction in
this, but it lies elsewhere, and I cannot examine it at this point. The
feeling of strangeness that you mention may be partly accounted for by
the fact that this stock of religious ideas is generally offered as a
divine revelation. But that is in itself a part of the religious system,
and entirely leaves out of account the known historical development of
these ideas and their variations in different ages and cultures.

‘Another point which seems to me more important. You would derive the
humanization of nature from the desire to put an end to human perplexity
and helplessness in the face of nature’s dreaded forces, and from the
necessity for establishing relations with, and finally influencing,
these forces. But this explanation seems to be superfluous. For
primitive man has no choice, he has no other way of thinking. It is
natural to him, as if innate, to project his existence outwards into the
world, and to regard all events that come under his observation as the
manifestations of beings who fundamentally resemble himself. It is his
only method of comprehension. And it is by no means self-evident, on the
contrary it is a remarkable coincidence, that he should succeed in
satisfying one of his great wants by thus indulging his natural
disposition.’

I do not find that so striking. For do you suppose that men’s
thought-processes have no practical motives, that they are simply the
expression of a disinterested curiosity? That is surely very improbable.
I believe, rather, that when he personifies the forces of nature man is
once again following an infantile prototype. He has learnt from the
persons of his earliest environment that the way to influence them is to
establish a relationship with them, and so, later on, with the same end
in view, he deals with everything that happens to him as he dealt with
those persons. Thus I do not contradict your descriptive observation; it
is, in point of fact, natural to man to personify everything that he
wishes to comprehend, in order that later he may control it—the
psychical subjugation as preparation for the physical—but I provide in
addition a motive and genesis for this peculiarity of human thought.

‘And now yet a third point. You have dealt with the origin of religion
once before, in your book _Totem und Tabu_. But there it appears in a
different light. Everything is the son-father relationship; God is the
exalted father, and the longing for the father is the root of the need
for religion. Since then, it seems, you have discovered the factor of
human weakness and helplessness, to which indeed the chief part in the
formation of religion is commonly assigned, and you now transfer to
helplessness everything that was formerly father complex. May I ask you
to enlighten me on this transformation?’

With pleasure. I was only waiting for this invitation. But is it really
a transformation? In _Totem und Tabu_ it was not my purpose to explain
the origin of religions, but only of totemism. Can you from any
standpoint known to you explain the fact that the first form in which
the protecting deity revealed itself to men was that of an animal, that
a prohibition existed against killing or eating this animal, and that
yet it was the solemn custom to kill it and eat it communally once a
year? It is just this that takes place in totemism. And it is hardly to
the purpose to argue whether totemism should be called a religion. It
has intimate connections with the later god-religions; the totem animals
become the sacred animals of the gods; and the earliest, and the most
profound, moral restrictions—the murder prohibition and the incest
prohibition—originate in totemism. Whether or not you accept the
conclusions of _Totem und Tabu_, I hope you will admit that in that book
a number of very remarkable isolated facts are brought together into a
consistent whole.

Why in the long run the animal god did not suffice and why it was
replaced by the human—that was hardly discussed in _Totem und Tabu_, and
other problems of the formation of religion find no mention there at
all. But do you regard such a limitation as identical with a denial? My
work is a good example of the strict isolation of the share that
psycho-analytic observation can contribute to the problem of religion.
If I am now trying to add to it the other, less deeply hidden, part, you
should not accuse me of inconsistency, just as before I was accused of
being one-sided. It is of course my business to point out the connecting
links between what I said before and what I now put forward, between the
deeper and the manifest motivation, between the father complex and man’s
helplessness and need for protection.

These connections are not difficult to find. They consist in the
relation of the child’s helplessness to the adult’s continuation of it,
so that, as was to be expected, the psycho-analytic motivation of the
forming of religion turns out to be the infantile contribution to its
manifest motivation. Let us imagine to ourselves the mental life of the
small child. You remember the object-choice after the anaclitic type,
which psycho-analysis talks about? The libido follows the paths of
narcissistic needs, and attaches itself to the objects that ensure their
satisfaction. So the mother, who satisfies hunger, becomes the first
love-object, and certainly also the first protection against all the
undefined and threatening dangers of the outer world; becomes, if we may
so express it, the first protection against anxiety.

In this function the mother is soon replaced by the stronger father, and
this situation persists from now on over the whole of childhood. But the
relation to the father is affected by a peculiar ambivalence. He was
himself a danger, perhaps just because of that earlier relation to the
mother; so he is feared no less than he is longed for and admired. The
indications of this ambivalence are deeply imprinted in all religions,
as is brought out in _Totem und Tabu_. Now when the child grows up and
finds that he is destined to remain a child for ever, and that he can
never do without protection against unknown and mighty powers, he
invests these with the traits of the father-figure; he creates for
himself the gods, of whom he is afraid, whom he seeks to propitiate, and
to whom he nevertheless entrusts the task of protecting him. Thus the
longing-for-the-father explanation is identical with the other, the need
for protection against the consequences of human weakness; the child’s
defensive reaction to his helplessness gives the characteristic features
to the adult’s reaction to his own sense of helplessness, _i.e_. the
formation of religion. But it is not our intention to pursue further the
development of the idea of God; we are concerned here with the matured
stock of religious ideas as culture transmits them to the individual.




                               CHAPTER V


Now to take up again the threads of our enquiry: what is the
psychological significance of religious ideas and how can we classify
them? The question is at first not at all easy to answer. Having
rejected various formulas, I shall take my stand by this one: religion
consists of certain dogmas, assertions about facts and conditions of
external (or internal) reality, which tell one something that one has
not oneself discovered and which claim that one should give them
credence. As they give information about what are to us the most
interesting and important things in life, they are particularly highly
valued. He who knows nothing of them is ignorant indeed, and he who has
assimilated them may consider himself enriched.

There are of course many such dogmas about the most diverse things of
this world. Every school hour is full of them. Let us choose geography.
We hear there: Konstanz is on the Bodensee. A student song adds: If you
don’t believe it go and see. I happen to have been there, and can
confirm the fact that this beautiful town lies on the shore of a broad
stretch of water, which all those dwelling around call the Bodensee. I
am now completely convinced of the accuracy of this geographical
statement. And in this connection I am reminded of another and very
remarkable experience. I was already a man of mature years when I stood
for the first time on the hill of the Athenian Acropolis, between the
temple ruins, looking out on to the blue sea. A feeling of astonishment
mingled with my pleasure, which prompted me to say: then it really is
true, what we used to be taught at school! How shallow and weak at that
age must have been my belief in the real truth of what I heard if I can
be so astonished to-day! But I will not emphasize the significance of
this experience too much; yet another explanation of my astonishment is
possible, which did not strike me at the time, and which is of a wholly
subjective nature and connected with the peculiar character of the
place.

All such dogmas as these, then, exact belief in their contents, but not
without substantiating their title to this. They claim to be the
condensed result of a long process of thought, which is founded on
observation and also, certainly, on reasoning; they show how, if one so
intends, one can go through this process oneself, instead of accepting
the result of it; and the source of the knowledge imparted by the dogma
is always added, where it is not, as with geographical statements,
self-evident. For instance: the earth is shaped like a globe; the proofs
adduced for this are Foucault’s pendulum experiment, the phenomena of
the horizon and the possibility of circumnavigating the earth. Since it
is impracticable, as all concerned realize, to send every school child
on a voyage round the world, one is content that the school teaching
shall be taken on trust, but one knows that the way to personal
conviction is still open.

Let us try to apply the same tests to the dogmas of religion. If we ask
on what their claim to be believed is based, we receive three answers,
which accord remarkably ill with one another. They deserve to be
believed: firstly, because our primal ancestors already believed them;
secondly, because we possess proofs, which have been handed down to us
from this very period of antiquity; and thirdly, because it is forbidden
to raise the question of their authenticity at all. Formerly this
presumptuous act was visited with the very severest penalties, and even
to-day society is unwilling to see anyone renew it.

This third point cannot but rouse our strongest suspicions. Such a
prohibition can surely have only one motive: that society knows very
well the uncertain basis of the claim it makes for its religious
doctrines. If it were otherwise, the relevant material would certainly
be placed most readily at the disposal of anyone who wished to gain
conviction for himself. And so we proceed to test the other two
arguments with a feeling of mistrust not easily allayed. We ought to
believe because our forefathers believed. But these ancestors of ours
were far more ignorant than we; they believed in things we could not
possibly accept to-day; so the possibility occurs that religious
doctrines may also be in this category. The proofs they have bequeathed
to us are deposited in writings that themselves bear every trace of
being untrustworthy. They are full of contradictions, revisions, and
interpolations; where they speak of actual authentic proofs they are
themselves of doubtful authenticity. It does not help much if divine
revelation is asserted to be the origin of their text or only of their
content, for this assertion is itself already a part of those doctrines
whose authenticity is to be examined, and no statement can bear its own
proof.

Thus we arrive at the singular conclusion that just what might be of the
greatest significance for us in our cultural system, the information
which should solve for us the riddles of the universe and reconcile us
to the troubles of life, that just this has the weakest possible claim
to authenticity. We should not be able to bring ourselves to accept
anything of as little concern to us as the fact that whales bear young
instead of laying eggs, if it were not capable of better proof than
this.

This state of things is in itself a very remarkable psychological
problem. Let no one think that the foregoing remarks on the
impossibility of proving religious doctrines contain anything new. It
has been felt at all times, assuredly even by the ancestors who
bequeathed this legacy. Probably many of them nursed the same doubts as
we, but the pressure imposed on them was too strong for them to have
dared to utter them. And since then countless people have been tortured
by the same doubts, which they would fain have suppressed because they
held themselves in duty bound to believe, and since then many brilliant
intellects have been wrecked upon this conflict and many characters have
come to grief through the compromises by which they sought a way out.

If all the arguments that are put forward for the authenticity of
religious doctrines originate in the past, it is natural to look round
and see whether the present, better able to judge in these matters,
cannot also furnish such evidence. The whole of the religious system
would become infinitely more credible if one could succeed in this way
in removing the element of doubt from a single part of it. It is at this
point that the activity of the spiritualists comes in; they are
convinced of the immortality of the individual soul, and they would
demonstrate to us that this one article of religious teaching is free
from doubt. Unfortunately they have not succeeded in disproving the fact
that the appearances and utterances of their spirits are merely the
productions of their own mental activity. They have called up the
spirits of the greatest of men, of the most eminent thinkers, but all
their utterances and all the information they have received from them
have been so foolish and so desperately insignificant that one could
find nothing else to believe in but the capacity of the spirits for
adapting themselves to the circle of people that had evoked them.

One must now mention two attempts to evade the problem, which both
convey the impression of frantic effort. One of them, high-handed in its
nature, is old; the other is subtle and modern. The first is the _Credo
quia absurdum_ of the early Father. It would imply that religious
doctrines are outside reason’s jurisdiction; they stand above reason.
Their truth must be inwardly felt: one does not need to comprehend them.
But this _Credo_ is only of interest as a voluntary confession; as a
decree it has no binding force. Am I to be obliged to believe every
absurdity? And if not, why just this one? There is no appeal beyond
reason. And if the truth of religious doctrines is dependent on an inner
experience which bears witness to that truth, what is one to make of the
many people who do not have that rare experience? One may expect all men
to use the gift of reason that they possess, but one cannot set up an
obligation that shall apply to all on a basis that only exists for quite
a few. Of what significance is it for other people that you have won
from a state of ecstasy, which has deeply moved you, an imperturbable
conviction of the real truth of the doctrines of religion?

The second attempt is that of the philosophy of ‘As If’. It explains
that in our mental activity we assume all manner of things, the
groundlessness, indeed the absurdity, of which we fully realize. They
are called ‘fictions’, but from a variety of practical motives we are
led to behave ‘as if’ we believed in these fictions. This, it is argued,
is the case with religious doctrines on account of their unequalled
importance for the maintenance of human society.[2] This argument is not
far removed from the _Credo quia absurdum_. But I think that the claim
of the philosophy of ‘As If’ is such as only a philosopher could make.
The man whose thinking is not influenced by the wiles of philosophy will
never be able to accept it; with the confession of absurdity, of
illogicality, there is no more to be said as far as he is concerned. He
cannot be expected to forgo the guarantees he demands for all his usual
activities just in the matter of his most important interests. I am
reminded of one of my children who was distinguished at an early age by
a peculiarly marked sense of reality. When the children were told a
fairy tale, to which they listened with rapt attention, he would come
forward and ask: Is that a true story? Having been told that it was not,
he would turn away with an air of disdain. It is to be expected that men
will soon behave in like manner towards the religious fairy tales,
despite the advocacy of the philosophy of ‘As If’.

Footnote 2:

  I hope I am not doing an injustice if I make the author of the
  philosophy of ‘As If’ represent a point of view that is familiar to
  other thinkers also. Cp. H. Vaihinger, _Die Philosophie des Als ob_,
  Siebente und achte Auflage, 1922, S. 68: ‘We include as fictions not
  merely indifferent theoretical operations but ideational constructions
  emanating from the noblest minds, to which the noblest part of mankind
  cling and of which they will not allow themselves to be deprived. Nor
  is it our object so to deprive them—for as _practical fictions_ we
  leave them all intact; they perish only as _theoretical truths_’ (C.
  K. Ogden’s translation).

But at present they still behave quite differently, and in past ages, in
spite of their incontrovertible lack of authenticity, religious ideas
have exercised the very strongest influence on mankind. This is a fresh
psychological problem. We must ask where the inherent strength of these
doctrines lies and to what circumstance they owe their efficacy,
independent, as it is, of the acknowledgement of the reason.




                               CHAPTER VI


I think we have sufficiently paved the way for the answer to both these
questions. It will be found if we fix our attention on the psychical
origin of religious ideas. These, which profess to be dogmas, are not
the residue of experience or the final result of reflection; they are
illusions, fulfilments of the oldest, strongest and most insistent
wishes of mankind; the secret of their strength is the strength of these
wishes. We know already that the terrifying effect of infantile
helplessness aroused the need for protection—protection through
love—which the father relieved, and that the discovery that this
helplessness would continue through the whole of life made it necessary
to cling to the existence of a father—but this time a more powerful one.
Thus the benevolent rule of divine providence allays our anxiety in face
of life’s dangers, the establishment of a moral world order ensures the
fulfilment of the demands of justice, which within human culture have so
often remained unfulfilled, and the prolongation of earthly existence by
a future life provides in addition the local and temporal setting for
these wish-fulfilments. Answers to the questions that tempt human
curiosity, such as the origin of the universe and the relation between
the body and the soul, are developed in accordance with the underlying
assumptions of this system; it betokens a tremendous relief for the
individual psyche if it is released from the conflicts of childhood
arising out of the father complex, which are never wholly overcome, and
if these conflicts are afforded a universally accepted solution.

When I say that they are illusions, I must define the meaning of the
word. An illusion is not the same as an error, it is indeed not
necessarily an error. Aristotle’s belief that vermin are evolved out of
dung, to which ignorant people still cling, was an error; so was the
belief of a former generation of doctors that _tabes dorsalis_ was the
result of sexual excess. It would be improper to call these errors
illusions. On the other hand, it was an illusion on the part of Columbus
that he had discovered a new sea-route to India. The part played by his
wish in this error is very clear. One may describe as an illusion the
statement of certain nationalists that the Indo-Germanic race is the
only one capable of culture, or the belief, which only psycho-analysis
destroyed, that the child is a being without sexuality. It is
characteristic of the illusion that it is derived from men’s wishes; in
this respect it approaches the psychiatric delusion, but it is to be
distinguished from this, quite apart from the more complicated structure
of the latter. In the delusion we emphasize as essential the conflict
with reality; the illusion need not be necessarily false, that is to
say, unrealizable or incompatible with reality. For instance, a poor
girl may have an illusion that a prince will come and fetch her home. It
is possible; some such cases have occurred. That the Messiah will come
and found a golden age is much less probable; according to one’s
personal attitude one will classify this belief as an illusion or as
analogous to a delusion. Examples of illusions that have come true are
not easy to discover, but the illusion of the alchemists that all metals
can be turned into gold may prove to be one. The desire to have lots of
gold, as much gold as possible, has been considerably damped by our
modern insight into the nature of wealth, yet chemistry no longer
considers a transmutation of metals into gold as impossible. Thus we
call a belief an illusion when wish-fulfilment is a prominent factor in
its motivation, while disregarding its relations to reality, just as the
illusion itself does.

If after this survey we turn again to religious doctrines, we may
reiterate that they are all illusions, they do not admit of proof, and
no one can be compelled to consider them as true or to believe in them.
Some of them are so improbable, so very incompatible with everything we
have laboriously discovered about the reality of the world, that we may
compare them—taking adequately into account the psychological
differences—to delusions. Of the reality value of most of them we cannot
judge; just as they cannot be proved, neither can they be refuted. We
still know too little to approach them critically. The riddles of the
universe only reveal themselves slowly to our enquiry, to many questions
science can as yet give no answer; but scientific work is our only way
to the knowledge of external reality. Again, it is merely illusion to
expect anything from intuition or trance; they can give us nothing but
particulars, which are difficult to interpret, about our own mental
life, never information about the questions that are so lightly answered
by the doctrines of religion. It would be wanton to let one’s own
arbitrary action fill the gap, and according to one’s personal estimate
declare this or that part of the religious system to be more or less
acceptable. These questions are too momentous for that; too sacred, one
might say.

At this point it may be objected: well, then, if even the crabbed
sceptics admit that the statements of religion cannot be confuted by
reason, why should not I believe in them, since they have so much on
their side—tradition, the concurrence of mankind, and all the
consolation they yield? Yes, why not? Just as no one can be forced into
belief, so no one can be forced into unbelief. But do not deceive
yourself into thinking that with such arguments you are following the
path of correct reasoning. If ever there was a case of facile argument,
this is one. Ignorance is ignorance; no right to believe anything is
derived from it. No reasonable man will behave so frivolously in other
matters or rest content with such feeble grounds for his opinions or for
the attitude he adopts; it is only in the highest and holiest things
that he allows this. In reality these are only attempts to delude
oneself or other people into the belief that one still holds fast to
religion, when one has long cut oneself loose from it. Where questions
of religion are concerned people are guilty of every possible kind of
insincerity and intellectual misdemeanour. Philosophers stretch the
meaning of words until they retain scarcely anything of their original
sense; by calling ‘God’ some vague abstraction which they have created
for themselves, they pose as deists, as believers, before the world;
they may even pride themselves on having attained a higher and purer
idea of God, although their God is nothing but an insubstantial shadow
and no longer the mighty personality of religious doctrine. Critics
persist in calling ‘deeply religious’ a person who confesses to a sense
of man’s insignificance and impotence in face of the universe, although
it is not this feeling that constitutes the essence of religious
emotion, but rather the next step, the reaction to it, which seeks a
remedy against this feeling. He who goes no further, he who humbly
acquiesces in the insignificant part man plays in the universe, is, on
the contrary, irreligious in the truest sense of the word.

It does not lie within the scope of this enquiry to estimate the value
of religious doctrines as truth. It suffices that we have recognized
them, psychologically considered, as illusions. But we need not conceal
the fact that this discovery strongly influences our attitude to what
must appear to many the most important of questions. We know
approximately at what periods and by what sort of men religious
doctrines were formed. If we now learn from what motives this happened,
our attitude to the problem of religion will suffer an appreciable
change. We say to ourselves: it would indeed be very nice if there were
a God, who was both creator of the world and a benevolent providence, if
there were a moral world order and a future life, but at the same time
it is very odd that this is all just as we should wish it ourselves. And
it would be still odder if our poor, ignorant, enslaved ancestors had
succeeded in solving all these difficult riddles of the universe.




                              CHAPTER VII


Having recognized religious doctrines to be illusions, we are at once
confronted with the further question: may not other cultural
possessions, which we esteem highly and by which we let our life be
ruled, be of a similar nature? Should not the assumptions that regulate
our political institutions likewise be called illusions, and is it not
the case that in our culture the relations between the sexes are
disturbed by an erotic illusion, or by a series of erotic illusions?
Once our suspicions have been roused, we shall not shrink from asking
whether there is any better foundation for our conviction that it is
possible to discover something about external reality through the
applying of observation and reasoning in scientific work. Nothing need
keep us from applying observation to our own natures or submitting the
process of reasoning to its own criticism. Here a series of enquiries
present themselves, which in their result should be of decisive
importance for constructing a ‘Weltanschauung’. We surmise, too, that
such an endeavour would not be wasted, and that it would at least
partially justify our suspicions. But the author of these pages has not
the means to undertake so comprehensive a task; forced by necessity, he
confines his work to the pursuit of a single one of these illusions,
that is, the religious.

But now the loud voice of our opponent bids us to stop. We are called to
account for our transgressions.

‘Archæological interests are no doubt most praiseworthy, but one does
not set about an excavation if one is thereby going to undermine
occupied dwelling-places so that they collapse and bury the inhabitants
under their ruins. The doctrines of religion are not a subject that one
can be clever about, as one can about any other. Our culture is built up
on them; the preservation of human society rests on the assumption that
the majority of mankind believe in the truth of these doctrines. If they
are taught that there is no almighty and all just God, no divine world
order, and no future life, then they will feel exempt from all
obligation to follow the rules of culture. Uninhibited and free from
fear, everybody will follow his asocial, egoistic instincts, and will
seek to prove his power. Chaos, which we have banished through thousands
of years of the work of civilization, will begin again. Even if one
knew, and could prove, that religion was not in possession of the truth,
one should conceal the fact and behave as the philosophy of “As If”
demands—and this in the interests of the preservation of everybody. And
apart from the danger of the undertaking, it is also a purposeless
cruelty. Countless people find their one consolation in the doctrines of
religion, and only with their help can they endure life. You would rob
them of what supports them, and yet you have nothing better to give them
in exchange. It has been admitted that so far science has not achieved
much, but even if it had advanced far further, it would not suffice for
men. Man has yet other imperative needs, which can never be satisfied by
cold science, and it is very strange—to be frank, it is the acme of
inconsistency—that a psychologist who has always emphasized how much in
men’s lives the intelligence retreats before the life of the instincts
should now strive to rob men of a precious wish-satisfaction, and should
want to give them in exchange a compensation of an intellectual nature.’

What a number of accusations all at once! However, I am prepared to deny
them all; and what is more, I am prepared to defend the statement that
culture incurs a greater danger by maintaining its present attitude to
religion than by relinquishing it. But I hardly know where to begin my
reply.

Perhaps with the assurance that I myself consider my undertaking to be
completely harmless and free from danger. This time the overestimation
of the intellect is not on my side. If men are such as my opponents
describe them—and I have no wish to contradict it—then there is no
danger of a devout believer, overwhelmed by my arguments, being deprived
of his faith. Besides, I have said nothing that other and better men
have not said before me in a much more complete, forcible and impressive
way. The names of these men are well known. I shall not quote them. I
should not like to give the impression that I would count myself of
their number. I have merely—this is the only thing that is new in my
statement—added a certain psychological foundation to the critique of my
great predecessors. It is hardly to be expected that just this addition
will produce the effect that was denied to the earlier attempts.
Certainly I might be asked at this point why I write such things if I am
convinced of their ineffectiveness. But we shall come back to that
later.

The one person this publication may harm is myself. I shall have to
listen to the most unpleasant reproaches on the score of shallowness,
narrow-mindedness, and lack of idealism and of understanding for the
highest interests of mankind. But on the one hand these remonstrances
are not new to me; and on the other hand, if a man has even in his early
years learnt to face the displeasure of his contemporaries, what effect
then can it have on him in his old age, when he is certain to be soon
beyond the reach of all favour or disfavour? In former times it was
different. Then utterances such as these brought with them a sure
foreshortening of one’s earthly existence and a speedy approach of the
opportunity to gain personal experience of the next life. But, I repeat,
those times are over, and to-day such things can be written without
endangering even the author; the most that can happen will be that in
this or that country the translation and the circulation of his book
will be forbidden—and naturally this will happen just in that country
which feels certain of the high standard of its culture. But one must be
able to put up with this also, if one makes any plea for
wish-renunciation or for acquiescence in fate.

And then it occurred to me to ask whether the publication of this work
might not do some harm after all—not indeed to a person, but to a cause:
the cause of psycho-analysis. For it cannot be denied that this is my
creation, and that an abundance of distrust and ill-will has been shown
to it. If I now come forward with such displeasing statements, people
will be only too ready to displace their feelings from my person on to
psycho-analysis. Now one can see, it will be said, where psycho-analysis
leads to. The mask is fallen; it leads to the denial of God and of an
ethical ideal, as indeed we have always supposed. To keep us from the
discovery, we have been made to believe that psycho-analysis neither
has, nor can have, a philosophical standpoint.

This pother will be really disagreeable to me on account of my many
fellow-workers, several of whom do not at all share my attitude to
religious problems. However, psycho-analysis has already braved many
storms, and it must face this new one also. In reality psycho-analysis
is a method of investigation, an impartial instrument like, say, the
infinitesimal calculus. Even if a physicist should discover with the
help of the latter that after a certain period the earth will be
destroyed, one would still hesitate to impute destructive tendencies to
the calculus itself, and to proscribe it on that account. Nothing that I
have said here against the truth-value of religion needed the support of
psycho-analysis; it had been said by others long before psycho-analysis
came into existence. If one can find a new argument against the truth of
religion by applying the psycho-analytic method, so much the worse for
religion, but the defenders of religion will with equal right avail
themselves of psycho-analysis in order to appreciate to the full the
affective significance of religious doctrines.

And now to proceed with the defence: clearly religion has performed
great services for human culture. It has contributed much toward
restraining the asocial instincts, but still not enough. For many
thousands of years it has ruled human society; it has had time to show
what it can achieve. If it had succeeded in making happy the greater
part of mankind, in consoling them, in reconciling them to life, and in
making them into supporters of civilization, then no one would dream of
striving to alter existing conditions. But instead of this what do we
see? We see that an appallingly large number of men are discontented
with civilization and unhappy in it, and feel it as a yoke that must be
shaken off; that these men either do everything in their power to alter
this civilization, or else go so far in their hostility to it that they
will have nothing whatever to do either with civilization or with
restraining their instincts. At this point it will be objected that this
state of affairs is due to the very fact that religion has forfeited a
part of its influence on the masses, just because of the deplorable
effect of the advances in science. We shall note this admission and the
reasons given for it, and shall make use of it later for our own
purposes; but the objection itself has no force.

It is doubtful whether men were in general happier at a time when
religious doctrines held unlimited sway than they are now; more moral
they certainly were not. They have always understood how to externalize
religious precepts, thereby frustrating their intentions. And the
priests, who had to enforce religious obedience, met them half-way.
God’s kindness must lay a restraining hand upon his justice. One sinned,
and then one made oblation or did penance, and then one was free to sin
anew. Russian mysticism has come to the sublime conclusion that sin is
indispensable for the full enjoyment of the blessings of divine grace,
and therefore, fundamentally, it is pleasing to God. It is well known
that the priests could only keep the masses submissive to religion by
making these great concessions to human instincts. And so it was
settled: God alone is strong and good, man is weak and sinful.
Immorality, no less than morality, has at all times found support in
religion. If the achievements of religion in promoting men’s happiness,
in adapting them to civilization, and in controlling them morally, are
no better, then the question arises whether we are right in considering
it necessary for mankind, and whether we do wisely in basing the demands
of our culture upon it.

Let us consider the unmistakable character of the present situation. We
have heard the admission that religion no longer has the same influence
on men that it used to have (we are concerned here with European
Christian culture). And this, not because its promises have become
smaller, but because they appear less credible to people. Let us admit
that the reason—perhaps not the only one—for this change is the increase
of the scientific spirit in the higher strata of human society.
Criticism has nibbled at the authenticity of religious documents,
natural science has shown up the errors contained in them, and the
comparative method of research has revealed the fatal resemblance
between religious ideas revered by us and the mental productions of
primitive ages and peoples.

The scientific spirit engenders a particular attitude to the problems of
this world; before the problems of religion it halts for a while, then
wavers, and finally here too steps over the threshold. In this process
there is no stopping. The more the fruits of knowledge become accessible
to men, the more widespread is the decline of religious belief, at first
only of the obsolete and objectionable expressions of the same, then of
its fundamental assumptions, also. The Americans who instituted the
monkey trial in Dayton have alone proved consistent. Elsewhere the
inevitable transition is accomplished by way of half-measures and
insincerities.

Culture has little to fear from the educated or from the brain workers.
In their case religious motives for civilized behaviour would be
unobtrusively replaced by other and secular ones; besides, for the most
part they are themselves supporters of culture. But it is another matter
with the great mass of the uneducated and suppressed, who have every
reason to be enemies of culture. So long as they do not discover that
people no longer believe in God, all is well. But they discover it,
infallibly, and would do so even if this work of mine were not
published. They are ready to accept the results of scientific thought,
without having effected in themselves the process of change which
scientific thought induces in men. Is there not a danger that these
masses, in their hostility to culture, will attack the weak point which
they have discovered in their taskmaster? If you must not kill your
neighbour, solely because God has forbidden it and will sorely avenge it
in this or the other life, and you then discover that there is no God so
that one need not fear his punishment, then you will certainly kill
without hesitation, and you could only be prevented from this by mundane
force. And so follows the necessity for either the most rigorous
suppression of these dangerous masses and the most careful exclusion of
all opportunities for mental awakening or a fundamental revision of the
relation between culture and religion.




                              CHAPTER VIII


One would suppose that this last proposal could be carried out without
any special difficulty. It is true that it would involve some measure of
renunciation, but one would gain, perhaps, more than one lost, and a
great danger would be avoided. But people have a horror of it, as if
civilization would thereby be exposed to an even greater danger. When
Saint Boniface felled the tree which was venerated as sacred by the
Saxons, those who stood round expected some fearful event to follow the
outrage. It did not happen, and the Saxons were baptized.

It is manifestly in the interest of man’s communal existence, which
would not otherwise be practicable, that civilization has laid down the
commandment that one shall not kill the neighbour whom one hates, who is
in one’s way, or whose property one covets. For the murderer would draw
on to himself the vengeance of the murdered man’s kinsmen and the secret
envy of the others who feel as much inward inclination as he did to such
an act of violence. Thus he would not enjoy his revenge or his spoil for
long, but would have every prospect of being killed soon himself. Even
if he could defend himself against single foes by his extraordinary
strength and caution, he would be bound to succumb to a combination of
these weaker foes. If a combination of this sort did not take place,
then murder would continue ceaselessly, and the end of it would be that
men would exterminate one another. It would be the same state of affairs
among individuals that still prevails in Corsica among families, but
otherwise survives only among nations. Insecurity of life, an equal
danger for all, now unites men into one society, which forbids the
individual to kill and reserves to itself the right to kill in the name
of society the man who violates this prohibition. This, then, is justice
and punishment.

We do not, however, tell others of this rational basis for the murder
prohibition; we declare, on the contrary, that God is its author. Thus,
making bold to divine his intentions, we find that he has no wish,
either, for men to exterminate each other. By acting thus we invest the
cultural prohibition with a quite peculiar solemnity, but at the same
time we risk making its observance dependent on belief in God. If we
retract this step, no longer saddling God with our own wishes, and
content ourselves with the social justification for the cultural
prohibition, then we renounce, it is true, its hallowed nature, but we
also avoid endangering its existence. And we gain something else as
well. Through some kind of diffusion or infection the character of
sanctity and inviolability, of other-worldliness, one might say, has
been extended from some few important prohibitions to all other cultural
institutions and laws and ordinances. And often the halo becomes these
none too well; not only do they invalidate each other by making
conflicting decisions according to the time and place of their origin;
even apart from this they betray every sign of human inadequacy. One can
easily recognize among them things which can only be the product of
shortsightedness and apprehensiveness, the expression of narrow
interests, or the result of inadequate hypotheses. The criticism to
which one must subject them also diminishes to an unwelcome extent
people’s respect for other and more justified cultural demands. As it is
a delicate task to decide what God has himself ordained and what derives
rather from the authority of an allpowerful parliament or a supreme
judicial decision, it would be an indubitable advantage to leave God out
of the question altogether, and to admit honestly the purely human
origin of all cultural laws and institutions. Along with their
pretensions to sanctity the rigid and immutable nature of these laws and
regulations would also cease. Men would realize that these have been
made, not so much to rule them, as, on the contrary, to serve their
interests; they would acquire a more friendly attitude to them, and
instead of aiming at their abolition they would aim only at improving
them. This would be an important advance on the road which leads to
reconciliation with the burden of culture.

But here our plea for a purely rational basis for cultural laws, that is
to say, for deriving them from social necessity, is interrupted by a
sudden doubt. We have chosen as our example the origin of the murder
prohibition. But does our account of it correspond to historical truth?
We fear not; it appears to be merely a rationalistic construction. With
the help of psycho-analysis we have studied this very point in the
history of human culture, and supported by this study we are bound to
say that in reality it did not happen like this. Even in men to-day
purely reasonable motives are of little avail against passionate
impulses. How much weaker, then, must they have been in the primordial
animal man! Perhaps even now his descendants would still kill one
another without inhibition, if there had not been among those acts of
murder one—the slaughter of the primal father—which evoked an
irresistible emotional reaction, momentous in its consequences. From it
arose the commandment: thou shalt not kill, which in totemism was
confined to the father-substitute, and was later extended to others, but
which even to-day is not universally observed.

But according to arguments which I need not repeat here, that primal
father has been the prototype of God, the model after which later
generations have formed their figure of God. Hence the religious
explanation is right. God was actually concerned in the origin of that
prohibition; his influence, not insight into what was necessary for
society, brought it into being. And the process of attributing man’s
will to God is fully justified; for men, knowing that they had brutally
set aside the father, determined, in the reaction to their outrage, to
respect his will in future. And so the religious doctrine does give us
the historical truth, though of course in a somewhat remodelled and
disguised form; our rational explanation belies it.

We now observe that the stock of religious ideas contains not only
wish-fulfilments, but also important historical memories. What
matchless, what abundant power this combination of past and present must
give to religion! But with the help of an analogy we may perhaps feel
our way towards another view of the problem. It is not a good thing to
transplant ideas far away from the soil in which they grew, but we
cannot resist pointing out the resemblance which forms this analogy. We
know that the human child cannot well complete its development towards
culture without passing through a more or less distinct phase of
neurosis. This is because the child is unable to suppress by rational
mental effort so many of those instinctual impulsions which cannot later
be turned to account, but has to check them by acts of repression,
behind which there stands as a rule an anxiety motive. Most of these
child neuroses are overcome spontaneously as one grows up, and
especially is this the fate of the obsessional neuroses of childhood.
The remainder can be cleared up still later by psycho-analytic
treatment. In just the same way one might assume that in its development
through the ages mankind as a whole experiences conditions that are
analogous to the neuroses, and this for the same reasons, because in the
ages of its ignorance and intellectual weakness it achieved by purely
affective means the instinctual renunciations, indispensable for man’s
communal existence. And the residue of these repression-like processes,
which took place in antiquity, has long clung on to civilization. Thus
religion would be the universal obsessional neurosis of humanity. It,
like the child’s, originated in the Oedipus complex, the relation to the
father. According to this conception one might prophesy that the
abandoning of religion must take place with the fateful inexorability of
a process of growth, and that we are just now in the middle of this
phase of development.

So we should form our behaviour after the model of a sensible teacher,
who does not oppose the new development confronting him, but seeks to
further it and to temper the force of its onset. To be sure this analogy
does not exhaust the essence of religion. If on the one hand religion
brings with it obsessional limitation, which can only be compared to an
individual obsessional neurosis, it comprises on the other hand a system
of wish-illusions, incompatible with reality, such as we find in an
isolated form only in Meynert’s amentia, a state of blissful
hallucinatory confusion. But these are only just comparisons, with whose
help we can endeavour to understand social phenomena; individual
psychology supplies us with no exact counterpart.

It has been shown repeatedly (by myself, and particularly by Theodor
Reik) into what details the analogy of religion and the obsessional
neurosis may be pursued, how much of the vicissitudes and peculiarities
of the formation of religion may be understood in this way. And it
accords well with this that the true believer is in a high degree
protected against the danger of certain neurotic afflictions; by
accepting the universal neurosis he is spared the task of forming a
personal neurosis.

Our knowledge of the historical value of certain religious doctrines
increases our respect for them, but it does not invalidate our proposal
to exclude them from the motivation of cultural laws. On the contrary!
This historical residue has given us the conception of religious dogmas
as, so to speak, neurotic survivals, and now we may say that the time
has probably come to replace the consequences of repression by the
results of rational mental effort, as in the analytic treatment of
neurotics. One may prophesy, but hardly regret, that this process of
remodelling will not stop at dispelling the solemn air of sanctity
surrounding the cultural laws, but that a general revision of these must
involve the abolition of many of them. And this will go far to solve our
appointed problem of reconciling men to civilization. We need not regret
the loss of historical truth involved in accepting the rational
motivation of cultural laws. The truths contained in religious doctrines
are after all so distorted and systematically disguised that the mass of
mankind cannot recognize them as truth. It is an instance of the same
thing when we tell the child that new-born babies are brought by the
stork. Here, too, we tell the truth in symbolic guise, for we know what
that large bird signifies. But the child does not know it; he hears only
the distortion, and feels that he has been deceived; and we know how
often his refractoriness and his distrust of the grown-ups gets bound up
with this impression. We have come to the conclusion that it is better
to avoid such symbolic disguisings of the truth, and to allow the child
knowledge of the real state of affairs in a way suitable for his stage
of intellectual development.




                               CHAPTER IX


‘You allow yourself contradictions which are hard to reconcile with one
another. First you declare that a work like yours is quite harmless; no
one will let himself be robbed of his religious faith through such
discussions. But since, as became evident later, it is your aim to
disturb this faith, one may ask: why in fact do you publish it? At
another point, however, you admit that it might be dangerous, indeed
very dangerous, for a man to discover that people no longer believe in
God. Docile though he had been hitherto, now he would throw off all
allegiance to the laws of culture. Your whole argument that the
religious motivation of the cultural commandments signifies a danger for
culture rests, in fact, on the assumption that the believer can be made
into an unbeliever. But that is a complete contradiction.

‘And here is another contradiction: you admit on the one hand that man
will not be guided by intelligence; he is ruled by his passions and by
the claims of his instincts; but on the other hand you propose to
replace the affective basis of his allegiance to culture by a rational
one. Let who can understand this. To me it seems a case of either the
one or the other.

‘Besides, have you learnt nothing from history? Once before such an
attempt to substitute reason for religion was made, officially and in
the grand manner. Surely you remember the French Revolution and
Robespierre, and also how short-lived and how deplorably ineffectual the
experiment? It is being repeated in Russia at present, and we need not
be curious about the result. Do you not think we may assume that man
cannot do without religion?

‘You have said yourself that religion is more than an obsessional
neurosis. But you have not dealt with this other aspect of it. You are
content to work out the analogy with the neurosis. Men must be freed
from a neurosis. What else is lost in the process does not trouble you.’

Probably these apparent contradictions have arisen because I have been
dealing too hastily with complicated matters, but we can make up for
this to some extent. I still maintain that in one respect my work is
quite harmless. No believer will let himself be led astray by these or
by similar arguments. A believer has certain ties of affection binding
him to the substance of religion. There are certainly a vast number of
other people who are not religious in the same sense. They obey the laws
of civilization because they are intimidated by the threats of religion,
and they fear religion so long as they consider it as a part of the
reality that restricts them. These are the people who break free as soon
as they dare to give up their belief in its reality value; but arguments
have no effect on them either. They cease to fear religion when they
find that others do not fear it, and of these I have asserted that they
would learn of the decline of religious influence even if I did not
publish my work.

But I suppose you yourself attach more value to the other contradiction
with which you tax me. Since men are so slightly amenable to reasonable
arguments, so completely are they ruled by their instinctual wishes, why
should one want to take away from them a means of satisfying their
instincts and replace it by reasonable arguments? Certainly men are like
this, but have you asked yourself whether they need be so, whether their
inmost nature necessitates it? Can an anthropologist give the cranial
index of a people whose custom it is to deform their children’s heads by
bandaging them from their earliest years? Think of the distressing
contrast between the radiant intelligence of a healthy child and the
feeble mentality of the average adult. Is it so utterly impossible that
it is just religious up-bringing which is largely to blame for this
relative degeneration? I think it would be a very long time before a
child who was not influenced began to trouble himself about God and the
things beyond this world. Perhaps his thoughts on these matters would
then take the same course as they did with his ancestors; but we do not
wait for this development; we introduce him to the doctrines of religion
at a time when he is neither interested in them nor capable of grasping
their import. Is it not true that the two main points in the modern
educational programme are the retardation of sexual development and the
early application of religious influence? So when the child’s mind
awakens, the doctrines of religion are already unassailable. But do you
suppose that it is particularly conducive to the strengthening of the
mental function that so important a sphere should be closed to it by the
menace of hell pains? We need not be greatly surprised at the feeble
mentality of the man who has once brought himself to accept without
criticism all the absurdities that religious doctrines repeat to him,
and even to overlook the contradictions between them. Now we have no
other means of controlling our instincts than our intelligence. And how
can we expect people who are dominated by thought-prohibitions to attain
the psychological ideal, the primacy of the intelligence? You know too
that women in general are said to suffer from so-called ‘physiological
weak-mindedness’, _i.e._ a poorer intelligence than the man’s. The fact
itself is disputable, its interpretation doubtful; but it has been
argued for the secondary nature of this intellectual degeneration that
women labour under the harshness of the early prohibition, which
prevented them from applying their mind to what would have interested
them most, that is to say, to the problems of sexual life. So long as a
man’s early years are influenced by the religious thought-inhibition and
by the loyal one derived from it, as well as by the sexual one, we
cannot really say what he is actually like.

But I will curb my ardour and admit the possibility that I too am
chasing after an illusion. Perhaps the effect of the religious
thought-prohibition is not as bad as I assume, perhaps it will turn out
that human nature remains the same even if education is not abused by
being subjected to religion. I do not know, and you cannot know either.
It is not only the great problems of this life that seem at present
insoluble; there are many smaller questions also that are hard to
decide. But you must admit that there is here the justification for a
hope for the future, that perhaps we may dig up a treasure which can
enrich culture, and that it is worth while to make the experiment of a
non-religious education. Should it prove unsatisfactory, I am ready to
give up the reform and to return to the earlier, purely descriptive
judgement: man is a creature of weak intelligence who is governed by his
instinctual wishes.

There is another point in which I wholeheartedly agree with you. It is,
to be sure, a senseless proceeding to try and do away with religion by
force and at one blow—more especially as it is a hopeless one. The
believer will not let his faith be taken from him, neither by arguments
nor by prohibitions. And even if it did succeed with some, it would be a
cruel thing to do. A man who has for decades taken a sleeping draught is
naturally unable to sleep if he is deprived of it. That the effect of
the consolations of religion may be compared to that of a narcotic is
prettily illustrated by what is happening in America. There they are now
trying—plainly under the influence of petticoat government—to deprive
men of all stimulants, intoxicants and luxuries,[3] and to satiate them
with piety by way of compensation. This is another experiment about the
result of which we need not be curious.

Footnote 3:

  _I.e._ tea, alcohol, and tobacco.

And so I disagree with you when you go on to argue that man cannot in
general do without the consolation of the religious illusion, that
without it he would not endure the troubles of life, the cruelty of
reality. Certainly this is true of the man into whom you have instilled
the sweet—or bitter-sweet—poison from childhood on. But what of the
other, who has been brought up soberly? Perhaps he, not suffering from
neurosis, will need no intoxicant to deaden it. True, man will then find
himself in a difficult situation. He will have to confess his utter
helplessness and his insignificant part in the working of the universe;
he will have to confess that he is no longer the centre of creation, no
longer the object of the tender care of a benevolent providence. He will
be in the same position as the child who has left the home where he was
so warm and comfortable. But, after all, is it not the destiny of
childishness to be overcome? Man cannot remain a child for ever; he must
venture at last into the hostile world. This may be called ‘_education
to reality_’; need I tell you that it is the sole aim of my book to draw
attention to the necessity for this advance?

You fear, probably, that he will not stand the test? Well, anyhow, let
us be hopeful. It is at least something to know that one is thrown on
one’s own resources. One learns then to use them properly. And man is
not entirely without means of assistance; since the time of the deluge
science has taught him much, and it will still further increase his
power. And as for the great necessities of fate, against which there is
no remedy, these he will simply learn to endure with resignation. Of
what use to him is the illusion of a kingdom on the moon, whose revenues
have never yet been seen by anyone? As an honest crofter on this earth
he will know how to cultivate his plot in a way that will support him.
Thus by withdrawing his expectations from the other world and
concentrating all his liberated energies on this earthly life he will
probably attain to a state of things in which life will be tolerable for
all and no one will be oppressed by culture any more. Then with one of
our comrades in unbelief he will be able to say without regret:

                        Let us leave the heavens
                    To the angels and the sparrows.




                               CHAPTER X


‘That does sound splendid. A race of men that has renounced all
illusions and has thus become capable of making its existence on the
earth a tolerable one! But I cannot share your expectations. And this,
not because I am the pig-headed reactionary you perhaps take me for. No;
it is because I am a sensible person. It seems to me that we have now
exchanged rôles; you prove to be the enthusiast, who allows himself to
be carried away by illusions, and I represent the claims of reason, the
right to be sceptical. What you have just stated seems to me to be
founded on errors, which after your precedent I may call illusions
because they betray clearly enough the influence of your wishes. You
indulge in the hope that generations which have not experienced the
influence of religious teaching in early childhood will easily attain
the wished-for primacy of the intelligence over the life of the
instincts. That is surely an illusion; in this decisive point human
nature is hardly likely to alter. If I am not mistaken—one knows so
little of other civilizations—there are even to-day peoples who do not
grow up under the pressure of a religious system, and they come no
nearer your ideal than the others. If you wish to expel religion from
our European civilization you can only do it through another system of
doctrines, and from the outset this would take over all the
psychological characteristics of religion, the same sanctity, rigidity
and intolerance, the same prohibition of thought in self-defence.
Something of this sort you must have in justice to the requirements of
education. For you cannot do without education. The way from sucking
child to civilized man is a long one; too many young people would go
astray and fail to arrive at their life tasks in due time if they were
left without guidance to their own development. The doctrines made use
of in their education will always confine the thought of their riper
years, exactly as you reproach religion with doing to-day. Do you not
observe that it is the ineradicable natural defect of our, of every,
culture that it imposes on the child, governed by his instincts and
intellectually weak, the making of decisions to which only the matured
intelligence of the grown-up can do justice? But owing to the fact that
mankind’s development through the ages is concentrated into a few years
of childhood culture cannot do otherwise, and it is only by affective
influence that the child can be induced to accomplish the task assigned
to it. And so this is the outlook for your “primacy of the intellect”.

‘And now you should not be surprised if I intervene on behalf of
retaining the religious system of teaching as the basis of education and
of man’s communal life. It is a practical problem, not a question of
reality value. Since we cannot, for the sake of the preservation of our
culture, postpone influencing the individual until he has become ready
for culture—many would never be so anyhow—and since we are obliged to
press some system of teaching on the growing child which shall have the
effect on him of a postulate that does not admit of criticism, it seems
to me that the religious system is by far the most suitable for the
purpose; of course just on account of that quality—its power for
wish-fulfilment and consolation—by which you claim to have recognized it
as an “illusion”. In face of the difficulty of discovering anything
about reality, indeed the doubt whether this is possible for us at all,
we must not overlook the fact that human needs are also a part, and
indeed an important part, of reality, and one that concerns us
particularly closely.

‘I find another advantage of religious doctrine in one of its
peculiarities, to which you seem to take particular exception. It admits
of an ideational refinement and sublimation, by which it can be divested
of most of those traces of a primitive and infantile way of thinking
which it bears. What is then left is a body of ideas which science no
longer contradicts and which it cannot disprove. These modifications of
religious doctrine, which you have condemned as half-measures and
compromises, make it possible to bridge the gap between the uneducated
masses and the philosophical thinker, and to preserve that common bond
between them which is so important for the protection of culture. With
it you would have no need to fear that the poor man would discover that
the upper strata of society “no longer believe in God”. I think I have
shown by now that your endeavour reduces itself to the attempt to
replace a proved and affectively valuable illusion by one that is
improved and without affective value.’

You shall not find me impervious to your criticism. I know how difficult
it is to avoid illusions; perhaps even the hopes I have confessed to are
of an illusory nature. But I hold fast to one distinction. My
illusions—apart from the fact that no penalty is imposed for not sharing
them—are not, like the religious ones, incapable of correction, they
have no delusional character. If experience should show—not to me, but
to others after me who think as I do—that we are mistaken, then we shall
give up our expectations. Take my endeavour for what it is. A
psychologist, who does not deceive himself about the difficulty of
finding his bearings in this world, strives to review the development of
mankind in accord with what insight he has won from studying the mental
processes of the individual during his development from childhood to
manhood. In this connection the idea forces itself upon him that
religion is comparable to a childhood neurosis, and he is optimistic
enough to assume that mankind will overcome this neurotic phase, just as
so many children grow out of their similar neuroses. These pieces of
knowledge from individual psychology may be inadequate, their
application to the human race unjustified, the optimism without
foundation; I grant you the uncertainty of all these things. But often
we cannot refrain from saying what we think, excusing ourselves on the
ground that it is given for no more than it is worth.

And there are two points that I must dwell on a little longer. First,
the weakness of my position does not betoken any strengthening of yours.
I think you are defending a lost cause. We may insist as much as we like
that the human intellect is weak in comparison with human instincts, and
be right in doing so. But nevertheless there is something peculiar about
this weakness. The voice of the intellect is a soft one, but it does not
rest until it has gained a hearing. Ultimately, after endlessly repeated
rebuffs, it succeeds. This is one of the few points in which one may be
optimistic about the future of mankind, but in itself it signifies not a
little. And one can make it a starting-point for yet other hopes. The
primacy of the intellect certainly lies in the far, far, but still
probably not infinite, distance. And as it will presumably set itself
the same aims that you expect to be realized by your God—of course
within human limits, in so far as external reality, Ἀνάγκη, allows
it—the brotherhood of man and the reduction of suffering, we may say
that our antagonism is only a temporary and not an irreconcilable one.
We desire the same things, but you are more impatient, more exacting,
and—why should I not say it—more selfish than I and those like me. You
would have the state of bliss to begin immediately after death; you ask
of it the impossible, and you will not surrender the claim of the
individual. Of these wishes our god Αόγος[4] will realize those which
external nature permits, but he will do this very gradually, only in the
incalculable future and for other children of men. Compensation for us,
who suffer grievously from life, he does not promise. On the way to this
distant goal your religious doctrines will have to be discarded, no
matter whether the first attempts fail, or whether the first
substitute-formations prove to be unstable. You know why; in the long
run nothing can withstand reason and experience, and the contradiction
religion offers to both is only too palpable. Not even the purified
religious ideas can escape this fate, so long as they still try to
preserve anything of the consolation of religion. Certainly if you
confine yourself to the belief in a higher spiritual being, whose
qualities are indefinable and whose intentions cannot be discerned, then
you are proof against the interference of science, but then you will
also relinquish the interest of men.

Footnote 4:

  The twin gods Αόγος-Ἀνάγκη of the Dutchman _Multatuli_.

And secondly: note the difference between your attitude to illusions and
mine. You have to defend the religious illusion with all your might; if
it were discredited—and to be sure it is sufficiently menaced—then your
world would collapse, there would be nothing left for you but to despair
of everything, of culture and of the future of mankind. From this
bondage I am, we are, free. Since we are prepared to renounce a good
part of our infantile wishes, we can bear it if some of our expectations
prove to be illusions.

Education freed from the burden of religious doctrines will not perhaps
effect much alteration in man’s psychological nature; our god Αόγος is
not perhaps a very powerful one; he may only fulfil a small part of what
his forerunners have promised. If we have to acknowledge this, we shall
do so with resignation. We shall not thereby lose our interest in the
world and in life, for we have in one respect a sure support which you
lack. We believe that it is possible for scientific work to discover
something about the reality of the world through which we can increase
our power and according to which we can regulate our life. If this
belief is an illusion, then we are in the same position as you, but
science has shown us by numerous and significant successes that it is no
illusion. Science has many open, and still more secret, enemies among
those who cannot forgive it for having weakened religious belief and for
threatening to overthrow it. People reproach it for the small amount it
has taught us and the incomparably greater amount it has left in the
dark. But then they forget how young it is, how difficult its
beginnings, and how infinitesimally small the space of time since the
human intellect has been strong enough for the tasks it sets it. Do we
not all do wrong in that the periods of time which we make the basis of
our judgements are of too short duration? We should take an example from
the geologist. People complain of the unreliability of science, that she
proclaims as a law to-day what the next generation will recognize to be
an error and which it will replace by a new law of equally short
currency. But that is unjust and in part untrue. The transformation of
scientific ideas is a process of development and progress, not of
revolution. A law that was at first held to be universally valid proves
to be a special case of a more comprehensive law, or else its scope is
limited by another law not discovered until later; a rough approximation
to the truth is replaced by one more carefully adjusted, which in its
turn awaits a further approach to perfection. In several spheres we have
not yet surmounted a phase of investigation in which we test hypotheses
that have soon to be rejected as inadequate; but in others we have
already an assured and almost immutable core of knowledge. Finally an
attempt has been made to discredit radically scientific endeavour on the
ground that, bound as it is to the conditions of our own organization,
it can yield nothing but subjective results, while the real nature of
things outside us remains inaccessible to it. But this is to disregard
several factors of decisive importance for the understanding of
scientific work. Firstly, our organization, _i.e._ our mental apparatus,
has been developed actually in the attempt to explore the outer world,
and therefore it must have realized in its structure a certain measure
of appropriateness; secondly, it itself is a constituent part of that
world which we are to investigate, and readily admits of such
investigation; thirdly, the task of science is fully circumscribed if we
confine it to showing how the world must appear to us in consequence of
the particular character of our organization; fourthly, the ultimate
findings of science, just because of the way in which they are attained,
are conditioned not only by our organization but also by that which has
affected this organization; and, finally, the problem of the nature of
the world irrespective of our perceptive mental apparatus is an empty
abstraction without practical interest.

No, science is no illusion. But it would be an illusion to suppose that
we could get anywhere else what it cannot give us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






