The Project Gutenberg EBook of Science and hypothesis, by Henri Poincaré

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

Title: Science and hypothesis

Author: Henri Poincaré

Release Date: August 21, 2011 [EBook #37157]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS ***Produced by Andrew D. Hwang







    transcriber’s note

The camera-quality  les for this public-domain
ebook may be downloaded gratis at

www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/37157.

Minor typographical corrections, regularizations,
and presentational changes have been made
without comment.

This ebook was produced using scanned images
and OCR text generously provided by the
University of Toronto Robarts Library through the
Internet Archive.

This PDF  le is optimized for screen viewing, but
may be recompiled for printing. Please consult the
preamble of the LATX source  le for instructions
      E
and other particulars.      SCIENCE


AND HYPOTHESIS



            BY

      H. POINCARÉ,

MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE.



      With a Preface by

J. LARMOR, D.Sc., Sec. R.S.,

Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in the University of Cambridge.






  London and Newcale-on-Tyne:

THE WALTER SCOTT PUBLISHING CO., LTD

  NEW YORK: 3 EAST 14TH STREET.

            1905.      CONTENTS.


                                      PAGE

Translator’s Note. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v

Introduction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi

Author’s Preface.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvi


          PART I.

    NUMBER AND MAGNITUDE.

        CHAPTER I.

On the Nature of Mathematical Reasoning.. . . . 1


        CHAPTER II.

Mathematical Magnitude and Experiment.. . . . . . 22


          PART II.

          SPACE.

        CHAPTER III.

Non-Euclidean Geometries.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42          contents.iii


        CHAPTER IV.

                                      PAGE

Space and Geometry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60


        CHAPTER V.

Experiment and Geometry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83


          PART III.

          FORCE.

        CHAPTER VI.

The Classical Mechanics.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .101


        CHAPTER VII.

Relative and Absolute Motion.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .125


        CHAPTER VIII.

Energy and Thermo-dynamics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138          contents.iv


          PART IV.

          NATURE.

        CHAPTER IX.

                                      PAGE

Hypotheses in Physics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156


        CHAPTER X.

The Theories of Modern Physics.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .178


        CHAPTER XI.

The Calculus of Probabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204


        CHAPTER XII.

Optics And Electricity.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .235


        CHAPTER XIII.

Electro-Dynamics.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .251TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.



The translator wishes to express his indebtedness to

Professor Larmor, for kindly consenting to introduce the

author of Science and Hypothesis to English readers; to

Dr. F. S. Macaulay and Mr. C. S. Jackson, M.A., who

have read the whole of the proofs and have greatly helped

by suggestions; also to Professor G. H. Bryan, F.R.S.,

who has read the proofs of Chapter VIII., and whose

criticisms have been most valuable.

                                W. J. G.
February 1905.  INTRODUCTION.



It is to be hoped that, as a consequence of the present

active scrutiny of our educational aims and methods, and

of the resulting encouragement of the study of modern

languages, we shall not remain, as a nation, so much iso-

lated from ideas and tendencies in continental thought

and literature as we have been in the past. As things

are, however, the translation of this book is doubtless

required; at any rate, it brings vividly before us an in-

structive point of view. Though some of M. Poincaré’s

chapters have been collected from well-known treatises

written several years ago, and indeed are sometimes in

detail not quite up to date, besides occasionally suggest-

ing the suspicion that his views may possibly have been

modi ed in the interval, yet their publication in a com-

pact form has excited a warm welcome in this country.

It must be confessed that the English language hardly

lends itself as a perfect medium for the rendering of the

delicate shades of suggestion and allusion characteristic

of M. Poincaré’s play around his subject; notwithstand-

ing the excellence of the translation, loss in this respect

is inevitable.        introduction.vii


There has been of late a growing trend of opinion,

prompted in part by general philosophical views, in the

direction that the theoretical constructions of physical

science are largely factitious, that instead of presenting

a valid image of the relations of things on which further

progress can be based, they are still little better than a

mirage. The best method of abating this scepticism is to

become acquainted with the real scope and modes of ap-

plication of conceptions which, in the popular language

of super cial exposition—and even in the unguarded and

playful paradox of their authors, intended only for the in-

structed eye—often look bizarre enough. But much ad-

vantage will accrue if men of science become their own

epistemologists, and show to the world by critical expo-

sition in non-technical terms of the results and methods

of their constructive work, that more than mere instinct

is involved in it: the community has indeed a right to

expect as much as this.

It would be hard to  nd any one better quali ed for

this kind of exposition, either from the profundity of his

own mathematical achievements, or from the extent and

freshness of his interest in the theories of physical sci-

ence, than the author of this book. If an appreciation

might be ventured on as regards the later chapters, they        introduction.viii


are, perhaps, intended to present the stern logical ana-

lyst quizzing the cultivator of physical ideas as to what

he is driving at, and whither he expects to go, rather

than any responsible attempt towards a settled confes-

sion of faith. Thus, when M. Poincaré allows himself for

a moment to indulge in a process of evaporation of the

Principle of Energy, he is content to sum up: “Eh bien,

quelles que soient les notions nouvelles que les expéri-

ences futures nous donneront sur le monde, nous sommes

sûrs d’avance qu’il y aura quelque chose qui demeurera

constant et que nous pourrons appeler énergie” (p. 185),

and to leave the matter there for his readers to think it

out. Though hardly necessary in the original French, it

may not now be super uous to point out that indepen-

dent re ection and criticism on the part of the reader are

tacitly implied here as elsewhere.

An interesting passage is the one devoted to Maxwell’s

theory of the functions of the æther, and the comparison

of the close-knit theories of the classical French mathe-

matical physicists with the somewhat loosely-connected

corpus of ideas by which Maxwell, the interpreter and

successor of Faraday, has (posthumously) recast the

whole face of physical science. How many times has that

theory been re-written since Maxwell’s day? and yet how        introduction.ix


little has it been altered in essence, except by further

developments in the problem of moving bodies, from the

form in which he left it! If, as M. Poincaré remarks, the

French instinct for precision and lucid demonstration

sometimes  nds itself ill at ease with physical theories of

the British school, he as readily admits (pp. 248, 250),

and indeed fully appreciates, the advantages on the other

side. Our own mental philosophers have been shocked at

the point of view indicated by the proposition hazarded

by Laplace, that a su ciently developed intelligence, if it

were made acquainted with the positions and motions of

the atoms at any instant, could predict all future history:

no amount of demur su ces sometimes to persuade them

that this is not a conception universally entertained in

physical science. It was not so even in Laplace’s own

day. From the point of view of the study of the evolution

of the sciences, there are few episodes more instruc-

tive than the collision between Laplace and Young with

regard to the theory of capillarity. The precise and in-

tricate mathematical analysis of Laplace, starting from

 xed preconceptions regarding atomic forces which were

to remain intact throughout the logical development of

the argument, came into contrast with the tentative,

mobile intuitions of Young; yet the latter was able to        introduction.x


grasp, by sheer direct mental force, the fruitful though

partial analogies of this recondite class of phenomena

with more familiar operations of nature, and to form

a direct picture of the way things interacted, such as

could only have been illustrated, quite possibly damaged

or obliterated, by premature e ort to translate it into

elaborate analytical formulas. The aperçus of Young

were apparently devoid of all cogency to Laplace; while

Young expressed, doubtless in too extreme a way, his

sense of the inanity of the array of mathematical logic of

his rival. The subsequent history involved the Nemesis

that the fabric of Laplace was taken down and recon-

structed in the next generation by Poisson; while the

modern cultivator of the subject turns, at any rate in

England, to neither of those expositions for illumination,

but rather  nds in the partial and succinct indications

of Young the best starting-point for further e ort.

It seems, however, hard to accept entirely the dis-

tinction suggested (p. 237) between the methods of culti-

vating theoretical physics in the two countries. To men-

tion only two transcendent names which stand at the

very front of two of the greatest developments of physi-

cal science of the last century, Carnot and Fresnel, their

procedure was certainly not on the lines thus described.        introduction.xi


Possibly it is not devoid of signi cance that each of them

attained his  rst e ective recognition from the British

school.

It may, in fact, be maintained that the part played

by mechanical and such-like theories—analogies if you

will—is an essential one. The reader of this book will

appreciate that the human mind has need of many in-

struments of comparison and discovery besides the un-

relenting logic of the in nitesimal calculus. The dynam-

ical basis which underlies the objects of our most fre-

quent experience has now been systematised into a great

calculus of exact thought, and traces of new real rela-

tionships may come out more vividly when considered in

terms of our familiar acquaintance with dynamical sys-

tems than when formulated under the paler shadow of

more analytical abstractions. It is even possible for a

constructive physicist to conduct his mental operations

entirely by dynamical images, though Helmholtz, as well

as our author, seems to class a predilection in this di-

rection as a British trait. A time arrives when, as in

other subjects, ideas have crystallised out into distinct-

ness; their exact veri cation and development then be-

comes a problem in mathematical physics. But whether

the mechanical analogies still survive, or new terms are        introduction.xii


now introduced devoid of all naïve mechanical bias, it

matters essentially little. The precise determination of

the relations of things in the rational scheme of nature

in which we  nd ourselves is the fundamental task, and

for its ful lment in any direction advantage has to be

taken of our knowledge, even when only partial, of new

aspects and types of relationship which may have become

familiar perhaps in quite di erent  elds. Nor can it be

forgotten that the most fruitful and fundamental concep-

tions of abstract pure mathematics itself have often been

suggested from these mechanical ideas of  ux and force,

where the play of intuition is our most powerful guide.

The study of the historical evolution of physical theories

is essential to the complete understanding of their im-

port. It is in the mental workshop of a Fresnel, a Kelvin,

or a Helmholtz, that profound ideas of the deep things of

Nature are struck out and assume form; when pondered

over and paraphrased by philosophers we see them react

on the conduct of life: it is the business of criticism to

polish them gradually to the common measure of human

understanding. Oppressed though we are with the ne-

cessity of being specialists, if we are to know anything

thoroughly in these days of accumulated details, we may

at any rate pro tably study the historical evolution of        introduction.xiii


knowledge over a  eld wider than our own.

The aspect of the subject which has here been dwelt

on is that scienti c progress, considered historically, is

not a strictly logical process, and does not proceed by

syllogisms. New ideas emerge dimly into intuition, come

into consciousness from nobody knows where, and be-

come the material on which the mind operates, forging

them gradually into consistent doctrine, which can be

welded on to existing domains of knowledge. But this

process is never complete: a crude connection can always

be pointed to by a logician as an indication of the imper-

fection of human constructions.

If intuition plays a part which is so important, it is

surely necessary that we should possess a  rm grasp of its

limitations. In M. Poincaré’s earlier chapters the reader

can gain very pleasantly a vivid idea of the various and

highly complicated ways of docketing our perceptions of

the relations of external things, all equally valid, that

were open to the human race to develop. Strange to

say, they never tried any of them; and, satis ed with the

very remarkable practical  tness of the scheme of geom-

etry and dynamics that came naturally to hand, did not

consciously trouble themselves about the possible exis-

tence of others until recently. Still more recently has it        introduction.xiv


been found that the good Bishop Berkeley’s logical jibes

against the Newtonian ideas of  uxions and limiting ra-

tios cannot be adequately appeased in the rigorous math-

ematical conscience, until our apparent continuities are

resolved mentally into discrete aggregates which we only

partially apprehend. The irresistible impulse to atom-

ize everything thus proves to be not merely a disease of

the physicist; a deeper origin, in the nature of knowledge

itself, is suggested.

Everywhere want of absolute, exact adaptation can

be detected, if pains are taken, between the various con-

structions that result from our mental activity and the

impressions which give rise to them. The bluntness of

our unaided sensual perceptions, which are the source

in part of the intuitions of the race, is well brought out

in this connection by M. Poincaré. Is there real con-

tradiction? Harmony usually proves to be recovered by

shifting our attitude to the phenomena. All experience

leads us to interpret the totality of things as a consis-

tent cosmos—undergoing evolution, the naturalists will

say—in the large-scale workings of which we are inter-

ested spectators and explorers, while of the inner rela-

tions and rami cations we only apprehend dim glimpses.

When our formulation of experience is imperfect or even        introduction.xv


paradoxical, we learn to attribute the fault to our point

of view, and to expect that future adaptation will put

it right. But Truth resides in a deep well, and we shall

never get to the bottom. Only, while deriving enjoyment

and insight from M. Poincaré’s Socratic exposition of the

limitations of the human outlook on the universe, let us

beware of counting limitation as imperfection, and drift-

ing into an inadequate conception of the wonderful fabric

of human knowledge.


                          J. LARMOR.AUTHOR’S PREFACE.



To the super cial observer scienti c truth is unassail-

able, the logic of science is infallible; and if scienti c men

sometimes make mistakes, it is because they have not un-

derstood the rules of the game. Mathematical truths are

derived from a few self-evident propositions, by a chain

of  awless reasonings; they are imposed not only on us,

but on Nature itself. By them the Creator is fettered,

as it were, and His choice is limited to a relatively small

number of solutions. A few experiments, therefore, will

be su cient to enable us to determine what choice He has

made. From each experiment a number of consequences

will follow by a series of mathematical deductions, and

in this way each of them will reveal to us a corner of the

universe. This, to the minds of most people, and to stu-

dents who are getting their  rst ideas of physics, is the

origin of certainty in science. This is what they take to be

the rôle of experiment and mathematics. And thus, too,

it was understood a hundred years ago by many men of

science who dreamed of constructing the world with the

aid of the smallest possible amount of material borrowed

from experiment.      author’s preface.xvii


But upon more mature re ection the position held by

hypothesis was seen; it was recognised that it is as nec-

essary to the experimenter as it is to the mathematician.

And then the doubt arose if all these constructions are

built on solid foundations. The conclusion was drawn

that a breath would bring them to the ground. This

sceptical attitude does not escape the charge of super -

ciality. To doubt everything or to believe everything are

two equally convenient solutions; both dispense with the

necessity of re ection.

Instead of a summary condemnation we should exam-

ine with the utmost care the rôle of hypothesis; we shall

then recognise not only that it is necessary, but that in

most cases it is legitimate. We shall also see that there

are several kinds of hypotheses; that some are veri able,

and when once con rmed by experiment become truths

of great fertility; that others may be useful to us in  xing

our ideas; and  nally, that others are hypotheses only in

appearance, and reduce to de nitions or to conventions

in disguise. The latter are to be met with especially in

mathematics and in the sciences to which it is applied.

From them, indeed, the sciences derive their rigour; such

conventions are the result of the unrestricted activity of

the mind, which in this domain recognises no obstacle.      author’s preface.xviii


For here the mind may a rm because it lays down its

own laws; but let us clearly understand that while these

laws are imposed on our science, which otherwise could

not exist, they are not imposed on Nature. Are they then

arbitrary? No; for if they were, they would not be fertile.

Experience leaves us our freedom of choice, but it guides

us by helping us to discern the most convenient path to

follow. Our laws are therefore like those of an absolute

monarch, who is wise and consults his council of state.

Some people have been struck by this characteristic of

free convention which may be recognised in certain fun-

damental principles of the sciences. Some have set no

limits to their generalisations, and at the same time they

have forgotten that there is a di erence between liberty

and the purely arbitrary. So that they are compelled

to end in what is called nominalism; they have asked if

the savant is not the dupe of his own de nitions, and if

the world he thinks he has discovered is not simply the
            1
creation of his own caprice.Under these conditions sci-

ence would retain its certainty, but would not attain its

object, and would become powerless. Now, we daily see

what science is doing for us. This could not be unless

1
Cf. M. le Roy: “Science et Philosophie,” Revue de Méta-
physique et de Morale, 1901.      author’s preface.xix


it taught us something about reality; the aim of science

is not things themselves, as the dogmatists in their sim-

plicity imagine, but the relations between things; outside

those relations there is no reality knowable.

Such is the conclusion to which we are led; but to

reach that conclusion we must pass in review the series

of sciences from arithmetic and geometry to mechanics

and experimental physics. What is the nature of mathe-

matical reasoning? Is it really deductive, as is commonly

supposed? Careful analysis shows us that it is nothing of

the kind; that it participates to some extent in the nature

of inductive reasoning, and for that reason it is fruitful.

But none the less does it retain its character of absolute

rigour; and this is what must  rst be shown.

When we know more of this instrument which is

placed in the hands of the investigator by mathematics,

we have then to analyse another fundamental idea, that

of mathematical magnitude. Do we  nd it in nature, or

have we ourselves introduced it? And if the latter be

the case, are we not running a risk of coming to incor-

rect conclusions all round? Comparing the rough data

of our senses with that extremely complex and subtle

conception which mathematicians call magnitude, we are

compelled to recognise a divergence. The framework into      author’s preface.xx


which we wish to make everything  t is one of our own

construction; but we did not construct it at random, we

constructed it by measurement so to speak; and that is

why we can  t the facts into it without altering their

essential qualities.

Space is another framework which we impose on the

world. Whence are the  rst principles of geometry de-

rived? Are they imposed on us by logic? Lobatschewsky,

by inventing non-Euclidean geometries, has shown that

this is not the case. Is space revealed to us by our senses?

No; for the space revealed to us by our senses is abso-

lutely di erent from the space of geometry. Is geometry

derived from experience? Careful discussion will give the

answer—no! We therefore conclude that the principles

of geometry are only conventions; but these conventions

are not arbitrary, and if transported into another world

(which I shall call the non-Euclidean world, and which I

shall endeavour to describe), we shall  nd ourselves com-

pelled to adopt more of them.

In mechanics we shall be led to analogous conclu-

sions, and we shall see that the principles of this science,

although more directly based on experience, still share

the conventional character of the geometrical postulates.

So far, nominalism triumphs; but we now come to the      author’s preface.xxi


physical sciences, properly so called, and here the scene

changes. We meet with hypotheses of another kind, and

we fully grasp how fruitful they are. No doubt at the

outset theories seem unsound, and the history of science

shows us how ephemeral they are; but they do not en-

tirely perish, and of each of them some traces still remain.

It is these traces which we must try to discover, because

in them and in them alone is the true reality.

The method of the physical sciences is based upon

the induction which leads us to expect the recurrence of

a phenomenon when the circumstances which give rise to

it are repeated. If all the circumstances could be simul-

taneously reproduced, this principle could be fearlessly

applied; but this never happens; some of the circum-

stances will always be missing. Are we absolutely cer-

tain that they are unimportant? Evidently not! It may

be probable, but it cannot be rigorously certain. Hence

the importance of the rôle that is played in the physi-

cal sciences by the law of probability. The calculus of

probabilities is therefore not merely a recreation, or a

guide to the baccarat player; and we must thoroughly

examine the principles on which it is based. In this con-

nection I have but very incomplete results to lay before

the reader, for the vague instinct which enables us to de-      author’s preface.xxii


termine probability almost de es analysis. After a study

of the conditions under which the work of the physicist

is carried on, I have thought it best to show him at work.

For this purpose I have taken instances from the history

of optics and of electricity. We shall thus see how the

ideas of Fresnel and Maxwell took their rise, and what

unconscious hypotheses were made by Ampère and the

other founders of electro-dynamics.SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS




          PART I.

  NUMBER AND MAGNITUDE.

      CHAPTER I.

ON THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICAL REASONING.

              I.

The very possibility of mathematical science seems an

insoluble contradiction. If this science is only deductive

in appearance, from whence is derived that perfect rigour

which is challenged by none? If, on the contrary, all the

propositions which it enunciates may be derived in order

by the rules of formal logic, how is it that mathematics

is not reduced to a gigantic tautology? The syllogism

can teach us nothing essentially new, and if everything

must spring from the principle of identity, then every-

thing should be capable of being reduced to that princi-

ple. Are we then to admit that the enunciations of all    science and hypothesis2


the theorems with which so many volumes are  lled, are

only indirect ways of saying that A is A?

No doubt we may refer back to axioms which are at

the source of all these reasonings. If it is felt that they

cannot be reduced to the principle of contradiction, if we

decline to see in them any more than experimental facts

which have no part or lot in mathematical necessity, there

is still one resource left to us: we may class them among

à priori synthetic views. But this is no solution of the

di culty—it is merely giving it a name; and even if the

nature of the synthetic views had no longer for us any

mystery, the contradiction would not have disappeared;

it would have only been shirked. Syllogistic reasoning

remains incapable of adding anything to the data that

are given it; the data are reduced to axioms, and that is

all we should  nd in the conclusions.

No theorem can be new unless a new axiom intervenes

in its demonstration; reasoning can only give us imme-

diately evident truths borrowed from direct intuition; it

would only be an intermediary parasite. Should we not

therefore have reason for asking if the syllogistic appara-

tus serves only to disguise what we have borrowed?

The contradiction will strike us the more if we open

any book on mathematics; on every page the author an-nature of mathematical reasoning.3


nounces his intention of generalising some proposition al-

ready known. Does the mathematical method proceed

from the particular to the general, and, if so, how can it

be called deductive?

Finally, if the science of number were merely ana-

lytical, or could be analytically derived from a few syn-

thetic intuitions, it seems that a su ciently powerful

mind could with a single glance perceive all its truths;

nay, one might even hope that some day a language would

be invented simple enough for these truths to be made

evident to any person of ordinary intelligence.

Even if these consequences are challenged, it must be

granted that mathematical reasoning has of itself a kind

of creative virtue, and is therefore to be distinguished

from the syllogism. The di erence must be profound.

We shall not, for instance,  nd the key to the mystery in

the frequent use of the rule by which the same uniform

operation applied to two equal numbers will give identical

results. All these modes of reasoning, whether or not

reducible to the syllogism, properly so called, retain the

analytical character, and ipso facto, lose their power.    science and hypothesis4


            II.

The argument is an old one. Let us see how Leibnitz

tried to show that two and two make four. I assume the

number one to be de ned, and also the operation x+ 1—

i.e., the adding of unity to a given number x. These

de nitions, whatever they may be, do not enter into the

subsequent reasoning. I next de ne the numbers 2, 3, 4

by the equalities

(1) 1 + 1 = 2; (2) 2 + 1 = 3; (3) 3 + 1 = 4;

and in the same way I de ne the operation x + 2 by the

relation

    (4) x + 2 = (x + 1) + 1:

Given this, we have

      2 + 2 = (2 + 1) + 1; (def. 4);

(2 + 1) + 1 = 3 + 1;(def. 2);

    3 + 1 = 4;(def. 3);

whence 2 + 2 = 4;Q.E.D.

It cannot be denied that this reasoning is purely an-

alytical. But if we ask a mathematician, he will reply:

“This is not a demonstration properly so called; it is anature of mathematical reasoning.5


veri cation.” We have con ned ourselves to bringing to-

gether one or other of two purely conventional de nitions,

and we have veri ed their identity; nothing new has been

learned. Veri cation di ers from proof precisely because

it is analytical, and because it leads to nothing. It leads

to nothing because the conclusion is nothing but the pre-

misses translated into another language. A real proof,

on the other hand, is fruitful, because the conclusion is

in a sense more general than the premisses. The equal-

ity 2 + 2 = 4 can be veri ed because it is particular.

Each individual enunciation in mathematics may be al-

ways veri ed in the same way. But if mathematics could

be reduced to a series of such veri cations it would not

be a science. A chess-player, for instance, does not create

a science by winning a piece. There is no science but the

science of the general. It may even be said that the ob-

ject of the exact sciences is to dispense with these direct

veri cations.


            III.

Let us now see the geometer at work, and try to surprise

some of his methods. The task is not without di culty;

it is not enough to open a book at random and to anal-    science and hypothesis6


yse any proof we may come across. First of all, geometry

must be excluded, or the question becomes complicated

by di cult problems relating to the rôle of the postulates,

the nature and the origin of the idea of space. For analo-

gous reasons we cannot avail ourselves of the in nitesimal

calculus. We must seek mathematical thought where it

has remained pure—i.e., in Arithmetic. But we still have

to choose; in the higher parts of the theory of numbers

the primitive mathematical ideas have already undergone

so profound an elaboration that it becomes di cult to

analyse them.

It is therefore at the beginning of Arithmetic that

we must expect to  nd the explanation we seek; but it

happens that it is precisely in the proofs of the most el-

ementary theorems that the authors of classic treatises

have displayed the least precision and rigour. We may

not impute this to them as a crime; they have obeyed

a necessity. Beginners are not prepared for real mathe-

matical rigour; they would see in it nothing but empty,

tedious subtleties. It would be waste of time to try to

make them more exacting; they have to pass rapidly and

without stopping over the road which was trodden slowly

by the founders of the science.

Why is so long a preparation necessary to habituatenature of mathematical reasoning.7


oneself to this perfect rigour, which it would seem should

naturally be imposed on all minds? This is a logical and

psychological problem which is well worthy of study. But

we shall not dwell on it; it is foreign to our subject. All I

wish to insist on is, that we shall fail in our purpose unless

we reconstruct the proofs of the elementary theorems,

and give them, not the rough form in which they are left

so as not to weary the beginner, but the form which will

satisfy the skilled geometer.


    definition of addition.

I assume that the operation x + 1 has been de ned; it

consists in adding the number 1 to a given number x.

Whatever may be said of this de nition, it does not enter

into the subsequent reasoning.

We now have to de ne the operation x + a, which

consists in adding the number a to any given number x.

Suppose that we have de ned the operation

        x + (a 1);

the operation x + a will be de ned by the equality

              
(1) x + a =x + (a 1)+ 1:    science and hypothesis8


We shall know what x+a is when we know what x+(a1)

is, and as I have assumed that to start with we know what

x + 1 is, we can de ne successively and “by recurrence”

the operations x + 2, x + 3, etc. This de nition deserves

a moment’s attention; it is of a particular nature which

distinguishes it even at this stage from the purely logi-

cal de nition; the equality (1), in fact, contains an in -

nite number of distinct de nitions, each having only one

meaning when we know the meaning of its predecessor.


    properties of addition.

Associative.—I say that

  a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c;

in fact, the theorem is true for c = 1. It may then be

written

    a + (b + 1) = (a + b) + 1;

which, remembering the di erence of notation, is nothing

but the equality (1) by which I have just de ned addition.

Assume the theorem true for c = , I say that it will be

true for c =  + 1. Let

    (a + b) +  = a + (b + );nature of mathematical reasoning.9


it follows that

    
(a + b) + + 1 =a + (b + )+ 1;

or by def. (1),

                              
(a + b) + ( + 1) = a + (b +  + 1) = a +b + ( + 1);

which shows by a series of purely analytical deductions

that the theorem is true for  + 1. Being true for c = 1,

we see that it is successively true for c = 2, c = 3, etc.

Commutative.—(1) I say that

        a + 1 = 1 + a:

The theorem is evidently true for a = 1; we can verify

by purely analytical reasoning that if it is true for a = 
              1
it will be true for a =  + 1.Now, it is true for a = 1,

and therefore is true for a = 2, a = 3, and so on. This is

what is meant by saying that the proof is demonstrated

“by recurrence.”

(2) I say that

        a + b = b + a:

1
For ( + 1) + 1 = (1 + ) + 1 = 1 + ( + 1).—[Tr.]  science and hypothesis10


The theorem has just been shown to hold good for b = 1,

and it may be veri ed analytically that if it is true for

b = , it will be true for b =  + 1. The proposition is

thus established by recurrence.


  definition of multiplication.

We shall de ne multiplication by the equalities

      (1) a   1 = a;
              
  (2) a   b =a   (b 1)+ a:

Both of these include an in nite number of de nitions;

having de ned a 1, it enables us to de ne in succession

a   2, a   3, and so on.


properties of multiplication.

Distributive.—I say that

  (a + b)   c = (a   c) + (b   c):

We can verify analytically that the theorem is true for

c = 1; then if it is true for c = , it will be true for

c =  + 1. The proposition is then proved by recurrence.nature of mathematical reasoning.11


Commutative.—(1) I say that

        a   1 = 1   a:

The theorem is obvious for a = 1. We can verify ana-

lytically that if it is true for a =  , it will be true for

a =   + 1.

(2) I say that

        a   b = b   a:

The theorem has just been proved for b = 1. We can

verify analytically that if it be true for b =  it will be

true for b =  + 1.


            IV.

This monotonous series of reasonings may now be laid

aside; but their very monotony brings vividly to light the

process, which is uniform, and is met again at every step.

The process is proof by recurrence. We  rst show that a

theorem is true for n = 1; we then show that if it is true

for n1 it is true for n, and we conclude that it is true for

all integers. We have now seen how it may be used for

the proof of the rules of addition and multiplication—

that is to say, for the rules of the algebraical calculus.  science and hypothesis12


This calculus is an instrument of transformation which

lends itself to many more di erent combinations than the

simple syllogism; but it is still a purely analytical instru-

ment, and is incapable of teaching us anything new. If

mathematics had no other instrument, it would immedi-

ately be arrested in its development; but it has recourse

anew to the same process—i.e., to reasoning by recur-

rence, and it can continue its forward march. Then if we

look carefully, we  nd this mode of reasoning at every

step, either under the simple form which we have just

given to it, or under a more or less modi ed form. It is

therefore mathematical reasoning par excellence, and we

must examine it closer.


            V.

The essential characteristic of reasoning by recurrence

is that it contains, condensed, so to speak, in a single

formula, an in nite number of syllogisms. We shall see

this more clearly if we enunciate the syllogisms one after

another. They follow one another, if one may use the ex-

pression, in a cascade. The following are the hypothetical

syllogisms:—The theorem is true of the number 1. Now,

if it is true of 1, it is true of 2; therefore it is true of 2.nature of mathematical reasoning.13


Now, if it is true of 2, it is true of 3; hence it is true of 3,

and so on. We see that the conclusion of each syllogism

serves as the minor of its successor. Further, the majors

of all our syllogisms may be reduced to a single form. If

the theorem is true of n 1, it is true of n.

We see, then, that in reasoning by recurrence we con-

 ne ourselves to the enunciation of the minor of the  rst

syllogism, and the general formula which contains as par-

ticular cases all the majors. This unending series of syl-

logisms is thus reduced to a phrase of a few lines.

It is now easy to understand why every particular con-

sequence of a theorem may, as I have above explained,

be veri ed by purely analytical processes. If, instead of

proving that our theorem is true for all numbers, we only

wish to show that it is true for the number 6 for instance,

it will be enough to establish the  rst  ve syllogisms in

our cascade. We shall require 9 if we wish to prove it

for the number 10; for a greater number we shall require

more still; but however great the number may be we shall

always reach it, and the analytical veri cation will al-

ways be possible. But however far we went we should

never reach the general theorem applicable to all num-

bers, which alone is the object of science. To reach it we

should require an in nite number of syllogisms, and we  science and hypothesis14


should have to cross an abyss which the patience of the

analyst, restricted to the resources of formal logic, will

never succeed in crossing.

I asked at the outset why we cannot conceive of a

mind powerful enough to see at a glance the whole body

of mathematical truth. The answer is now easy. A chess-

player can combine for four or  ve moves ahead; but,

however extraordinary a player he may be, he cannot

prepare for more than a  nite number of moves. If he

applies his faculties to Arithmetic, he cannot conceive its

general truths by direct intuition alone; to prove even

the smallest theorem he must use reasoning by recur-

rence, for that is the only instrument which enables us to

pass from the  nite to the in nite. This instrument is al-

ways useful, for it enables us to leap over as many stages

as we wish; it frees us from the necessity of long, te-

dious, and monotonous veri cations which would rapidly

become impracticable. Then when we take in hand the

general theorem it becomes indispensable, for otherwise

we should ever be approaching the analytical veri ca-

tion without ever actually reaching it. In this domain of

Arithmetic we may think ourselves very far from the in-

 nitesimal analysis, but the idea of mathematical in nity

is already playing a preponderating part, and without itnature of mathematical reasoning.15


there would be no science at all, because there would be

nothing general.


            VI.

The views upon which reasoning by recurrence is based

may be exhibited in other forms; we may say, for in-

stance, that in any  nite collection of di erent integers

there is always one which is smaller than any other. We

may readily pass from one enunciation to another, and

thus give ourselves the illusion of having proved that rea-

soning by recurrence is legitimate. But we shall always

be brought to a full stop—we shall always come to an

indemonstrable axiom, which will at bottom be but the

proposition we had to prove translated into another lan-

guage. We cannot therefore escape the conclusion that

the rule of reasoning by recurrence is irreducible to the

principle of contradiction. Nor can the rule come to us

from experiment. Experiment may teach us that the rule

is true for the  rst ten or the  rst hundred numbers, for

instance; it will not bring us to the inde nite series of

numbers, but only to a more or less long, but always

limited, portion of the series.

Now, if that were all that is in question, the principle  science and hypothesis16


of contradiction would be su cient, it would always en-

able us to develop as many syllogisms as we wished. It

is only when it is a question of a single formula to em-

brace an in nite number of syllogisms that this principle

breaks down, and there, too, experiment is powerless to

aid. This rule, inaccessible to analytical proof and to

experiment, is the exact type of the à priori synthetic

intuition. On the other hand, we cannot see in it a con-

vention as in the case of the postulates of geometry.

Why then is this view imposed upon us with such an

irresistible weight of evidence? It is because it is only

the a rmation of the power of the mind which knows it

can conceive of the inde nite repetition of the same act,

when the act is once possible. The mind has a direct

intuition of this power, and experiment can only be for

it an opportunity of using it, and thereby of becoming

conscious of it.

But it will be said, if the legitimacy of reasoning by

recurrence cannot be established by experiment alone,

is it so with experiment aided by induction? We see

successively that a theorem is true of the number 1, of

the number 2, of the number 3, and so on—the law is

manifest, we say, and it is so on the same ground that

every physical law is true which is based on a very largenature of mathematical reasoning.17


but limited number of observations.

It cannot escape our notice that here is a striking anal-

ogy with the usual processes of induction. But an essen-

tial di erence exists. Induction applied to the physical

sciences is always uncertain, because it is based on the

belief in a general order of the universe, an order which

is external to us. Mathematical induction—i.e., proof by

recurrence—is, on the contrary, necessarily imposed on

us, because it is only the a rmation of a property of the

mind itself.


            VII.

Mathematicians, as I have said before, always endeavour

to generalise the propositions they have obtained. To

seek no further example, we have just shown the equality

        a + 1 = 1 + a;

and we then used it to establish the equality

        a + b = b + a;

which is obviously more general. Mathematics may,

therefore, like the other sciences, proceed from the

particular to the general. This is a fact which might  science and hypothesis18


otherwise have appeared incomprehensible to us at the

beginning of this study, but which has no longer any-

thing mysterious about it, since we have ascertained

the analogies between proof by recurrence and ordinary

induction.

No doubt mathematical recurrent reasoning and

physical inductive reasoning are based on di erent foun-

dations, but they move in parallel lines and in the same

direction—namely, from the particular to the general.

Let us examine the case a little more closely. To prove

the equality

      (1) a + 2 = 2 + a;

we need only apply the rule

        a + 1 = 1 + a

twice, and write

(2) a + 2 = a + 1 + 1 = 1 + a + 1 = 1 + 1 + a = 2 + a:

The equality thus deduced by purely analytical means

is not, however, a simple particular case. It is something

quite di erent. We may not therefore even say in the re-

ally analytical and deductive part of mathematical rea-

soning that we proceed from the general to the particularnature of mathematical reasoning.19


in the ordinary sense of the words. The two sides of the

equality (2) are merely more complicated combinations

than the two sides of the equality (1), and analysis only

serves to separate the elements which enter into these

combinations and to study their relations.

Mathematicians therefore proceed “by construction,”

they “construct” more complicated combinations. When

they analyse these combinations, these aggregates, so to

speak, into their primitive elements, they see the relations

of the elements and deduce the relations of the aggregates

themselves. The process is purely analytical, but it is not

a passing from the general to the particular, for the ag-

gregates obviously cannot be regarded as more particular

than their elements.

Great importance has been rightly attached to this

process of “construction,” and some claim to see in it the

necessary and su cient condition of the progress of the

exact sciences. Necessary, no doubt, but not su cient!

For a construction to be useful and not mere waste of

mental e ort, for it to serve as a stepping-stone to higher

things, it must  rst of all possess a kind of unity en-

abling us to see something more than the juxtaposition

of its elements. Or more accurately, there must be some

advantage in considering the construction rather than the  science and hypothesis20


elements themselves. What can this advantage be? Why

reason on a polygon, for instance, which is always decom-

posable into triangles, and not on elementary triangles?

It is because there are properties of polygons of any num-

ber of sides, and they can be immediately applied to any

particular kind of polygon. In most cases it is only after

long e orts that those properties can be discovered, by

directly studying the relations of elementary triangles. If

the quadrilateral is anything more than the juxtaposition

of two triangles, it is because it is of the polygon type.

A construction only becomes interesting when it can

be placed side by side with other analogous constructions

for forming species of the same genus. To do this we must

necessarily go back from the particular to the general,

ascending one or more steps. The analytical process “by

construction” does not compel us to descend, but it leaves

us at the same level. We can only ascend by mathemat-

ical induction, for from it alone can we learn something

new. Without the aid of this induction, which in certain

respects di ers from, but is as fruitful as, physical induc-

tion, construction would be powerless to create science.

Let me observe, in conclusion, that this induction is

only possible if the same operation can be repeated indef-

initely. That is why the theory of chess can never becomenature of mathematical reasoning.21


a science, for the di erent moves of the same piece are

limited and do not resemble each other.        CHAPTER II.

MATHEMATICAL MAGNITUDE AND EXPERIMENT.

If we want to know what the mathematicians mean by

a continuum, it is useless to appeal to geometry. The

geometer is always seeking, more or less, to represent

to himself the  gures he is studying, but his representa-

tions are only instruments to him; he uses space in his

geometry just as he uses chalk; and further, too much

importance must not be attached to accidents which are

often nothing more than the whiteness of the chalk.

The pure analyst has not to dread this pitfall. He has

disengaged mathematics from all extraneous elements,

and he is in a position to answer our question:—“Tell

me exactly what this continuum is, about which math-

ematicians reason.” Many analysts who re ect on their

art have already done so—M. Tannery, for instance, in

his Introduction à la théorie des Fonctions d’une variable.

Let us start with the integers. Between any two con-

secutive sets, intercalate one or more intermediary sets,

and then between these sets others again, and so on in-

de nitely. We thus get an unlimited number of terms,

and these will be the numbers which we call fractional,

rational, or commensurable. But this is not yet all; be-  mathematical magnitude.23


tween these terms, which, be it marked, are already in-

 nite in number, other terms are intercalated, and these

are called irrational or incommensurable.

Before going any further, let me make a preliminary

remark. The continuum thus conceived is no longer a col-

lection of individuals arranged in a certain order, in nite

in number, it is true, but external the one to the other.

This is not the ordinary conception in which it is sup-

posed that between the elements of the continuum exists

an intimate connection making of it one whole, in which

the point has no existence previous to the line, but the

line does exist previous to the point. Multiplicity alone

subsists, unity has disappeared—“the continuum is unity

in multiplicity,” according to the celebrated formula. The

analysts have even less reason to de ne their continuum

as they do, since it is always on this that they reason

when they are particularly proud of their rigour. It is

enough to warn the reader that the real mathematical

continuum is quite di erent from that of the physicists

and from that of the metaphysicians.

It may also be said, perhaps, that mathematicians

who are contented with this de nition are the dupes of

words, that the nature of each of these sets should be

precisely indicated, that it should be explained how they  science and hypothesis24


are to be intercalated, and that it should be shown how it

is possible to do it. This, however, would be wrong; the

only property of the sets which comes into the reasoning

is that of preceding or succeeding these or those other

sets; this alone should therefore intervene in the de ni-

tion. So we need not concern ourselves with the manner

in which the sets are intercalated, and no one will doubt

the possibility of the operation if he only remembers that

“possible” in the language of geometers simply means ex-

empt from contradiction. But our de nition is not yet

complete, and we come back to it after this rather long

digression.

De nition of Incommensurables.—The mathemati-

cians of the Berlin school, and Kronecker in particular,

have devoted themselves to constructing this continuous

scale of irrational and fractional numbers without using

any other materials than the integer. The mathemati-

cal continuum from this point of view would be a pure

creation of the mind in which experiment would have no

part.

The idea of rational number not seeming to present

to them any di culty, they have con ned their attention

mainly to de ning incommensurable numbers. But be-

fore reproducing their de nition here, I must make an  mathematical magnitude.25


observation that will allay the astonishment which this

will not fail to provoke in readers who are but little fa-

miliar with the habits of geometers.

Mathematicians do not study objects, but the rela-

tions between objects; to them it is a matter of indif-

ference if these objects are replaced by others, provided

that the relations do not change. Matter does not engage

their attention, they are interested by form alone.

If we did not remember it, we could hardly under-

stand that Kronecker gives the name of incommensurable

number to a simple symbol—that is to say, something

very di erent from the idea we think we ought to have

of a quantity which should be measurable and almost

tangible.

Let us see now what is Kronecker’s de nition. Com-

mensurable numbers may be divided into classes in an

in nite number of ways, subject to the condition that

any number whatever of the  rst class is greater than

any number of the second. It may happen that among

the numbers of the  rst class there is one which is smaller

than all the rest; if, for instance, we arrange in the  rst

class all the numbers greater than 2, and 2 itself, and

in the second class all the numbers smaller than 2, it is

clear that 2 will be the smallest of all the numbers of the  science and hypothesis26


 rst class. The number 2 may therefore be chosen as the

symbol of this division.

It may happen, on the contrary, that in the second

class there is one which is greater than all the rest. This is

what takes place, for example, if the  rst class comprises

all the numbers greater than 2, and if, in the second, are

all the numbers less than 2, and 2 itself. Here again the

number 2 might be chosen as the symbol of this division.

But it may equally well happen that we can  nd nei-

ther in the  rst class a number smaller than all the rest,

nor in the second class a number greater than all the

rest. Suppose, for instance, we place in the  rst class

all the numbers whose squares are greater than 2, and

in the second all the numbers whose squares are smaller

than 2. We know that in neither of them is a number

whose square is equal to 2. Evidently there will be in

the  rst class no number which is smaller than all the

rest, for however near the square of a number may be

to 2, we can always  nd a commensurable whose square

is still nearer to 2. From Kronecker’s point of view, the
            p
incommensurable number2 is nothing but the symbol

of this particular method of division of commensurable

numbers; and to each mode of repartition corresponds in

this way a number, commensurable or not, which serves  mathematical magnitude.27


as a symbol. But to be satis ed with this would be to for-

get the origin of these symbols; it remains to explain how

we have been led to attribute to them a kind of concrete

existence, and on the other hand, does not the di culty

begin with fractions? Should we have the notion of these

numbers if we did not previously know a matter which

we conceive as in nitely divisible—i.e., as a continuum?

The Physical Continuum.—We are next led to ask if

the idea of the mathematical continuum is not simply

drawn from experiment. If that be so, the rough data of

experiment, which are our sensations, could be measured.

We might, indeed, be tempted to believe that this is so,

for in recent times there has been an attempt to mea-

sure them, and a law has even been formulated, known

as Fechner’s law, according to which sensation is propor-

tional to the logarithm of the stimulus. But if we examine

the experiments by which the endeavour has been made

to establish this law, we shall be led to a diametrically op-

posite conclusion. It has, for instance, been observed that

a weight A of 10 grammes and a weight B of 11 grammes

produced identical sensations, that the weight B could no

longer be distinguished from a weight C of 12 grammes,

but that the weight A was readily distinguished from the

weight C. Thus the rough results of the experiments may  science and hypothesis28


be expressed by the following relations

A = B;B = C;A < C;

which may be regarded as the formula of the physical

continuum. But here is an intolerable disagreement with

the law of contradiction, and the necessity of banishing

this disagreement has compelled us to invent the mathe-

matical continuum. We are therefore forced to conclude

that this notion has been created entirely by the mind,

but it is experiment that has provided the opportunity.

We cannot believe that two quantities which are equal to

a third are not equal to one another, and we are thus led

to suppose that A is di erent from B, and B from C, and

that if we have not been aware of this, it is due to the

imperfections of our senses.

The Creation of the Mathematical Continuum: First

Stage.—So far it would su ce, in order to account for

facts, to intercalate between A and B a small number of

terms which would remain discrete. What happens now

if we have recourse to some instrument to make up for

the weakness of our senses? If, for example, we use a

microscope? Such terms as A and B, which before were

indistinguishable from one another, appear now to be dis-

tinct: but between A and B, which are distinct, is inter-  mathematical magnitude.29


calated another new term D, which we can distinguish

neither from A nor from B. Although we may use the

most delicate methods, the rough results of our experi-

ments will always present the characters of the physical

continuum with the contradiction which is inherent in it.

We only escape from it by incessantly intercalating new

terms between the terms already distinguished, and this

operation must be pursued inde nitely. We might con-

ceive that it would be possible to stop if we could imagine

an instrument powerful enough to decompose the physi-

cal continuum into discrete elements, just as the telescope

resolves the Milky Way into stars. But this we cannot

imagine; it is always with our senses that we use our in-

struments; it is with the eye that we observe the image

magni ed by the microscope, and this image must there-

fore always retain the characters of visual sensation, and

therefore those of the physical continuum.

Nothing distinguishes a length directly observed

from half that length doubled by the microscope. The

whole is homogeneous to the part; and there is a fresh

contradiction—or rather there would be one if the num-

ber of the terms were supposed to be  nite; it is clear

that the part containing less terms than the whole cannot

be similar to the whole. The contradiction ceases as soon  science and hypothesis30


as the number of terms is regarded as in nite. There is

nothing, for example, to prevent us from regarding the

aggregate of integers as similar to the aggregate of even

numbers, which is however only a part of it; in fact, to

each integer corresponds another even number which is

its double. But it is not only to escape this contradiction

contained in the empiric data that the mind is led to

create the concept of a continuum formed of an inde nite

number of terms.

Here everything takes place just as in the series of the

integers. We have the faculty of conceiving that a unit

may be added to a collection of units. Thanks to ex-

periment, we have had the opportunity of exercising this

faculty and are conscious of it; but from this fact we feel

that our power is unlimited, and that we can count indef-

initely, although we have never had to count more than a

 nite number of objects. In the same way, as soon as we

have intercalated terms between two consecutive terms

of a series, we feel that this operation may be continued

without limit, and that, so to speak, there is no intrinsic

reason for stopping. As an abbreviation, I may give the

name of a mathematical continuum of the  rst order to

every aggregate of terms formed after the same law as

the scale of commensurable numbers. If, then, we inter-  mathematical magnitude.31


calate new sets according to the laws of incommensurable

numbers, we obtain what may be called a continuum of

the second order.

Second Stage.—We have only taken our  rst step. We

have explained the origin of continuums of the  rst order;

we must now see why this is not su cient, and why the

incommensurable numbers had to be invented.

If we try to imagine a line, it must have the characters

of the physical continuum—that is to say, our representa-

tion must have a certain breadth. Two lines will therefore

appear to us under the form of two narrow bands, and

if we are content with this rough image, it is clear that

where two lines cross they must have some common part.

But the pure geometer makes one further e ort; without

entirely renouncing the aid of his senses, he tries to imag-

ine a line without breadth and a point without size. This

he can do only by imagining a line as the limit towards

which tends a band that is growing thinner and thinner,

and the point as the limit towards which is tending an

area that is growing smaller and smaller. Our two bands,

however narrow they may be, will always have a common

area; the smaller they are the smaller it will be, and its

limit is what the geometer calls a point. This is why it is

said that the two lines which cross must have a common  science and hypothesis32


point, and this truth seems intuitive.

But a contradiction would be implied if we conceived

of lines as continuums of the  rst order—i.e., the lines

traced by the geometer should only give us points, the

co-ordinates of which are rational numbers. The con-

tradiction would be manifest if we were, for instance, to

assert the existence of lines and circles. It is clear, in fact,

that if the points whose co-ordinates are commensurable

were alone regarded as real, the in-circle of a square and

the diagonal of the square would not intersect, since the

co-ordinates of the point of intersection are incommensu-

rable.

Even then we should have only certain incommensu-

rable numbers, and not all these numbers.

But let us imagine a line divided into two half-rays

(demi-droites). Each of these half-rays will appear to

our minds as a band of a certain breadth; these bands

will  t close together, because there must be no interval

between them. The common part will appear to us to be

a point which will still remain as we imagine the bands

to become thinner and thinner, so that we admit as an

intuitive truth that if a line be divided into two half-rays

the common frontier of these half-rays is a point. Here

we recognise the conception of Kronecker, in which an  mathematical magnitude.33


incommensurable number was regarded as the common

frontier of two classes of rational numbers. Such is the

origin of the continuum of the second order, which is the

mathematical continuum properly so called.

Summary.—To sum up, the mind has the faculty of

creating symbols, and it is thus that it has constructed

the mathematical continuum, which is only a particular

system of symbols. The only limit to its power is the

necessity of avoiding all contradiction; but the mind only

makes use of it when experiment gives a reason for it.

In the case with which we are concerned, the reason

is given by the idea of the physical continuum, drawn

from the rough data of the senses. But this idea leads

to a series of contradictions from each of which in turn

we must be freed. In this way we are forced to imagine

a more and more complicated system of symbols. That

on which we shall dwell is not merely exempt from in-

ternal contradiction,—it was so already at all the steps

we have taken,—but it is no longer in contradiction with

the various propositions which are called intuitive, and

which are derived from more or less elaborate empirical

notions.

Measurable Magnitude.—So far we have not spoken

of the measure of magnitudes; we can tell if any one of  science and hypothesis34


them is greater than any other, but we cannot say that

it is two or three times as large.

So far, I have only considered the order in which the

terms are arranged; but that is not su cient for most

applications. We must learn how to compare the interval

which separates any two terms. On this condition alone

will the continuum become measurable, and the opera-

tions of arithmetic be applicable. This can only be done

by the aid of a new and special convention; and this con-

vention is, that in such a case the interval between the

terms A and B is equal to the interval which separates

C and D. For instance, we started with the integers, and

between two consecutive sets we intercalated n interme-

diary sets; by convention we now assume these new sets

to be equidistant. This is one of the ways of de ning the

addition of two magnitudes; for if the interval AB is by

de nition equal to the interval CD, the interval AD will

by de nition be the sum of the intervals AB and AC.

This de nition is very largely, but not altogether, arbi-

trary. It must satisfy certain conditions—the commuta-

tive and associative laws of addition, for instance; but,

provided the de nition we choose satis es these laws, the

choice is indi erent, and we need not state it precisely.

Remarks.—We are now in a position to discuss several  mathematical magnitude.35


important questions.

(1) Is the creative power of the mind exhausted by the

creation of the mathematical continuum? The answer

is in the negative, and this is shown in a very striking

manner by the work of Du Bois Reymond.

We know that mathematicians distinguish between

in nitesimals of di erent orders, and that in nitesimals

of the second order are in nitely small, not only abso-

lutely so, but also in relation to those of the  rst order.

It is not di cult to imagine in nitesimals of fractional

or even of irrational order, and here once more we  nd

the mathematical continuum which has been dealt with

in the preceding pages. Further, there are in nitesimals

which are in nitely small with reference to those of the

 rst order, and in nitely large with respect to the or-

der 1 +  , however small   may be. Here, then, are new

terms intercalated in our series; and if I may be permit-

ted to revert to the terminology used in the preceding

pages, a terminology which is very convenient, although

it has not been consecrated by usage, I shall say that we

have created a kind of continuum of the third order.

It is an easy matter to go further, but it is idle to do

so, for we would only be imagining symbols without any

possible application, and no one will dream of doing that.  science and hypothesis36


This continuum of the third order, to which we are led by

the consideration of the di erent orders of in nitesimals,

is in itself of but little use and hardly worth quoting.

Geometers look on it as a mere curiosity. The mind only

uses its creative faculty when experiment requires it.

(2) When we are once in possession of the conception

of the mathematical continuum, are we protected from

contradictions analogous to those which gave it birth?

No, and the following is an instance:—

He is a savant indeed who will not take it as evi-

dent that every curve has a tangent; and, in fact, if we

think of a curve and a straight line as two narrow bands,

we can always arrange them in such a way that they

have a common part without intersecting. Suppose now

that the breadth of the bands diminishes inde nitely: the

common part will still remain, and in the limit, so to

speak, the two lines will have a common point, although

they do not intersect—i.e., they will touch. The geome-

ter who reasons in this way is only doing what we have

done when we proved that two lines which intersect have

a common point, and his intuition might also seem to

be quite legitimate. But this is not the case. We can

show that there are curves which have no tangent, if we

de ne such a curve as an analytical continuum of the sec-  mathematical magnitude.37


ond order. No doubt some arti ce analogous to those we

have discussed above would enable us to get rid of this

contradiction, but as the latter is only met with in very

exceptional cases, we need not trouble to do so. Instead

of endeavouring to reconcile intuition and analysis, we

are content to sacri ce one of them, and as analysis must

be  awless, intuition must go to the wall.

The Physical Continuum of several Dimensions.—We

have discussed above the physical continuum as it is de-

rived from the immediate evidence of our senses—or, if

the reader prefers, from the rough results of Fechner’s ex-

periments; I have shown that these results are summed

up in the contradictory formulæ

A = B;B = C;A < C:

Let us now see how this notion is generalised, and

how from it may be derived the concept of continuums

of several dimensions. Consider any two aggregates of

sensations. We can either distinguish between them, or

we cannot; just as in Fechner’s experiments the weight

of 10 grammes could be distinguished from the weight

of 12 grammes, but not from the weight of 11 grammes.

This is all that is required to construct the continuum of

several dimensions.  science and hypothesis38


Let us call one of these aggregates of sensations an

element. It will be in a measure analogous to the point

of the mathematicians, but will not be, however, the same

thing. We cannot say that our element has no size, for we

cannot distinguish it from its immediate neighbours, and

it is thus surrounded by a kind of fog. If the astronomical

comparison may be allowed, our “elements” would be like

nebulæ, whereas the mathematical points would be like

stars.

If this be granted, a system of elements will form a

continuum, if we can pass from any one of them to any

other by a series of consecutive elements such that each

cannot be distinguished from its predecessor. This lin-

ear series is to the line of the mathematician what the

isolated element was to the point.

Before going further, I must explain what is meant

by a cut. Let us consider a continuum C, and remove

from it certain of its elements, which for a moment we

shall regard as no longer belonging to the continuum. We

shall call the aggregate of elements thus removed a cut.

By means of this cut, the continuum C will be subdi-

vided into several distinct continuums; the aggregate of

elements which remain will cease to form a single contin-

uum. There will then be on C two elements, A and B,  mathematical magnitude.39


which we must look upon as belonging to two distinct

continuums; and we see that this must be so, because it

will be impossible to  nd a linear series of consecutive el-

ements of C (each of the elements indistinguishable from

the preceding, the  rst being A and the last B), unless

one of the elements of this series is indistinguishable from

one of the elements of the cut.

It may happen, on the contrary, that the cut may not

be su cient to subdivide the continuum C. To classify

the physical continuums, we must  rst of all ascertain

the nature of the cuts which must be made in order to

subdivide them. If a physical continuum, C, may be sub-

divided by a cut reducing to a  nite number of elements,

all distinguishable the one from the other (and therefore

forming neither one continuum nor several continuums),

we shall call C a continuum of one dimension. If, on the

contrary, C can only be subdivided by cuts which are

themselves continuums, we shall say that C is of several

dimensions; if the cuts are continuums of one dimension,

then we shall say that C has two dimensions; if cuts of two

dimensions are su cient, we shall say that C is of three

dimensions, and so on. Thus the notion of the physical

continuum of several dimensions is de ned, thanks to the

very simple fact, that two aggregates of sensations may  science and hypothesis40


be distinguishable or indistinguishable.

The Mathematical Continuum of Several Dimen-

sions.—The conception of the mathematical continuum

of n dimensions may be led up to quite naturally by a

process similar to that which we discussed at the be-

ginning of this chapter. A point of such a continuum is

de ned by a system of n distinct magnitudes which we

call its co-ordinates.

The magnitudes need not always be measurable; there

is, for instance, one branch of geometry independent of

the measure of magnitudes, in which we are only con-

cerned with knowing, for example, if, on a curve ABC,

the point B is between the points A and C, and in which

it is immaterial whether the arc AB is equal to or twice

the arc BC. This branch is called Analysis Situs. It con-

tains quite a large body of doctrine which has attracted

the attention of the greatest geometers, and from which

are derived, one from another, a whole series of remark-

able theorems. What distinguishes these theorems from

those of ordinary geometry is that they are purely qual-

itative. They are still true if the  gures are copied by

an unskilful draughtsman, with the result that the pro-

portions are distorted and the straight lines replaced by

lines which are more or less curved.  mathematical magnitude.41


As soon as measurement is introduced into the contin-

uum we have just de ned, the continuum becomes space,

and geometry is born. But the discussion of this is re-

served for Part II.        PART II.

          SPACE.

      CHAPTER III.

  NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES.

Every conclusion presumes premisses. These premisses

are either self-evident and need no demonstration, or can

be established only if based on other propositions; and,

as we cannot go back in this way to in nity, every deduc-

tive science, and geometry in particular, must rest upon

a certain number of indemonstrable axioms. All treatises

of geometry begin therefore with the enunciation of these

axioms. But there is a distinction to be drawn between

them. Some of these, for example, “Things which are

equal to the same thing are equal to one another,” are

not propositions in geometry but propositions in analy-

sis. I look upon them as analytical à priori intuitions,

and they concern me no further. But I must insist on

other axioms which are special to geometry. Of these

most treatises explicitly enunciate three:—(1) Only one

line can pass through two points; (2) a straight line is the

shortest distance between two points; (3) through one

point only one parallel can be drawn to a given straightnon-euclidean geometries.43


line. Although we generally dispense with proving the

second of these axioms, it would be possible to deduce it

from the other two, and from those much more numer-

ous axioms which are implicitly admitted without enun-

ciation, as I shall explain further on. For a long time

a proof of the third axiom known as Euclid’s postulate

was sought in vain. It is impossible to imagine the e orts

that have been spent in pursuit of this chimera. Finally,

at the beginning of the nineteenth century, and almost

simultaneously, two scientists, a Russian and a Hungar-

ian, Lobatschewsky and Bolyai, showed irrefutably that

this proof is impossible. They have nearly rid us of in-

ventors of geometries without a postulate, and ever since

the Académic des Sciences receives only about one or

two new demonstrations a year. But the question was

not exhausted, and it was not long before a great step

was taken by the celebrated memoir of Riemann, enti-

tled: Ueber die Hypothesen welche der Geometrie zum

Grunde liegen. This little work has inspired most of the

recent treatises to which I shall later on refer, and among

which I may mention those of Beltrami and Helmholtz.

The Geometry of Lobatschewsky.—If it were possible

to deduce Euclid’s postulate from the several axioms, it

is evident that by rejecting the postulate and retaining  science and hypothesis44


the other axioms we should be led to contradictory con-

sequences. It would be, therefore, impossible to found

on those premisses a coherent geometry. Now, this is

precisely what Lobatschewsky has done. He assumes at

the outset that several parallels may be drawn through a

point to a given straight line, and he retains all the other

axioms of Euclid. From these hypotheses he deduces a

series of theorems between which it is impossible to  nd

any contradiction, and he constructs a geometry as im-

peccable in its logic as Euclidean geometry. The theo-

rems are very di erent, however, from those to which we

are accustomed, and at  rst will be found a little discon-

certing. For instance, the sum of the angles of a triangle

is always less than two right angles, and the di erence

between that sum and two right angles is proportional

to the area of the triangle. It is impossible to construct

a  gure similar to a given  gure but of di erent dimen-

sions. If the circumference of a circle be divided into

n equal parts, and tangents be drawn at the points of

intersection, the n tangents will form a polygon if the

radius of the circle is small enough, but if the radius is

large enough they will never meet. We need not multi-

ply these examples. Lobatschewsky’s propositions have

no relation to those of Euclid, but they are none the lessnon-euclidean geometries.45


logically interconnected.

Riemann’s Geometry.—Let us imagine to ourselves

a world only peopled with beings of no thickness, and

suppose these “in nitely  at” animals are all in one and

the same plane, from which they cannot emerge. Let us

further admit that this world is su ciently distant from

other worlds to be withdrawn from their in uence, and

while we are making these hypotheses it will not cost

us much to endow these beings with reasoning power,

and to believe them capable of making a geometry. In

that case they will certainly attribute to space only two

dimensions. But now suppose that these imaginary ani-

mals, while remaining without thickness, have the form

of a spherical, and not of a plane  gure, and are all on

the same sphere, from which they cannot escape. What

kind of a geometry will they construct? In the  rst place,

it is clear that they will attribute to space only two di-

mensions. The straight line to them will be the shortest

distance from one point on the sphere to another—that

is to say, an arc of a great circle. In a word, their ge-

ometry will be spherical geometry. What they will call

space will be the sphere on which they are con ned, and

on which take place all the phenomena with which they

are acquainted. Their space will therefore be unbounded,  science and hypothesis46


since on a sphere one may always walk forward without

ever being brought to a stop, and yet it will be  nite;

the end will never be found, but the complete tour can

be made. Well, Riemann’s geometry is spherical geom-

etry extended to three dimensions. To construct it, the

German mathematician had  rst of all to throw over-

board, not only Euclid’s postulate but also the  rst ax-

iom that only one line can pass through two points. On

a sphere, through two given points, we can in general

draw only one great circle which, as we have just seen,

would be to our imaginary beings a straight line. But

there was one exception. If the two given points are at

the ends of a diameter, an in nite number of great circles

can be drawn through them. In the same way, in Rie-

mann’s geometry—at least in one of its forms—through

two points only one straight line can in general be drawn,

but there are exceptional cases in which through two

points an in nite number of straight lines can be drawn.

So there is a kind of opposition between the geometries

of Riemann and Lobatschewsky. For instance, the sum

of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles

in Euclid’s geometry, less than two right angles in that

of Lobatschewsky, and greater than two right angles in

that of Riemann. The number of parallel lines that cannon-euclidean geometries.47


be drawn through a given point to a given line is one

in Euclid’s geometry, none in Riemann’s, and an in nite

number in the geometry of Lobatschewsky. Let us add

that Riemann’s space is  nite, although unbounded in

the sense which we have above attached to these words.

Surfaces with Constant Curvature.—One objection,

however, remains possible. There is no contradiction be-

tween the theorems of Lobatschewsky and Riemann; but

however numerous are the other consequences that these

geometers have deduced from their hypotheses, they had

to arrest their course before they exhausted them all, for

the number would be in nite; and who can say that if

they had carried their deductions further they would not

have eventually reached some contradiction? This dif-

 culty does not exist for Riemann’s geometry, provided

it is limited to two dimensions. As we have seen, the

two-dimensional geometry of Riemann, in fact, does not

di er from spherical geometry, which is only a branch

of ordinary geometry, and is therefore outside all con-

tradiction. Beltrami, by showing that Lobatschewsky’s

two-dimensional geometry was only a branch of ordinary

geometry, has equally refuted the objection as far as it

is concerned. This is the course of his argument: Let us

consider any  gure whatever on a surface. Imagine this  science and hypothesis48


 gure to be traced on a  exible and inextensible canvas

applied to the surface, in such a way that when the canvas

is displaced and deformed the di erent lines of the  gure

change their form without changing their length. As a

rule, this  exible and inextensible  gure cannot be dis-

placed without leaving the surface. But there are certain

surfaces for which such a movement would be possible.

They are surfaces of constant curvature. If we resume

the comparison that we made just now, and imagine be-

ings without thickness living on one of these surfaces,

they will regard as possible the motion of a  gure all

the lines of which remain of a constant length. Such a

movement would appear absurd, on the other hand, to

animals without thickness living on a surface of variable

curvature. These surfaces of constant curvature are of

two kinds. The curvature of some is positive, and they

may be deformed so as to be applied to a sphere. The ge-

ometry of these surfaces is therefore reduced to spherical

geometry—namely, Riemann’s. The curvature of others

is negative. Beltrami has shown that the geometry of

these surfaces is identical with that of Lobatschewsky.

Thus the two-dimensional geometries of Riemann and

Lobatschewsky are connected with Euclidean geometry.

Interpretation of Non-Euclidean Geometries.—Thusnon-euclidean geometries.49


vanishes the objection so far as two-dimensional geome-

tries are concerned. It would be easy to extend Bel-

trami’s reasoning to three-dimensional geometries, and

minds which do not recoil before space of four dimen-

sions will see no di culty in it; but such minds are few

in number. I prefer, then, to proceed otherwise. Let us

consider a certain plane, which I shall call the fundamen-

tal plane, and let us construct a kind of dictionary by

making a double series of terms written in two columns,

and corresponding each to each, just as in ordinary dic-

tionaries the words in two languages which have the same

signi cation correspond to one another:—

Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The portion of space situated

                above the fundamental

                plane.

Plane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sphere cutting orthogonally

                the fundamental plane.

Line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Circle cutting orthogonally the

                fundamental plane.

Sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sphere.

Circle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Circle.

Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Angle.  science and hypothesis50


Distance between twoLogarithm of the anharmonic

points . . . . . . . . . .ratio of these two points

                  and of the intersection of

                  the fundamental plane with

                  the circle passing through

                  these two points and cut-

                ting it orthogonally.

Etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Etc.

Let us now take Lobatschewsky’s theorems and trans-

late them by the aid of this dictionary, as we would trans-

late a German text with the aid of a German-French dic-

tionary. We shall then obtain the theorems of ordinary

geometry. For instance, Lobatschewsky’s theorem: “The

sum of the angles of a triangle is less than two right

angles,” may be translated thus: “If a curvilinear tri-

angle has for its sides arcs of circles which if produced

would cut orthogonally the fundamental plane, the sum

of the angles of this curvilinear triangle will be less than

two right angles.” Thus, however far the consequences of

Lobatschewsky’s hypotheses are carried, they will never

lead to a contradiction; in fact, if two of Lobatschewsky’s

theorems were contradictory, the translations of these

two theorems made by the aid of our dictionary would be

contradictory also. But these translations are theoremsnon-euclidean geometries.51


of ordinary geometry, and no one doubts that ordinary

geometry is exempt from contradiction. Whence is the

certainty derived, and how far is it justi ed? That is a

question upon which I cannot enter here, but it is a very

interesting question, and I think not insoluble. Nothing,

therefore, is left of the objection I formulated above. But

this is not all. Lobatschewsky’s geometry being suscep-

tible of a concrete interpretation, ceases to be a useless

logical exercise, and may be applied. I have no time

here to deal with these applications, nor with what Herr

Klein and myself have done by using them in the inte-

gration of linear equations. Further, this interpretation is

not unique, and several dictionaries may be constructed

analogous to that above, which will enable us by a simple

translation to convert Lobatschewsky’s theorems into the

theorems of ordinary geometry.

Implicit Axioms.—Are the axioms implicitly enunci-

ated in our text-books the only foundation of geometry?

We may be assured of the contrary when we see that,

when they are abandoned one after another, there are

still left standing some propositions which are common to

the geometries of Euclid, Lobatschewsky, and Riemann.

These propositions must be based on premisses that ge-

ometers admit without enunciation. It is interesting to  science and hypothesis52


try and extract them from the classical proofs.
              1
John Stuart Mill assertedthat every de nition con-

tains an axiom, because by de ning we implicitly a rm

the existence of the object de ned. That is going rather

too far. It is but rarely in mathematics that a de nition

is given without following it up by the proof of the exis-

tence of the object de ned, and when this is not done it

is generally because the reader can easily supply it; and

it must not be forgotten that the word “existence” has

not the same meaning when it refers to a mathematical

entity as when it refers to a material object.

A mathematical entity exists provided there is no con-

tradiction implied in its de nition, either in itself, or with

the propositions previously admitted. But if the observa-

tion of John Stuart Mill cannot be applied to all de ni-

tions, it is none the less true for some of them. A plane is

sometimes de ned in the following manner:—The plane

is a surface such that the line which joins any two points

upon it lies wholly on that surface. Now, there is obvi-

ously a new axiom concealed in this de nition. It is true

we might change it, and that would be preferable, but

then we should have to enunciate the axiom explicitly.

Other de nitions may give rise to no less important re-

1
Logic, c. viii., cf. De nitions, §5–6.—[Tr.]non-euclidean geometries.53


 ections, such as, for example, that of the equality of two

 gures. Two  gures are equal when they can be super-

posed. To superpose them, one of them must be displaced

until it coincides with the other. But how must it be dis-

placed? If we asked that question, no doubt we should

be told that it ought to be done without deforming it,

and as an invariable solid is displaced. The vicious circle

would then be evident. As a matter of fact, this de ni-

tion de nes nothing. It has no meaning to a being living

in a world in which there are only  uids. If it seems clear

to us, it is because we are accustomed to the properties

of natural solids which do not much di er from those of

the ideal solids, all of whose dimensions are invariable.

However, imperfect as it may be, this de nition implies

an axiom. The possibility of the motion of an invariable

 gure is not a self-evident truth. At least it is only so in

the application to Euclid’s postulate, and not as an an-

alytical à priori intuition would be. Moreover, when we

study the de nitions and the proofs of geometry, we see

that we are compelled to admit without proof not only

the possibility of this motion, but also some of its prop-

erties. This  rst arises in the de nition of the straight

line. Many defective de nitions have been given, but the

true one is that which is understood in all the proofs in  science and hypothesis54


which the straight line intervenes. “It may happen that

the motion of an invariable  gure may be such that all

the points of a line belonging to the  gure are motion-

less, while all the points situate outside that line are in

motion. Such a line would be called a straight line.” We

have deliberately in this enunciation separated the def-

inition from the axiom which it implies. Many proofs

such as those of the cases of the equality of triangles, of

the possibility of drawing a perpendicular from a point

to a straight line, assume propositions the enunciations

of which are dispensed with, for they necessarily imply

that it is possible to move a  gure in space in a certain

way.

The Fourth Geometry.—Among these explicit axioms

there is one which seems to me to deserve some attention,

because when we abandon it we can construct a fourth

geometry as coherent as those of Euclid, Lobatschewsky,

and Riemann. To prove that we can always draw a per-

pendicular at a point A to a straight line AB, we consider

a straight line AC movable about the point A, and ini-

tially identical with the  xed straight line AB. We then

can make it turn about the point A until it lies in AB

produced. Thus we assume two propositions— rst, that

such a rotation is possible, and then that it may continuenon-euclidean geometries.55


until the two lines lie the one in the other produced. If

the  rst point is conceded and the second rejected, we

are led to a series of theorems even stranger than those

of Lobatschewsky and Riemann, but equally free from

contradiction. I shall give only one of these theorems,

and I shall not choose the least remarkable of them. A

real straight line may be perpendicular to itself.

Lie’s Theorem.—The number of axioms implicitly in-

troduced into classical proofs is greater than necessary,

and it would be interesting to reduce them to a mini-

mum. It may be asked, in the  rst place, if this reduction

is possible—if the number of necessary axioms and that

of imaginable geometries is not in nite? A theorem due

to Sophus Lie is of weighty importance in this discussion.

It may be enunciated in the following manner:—Suppose

the following premisses are admitted: (1) space has n di-

mensions; (2) the movement of an invariable  gure is

possible; (3) p conditions are necessary to determine the

position of this  gure in space.

The number of geometries compatible with these pre-

misses will be limited. I may even add that if n is given, a

superior limit can be assigned to p. If, therefore, the pos-

sibility of the movement is granted, we can only invent

a  nite and even a rather restricted number of three-  science and hypothesis56


dimensional geometries.

Riemann’s Geometries.—However, this result seems

contradicted by Riemann, for that scientist constructs

an in nite number of geometries, and that to which his

name is usually attached is only a particular case of them.

All depends, he says, on the manner in which the length

of a curve is de ned. Now, there is an in nite number of

ways of de ning this length, and each of them may be the

starting-point of a new geometry. That is perfectly true,

but most of these de nitions are incompatible with the

movement of a variable  gure such as we assume to be

possible in Lie’s theorem. These geometries of Riemann,

so interesting on various grounds, can never be, there-

fore, purely analytical, and would not lend themselves to

proofs analogous to those of Euclid.

On the Nature of Axioms.—Most mathematicians re-

gard Lobatschewsky’s geometry as a mere logical curios-

ity. Some of them have, however, gone further. If sev-

eral geometries are possible, they say, is it certain that

our geometry is the one that is true? Experiment no

doubt teaches us that the sum of the angles of a trian-

gle is equal to two right angles, but this is because the

triangles we deal with are too small. According to Lo-

batschewsky, the di erence is proportional to the area ofnon-euclidean geometries.57


the triangle, and will not this become sensible when we

operate on much larger triangles, and when our measure-

ments become more accurate? Euclid’s geometry would

thus be a provisory geometry. Now, to discuss this view

we must  rst of all ask ourselves, what is the nature of

geometrical axioms? Are they synthetic à priori intu-

itions, as Kant a rmed? They would then be imposed

upon us with such a force that we could not conceive of

the contrary proposition, nor could we build upon it a

theoretical edi ce. There would be no non-Euclidean ge-

ometry. To convince ourselves of this, let us take a true

synthetic à priori intuition—the following, for instance,

which played an important part in the  rst chapter:—If

a theorem is true for the number 1, and if it has been

proved that it is true of n+ 1, provided it is true of n, it

will be true for all positive integers. Let us next try to

get rid of this, and while rejecting this proposition let us

construct a false arithmetic analogous to non-Euclidean

geometry. We shall not be able to do it. We shall be

even tempted at the outset to look upon these intuitions

as analytical. Besides, to take up again our  ction of

animals without thickness, we can scarcely admit that

these beings, if their minds are like ours, would adopt

the Euclidean geometry, which would be contradicted by  science and hypothesis58


all their experience. Ought we, then, to conclude that

the axioms of geometry are experimental truths? But we

do not make experiments on ideal lines or ideal circles;

we can only make them on material objects. On what,

therefore, would experiments serving as a foundation for

geometry be based? The answer is easy. We have seen

above that we constantly reason as if the geometrical

 gures behaved like solids. What geometry would bor-

row from experiment would be therefore the properties

of these bodies. The properties of light and its propa-

gation in a straight line have also given rise to some of

the propositions of geometry, and in particular to those

of projective geometry, so that from that point of view

one would be tempted to say that metrical geometry is

the study of solids, and projective geometry that of light.

But a di culty remains, and is unsurmountable. If ge-

ometry were an experimental science, it would not be an

exact science. It would be subjected to continual revi-

sion. Nay, it would from that day forth be proved to be

erroneous, for we know that no rigorously invariable solid

exists. The geometrical axioms are therefore neither syn-

thetic à priori intuitions nor experimental facts. They

are conventions. Our choice among all possible conven-

tions is guided by experimental facts; but it remains free,non-euclidean geometries.59


and is only limited by the necessity of avoiding every

contradiction, and thus it is that postulates may remain

rigorously true even when the experimental laws which

have determined their adoption are only approximate.

In other words, the axioms of geometry (I do not speak

of those of arithmetic) are only de nitions in disguise.

What, then, are we to think of the question: Is Euclidean

geometry true? It has no meaning. We might as well ask

if the metric system is true, and if the old weights and

measures are false; if Cartesian co-ordinates are true and

polar co-ordinates false. One geometry cannot be more

true than another; it can only be more convenient. Now,

Euclidean geometry is, and will remain, the most con-

venient: 1st, because it is the simplest, and it is not so

only because of our mental habits or because of the kind

of direct intuition that we have of Euclidean space; it is

the simplest in itself, just as a polynomial of the  rst de-

gree is simpler than a polynomial of the second degree;

2nd, because it su ciently agrees with the properties of

natural solids, those bodies which we can compare and

measure by means of our senses.      CHAPTER IV.

    SPACE AND GEOMETRY.

Let us begin with a little paradox. Beings whose minds

were made as ours, and with senses like ours, but without

any preliminary education, might receive from a suitably-

chosen external world impressions which would lead them

to construct a geometry other than that of Euclid, and to

localise the phenomena of this external world in a non-

Euclidean space, or even in space of four dimensions.

As for us, whose education has been made by our ac-

tual world, if we were suddenly transported into this new

world, we should have no di culty in referring phenom-

ena to our Euclidean space. Perhaps somebody may ap-

pear on the scene some day who will devote his life to it,

and be able to represent to himself the fourth dimension.

Geometrical Space and Representative Space.—It is

often said that the images we form of external objects

are localised in space, and even that they can only be

formed on this condition. It is also said that this space,

which thus serves as a kind of framework ready prepared

for our sensations and representations, is identical with

the space of the geometers, having all the properties of

that space. To all clear-headed men who think in this    space and geometry.61


way, the preceding statement might well appear extra-

ordinary; but it is as well to see if they are not the vic-

tims of some illusion which closer analysis may be able

to dissipate. In the  rst place, what are the properties of

space properly so called? I mean of that space which is

the object of geometry, and which I shall call geometrical

space. The following are some of the more essential:—

1st, it is continuous; 2nd, it is in nite; 3rd, it is of

three dimensions; 4th, it is homogeneous—that is to say,

all its points are identical one with another; 5th, it is

isotropic. Compare this now with the framework of our

representations and sensations, which I may call repre-

sentative space.

Visual Space.—First of all let us consider a purely

visual impression, due to an image formed on the back

of the retina. A cursory analysis shows us this image as

continuous, but as possessing only two dimensions, which

already distinguishes purely visual from what may be

called geometrical space. On the other hand, the image

is enclosed within a limited framework; and there is a

no less important di erence: this pure visual space is not

homogeneous. All the points on the retina, apart from the

images which may be formed, do not play the same rôle.

The yellow spot can in no way be regarded as identical  science and hypothesis62


with a point on the edge of the retina. Not only does the

same object produce on it much brighter impressions, but

in the whole of the limited framework the point which

occupies the centre will not appear identical with a point

near one of the edges. Closer analysis no doubt would

show us that this continuity of visual space and its two

dimensions are but an illusion. It would make visual

space even more di erent than before from geometrical

space, but we may treat this remark as incidental.

However, sight enables us to appreciate distance, and

therefore to perceive a third dimension. But every one

knows that this perception of the third dimension reduces

to a sense of the e ort of accommodation which must

be made, and to a sense of the convergence of the two

eyes, that must take place in order to perceive an object

distinctly. These are muscular sensations quite di erent

from the visual sensations which have given us the con-

cept of the two  rst dimensions. The third dimension will

therefore not appear to us as playing the same rôle as the

two others. What may be called complete visual space is

not therefore an isotropic space. It has, it is true, exactly

three dimensions; which means that the elements of our

visual sensations (those at least which concur in forming

the concept of extension) will be completely de ned if we    space and geometry.63


know three of them; or, in mathematical language, they

will be functions of three independent variables. But let

us look at the matter a little closer. The third dimen-

sion is revealed to us in two di erent ways: by the e ort

of accommodation, and by the convergence of the eyes.

No doubt these two indications are always in harmony;

there is between them a constant relation; or, in mathe-

matical language, the two variables which measure these

two muscular sensations do not appear to us as indepen-

dent. Or, again, to avoid an appeal to mathematical ideas

which are already rather too re ned, we may go back to

the language of the preceding chapter and enunciate the

same fact as follows:—If two sensations of convergence

A and B are indistinguishable, the two sensations of ac-
  00
commodation Aand Bwhich accompany them respec-

tively will also be indistinguishable. But that is, so to

speak, an experimental fact. Nothing prevents us à pri-

ori from assuming the contrary, and if the contrary takes

place, if these two muscular sensations both vary inde-

pendently, we must take into account one more indepen-

dent variable, and complete visual space will appear to

us as a physical continuum of four dimensions. And so in

this there is also a fact of external experiment. Nothing

prevents us from assuming that a being with a mind like  science and hypothesis64


ours, with the same sense-organs as ourselves, may be

placed in a world in which light would only reach him af-

ter being passed through refracting media of complicated

form. The two indications which enable us to appreciate

distances would cease to be connected by a constant rela-

tion. A being educating his senses in such a world would

no doubt attribute four dimensions to complete visual

space.

Tactile and Motor Space.—“Tactile space” is more

complicated still than visual space, and di ers even more

widely from geometrical space. It is useless to repeat

for the sense of touch my remarks on the sense of sight.

But outside the data of sight and touch there are other

sensations which contribute as much and more than they

do to the genesis of the concept of space. They are those

which everybody knows, which accompany all our move-

ments, and which we usually call muscular sensations.

The corresponding framework constitutes what may be

called motor space. Each muscle gives rise to a special

sensation which may be increased or diminished so that

the aggregate of our muscular sensations will depend

upon as many variables as we have muscles. From this

point of view motor space would have as many dimen-

sions as we have muscles. I know that it is said that if    space and geometry.65


the muscular sensations contribute to form the concept

of space, it is because we have the sense of the direction

of each movement, and that this is an integral part of

the sensation. If this were so, and if a muscular sense

could not be aroused unless it were accompanied by this

geometrical sense of direction, geometrical space would

certainly be a form imposed upon our sensitiveness. But

I do not see this at all when I analyse my sensations.

What I do see is that the sensations which correspond

to movements in the same direction are connected in

my mind by a simple association of ideas. It is to this

association that what we call the sense of direction is

reduced. We cannot therefore discover this sense in a

single sensation. This association is extremely complex,

for the contraction of the same muscle may correspond,

according to the position of the limbs, to very di erent

movements of direction. Moreover, it is evidently ac-

quired; it is like all associations of ideas, the result of

a habit. This habit itself is the result of a very large

number of experiments, and no doubt if the education

of our senses had taken place in a di erent medium,

where we would have been subjected to di erent impres-

sions, then contrary habits would have been acquired,

and our muscular sensations would have been associated  science and hypothesis66


according to other laws.

Characteristics of Representative Space.—Thus rep-

resentative space in its triple form—visual, tactile, and

motor—di ers essentially from geometrical space. It is

neither homogeneous nor isotropic; we cannot even say

that it is of three dimensions. It is often said that we

“project” into geometrical space the objects of our exter-

nal perception; that we “localise” them. Now, has that

any meaning, and if so what is that meaning? Does it

mean that we represent to ourselves external objects in

geometrical space? Our representations are only the re-

production of our sensations; they cannot therefore be

arranged in the same framework—that is to say, in rep-

resentative space. It is also just as impossible for us

to represent to ourselves external objects in geometri-

cal space, as it is impossible for a painter to paint on a

 at surface objects with their three dimensions. Repre-

sentative space is only an image of geometrical space, an

image deformed by a kind of perspective, and we can only

represent to ourselves objects by making them obey the

laws of this perspective. Thus we do not represent to our-

selves external bodies in geometrical space, but we reason

about these bodies as if they were situated in geometrical

space. When it is said, on the other hand, that we “lo-    space and geometry.67


calise” such an object in such a point of space, what does

it mean? It simply means that we represent to ourselves

the movements that must take place to reach that object.

And it does not mean that to represent to ourselves these

movements they must be projected into space, and that

the concept of space must therefore pre-exist. When I

say that we represent to ourselves these movements, I

only mean that we represent to ourselves the muscular

sensations which accompany them, and which have no

geometrical character, and which therefore in no way im-

ply the pre-existence of the concept of space.

Changes of State and Changes of Position.—But, it

may be said, if the concept of geometrical space is not

imposed upon our minds, and if, on the other hand, none

of our sensations can furnish us with that concept, how

then did it ever come into existence? This is what we

have now to examine, and it will take some time; but

I can sum up in a few words the attempt at explana-

tion which I am going to develop. None of our sensa-

tions, if isolated, could have brought us to the concept of

space; we are brought to it solely by studying the laws

by which those sensations succeed one another. We see

at  rst that our impressions are subject to change; but

among the changes that we ascertain, we are very soon  science and hypothesis68


led to make a distinction. Sometimes we say that the

objects, the causes of these impressions, have changed

their state, sometimes that they have changed their po-

sition, that they have only been displaced. Whether an

object changes its state or only its position, this is always

translated for us in the same manner, by a modi cation

in an aggregate of impressions. How then have we been

enabled to distinguish them? If there were only change

of position, we could restore the primitive aggregate of

impressions by making movements which would confront

us with the movable object in the same relative situa-

tion. We thus correct the modi cation which was pro-

duced, and we re-establish the initial state by an inverse

modi cation. If, for example, it were a question of the

sight, and if an object be displaced before our eyes, we

can “follow it with the eye,” and retain its image on the

same point of the retina by appropriate movements of the

eyeball. These movements we are conscious of because

they are voluntary, and because they are accompanied

by muscular sensations. But that does not mean that

we represent them to ourselves in geometrical space. So

what characterises change of position, what distinguishes

it from change of state, is that it can always be corrected

by this means. It may therefore happen that we pass    space and geometry.69


from the aggregate of impressions A to the aggregate B

in two di erent ways. First, involuntarily and without

experiencing muscular sensations—which happens when

it is the object that is displaced; secondly, voluntarily,

and with muscular sensation—which happens when the

object is motionless, but when we displace ourselves in

such a way that the object has relative motion with re-

spect to us. If this be so, the translation of the aggre-

gate A to the aggregate B is only a change of position. It

follows that sight and touch could not have given us the

idea of space without the help of the “muscular sense.”

Not only could this concept not be derived from a single

sensation, or even from a series of sensations; but a mo-

tionless being could never have acquired it, because, not

being able to correct by his movements the e ects of the

change of position of external objects, he would have had

no reason to distinguish them from changes of state. Nor

would he have been able to acquire it if his movements

had not been voluntary, or if they were unaccompanied

by any sensations whatever.

Conditions of Compensation.—How is such a com-

pensation possible in such a way that two changes, oth-

erwise mutually independent, may be reciprocally cor-

rected? A mind already familiar with geometry would  science and hypothesis70


reason as follows:—If there is to be compensation, the

di erent parts of the external object on the one hand, and

the di erent organs of our senses on the other, must be in

the same relative position after the double change. And

for that to be the case, the di erent parts of the external

body on the one hand, and the di erent organs of our

senses on the other, must have the same relative position

to each other after the double change; and so with the

di erent parts of our body with respect to each other. In

other words, the external object in the  rst change must

be displaced as an invariable solid would be displaced,

and it must also be so with the whole of our body in the

second change, which is to correct the  rst. Under these

conditions compensation may be produced. But we who

as yet know nothing of geometry, whose ideas of space are

not yet formed, we cannot reason in this way—we cannot

predict à priori if compensation is possible. But experi-

ment shows us that it sometimes does take place, and we

start from this experimental fact in order to distinguish

changes of state from changes of position.

Solid Bodies and Geometry.—Among surrounding ob-

jects there are some which frequently experience displace-

ments that may be thus corrected by a correlative move-

ment of our own body—namely, solid bodies. The other    space and geometry.71


objects, whose form is variable, only in exceptional cir-

cumstances undergo similar displacement (change of po-

sition without change of form). When the displacement

of a body takes place with deformation, we can no longer

by appropriate movements place the organs of our body

in the same relative situation with respect to this body;

we can no longer, therefore, reconstruct the primitive ag-

gregate of impressions.

It is only later, and after a series of new experiments,

that we learn how to decompose a body of variable form

into smaller elements such that each is displaced approx-

imately according to the same laws as solid bodies. We

thus distinguish “deformations” from other changes of

state. In these deformations each element undergoes a

simple change of position which may be corrected; but

the modi cation of the aggregate is more profound, and

can no longer be corrected by a correlative movement.

Such a concept is very complex even at this stage, and

has been relatively slow in its appearance. It would not

have been conceived at all had not the observation of solid

bodies shown us beforehand how to distinguish changes

of position.

If, then, there were no solid bodies in nature there

would be no geometry.  science and hypothesis72


Another remark deserves a moment’s attention. Sup-

pose a solid body to occupy successively the positions

  and ; in the  rst position it will give us an aggregate of

impressions A, and in the second position the aggregate

of impressions B. Now let there be a second solid body,

of qualities entirely di erent from the  rst—of di erent

colour, for instance. Assume it to pass from the posi-
                                          0
tion  , where it gives us the aggregate of impressions A

to the position , where it gives the aggregate of impres-
0
sions B. In general, the aggregate A will have nothing in
                0
common with the aggregate A, nor will the aggregate B
                                    0
have anything in common with the aggregate B. The

transition from the aggregate A to the aggregate B, and
        00
that of the aggregate Ato the aggregate B, are therefore

two changes which in themselves have in general nothing

in common. Yet we consider both these changes as dis-

placements; and, further, we consider them the same dis-

placement. How can this be? It is simply because they

may be both corrected by the same correlative movement

of our body. “Correlative movement,” therefore, consti-

tutes the sole connection between two phenomena which

otherwise we should never have dreamed of connecting.

On the other hand, our body, thanks to the number

of its articulations and muscles, may have a multitude    space and geometry.73


of di erent movements, but all are not capable of “cor-

recting” a modi cation of external objects; those alone

are capable of it in which our whole body, or at least all

those in which the organs of our senses enter into play

are displaced en bloc—i.e., without any variation of their

relative positions, as in the case of a solid body.

To sum up:—

1. In the  rst place, we distinguish two categories of

phenomena:—The  rst involuntary, unaccompanied by

muscular sensations, and attributed to external objects—

they are external changes; the second, of opposite char-

acter and attributed to the movements of our own body,

are internal changes.

2. We notice that certain changes of each in these

categories may be corrected by a correlative change of

the other category.

3. We distinguish among external changes those that

have a correlative in the other category—which we call

displacements; and in the same way we distinguish among

the internal changes those which have a correlative in the

 rst category.

Thus by means of this reciprocity is de ned a partic-

ular class of phenomena called displacements. The laws

of these phenomena are the object of geometry.  science and hypothesis74


Law of Homogeneity.—The  rst of these laws is the

law of homogeneity. Suppose that by an external change

we pass from the aggregate of impressions A to the ag-

gregate B, and that then this change   is corrected by a

correlative voluntary movement , so that we are brought

back to the aggregate A. Suppose now that another ex-
  0
ternal change  brings us again from the aggregate A

to the aggregate B. Experiment then shows us that this
0
change  , like the change  , may be corrected by a volun-
              00
tary correlative movement , and that this movement 

corresponds to the same muscular sensations as the move-

ment  which corrected  .

This fact is usually enunciated as follows:—Space is

homogeneous and isotropic. We may also say that a

movement which is once produced may be repeated a

second and a third time, and so on, without any varia-

tion of its properties. In the  rst chapter, in which we

discussed the nature of mathematical reasoning, we saw

the importance that should be attached to the possibility

of repeating the same operation inde nitely. The virtue

of mathematical reasoning is due to this repetition; by

means of the law of homogeneity geometrical facts are

apprehended. To be complete, to the law of homogeneity

must be added a multitude of other laws, into the details    space and geometry.75


of which I do not propose to enter, but which mathemati-

cians sum up by saying that these displacements form a

“group.”

The Non-Euclidean World.—If geometrical space

were a framework imposed on each of our representa-

tions considered individually, it would be impossible to

represent to ourselves an image without this framework,

and we should be quite unable to change our geometry.

But this is not the case; geometry is only the summary

of the laws by which these images succeed each other.

There is nothing, therefore, to prevent us from imagining

a series of representations, similar in every way to our

ordinary representations, but succeeding one another ac-

cording to laws which di er from those to which we are

accustomed. We may thus conceive that beings whose

education has taken place in a medium in which those

laws would be so di erent, might have a very di erent

geometry from ours.

Suppose, for example, a world enclosed in a large

sphere and subject to the following laws:—The temper-

ature is not uniform; it is greatest at the centre, and

gradually decreases as we move towards the circumfer-

ence of the sphere, where it is absolute zero. The law of

this temperature is as follows:—If R be the radius of the  science and hypothesis76


sphere, and r the distance of the point considered from

the centre, the absolute temperature will be proportional
22
to R r. Further, I shall suppose that in this world

all bodies have the same co-e cient of dilatation, so that

the linear dilatation of any body is proportional to its ab-

solute temperature. Finally, I shall assume that a body

transported from one point to another of di erent tem-

perature is instantaneously in thermal equilibrium with

its new environment. There is nothing in these hypothe-

ses either contradictory or unimaginable. A moving ob-

ject will become smaller and smaller as it approaches the

circumference of the sphere. Let us observe, in the  rst

place, that although from the point of view of our or-

dinary geometry this world is  nite, to its inhabitants

it will appear in nite. As they approach the surface of

the sphere they become colder, and at the same time

smaller and smaller. The steps they take are therefore

also smaller and smaller, so that they can never reach

the boundary of the sphere. If to us geometry is only

the study of the laws according to which invariable solids

move, to these imaginary beings it will be the study of

the laws of motion of solids deformed by the di erences

of temperature alluded to.

No doubt, in our world, natural solids also experience    space and geometry.77


variations of form and volume due to di erences of tem-

perature. But in laying the foundations of geometry we

neglect these variations; for besides being but small they

are irregular, and consequently appear to us to be acci-

dental. In our hypothetical world this will no longer be

the case, the variations will obey very simple and regu-

lar laws. On the other hand, the di erent solid parts of

which the bodies of these inhabitants are composed will

undergo the same variations of form and volume.

Let me make another hypothesis: suppose that light

passes through media of di erent refractive indices, such

that the index of refraction is inversely proportional
22
to R r. Under these conditions it is clear that the

rays of light will no longer be rectilinear but circular. To

justify what has been said, we have to prove that cer-

tain changes in the position of external objects may be

corrected by correlative movements of the beings which

inhabit this imaginary world; and in such a way as to

restore the primitive aggregate of the impressions expe-

rienced by these sentient beings. Suppose, for example,

that an object is displaced and deformed, not like an

invariable solid, but like a solid subjected to unequal

dilatations in exact conformity with the law of temper-

ature assumed above. To use an abbreviation, we shall  science and hypothesis78


call such a movement a non-Euclidean displacement.

If a sentient being be in the neighbourhood of such a

displacement of the object, his impressions will be mod-

i ed; but by moving in a suitable manner, he may re-

construct them. For this purpose, all that is required is

that the aggregate of the sentient being and the object,

considered as forming a single body, shall experience one

of those special displacements which I have just called

non-Euclidean. This is possible if we suppose that the

limbs of these beings dilate according to the same laws

as the other bodies of the world they inhabit.

Although from the point of view of our ordinary

geometry there is a deformation of the bodies in this

displacement, and although their di erent parts are no

longer in the same relative position, nevertheless we shall

see that the impressions of the sentient being remain the

same as before; in fact, though the mutual distances

of the di erent parts have varied, yet the parts which

at  rst were in contact are still in contact. It follows

that tactile impressions will be unchanged. On the other

hand, from the hypothesis as to refraction and the cur-

vature of the rays of light, visual impressions will also

be unchanged. These imaginary beings will therefore

be led to classify the phenomena they observe, and to    space and geometry.79


distinguish among them the “changes of position,” which

may be corrected by a voluntary correlative movement,

just as we do.

If they construct a geometry, it will not be like ours,

which is the study of the movements of our invariable

solids; it will be the study of the changes of position

which they will have thus distinguished, and will be “non-

Euclidean displacements,” and this will be non-Euclidean

geometry. So that beings like ourselves, educated in such

a world, will not have the same geometry as ours.

The World of Four Dimensions.—Just as we have pic-

tured to ourselves a non-Euclidean world, so we may pic-

ture a world of four dimensions.

The sense of light, even with one eye, together with

the muscular sensations relative to the movements of the

eyeball, will su ce to enable us to conceive of space of

three dimensions. The images of external objects are

painted on the retina, which is a plane of two dimen-

sions; these are perspectives. But as eye and objects are

movable, we see in succession di erent perspectives of

the same body taken from di erent points of view. We

 nd at the same time that the transition from one per-

spective to another is often accompanied by muscular

sensations. If the transition from the perspective A to  science and hypothesis80


                                  0
the perspective B, and that of the perspective Ato the
0
perspective Bare accompanied by the same muscular

sensations, we connect them as we do other operations

of the same nature. Then when we study the laws ac-

cording to which these operations are combined, we see

that they form a group, which has the same structure

as that of the movements of invariable solids. Now, we

have seen that it is from the properties of this group

that we derive the idea of geometrical space and that of

three dimensions. We thus understand how these per-

spectives gave rise to the conception of three dimensions,

although each perspective is of only two dimensions,—

because they succeed each other according to certain laws.

Well, in the same way that we draw the perspective of

a three-dimensional  gure on a plane, so we can draw

that of a four-dimensional  gure on a canvas of three

(or two) dimensions. To a geometer this is but child’s

play. We can even draw several perspectives of the same

 gure from several di erent points of view. We can eas-

ily represent to ourselves these perspectives, since they

are of only three dimensions. Imagine that the di erent

perspectives of one and the same object to occur in suc-

cession, and that the transition from one to the other is

accompanied by muscular sensations. It is understood    space and geometry.81


that we shall consider two of these transitions as two

operations of the same nature when they are associated

with the same muscular sensations. There is nothing,

then, to prevent us from imagining that these operations

are combined according to any law we choose—for in-

stance, by forming a group with the same structure as

that of the movements of an invariable four-dimensional

solid. In this there is nothing that we cannot represent

to ourselves, and, moreover, these sensations are those

which a being would experience who has a retina of two

dimensions, and who may be displaced in space of four

dimensions. In this sense we may say that we can repre-

sent to ourselves the fourth dimension.

Conclusions.—It is seen that experiment plays a con-

siderable rôle in the genesis of geometry; but it would be

a mistake to conclude from that that geometry is, even

in part, an experimental science. If it were experimental,

it would only be approximative and provisory. And what

a rough approximation it would be! Geometry would be

only the study of the movements of solid bodies; but, in

reality, it is not concerned with natural solids: its object

is certain ideal solids, absolutely invariable, which are

but a greatly simpli ed and very remote image of them.

The concept of these ideal bodies is entirely mental, and  science and hypothesis82


experiment is but the opportunity which enables us to

reach the idea. The object of geometry is the study of a

particular “group”; but the general concept of group pre-

exists in our minds, at least potentially. It is imposed on

us not as a form of our sensitiveness, but as a form of our

understanding; only, from among all possible groups, we

must choose one that will be the standard, so to speak,

to which we shall refer natural phenomena.

Experiment guides us in this choice, which it does not

impose on us. It tells us not what is the truest, but what

is the most convenient geometry. It will be noticed that

my description of these fantastic worlds has required no

language other than that of ordinary geometry. Then,

were we transported to those worlds, there would be no

need to change that language. Beings educated there

would no doubt  nd it more convenient to create a ge-

ometry di erent from ours, and better adapted to their

impressions; but as for us, in the presence of the same

impressions, it is certain that we should not  nd it more

convenient to make a change.      CHAPTER V.

  EXPERIMENT AND GEOMETRY.

1. I have on several occasions in the preceding pages

tried to show how the principles of geometry are not ex-

perimental facts, and that in particular Euclid’s postu-

late cannot be proved by experiment. However convinc-

ing the reasons already given may appear to me, I feel

I must dwell upon them, because there is a profoundly

false conception deeply rooted in many minds.

2. Think of a material circle, measure its radius and

circumference, and see if the ratio of the two lengths is

equal to  . What have we done? We have made an ex-

periment on the properties of the matter with which this

roundness has been realised, and of which the measure

we used is made.

3. Geometry and Astronomy.—The same question

may also be asked in another way. If Lobatschewsky’s

geometry is true, the parallax of a very distant star will

be  nite. If Riemann’s is true, it will be negative. These

are the results which seem within the reach of exper-

iment, and it is hoped that astronomical observations

may enable us to decide between the three geometries.

But what we call a straight line in astronomy is simply  science and hypothesis84


the path of a ray of light. If, therefore, we were to dis-

cover negative parallaxes, or to prove that all parallaxes

are higher than a certain limit, we should have a choice

between two conclusions: we could give up Euclidean

geometry, or modify the laws of optics, and suppose that

light is not rigorously propagated in a straight line. It

is needless to add that every one would look upon this

solution as the more advantageous. Euclidean geometry,

therefore, has nothing to fear from fresh experiments.

4. Can we maintain that certain phenomena which

are possible in Euclidean space would be impossible in

non-Euclidean space, so that experiment in establish-

ing these phenomena would directly contradict the non-

Euclidean hypothesis? I think that such a question can-

not be seriously asked. To me it is exactly equivalent to

the following, the absurdity of which is obvious:—There

are lengths which can be expressed in metres and cen-

timetres, but cannot be measured in toises, feet, and

inches; so that experiment, by ascertaining the existence

of these lengths, would directly contradict this hypothe-

sis, that there are toises divided into six feet. Let us look

at the question a little more closely. I assume that the

straight line in Euclidean space possesses any two prop-

erties, which I shall call A and B; that in non-Euclidean  experiment and geometry.85


space it still possesses the property A, but no longer

possesses the property B; and,  nally, I assume that

in both Euclidean and non-Euclidean space the straight

line is the only line that possesses the property A. If

this were so, experiment would be able to decide be-

tween the hypotheses of Euclid and Lobatschewsky. It

would be found that some concrete object, upon which we

can experiment—for example, a pencil of rays of light—

possesses the property A. We should conclude that it is

rectilinear, and we should then endeavour to  nd out if

it does, or does not, possess the property B. But it is not

so. There exists no property which can, like this prop-

erty A, be an absolute criterion enabling us to recognise

the straight line, and to distinguish it from every other

line. Shall we say, for instance, “This property will be

the following: the straight line is a line such that a  gure

of which this line is a part can move without the mu-

tual distances of its points varying, and in such a way

that all the points in this straight line remain  xed”?

Now, this is a property which in either Euclidean or non-

Euclidean space belongs to the straight line, and belongs

to it alone. But how can we ascertain by experiment if

it belongs to any particular concrete object? Distances

must be measured, and how shall we know that any con-  science and hypothesis86


crete magnitude which I have measured with my material

instrument really represents the abstract distance? We

have only removed the di culty a little farther o . In

reality, the property that I have just enunciated is not a

property of the straight line alone; it is a property of the

straight line and of distance. For it to serve as an abso-

lute criterion, we must be able to show, not only that it

does not also belong to any other line than the straight

line and to distance, but also that it does not belong to

any other line than the straight line, and to any other

magnitude than distance. Now, that is not true, and

if we are not convinced by these considerations, I chal-

lenge any one to give me a concrete experiment which

can be interpreted in the Euclidean system, and which

cannot be interpreted in the system of Lobatschewsky.

As I am well aware that this challenge will never be ac-

cepted, I may conclude that no experiment will ever be in

contradiction with Euclid’s postulate; but, on the other

hand, no experiment will ever be in contradiction with

Lobatschewsky’s postulate.

5. But it is not su cient that the Euclidean (or non-

Euclidean) geometry can ever be directly contradicted by

experiment. Nor could it happen that it can only agree

with experiment by a violation of the principle of su -  experiment and geometry.87


cient reason, and of that of the relativity of space. Let me

explain myself. Consider any material system whatever.

We have to consider on the one hand the “state” of the

various bodies of this system—for example, their temper-

ature, their electric potential, etc.; and on the other hand

their position in space. And among the data which enable

us to de ne this position we distinguish the mutual dis-

tances of these bodies that de ne their relative positions,

and the conditions which de ne the absolute position of

the system and its absolute orientation in space. The law

of the phenomena which will be produced in this system

will depend on the state of these bodies, and on their

mutual distances; but because of the relativity and the

inertia of space, they will not depend on the absolute po-

sition and orientation of the system. In other words, the

state of the bodies and their mutual distances at any mo-

ment will solely depend on the state of the same bodies

and on their mutual distances at the initial moment, but

will in no way depend on the absolute initial position of

the system and of its absolute initial orientation. This is

what we shall call, for the sake of abbreviation, the law

of relativity.

So far I have spoken as a Euclidean geometer. But

I have said that an experiment, whatever it may be, re-  science and hypothesis88


quires an interpretation on the Euclidean hypothesis; it

equally requires one on the non-Euclidean hypothesis.

Well, we have made a series of experiments. We have

interpreted them on the Euclidean hypothesis, and we

have recognised that these experiments thus interpreted

do not violate this “law of relativity.” We now interpret

them on the non-Euclidean hypothesis. This is always

possible, only the non-Euclidean distances of our di er-

ent bodies in this new interpretation will not generally

be the same as the Euclidean distances in the primitive

interpretation. Will our experiment interpreted in this

new manner be still in agreement with our “law of rela-

tivity,” and if this agreement had not taken place, would

we not still have the right to say that experiment has

proved the falsity of non-Euclidean geometry? It is easy

to see that this is an idle fear. In fact, to apply the law

of relativity in all its rigour, it must be applied to the en-

tire universe; for if we were to consider only a part of the

universe, and if the absolute position of this part were

to vary, the distances of the other bodies of the universe

would equally vary; their in uence on the part of the

universe considered might therefore increase or dimin-

ish, and this might modify the laws of the phenomena

which take place in it. But if our system is the entire  experiment and geometry.89


universe, experiment is powerless to give us any opinion

on its position and its absolute orientation in space. All

that our instruments, however perfect they may be, can

let us know will be the state of the di erent parts of the

universe, and their mutual distances. Hence, our law of

relativity may be enunciated as follows:—The readings

that we can make with our instruments at any given mo-

ment will depend only on the readings that we were able

to make on the same instruments at the initial moment.

Now such an enunciation is independent of all interpre-

tation by experiments. If the law is true in the Euclidean

interpretation, it will be also true in the non-Euclidean

interpretation. Allow me to make a short digression on

this point. I have spoken above of the data which de ne

the position of the di erent bodies of the system. I might

also have spoken of those which de ne their velocities. I

should then have to distinguish the velocity with which

the mutual distances of the di erent bodies are chang-

ing, and on the other hand the velocities of translation

and rotation of the system; that is to say, the veloci-

ties with which its absolute position and orientation are

changing. For the mind to be fully satis ed, the law of

relativity would have to be enunciated as follows:—The

state of bodies and their mutual distances at any given  science and hypothesis90


moment, as well as the velocities with which those dis-

tances are changing at that moment, will depend only

on the state of those bodies, on their mutual distances

at the initial moment, and on the velocities with which

those distances were changing at the initial moment. But

they will not depend on the absolute initial position of

the system nor on its absolute orientation, nor on the ve-

locities with which that absolute position and orientation

were changing at the initial moment. Unfortunately, the

law thus enunciated does not agree with experiments—at

least, as they are ordinarily interpreted. Suppose a man

were translated to a planet, the sky of which was con-

stantly covered with a thick curtain of clouds, so that he

could never see the other stars. On that planet he would

live as if it were isolated in space. But he would notice

that it revolves, either by measuring its ellipticity (which

is ordinarily done by means of astronomical observations,

but which could be done by purely geodesic means), or by

repeating the experiment of Foucault’s pendulum. The

absolute rotation of this planet might be clearly shown

in this way. Now, here is a fact which shocks the philoso-

pher, but which the physicist is compelled to accept. We

know that from this fact Newton concluded the existence

of absolute space. I myself cannot accept this way of  experiment and geometry.91


looking at it. I shall explain why in Part III., but for the

moment it is not my intention to discuss this di culty. I

must therefore resign myself, in the enunciation of the law

of relativity, to including velocities of every kind among

the data which de ne the state of the bodies. However

that may be, the di culty is the same for both Euclid’s

geometry and for Lobatschewsky’s. I need not therefore

trouble about it further, and I have only mentioned it in-

cidentally. To sum up, whichever way we look at it, it is

impossible to discover in geometric empiricism a rational

meaning.

6. Experiments only teach us the relations of bod-

ies to one another. They do not and cannot give us the

relations of bodies and space, nor the mutual relations

of the di erent parts of space. “Yes!” you reply, “a sin-

gle experiment is not enough, because it only gives us

one equation with several unknowns; but when I have

made enough experiments I shall have enough equations

to calculate all my unknowns.” If I know the height of the

main-mast, that is not su cient to enable me to calculate

the age of the captain. When you have measured every

fragment of wood in a ship you will have many equa-

tions, but you will be no nearer knowing the captain’s

age. All your measurements bearing on your fragments  science and hypothesis92


of wood can tell you only what concerns those fragments;

and similarly, your experiments, however numerous they

may be, referring only to the relations of bodies with one

another, will tell you nothing about the mutual relations

of the di erent parts of space.

7. Will you say that if the experiments have refer-

ence to the bodies, they at least have reference to the

geometrical properties of the bodies. First, what do you

understand by the geometrical properties of bodies? I

assume that it is a question of the relations of the bodies

to space. These properties therefore are not reached by

experiments which only have reference to the relations of

bodies to one another, and that is enough to show that

it is not of those properties that there can be a ques-

tion. Let us therefore begin by making ourselves clear

as to the sense of the phrase: geometrical properties of

bodies. When I say that a body is composed of several

parts, I presume that I am thus enunciating a geometri-

cal property, and that will be true even if I agree to give

the improper name of points to the very small parts I am

considering. When I say that this or that part of a cer-

tain body is in contact with this or that part of another

body, I am enunciating a proposition which concerns the

mutual relations of the two bodies, and not their rela-  experiment and geometry.93


tions with space. I assume that you will agree with me

that these are not geometrical properties. I am sure that

at least you will grant that these properties are indepen-

dent of all knowledge of metrical geometry. Admitting

this, I suppose that we have a solid body formed of eight

thin iron rods, oa, ob, oc, od, oe, of, og, oh, connected

at one of their extremities, o. And let us take a second

solid body—for example, a piece of wood, on which are

marked three little spots of ink which I shall call    .

I now suppose that we  nd that we can bring into con-

tact   with ago; by that I mean   with a, and at the

same time  with g, and  with o. Then we can suc-

cessively bring into contact   with bgo, cgo, dgo, ego,

f go, then with aho, bho, cho, dho, eho, f ho; and then

  successively with ab, bc, cd, de, ef, f a. Now these are

observations that can be made without having any idea

beforehand as to the form or the metrical properties of

space. They have no reference whatever to the “geometri-

cal properties of bodies.” These observations will not be

possible if the bodies on which we experiment move in a

group having the same structure as the Lobatschewskian

group (I mean according to the same laws as solid bodies

in Lobatschewsky’s geometry). They therefore su ce to

prove that these bodies move according to the Euclidean  science and hypothesis94


group; or at least that they do not move according to

the Lobatschewskian group. That they may be compati-

ble with the Euclidean group is easily seen; for we might

make them so if the body   were an invariable solid

of our ordinary geometry in the shape of a right-angled

triangle, and if the points abcdef gh were the vertices of

a polyhedron formed of two regular hexagonal pyramids

of our ordinary geometry having abcdef as their common

base, and having the one g and the other h as their ver-

tices. Suppose now, instead of the previous observations,

we note that we can as before apply   successively

to ago, bgo, cgo, dgo, ego, f go, aho, bho, cho, dho, eho,

f ho, and then that we can apply   (and no longer  )

successively to ab, bc, cd, de, ef, and f a. These are ob-

servations that could be made if non-Euclidean geometry

were true. If the bodies  , oabcdef gh were invariable

solids, if the former were a right-angled triangle, and

the latter a double regular hexagonal pyramid of suit-

able dimensions. These new veri cations are therefore

impossible if the bodies move according to the Euclidean

group; but they become possible if we suppose the bodies

to move according to the Lobatschewskian group. They

would therefore su ce to show, if we carried them out,

that the bodies in question do not move according to the  experiment and geometry.95


Euclidean group. And so, without making any hypothe-

sis on the form and the nature of space, on the relations

of the bodies and space, and without attributing to bod-

ies any geometrical property, I have made observations

which have enabled me to show in one case that the bod-

ies experimented upon move according to a group, the

structure of which is Euclidean, and in the other case,

that they move in a group, the structure of which is Lo-

batschewskian. It cannot be said that all the  rst ob-

servations would constitute an experiment proving that

space is Euclidean, and the second an experiment proving

that space is non-Euclidean; in fact, it might be imagined

(note that I use the word imagined) that there are bod-

ies moving in such a manner as to render possible the

second series of observations: and the proof is that the

 rst mechanic who came our way could construct it if he

would only take the trouble. But you must not conclude,

however, that space is non-Euclidean. In the same way,

just as ordinary solid bodies would continue to exist when

the mechanic had constructed the strange bodies I have

just mentioned, he would have to conclude that space

is both Euclidean and non-Euclidean. Suppose, for in-

stance, that we have a large sphere of radius R, and that

its temperature decreases from the centre to the surface  science and hypothesis96


of the sphere according to the law of which I spoke when I

was describing the non-Euclidean world. We might have

bodies whose dilatation is negligible, and which would

behave as ordinary invariable solids; and, on the other

hand, we might have very dilatable bodies, which would

behave as non-Euclidean solids. We might have two dou-
                000000000
ble pyramids oabcdef gh and oabcdefgh, and two tri-
    000
angles   and  . The  rst double pyramid would

be rectilinear, and the second curvilinear. The trian-

gle   would consist of undilatable matter, and the

other of very dilatable matter. We might therefore make
                                  000
our  rst observations with the double pyramid oahand
000
the triangle  .

And then the experiment would seem to show— rst,

that Euclidean geometry is true, and then that it is false.

Hence, experiments have reference not to space but to

bodies.


        supplement.

8. To round the matter o , I ought to speak of a very

delicate question, which will require considerable devel-

opment; but I shall con ne myself to summing up what I

have written in the Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale

and in the Monist. When we say that space has three  experiment and geometry.97


dimensions, what do we mean? We have seen the impor-

tance of these “internal changes” which are revealed to

us by our muscular sensations. They may serve to char-

acterise the di erent attitudes of our body. Let us take

arbitrarily as our origin one of these attitudes, A. When

we pass from this initial attitude to another attitude B

we experience a series of muscular sensations, and this

series S of muscular sensations will de ne B. Observe,
                                          0
however, that we shall often look upon two series S and S

as de ning the same attitude B (since the initial and  -

nal attitudes A and B remaining the same, the intermedi-

ary attitudes of the corresponding sensations may di er).

How then can we recognise the equivalence of these two

series? Because they may serve to compensate for the

same external change, or more generally, because, when

it is a question of compensation for an external change,

one of the series may be replaced by the other. Among

these series we have distinguished those which can alone

compensate for an external change, and which we have

called “displacements.” As we cannot distinguish two dis-

placements which are very close together, the aggregate

of these displacements presents the characteristics of a

physical continuum. Experience teaches us that they are

the characteristics of a physical continuum of six dimen-  science and hypothesis98


sions; but we do not know as yet how many dimensions

space itself possesses, so we must  rst of all answer an-

other question. What is a point in space? Every one

thinks he knows, but that is an illusion. What we see

when we try to represent to ourselves a point in space is

a black spot on white paper, a spot of chalk on a black-

board, always an object. The question should therefore

be understood as follows:—What do I mean when I say

the object B is at the point which a moment before was

occupied by the object A? Again, what criterion will

enable me to recognise it? I mean that although I have

not moved (my muscular sense tells me this), my  nger,

which just now touched the object A, is now touching

the object B. I might have used other criteria—for in-

stance, another  nger or the sense of sight—but the  rst

criterion is su cient. I know that if it answers in the

a rmative all other criteria will give the same answer. I

know it from experiment. I cannot know it à priori. For

the same reason I say that touch cannot be exercised at

a distance; that is another way of enunciating the same

experimental fact. If I say, on the contrary, that sight is

exercised at a distance, it means that the criterion fur-

nished by sight may give an a rmative answer while the

others reply in the negative.  experiment and geometry.99


To sum up. For each attitude of my body my  nger

determines a point, and it is that and that only which

de nes a point in space. To each attitude corresponds

in this way a point. But it often happens that the same

point corresponds to several di erent attitudes (in this

case we say that our  nger has not moved, but the rest of

our body has). We distinguish, therefore, among changes

of attitude those in which the  nger does not move. How

are we led to this? It is because we often remark that in

these changes the object which is in touch with the  nger

remains in contact with it. Let us arrange then in the

same class all the attitudes which are deduced one from

the other by one of the changes that we have thus dis-

tinguished. To all these attitudes of the same class will

correspond the same point in space. Then to each class

will correspond a point, and to each point a class. Yet it

may be said that what we get from this experiment is not

the point, but the class of changes, or, better still, the

corresponding class of muscular sensations. Thus, when

we say that space has three dimensions, we merely mean

that the aggregate of these classes appears to us with the

characteristics of a physical continuum of three dimen-

sions. Then if, instead of de ning the points in space

with the aid of the  rst  nger, I use, for example, an-    science and hypothesis100


other  nger, would the results be the same? That is by

no means à priori evident. But, as we have seen, experi-

ment has shown us that all our criteria are in agreement,

and this enables us to answer in the a rmative. If we

recur to what we have called displacements, the aggre-

gate of which forms, as we have seen, a group, we shall

be brought to distinguish those in which a  nger does

not move; and by what has preceded, those are the dis-

placements which characterise a point in space, and their

aggregate will form a sub-group of our group. To each

sub-group of this kind, then, will correspond a point in

space. We might be tempted to conclude that experiment

has taught us the number of dimensions of space; but in

reality our experiments have referred not to space, but

to our body and its relations with neighbouring objects.

What is more, our experiments are exceeding crude. In

our mind the latent idea of a certain number of groups

pre-existed; these are the groups with which Lie’s theory

is concerned. Which shall we choose to form a kind of

standard by which to compare natural phenomena? And

when this group is chosen, which of the sub-groups shall

we take to characterise a point in space? Experiment has

guided us by showing us what choice adapts itself best

to the properties of our body; but there its rôle ends.        PART III.

          FORCE.

      CHAPTER VI.

  THE CLASSICAL MECHANICS.

The English teach mechanics as an experimental science;

on the Continent it is taught always more or less as a de-

ductive and à priori science. The English are right, no

doubt. How is it that the other method has been per-

sisted in for so long; how is it that Continental scientists

who have tried to escape from the practice of their pre-

decessors have in most cases been unsuccessful? On the

other hand, if the principles of mechanics are only of ex-

perimental origin, are they not merely approximate and

provisory? May we not be some day compelled by new

experiments to modify or even to abandon them? These

are the questions which naturally arise, and the di culty

of solution is largely due to the fact that treatises on me-

chanics do not clearly distinguish between what is exper-

iment, what is mathematical reasoning, what is conven-

tion, and what is hypothesis. This is not all.

1. There is no absolute space, and we only conceive of

relative motion; and yet in most cases mechanical facts    science and hypothesis102


are enunciated as if there is an absolute space to which

they can be referred.

2. There is no absolute time. When we say that two

periods are equal, the statement has no meaning, and

can only acquire a meaning by a convention.

3. Not only have we no direct intuition of the equality

of two periods, but we have not even direct intuition of

the simultaneity of two events occurring in two di erent

places. I have explained this in an article entitled “Mesure
1
du Temps.”

4. Finally, is not our Euclidean geometry in itself only

a kind of convention of language? Mechanical facts might

be enunciated with reference to a non-Euclidean space

which would be less convenient but quite as legitimate as

our ordinary space; the enunciation would become more

complicated, but it still would be possible.

Thus, absolute space, absolute time, and even geom-

etry are not conditions which are imposed on mechan-

ics. All these things no more existed before mechanics

than the French language can be logically said to have

existed before the truths which are expressed in French.

We might endeavour to enunciate the fundamental law of

1
Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, t. vi., pp. 1–13, January,
1898.  the classical mechanics.103


mechanics in a language independent of all these conven-

tions; and no doubt we should in this way get a clearer

idea of those laws in themselves. This is what M. An-

drade has tried to do, to some extent at any rate, in his

Leçons de Mécanique physique. Of course the enunciation

of these laws would become much more complicated, be-

cause all these conventions have been adopted for the

very purpose of abbreviating and simplifying the enun-

ciation. As far as we are concerned, I shall ignore all

these di culties; not because I disregard them, far from

it; but because they have received su cient attention in

the  rst two parts, of the book. Provisionally, then, we

shall admit absolute time and Euclidean geometry.

The Principle of Inertia.—A body under the action

of no force can only move uniformly in a straight line.

Is this a truth imposed on the mind à priori? If this

be so, how is it that the Greeks ignored it? How could

they have believed that motion ceases with the cause of

motion? or, again, that every body, if there is nothing to

prevent it, will move in a circle, the noblest of all forms

of motion?

If it be said that the velocity of a body cannot change,

if there is no reason for it to change, may we not just as

legitimately maintain that the position of a body cannot    science and hypothesis104


change, or that the curvature of its path cannot change,

without the agency of an external cause? Is, then, the

principle of inertia, which is not an à priori truth, an

experimental fact? Have there ever been experiments on

bodies acted on by no forces? and, if so, how did we know

that no forces were acting? The usual instance is that of

a ball rolling for a very long time on a marble table; but

why do we say it is under the action of no force? Is it be-

cause it is too remote from all other bodies to experience

any sensible action? It is not further from the earth than

if it were thrown freely into the air; and we all know that

in that case it would be subject to the attraction of the

earth. Teachers of mechanics usually pass rapidly over

the example of the ball, but they add that the principle

of inertia is veri ed indirectly by its consequences. This

is very badly expressed; they evidently mean that various

consequences may be veri ed by a more general princi-

ple, of which the principle of inertia is only a particular

case. I shall propose for this general principle the fol-

lowing enunciation:—The acceleration of a body depends

only on its position and that of neighbouring bodies, and

on their velocities. Mathematicians would say that the

movements of all the material molecules of the universe

depend on di erential equations of the second order. To  the classical mechanics.105


make it clear that this is really a generalisation of the law

of inertia we may again have recourse to our imagination.

The law of inertia, as I have said above, is not imposed

on us à priori; other laws would be just as compatible

with the principle of su cient reason. If a body is not

acted upon by a force, instead of supposing that its ve-

locity is unchanged we may suppose that its position or

its acceleration is unchanged.

Let us for a moment suppose that one of these two

laws is a law of nature, and substitute it for the law

of inertia: what will be the natural generalisation? A

moment’s re ection will show us. In the  rst case, we

may suppose that the velocity of a body depends only on

its position and that of neighbouring bodies; in the sec-

ond case, that the variation of the acceleration of a body

depends only on the position of the body and of neigh-

bouring bodies, on their velocities and accelerations; or,

in mathematical terms, the di erential equations of the

motion would be of the  rst order in the  rst case and of

the third order in the second.

Let us now modify our supposition a little. Suppose a

world analogous to our solar system, but one in which by

a singular chance the orbits of all the planets have nei-

ther eccentricity nor inclination; and further, I suppose    science and hypothesis106


that the masses of the planets are too small for their

mutual perturbations to be sensible. Astronomers living

in one of these planets would not hesitate to conclude

that the orbit of a star can only be circular and parallel

to a certain plane; the position of a star at a given mo-

ment would then be su cient to determine its velocity

and path. The law of inertia which they would adopt

would be the former of the two hypothetical laws I have

mentioned.

Now, imagine this system to be some day crossed by

a body of vast mass and immense velocity coming from

distant constellations. All the orbits would be profoundly

disturbed. Our astronomers would not be greatly aston-

ished. They would guess that this new star is in itself

quite capable of doing all the mischief; but, they would

say, as soon as it has passed by, order will again be es-

tablished. No doubt the distances of the planets from

the sun will not be the same as before the cataclysm,

but the orbits will become circular again as soon as the

disturbing cause has disappeared. It would be only when

the perturbing body is remote, and when the orbits, in-

stead of being circular are found to be elliptical, that the

astronomers would  nd out their mistake, and discover

the necessity of reconstructing their mechanics.  the classical mechanics.107


I have dwelt on these hypotheses, for it seems to me

that we can clearly understand our generalised law of

inertia only by opposing it to a contrary hypothesis.

Has this generalised law of inertia been veri ed by

experiment, and can it be so veri ed? When Newton

wrote the Principia, he certainly regarded this truth as

experimentally acquired and demonstrated. It was so in

his eyes, not only from the anthropomorphic conception

to which I shall later refer, but also because of the work

of Galileo. It was so proved by the laws of Kepler. Ac-

cording to those laws, in fact, the path of a planet is

entirely determined by its initial position and initial ve-

locity; this, indeed, is what our generalised law of inertia

requires.

For this principle to be only true in appearance—lest

we should fear that some day it must be replaced by one

of the analogous principles which I opposed to it just

now—we must have been led astray by some amazing

chance such as that which had led into error our imagi-

nary astronomers. Such an hypothesis is so unlikely that

it need not delay us. No one will believe that there can

be such chances; no doubt the probability that two ec-

centricities are both exactly zero is not smaller than the

probability that one is 0:1 and the other 0:2. The proba-    science and hypothesis108


bility of a simple event is not smaller than that of a com-

plex one. If, however, the former does occur, we shall

not attribute its occurrence to chance; we shall not be

inclined to believe that nature has done it deliberately

to deceive us. The hypothesis of an error of this kind

being discarded, we may admit that so far as astronomy

is concerned our law has been veri ed by experiment.

But Astronomy is not the whole of Physics. May we

not fear that some day a new experiment will falsify the

law in some domain of physics? An experimental law is

always subject to revision; we may always expect to see

it replaced by some other and more exact law. But no

one seriously thinks that the law of which we speak will

ever be abandoned or amended. Why? Precisely because

it will never be submitted to a decisive test.

In the  rst place, for this test to be complete, all the

bodies of the universe must return with their initial ve-

locities to their initial positions after a certain time. We

ought then to  nd that they would resume their original

paths. But this test is impossible; it can be only par-

tially applied, and even when it is applied there will still

be some bodies which will not return to their original

positions. Thus there will be a ready explanation of any

breaking down of the law.  the classical mechanics.109


Yet this is not all. In Astronomy we see the bodies

whose motion we are studying, and in most cases we grant

that they are not subject to the action of other invisible

bodies. Under these conditions, our law must certainly

be either veri ed or not. But it is not so in Physics.

If physical phenomena are due to motion, it is to the

motion of molecules which we cannot see. If, then, the

acceleration of bodies we cannot see depends on some-

thing else than the positions or velocities of other visible

bodies or of invisible molecules, the existence of which

we have been led previously to admit, there is nothing

to prevent us from supposing that this something else is

the position or velocity of other molecules of which we

have not so far suspected the existence. The law will be

safeguarded. Let me express the same thought in another

form in mathematical language. Suppose we are observ-

ing n molecules, and  nd that their 3n co-ordinates sat-

isfy a system of 3n di erential equations of the fourth

order (and not of the second, as required by the law of

inertia). We know that by introducing 3n variable auxil-

iaries, a system of 3n equations of the fourth order may

be reduced to a system of 6n equations of the second or-

der. If, then, we suppose that the 3n auxiliary variables

represent the co-ordinates of n invisible molecules, the    science and hypothesis110


result is again conformable to the law of inertia. To sum

up, this law, veri ed experimentally in some particular

cases, may be extended fearlessly to the most general

cases; for we know that in these general cases it can nei-

ther be con rmed nor contradicted by experiment.

The Law of Acceleration.—The acceleration of a body

is equal to the force which acts on it divided by its mass.

Can this law be veri ed by experiment? If so, we

have to measure the three magnitudes mentioned in the

enunciation: acceleration, force, and mass. I admit that

acceleration may be measured, because I pass over the

di culty arising from the measurement of time. But how

are we to measure force and mass? We do not even know

what they are. What is mass? Newton replies: “The

product of the volume and the density.” “It were better

to say,” answer Thomson and Tait, “that density is the

quotient of the mass by the volume.” What is force? “It

is,” replies Lagrange, “that which moves or tends to move

a body.” “It is,” according to Kircho , “the product of the

mass and the acceleration.” Then why not say that mass

is the quotient of the force by the acceleration? These

di culties are insurmountable.

When we say force is the cause of motion, we are

talking metaphysics; and this de nition, if we had to be  the classical mechanics.111


content with it, would be absolutely fruitless, would lead

to absolutely nothing. For a de nition to be of any use it

must tell us how to measure force; and that is quite suf-

 cient, for it is by no means necessary to tell what force

is in itself, nor whether it is the cause or the e ect of mo-

tion. We must therefore  rst de ne what is meant by the

equality of two forces. When are two forces equal? We

are told that it is when they give the same acceleration

to the same mass, or when acting in opposite directions

they are in equilibrium. This de nition is a sham. A

force applied to a body cannot be uncoupled and applied

to another body as an engine is uncoupled from one train

and coupled to another. It is therefore impossible to say

what acceleration such a force, applied to such a body,

would give to another body if it were applied to it. It

is impossible to tell how two forces which are not act-

ing in exactly opposite directions would behave if they

were acting in opposite directions. It is this de nition

which we try to materialise, as it were, when we mea-

sure a force with a dynamometer or with a balance. Two
  0
forces, F and F, which I suppose, for simplicity, to be

acting vertically upwards, are respectively applied to two
  0
bodies, C and C. I attach a body weighing P  rst to C
0
and then to C; if there is equilibrium in both cases I    science and hypothesis112


                      0
conclude that the two forces F and Fare equal, for they

are both equal to the weight of the body P. But am I

certain that the body P has kept its weight when I trans-

ferred it from the  rst body to the second? Far from it.

I am certain of the contrary. I know that the magnitude

of the weight varies from one point to another, and that

it is greater, for instance, at the pole than at the equa-

tor. No doubt the di erence is very small, and we neglect

it in practice; but a de nition must have mathematical

rigour; this rigour does not exist. What I say of weight

would apply equally to the force of the spring of a dy-

namometer, which would vary according to temperature

and many other circumstances. Nor is this all. We can-

not say that the weight of the body P is applied to the

body C and keeps in equilibrium the force F. What is

applied to the body C is the action of the body P on the

body C. On the other hand, the body P is acted on by

its weight, and by the reaction R of the body C on P

the forces F and A are equal, because they are in equi-

librium; the forces A and R are equal by virtue of the

principle of action and reaction; and  nally, the force R

and the weight P are equal because they are in equilib-

rium. From these three equalities we deduce the equality

of the weight P and the force F.  the classical mechanics.113


Thus we are compelled to bring into our de nition of

the equality of two forces the principle of the equality of

action and reaction; hence this principle can no longer be

regarded as an experimental law but only as a de nition.

To recognise the equality of two forces we are then

in possession of two rules: the equality of two forces in

equilibrium and the equality of action and reaction. But,

as we have seen, these are not su cient, and we are com-

pelled to have recourse to a third rule, and to admit that

certain forces—the weight of a body, for instance—are

constant in magnitude and direction. But this third rule

is an experimental law. It is only approximately true:

it is a bad de nition. We are therefore reduced to Kir-

cho ’s de nition: force is the product of the mass and

the acceleration. This law of Newton in its turn ceases

to be regarded as an experimental law, it is now only a

de nition. But as a de nition it is insu cient, for we

do not know what mass is. It enables us, no doubt, to

calculate the ratio of two forces applied at di erent times

to the same body, but it tells us nothing about the ratio

of two forces applied to two di erent bodies. To  ll up

the gap we must have recourse to Newton’s third law,

the equality of action and reaction, still regarded not as

an experimental law but as a de nition. Two bodies,    science and hypothesis114


A and B, act on each other; the acceleration of A, multi-

plied by the mass of A, is equal to the action of B on A;

in the same way the acceleration of B, multiplied by the

mass of B is equal to the reaction of A on B. As, by def-

inition, the action and the reaction are equal, the masses

of A and B arc respectively in the inverse ratio of their

masses. Thus is the ratio of the two masses de ned, and

it is for experiment to verify that the ratio is constant.

This would do very well if the two bodies were alone

and could be abstracted from the action of the rest of

the world; but this is by no means the case. The accel-

eration of A is not solely due to the action of B, but to

that of a multitude of other bodies, C, D, . . . . To apply

the preceding rule we must decompose the acceleration

of A into many components, and  nd out which of these

components is due to the action of B. The decomposi-

tion would still be possible if we suppose that the action

of C on A is simply added to that of B on A, and that

the presence of the body C does not in any way modify

the action of B on A, or that the presence of B does not

modify the action of C on A; that is, if we admit that any

two bodies attract each other, that their mutual action is

along their join, and is only dependent on their distance

apart; if, in a word, we admit the hypothesis of central  the classical mechanics.115


forces.

We know that to determine the masses of the heavenly

bodies we adopt quite a di erent principle. The law of

gravitation teaches us that the attraction of two bodies is

proportional to their masses; if r is their distance apart,
0
m and mtheir masses, k a constant, then their attraction
02
will be kmm=r. What we are measuring is therefore

not mass, the ratio of the force to the acceleration, but

the attracting mass; not the inertia of the body, but its

attracting power. It is an indirect process, the use of

which is not indispensable theoretically. We might have

said that the attraction is inversely proportional to the

square of the distance, without being proportional to the
                              2
product of the masses, that it is equal to f =rbut without
  0
having f = kmm. If it were so, we should nevertheless,

by observing the relative motion of the celestial bodies,

be able to calculate the masses of these bodies.

But have we any right to admit the hypothesis of

central forces? Is this hypothesis rigorously accurate? Is

it certain that it will never be falsi ed by experiment?

Who will venture to make such an assertion? And if we

must abandon this hypothesis, the building which has

been so laboriously erected must fall to the ground.

We have no longer any right to speak of the compo-    science and hypothesis116


nent of the acceleration of A which is due to the action

of B. We have no means of distinguishing it from that

which is due to the action of C or of any other body. The

rule becomes inapplicable in the measurement of masses.

What then is left of the principle of the equality of action

and reaction? If we reject the hypothesis of central forces

this principle must go too; the geometrical resultant of

all the forces applied to the di erent bodies of a system

abstracted from all external action will be zero. In other

words, the motion of the centre of gravity of this system

will be uniform and in a straight line. Here would seem to

be a means of de ning mass. The position of the centre

of gravity evidently depends on the values given to the

masses; we must select these values so that the motion of

the centre of gravity is uniform and rectilinear. This will

always be possible if Newton’s third law holds good, and

it will be in general possible only in one way. But no sys-

tem exists which is abstracted from all external action;

every part of the universe is subject, more or less, to the

action of the other parts. The law of the motion of the

centre of gravity is only rigorously true when applied to

the whole universe.

But then, to obtain the values of the masses we must

 nd the motion of the centre of gravity of the universe.  the classical mechanics.117


The absurdity of this conclusion is obvious; the motion

of the centre of gravity of the universe will be for ever

to us unknown. Nothing, therefore, is left, and our ef-

forts are fruitless. There is no escape from the following

de nition, which is only a confession of failure: Masses

are co-e cients which it is found convenient to introduce

into calculations.

We could reconstruct our mechanics by giving to our

masses di erent values. The new mechanics would be in

contradiction neither with experiment nor with the gen-

eral principles of dynamics (the principle of inertia, pro-

portionality of masses and accelerations, equality of ac-

tion and reaction, uniform motion of the centre of gravity

in a straight line, and areas). But the equations of this

mechanics would not be so simple. Let us clearly under-

stand this. It would be only the  rst terms which would

be less simple—i.e., those we already know through ex-

periment; perhaps the small masses could be slightly al-

tered without the complete equations gaining or losing in

simplicity.

Hertz has inquired if the principles of mechanics are

rigorously true. “In the opinion of many physicists it

seems inconceivable that experiment will ever alter the

impregnable principles of mechanics; and yet, what is due    science and hypothesis118


to experiment may always be recti ed by experiment.”

From what we have just seen these fears would appear to

be groundless. The principles of dynamics appeared to us

 rst as experimental truths, but we have been compelled

to use them as de nitions. It is by de nition that force

is equal to the product of the mass and the acceleration;

this is a principle which is henceforth beyond the reach

of any future experiment. Thus it is by de nition that

action and reaction are equal and opposite. But then it

will be said, these unveri able principles are absolutely

devoid of any signi cance. They cannot be disproved

by experiment, but we can learn from them nothing of

any use to us; what then is the use of studying dynam-

ics? This somewhat rapid condemnation would be rather

unfair. There is not in Nature any system perfectly iso-

lated, perfectly abstracted from all external action; but

there are systems which are nearly isolated. If we ob-

serve such a system, we can study not only the relative

motion of its di erent parts with respect to each other,

but the motion of its centre of gravity with respect to

the other parts of the universe. We then  nd that the

motion of its centre of gravity is nearly uniform and rec-

tilinear in conformity with Newton’s Third Law. This is

an experimental fact, which cannot be invalidated by a  the classical mechanics.119


more accurate experiment. What, in fact, would a more

accurate experiment teach us? It would teach us that

the law is only approximately true, and we know that

already. Thus is explained how experiment may serve as

a basis for the principles of mechanics, and yet will never

invalidate them.

Anthropomorphic Mechanics.—It will be said that

Kircho  has only followed the general tendency of math-

ematicians towards nominalism; from this his skill as a

physicist has not saved him. He wanted a de nition of

a force, and he took the  rst that came handy; but we

do not require a de nition of force; the idea of force is

primitive, irreducible, inde nable; we all know what it

is; of it we have direct intuition. This direct intuition

arises from the idea of e ort which is familiar to us from

childhood. But in the  rst place, even if this direct intu-

ition made known to us the real nature of force in itself,

it would prove to be an insu cient basis for mechanics;

it would, moreover, be quite useless. The important

thing is not to know what force is, but how to measure

it. Everything which does not teach us how to measure

it is as useless to the mechanician as, for instance, the

subjective idea of heat and cold to the student of heat.

This subjective idea cannot be translated into numbers,    science and hypothesis120


and is therefore useless; a scientist whose skin is an ab-

solutely bad conductor of heat, and who, therefore, has

never felt the sensation of heat or cold, would read a

thermometer in just the same way as any one else, and

would have enough material to construct the whole of

the theory of heat.

Now this immediate notion of e ort is of no use to

us in the measurement of force. It is clear, for example,

that I shall experience more fatigue in lifting a weight of

100 lb. than a man who is accustomed to lifting heavy

burdens. But there is more than this. This notion of ef-

fort does not teach us the nature of force; it is de nitively

reduced to a recollection of muscular sensations, and no

one will maintain that the sun experiences a muscular

sensation when it attracts the earth. All that we can

expect to  nd from it is a symbol, less precise and less

convenient than the arrows (to denote direction) used by

geometers, and quite as remote from reality.

Anthropomorphism plays a considerable historic rôle

in the genesis of mechanics; perhaps it may yet furnish

us with a symbol which some minds may  nd convenient;

but it can be the foundation of nothing of a really scien-

ti c or philosophical character.

The Thread School.—M. Andrade, in his Leçons de  the classical mechanics.121


Mécanique physique, has modernised anthropomorphic

mechanics. To the school of mechanics with which Kir-

cho  is identi ed, he opposes a school which is quaintly

called the “Thread School.”

This school tries to reduce everything to the consid-

eration of certain material systems of negligible mass, re-

garded in a state of tension and capable of transmitting

considerable e ort to distant bodies—systems of which

the ideal type is the  ne string, wire, or thread. A thread

which transmits any force is slightly lengthened in the

direction of that force; the direction of the thread tells

us the direction of the force, and the magnitude of the

force is measured by the lengthening of the thread.

We may imagine such an experiment as the

following:—A body A is attached to a thread; at the

other extremity of the thread acts a force which is made

to vary until the length of the thread is increased by  ,

and the acceleration of the body A is recorded. A is

then detached, and a body B is attached to the same

thread, and the same or another force is made to act

until the increment of length again is  , and the accel-

eration of B is noted. The experiment is then renewed

with both A and B until the increment of length is .

The four accelerations observed should be proportional.    science and hypothesis122


Here we have an experimental veri cation of the law of

acceleration enunciated above. Again, we may consider

a body under the action of several threads in equal ten-

sion, and by experiment we determine the direction of

those threads when the body is in equilibrium. This is

an experimental veri cation of the law of the composition

of forces. But, as a matter of fact, what have we done?

We have de ned the force acting on the string by the

deformation of the thread, which is reasonable enough;

we have then assumed that if a body is attached to this

thread, the e ort which is transmitted to it by the thread

is equal to the action exercised by the body on the thread;

in fact, we have used the principle of action and reaction

by considering it, not as an experimental truth, but as

the very de nition of force. This de nition is quite as

conventional as that of Kircho , but it is much less gen-

eral.

All the forces are not transmitted by the thread (and

to compare them they would all have to be transmitted

by identical threads). If we even admitted that the earth

is attached to the sun by an invisible thread, at any rate

it will be agreed that we have no means of measuring

the increment of the thread. Nine times out of ten, in

consequence, our de nition will be in default; no sense  the classical mechanics.123


of any kind can be attached to it, and we must fall back

on that of Kircho . Why then go on in this roundabout

way? You admit a certain de nition of force which has a

meaning only in certain particular cases. In those cases

you verify by experiment that it leads to the law of accel-

eration. On the strength of these experiments you then

take the law of acceleration as a de nition of force in all

the other cases.

Would it not be simpler to consider the law of ac-

celeration as a de nition in all cases, and to regard the

experiments in question, not as veri cations of that law,

but as veri cations of the principle of action and reaction,

or as proving the deformations of an elastic body depend

only on the forces acting on that body? Without taking

into account the fact that the conditions in which your

de nition could be accepted can only be very imperfectly

ful lled, that a thread is never without mass, that it is

never isolated from all other forces than the reaction of

the bodies attached to its extremities.

The ideas expounded by M. Andrade are none the less

very interesting. If they do not satisfy our logical require-

ments, they give us a better view of the historical genesis

of the fundamental ideas of mechanics. The re ections

they suggest show us how the human mind passed from    science and hypothesis124


a naïve anthropomorphism to the present conception of

science.

We see that we end with an experiment which is very

particular, and as a matter of fact very crude, and we

start with a perfectly general law, perfectly precise, the

truth of which we regard as absolute. We have, so to

speak, freely conferred this certainty on it by looking

upon it as a convention.

Are the laws of acceleration and of the composition

of forces only arbitrary conventions? Conventions, yes;

arbitrary, no—they would be so if we lost sight of the ex-

periments which led the founders of the science to adopt

them, and which, imperfect as they were, were su cient

to justify their adoption. It is well from time to time

to let our attention dwell on the experimental origin of

these conventions.      CHAPTER VII.

RELATIVE AND ABSOLUTE MOTION.

The Principle of Relative Motion.—Sometimes endeav-

ours have been made to connect the law of acceleration

with a more general principle. The movement of any sys-

tem whatever ought to obey the same laws, whether it

is referred to  xed axes or to the movable axes which

are implied in uniform motion in a straight line. This

is the principle of relative motion; it is imposed upon us

for two reasons: the commonest experiment con rms it;

the consideration of the contrary hypothesis is singularly

repugnant to the mind.

Let us admit it then, and consider a body under the

action of a force. The relative motion of this body with

respect to an observer moving with a uniform velocity

equal to the initial velocity of the body, should be iden-

tical with what would be its absolute motion if it started

from rest. We conclude that its acceleration must not

depend upon its absolute velocity, and from that we at-

tempt to deduce the complete law of acceleration.

For a long time there have been traces of this proof

in the regulations for the degree of B. ès Sc. It is clear

that the attempt has failed. The obstacle which pre-    science and hypothesis126


vented us from proving the law of acceleration is that

we have no de nition of force. This obstacle subsists in

its entirety, since the principle invoked has not furnished

us with the missing de nition. The principle of relative

motion is none the less very interesting, and deserves to

be considered for its own sake. Let us try to enunciate

it in an accurate manner. We have said above that the

accelerations of the di erent bodies which form part of

an isolated system only depend on their velocities and

their relative positions, and not on their velocities and

their absolute positions, provided that the movable axes

to which the relative motion is referred move uniformly

in a straight line; or, if it is preferred, their accelerations

depend only on the di erences of their velocities and the

di erences of their co-ordinates, and not on the abso-

lute values of these velocities and co-ordinates. If this

principle is true for relative accelerations, or rather for

di erences of acceleration, by combining it with the law

of reaction we shall deduce that it is true for absolute ac-

celerations. It remains to be seen how we can prove that

di erences of acceleration depend only on di erences of

velocities and co-ordinates; or, to speak in mathematical

language, that these di erences of co-ordinates satisfy

di erential equations of the second order. Can this proofrelative and absolute motion.127


be deduced from experiment or from à priori conditions?

Remembering what we have said before, the reader will

give his own answer. Thus enunciated, in fact, the prin-

ciple of relative motion curiously resembles what I called

above the generalised principle of inertia; it is not quite

the same thing, since it is a question of di erences of co-

ordinates, and not of the co-ordinates themselves. The

new principle teaches us something more than the old,

but the same discussion applies to it, and would lead to

the same conclusions. We need not recur to it.

Newton’s Argument.—Here we  nd a very important

and even slightly disturbing question. I have said that

the principle of relative motion was not for us simply a

result of experiment; and that à priori every contrary

hypothesis would be repugnant to the mind. But, then,

why is the principle only true if the motion of the movable

axes is uniform and in a straight line? It seems that it

should be imposed upon us with the same force if the

motion is accelerated, or at any rate if it reduces to a

uniform rotation. In these two cases, in fact, the principle

is not true. I need not dwell on the case in which the

motion of the axes is in a straight line and not uniform.

The paradox does not bear a moment’s examination. If I

am in a railway carriage, and if the train, striking against    science and hypothesis128


any obstacle whatever, is suddenly stopped, I shall be

projected on to the opposite side, although I have not

been directly acted upon by any force. There is nothing

mysterious in that, and if I have not been subject to the

action of any external force, the train has experienced

an external impact. There can be nothing paradoxical in

the relative motion of two bodies being disturbed when

the motion of one or the other is modi ed by an external

cause. Nor need I dwell on the case of relative motion

referring to axes which rotate uniformly. If the sky were

for ever covered with clouds, and if we had no means of

observing the stars, we might, nevertheless, conclude that

the earth turns round. We should be warned of this fact

by the  attening at the poles, or by the experiment of

Foucault’s pendulum. And yet, would there in this case

be any meaning in saying that the earth turns round?

If there is no absolute space, can a thing turn without

turning with respect to something; and, on the other

hand, how can we admit Newton’s conclusion and believe

in absolute space? But it is not su cient to state that all

possible solutions are equally unpleasant to us. We must

analyse in each case the reason of our dislike, in order to

make our choice with the knowledge of the cause. The

long discussion which follows must, therefore, be excused.relative and absolute motion.129


Let us resume our imaginary story. Thick clouds hide

the stars from men who cannot observe them, and even

are ignorant of their existence. How will those men know

that the earth turns round? No doubt, for a longer period

than did our ancestors, they will regard the soil on which

they stand as  xed and immovable! They will wait a

much longer time than we did for the coming of a Coper-

nicus; but this Copernicus will come at last. How will he

come? In the  rst place, the mechanical school of this

world would not run their heads against an absolute con-

tradiction. In the theory of relative motion we observe,

besides real forces, two imaginary forces, which we call

ordinary centrifugal force and compounded centrifugal

force. Our imaginary scientists can thus explain every-

thing by looking upon these two forces as real, and they

would not see in this a contradiction of the generalised

principle of inertia, for these forces would depend, the

one on the relative positions of the di erent parts of the

system, such as real attractions, and the other on their

relative velocities, as in the case of real frictions. Many

di culties, however, would before long awaken their at-

tention. If they succeeded in realising an isolated sys-

tem, the centre of gravity of this system would not have

an approximately rectilinear path. They could invoke, to    science and hypothesis130


explain this fact, the centrifugal forces which they would

regard as real, and which, no doubt, they would attribute

to the mutual actions of the bodies—only they would not

see these forces vanish at great distances—that is to say,

in proportion as the isolation is better realised. Far from

it. Centrifugal force increases inde nitely with distance.

Already this di culty would seem to them su ciently se-

rious, but it would not detain them for long. They would

soon imagine some very subtle medium analogous to our

ether, in which all bodies would be bathed, and which

would exercise on them a repulsive action. But that is not

all. Space is symmetrical—yet the laws of motion would

present no symmetry. They should be able to distinguish

between right and left. They would see, for instance, that

cyclones always turn in the same direction, while for rea-

sons of symmetry they should turn indi erently in any

direction. If our scientists were able by dint of much

hard work to make their universe perfectly symmetrical,

this symmetry would not subsist, although there is no

apparent reason why it should be disturbed in one di-

rection more than in another. They would extract this

from the situation no doubt—they would invent some-

thing which would not be more extraordinary than the

glass spheres of Ptolemy, and would thus go on accumu-relative and absolute motion.131


lating complications until the long-expected Copernicus

would sweep them all away with a single blow, saying it

is much more simple to admit that the earth turns round.

Just as our Copernicus said to us: “It is more convenient

to suppose that the earth turns round, because the laws

of astronomy are thus expressed in a more simple lan-

guage,” so he would say to them: “It is more convenient

to suppose that the earth turns round, because the laws

of mechanics are thus expressed in much more simple

language.” That does not prevent absolute space—that

is to say, the point to which we must refer the earth to

know if it really does turn round—from having no ob-

jective existence. And hence this a rmation: “the earth

turns round,” has no meaning, since it cannot be veri-

 ed by experiment; since such an experiment not only

cannot be realised or even dreamed of by the most dar-

ing Jules Verne, but cannot even be conceived of without

contradiction; or, in other words, these two propositions,

“the earth turns round,” and, “it is more convenient to

suppose that the earth turns round,” have one and the

same meaning. There is nothing more in one than in the

other. Perhaps they will not be content with this, and

may  nd it surprising that among all the hypotheses,

or rather all the conventions, that can be made on this    science and hypothesis132


subject there is one which is more convenient than the

rest? But if we have admitted it without di culty when

it is a question of the laws of astronomy, why should we

object when it is a question of the laws of mechanics?

We have seen that the co-ordinates of bodies are deter-

mined by di erential equations of the second order, and

that so are the di erences of these co-ordinates. This is

what we have called the generalised principle of inertia,

and the principle of relative motion. If the distances of

these bodies were determined in the same way by equa-

tions of the second order, it seems that the mind should

be entirely satis ed. How far does the mind receive this

satisfaction, and why is it not content with it? To ex-

plain this we had better take a simple example. I assume

a system analogous to our solar system, but in which

 xed stars foreign to this system cannot be perceived, so

that astronomers can only observe the mutual distances

of planets and the sun, and not the absolute longitudes

of the planets. If we deduce directly from Newton’s law

the di erential equations which de ne the variation of

these distances, these equations will not be of the second

order. I mean that if, outside Newton’s law, we knew the

initial values of these distances and of their derivatives

with respect to time—that would not be su cient to de-relative and absolute motion.133


termine the values of these same distances at an ulterior

moment. A datum would be still lacking, and this datum

might be, for example, what astronomers call the area-

constant. But here we may look at it from two di erent

points of view. We may consider two kinds of constants.

In the eyes of the physicist the world reduces to a series of

phenomena depending, on the one hand, solely on initial

phenomena, and, on the other hand, on the laws con-

necting consequence and antecedent. If observation then

teaches us that a certain quantity is a constant, we shall

have a choice of two ways of looking at it. So let us ad-

mit that there is a law which requires that this quantity

shall not vary, but that by chance it has been found to

have had in the beginning of time this value rather than

that, a value that it has kept ever since. This quantity

might then be called an accidental constant. Or again,

let us admit on the contrary that there is a law of nature

which imposes on this quantity this value and not that.

We shall then have what may be called an essential con-

stant. For example, in virtue of the laws of Newton the

duration of the revolution of the earth must be constant.

But if it is 366 and something sidereal days, and not

300 or 400, it is because of some initial chance or other.

It is an accidental constant. If, on the other hand, the ex-    science and hypothesis134


ponent of the distance which  gures in the expression of

the attractive force is equal to 2 and not to 3, it is not

by chance, but because it is required by Newton’s law.

It is an essential constant. I do not know if this manner

of giving to chance its share is legitimate in itself, and if

there is not some arti ciality about this distinction; but

it is certain at least that in proportion as Nature has se-

crets, she will be strictly arbitrary and always uncertain

in their application. As far as the area-constant is con-

cerned, we are accustomed to look upon it as accidental.

Is it certain that our imaginary astronomers would do the

same? If they were able to compare two di erent solar

systems, they would get the idea that this constant may

assume several di erent values. But I supposed at the

outset, as I was entitled to do, that their system would

appear isolated, and that they would see no star which

was foreign to their system. Under these conditions they

could only detect a single constant, which would have an

absolutely invariable, unique value. They would be led

no doubt to look upon it as an essential constant.

One word in passing to forestall an objection. The in-

habitants of this imaginary world could neither observe

nor de ne the area-constant as we do, because absolute

longitudes escape their notice; but that would not pre-relative and absolute motion.135


vent them from being rapidly led to remark a certain

constant which would be naturally introduced into their

equations, and which would be nothing but what we call

the area-constant. But then what would happen? If the

area-constant is regarded as essential, as dependent upon

a law of nature, then in order to calculate the distances

of the planets at any given moment it would be su cient

to know the initial values of these distances and those of

their  rst derivatives. From this new point of view, dis-

tances will be determined by di erential equations of the

second order. Would this completely satisfy the minds of

these astronomers? I think not. In the  rst place, they

would very soon see that in di erentiating their equations

so as to raise them to a higher order, these equations

would become much more simple, and they would be es-

pecially struck by the di culty which arises from symme-

try. They would have to admit di erent laws, according

as the aggregate of the planets presented the  gure of

a certain polyhedron or rather of a regular polyhedron,

and these consequences can only be escaped by regarding

the area-constant as accidental. I have taken this partic-

ular example, because I have imagined astronomers who

would not be in the least concerned with terrestrial me-

chanics and whose vision would be bounded by the solar    science and hypothesis136


system. But our conclusions apply in all cases. Our uni-

verse is more extended than theirs, since we have  xed

stars; but it, too, is very limited, so we might reason on

the whole of our universe just as these astronomers do on

their solar system. We thus see that we should be de ni-

tively led to conclude that the equations which de ne

distances are of an order higher than the second. Why

should this alarm us—why do we  nd it perfectly nat-

ural that the sequence of phenomena depends on initial

values of the  rst derivatives of these distances, while we

hesitate to admit that they may depend on the initial val-

ues of the second derivatives? It can only be because of

mental habits created in us by the constant study of the

generalised principle of inertia and of its consequences.

The values of the distances at any given moment depend

upon their initial values, on that of their  rst derivatives,

and something else. What is that something else? If we

do not want it to be merely one of the second deriva-

tives, we have only the choice of hypotheses. Suppose, as

is usually done, that this something else is the absolute

orientation of the universe in space, or the rapidity with

which this orientation varies; this may be, it certainly is,

the most convenient solution for the geometer. But it

is not the most satisfactory for the philosopher, becauserelative and absolute motion.137


this orientation does not exist. We may assume that this

something else is the position or the velocity of some in-

visible body, and this is what is done by certain persons,

who have even called the body Alpha, although we are

destined to never know anything about this body except

its name. This is an arti ce entirely analogous to that

of which I spoke at the end of the paragraph containing

my re ections on the principle of inertia. But as a mat-

ter of fact the di culty is arti cial. Provided that the

future indications of our instruments can only depend on

the indications which they have given us, or that they

might have formerly given us, such is all we want, and

with these conditions we may rest satis ed.    CHAPTER VIII.

ENERGY AND THERMO-DYNAMICS.

Energetics.—The di culties raised by the classical me-

chanics have led certain minds to prefer a new system

which they call Energetics. Energetics took its rise in

consequence of the discovery of the principle of the con-

servation of energy. Helmholtz gave it its de nite form.

We begin by de ning two quantities which play a fun-

damental part in this theory. They are kinetic energy,

or vis viva, and potential energy. Every change that the

bodies of nature can undergo is regulated by two experi-

mental laws. First, the sum of the kinetic and potential

energies is constant. This is the principle of the conser-

vation of energy. Second, if a system of bodies is at A

at the time t0, and at B at the time t1, it always passes

from the  rst position to the second by such a path that

the mean value of the di erence between the two kinds

of energy in the interval of time which separates the two

epochs t0and t1is a minimum. This is Hamilton’s prin-

ciple, and is one of the forms of the principle of least

action. The energetic theory has the following advan-

tages over the classical. First, it is less incomplete—that

is to say, the principles of the conservation of energy andenergy and thermo-dynamics.139


of Hamilton teach us more than the fundamental princi-

ples of the classical theory, and exclude certain motions

which do not occur in nature and which would be com-

patible with the classical theory. Second, it frees us from

the hypothesis of atoms, which it was almost impossi-

ble to avoid with the classical theory. But in its turn it

raises fresh di culties. The de nitions of the two kinds

of energy would raise di culties almost as great as those

of force and mass in the  rst system. However, we can

get out of these di culties more easily, at any rate in

the simplest cases. Assume an isolated system formed of

a certain number of material points. Assume that these

points are acted upon by forces depending only on their

relative position and their distances apart, and indepen-

dent of their velocities. In virtue of the principle of the

conservation of energy there must be a function of forces.

In this simple case the enunciation of the principle of the

conservation of energy is of extreme simplicity. A cer-

tain quantity, which may be determined by experiment,

must remain constant. This quantity is the sum of two

terms. The  rst depends only on the position of the ma-

terial points, and is independent of their velocities; the

second is proportional to the squares of these velocities.

This decomposition can only take place in one way. The    science and hypothesis140


 rst of these terms, which I shall call U, will be potential

energy; the second, which I shall call T, will be kinetic

energy. It is true that if T + U is constant, so is any func-

tion of T + U,  (T + U). But this function  (T + U) will

not be the sum of two terms, the one independent of the

velocities, and the other proportional to the square of the

velocities. Among the functions which remain constant

there is only one which enjoys this property. It is T + U

(or a linear function of T + U, it matters not which, since

this linear function may always be reduced to T + U by

a change of unit and of origin). This, then, is what we

call energy. The  rst term we shall call potential energy,

and the second kinetic energy. The de nition of the two

kinds of energy may therefore be carried through without

any ambiguity.

So it is with the de nition of mass. Kinetic energy, or

vis viva, is expressed very simply by the aid of the masses,

and of the relative velocities of all the material points

with reference to one of them. These relative velocities

may be observed, and when we have the expression of

the kinetic energy as a function of these relative veloc-

ities, the co-e cients of this expression will give us the

masses. So in this simple case the fundamental ideas can

be de ned without di culty. But the di culties reap-energy and thermo-dynamics.141


pear in the more complicated cases if the forces, instead

of depending solely on the distances, depend also on the

velocities. For example, Weber supposes the mutual ac-

tion of two electric molecules to depend not only on their

distance but on their velocity and on their acceleration.

If material points attracted each other according to an

analogous law, U would depend on the velocity, and it

might contain a term proportional to the square of the

velocity. How can we detect among such terms those that

arise from T or U? and how, therefore, can we distinguish

the two parts of the energy? But there is more than this.

How can we de ne energy itself? We have no more rea-

son to take as our de nition T + U rather than any other

function of T+U, when the property which characterised

T + U has disappeared—namely, that of being the sum

of two terms of a particular form. But that is not all. We

must take account, not only of mechanical energy prop-

erly so called, but of the other forms of energy—heat,

chemical energy, electrical energy, etc. The principle of

the conservation of energy must be written T+U+Q = a

constant, where T is the sensible kinetic energy, U the po-

tential energy of position, depending only on the position

of the bodies, Q the internal molecular energy under the

thermal, chemical, or electrical form. This would be all    science and hypothesis142


right if the three terms were absolutely distinct; if T were

proportional to the square of the velocities, U indepen-

dent of these velocities and of the state of the bodies,

Q independent of the velocities and of the positions of

the bodies, and depending only on their internal state.

The expression for the energy could be decomposed in one

way only into three terms of this form. But this is not

the case. Let us consider electri ed bodies. The electro-

static energy due to their mutual action will evidently

depend on their charge—i.e., on their state; but it will

equally depend on their position. If these bodies are in

motion, they will act electro-dynamically on one another,

and the electro-dynamic energy will depend not only on

their state and their position but on their velocities. We

have therefore no means of making the selection of the

terms which should form part of T, and U, and Q, and

of separating the three parts of the energy. If T + U + Q

is constant, the same is true of any function whatever,

 (T + U + Q).

If T + U + Q were of the particular form that I have

suggested above, no ambiguity would ensue. Among the

functions  (T + U + Q) which remain constant, there is

only one that would be of this particular form, namely the

one which I would agree to call energy. But I have saidenergy and thermo-dynamics.143


this is not rigorously the case. Among the functions that

remain constant there is not one which can rigorously be

placed in this particular form. How then can we choose

from among them that which should be called energy?

We have no longer any guide in our choice.

Of the principle of the conservation of energy there

is nothing left then but an enunciation:—There is some-

thing which remains constant. In this form it, in its turn,

is outside the bounds of experiment and reduced to a kind

of tautology. It is clear that if the world is governed by

laws there will be quantities which remain constant. Like

Newton’s laws, and for an analogous reason, the principle

of the conservation of energy being based on experiment,

can no longer be invalidated by it.

This discussion shows that, in passing from the clas-

sical system to the energetic, an advance has been made;

but it shows, at the same time, that we have not advanced

far enough.

Another objection seems to be still more serious. The

principle of least action is applicable to reversible phe-

nomena, but it is by no means satisfactory as far as irre-

versible phenomena are concerned. Helmholtz attempted

to extend it to this class of phenomena, but he did not

and could not succeed. So far as this is concerned all    science and hypothesis144


has yet to be done. The very enunciation of the princi-

ple of least action is objectionable. To move from one

point to another, a material molecule, acted upon by no

force, but compelled to move on a surface, will take as

its path the geodesic line—i.e., the shortest path. This

molecule seems to know the point to which we want to

take it, to foresee the time that it will take it to reach

it by such a path, and then to know how to choose the

most convenient path. The enunciation of the principle

presents it to us, so to speak, as a living and free entity.

It is clear that it would be better to replace it by a less

objectionable enunciation, one in which, as philosophers

would say,  nal e ects do not seem to be substituted for

acting causes.

Thermo-dynamics.—The rôle of the two fundamental

principles of thermo-dynamics becomes daily more im-

portant in all branches of natural philosophy. Abandon-

ing the ambitious theories of forty years ago, encumbered

as they were with molecular hypotheses, we now try to

rest on thermo-dynamics alone the entire edi ce of math-

ematical physics. Will the two principles of Mayer and

of Clausius assure to it foundations solid enough to last

for some time? We all feel it, but whence does our con-

 dence arise? An eminent physicist said to me one day,energy and thermo-dynamics.145


àpropos of the law of errors:—every one stoutly believes

it, because mathematicians imagine that it is an e ect

of observation, and observers imagine that it is a math-

ematical theorem. And this was for a long time the case

with the principle of the conservation of energy. It is no

longer the same now. There is no one who does not know

that it is an experimental fact. But then who gives us the

right of attributing to the principle itself more generality

and more precision than to the experiments which have

served to demonstrate it? This is asking, if it is legiti-

mate to generalise, as we do every day, empiric data, and

I shall not be so foolhardy as to discuss this question,

after so many philosophers have vainly tried to solve it.

One thing alone is certain. If this permission were re-

fused to us, science could not exist; or at least would be

reduced to a kind of inventory, to the ascertaining of iso-

lated facts. It would not longer be to us of any value,

since it could not satisfy our need of order and harmony,

and because it would be at the same time incapable of

prediction. As the circumstances which have preceded

any fact whatever will never again, in all probability, be

simultaneously reproduced, we already require a  rst gen-

eralisation to predict whether the fact will be renewed

as soon as the least of these circumstances is changed.    science and hypothesis146


But every proposition may be generalised in an in nite

number of ways. Among all possible generalisations we

must choose, and we cannot but choose the simplest. We

are therefore led to adopt the same course as if a simple

law were, other things being equal, more probable than

a complex law. A century ago it was frankly confessed

and proclaimed abroad that Nature loves simplicity; but

Nature has proved the contrary since then on more than

one occasion. We no longer confess this tendency, and we

only keep of it what is indispensable, so that science may

not become impossible. In formulating a general, simple,

and formal law, based on a comparatively small number

of not altogether consistent experiments, we have only

obeyed a necessity from which the human mind cannot

free itself. But there is something more, and that is why

I dwell on this topic. No one doubts that Mayer’s prin-

ciple is not called upon to survive all the particular laws

from which it was deduced, in the same way that New-

ton’s law has survived the laws of Kepler from which it

was derived, and which are no longer anything but ap-

proximations, if we take perturbations into account. Now

why does this principle thus occupy a kind of privileged

position among physical laws? There are many reasons

for that. At the outset we think that we cannot rejectenergy and thermo-dynamics.147


it, or even doubt its absolute rigour, without admitting

the possibility of perpetual motion; we certainly feel dis-

trust at such a prospect, and we believe ourselves less

rash in a rming it than in denying it. That perhaps is

not quite accurate. The impossibility of perpetual mo-

tion only implies the conservation of energy for reversible

phenomena. The imposing simplicity of Mayer’s principle

equally contributes to strengthen our faith. In a law im-

mediately deduced from experiments, such as Mariotte’s

law, this simplicity would rather appear to us a reason

for distrust; but here this is no longer the case. We take

elements which at the  rst glance are unconnected; these

arrange themselves in an unexpected order, and form a

harmonious whole. We cannot believe that this unex-

pected harmony is a mere result of chance. Our conquest

appears to be valuable to us in proportion to the e orts it

has cost, and we feel the more certain of having snatched

its true secret from Nature in proportion as Nature has

appeared more jealous of our attempts to discover it. But

these are only small reasons. Before we raise Mayer’s law

to the dignity of an absolute principle, a deeper discus-

sion is necessary. But if we embark on this discussion we

see that this absolute principle is not even easy to enun-

ciate. In every particular case we clearly see what energy    science and hypothesis148


is, and we can give it at least a provisory de nition; but

it is impossible to  nd a general de nition of it. If we

wish to enunciate the principle in all its generality and

apply it to the universe, we see it vanish, so to speak,

and nothing is left but this—there is something which

remains constant. But has this a meaning? In the deter-

minist hypothesis the state of the universe is determined

by an extremely large number n of parameters, which I

shall call x1, x2, x3; : : : ; ; xn. As soon as we know at a

given moment the values of these n parameters, we also

know their derivatives with respect to time, and we can

therefore calculate the values of these same parameters

at an anterior or ulterior moment. In other words, these

n parameters specify n di erential equations of the  rst

order. These equations have n1 integrals, and therefore

there are n1 functions of x1, x2, x3; : : : ; xn, which re-

main constant. If we say then, there is something which

remains constant, we are only enunciating a tautology.

We would be even embarrassed to decide which among

all our integrals is that which should retain the name of

energy. Besides, it is not in this sense that Mayer’s prin-

ciple is understood when it is applied to a limited system.

We admit, then, that p of our n parameters vary inde-

pendently so that we have only np relations, generallyenergy and thermo-dynamics.149


linear, between our n parameters and their derivatives.

Suppose, for the sake of simplicity, that the sum of the

work done by the external forces is zero, as well as that

of all the quantities of heat given o  from the interior:

what will then be the meaning of our principle? There is

a combination of these n p relations, of which the  rst

member is an exact di erential; and then this di erential

vanishing in virtue of our np relations, its integral is a

constant, and it is this integral which we call energy. But

how can it be that there are several parameters whose

variations are independent? That can only take place in

the case of external forces (although we have supposed,

for the sake of simplicity, that the algebraical sum of all

the work done by these forces has vanished). If, in fact,

the system were completely isolated from all external ac-

tion, the values of our n parameters at a given moment

would su ce to determine the state of the system at any

ulterior moment whatever, provided that we still clung to

the determinist hypothesis. We should therefore fall back

on the same di culty as before. If the future state of the

system is not entirely determined by its present state, it

is because it further depends on the state of bodies ex-

ternal to the system. But then, is it likely that there

exist among the parameters x which de ne the state of    science and hypothesis150


the system of equations independent of this state of the

external bodies? and if in certain cases we think we can

 nd them, is it not only because of our ignorance, and

because the in uence of these bodies is too weak for our

experiment to be able to detect it? If the system is not

regarded as completely isolated, it is probable that the

rigorously exact expression of its internal energy will de-

pend upon the state of the external bodies. Again, I have

supposed above that the sum of all the external work is

zero, and if we wish to be free from this rather arti cial

restriction the enunciation becomes still more di cult.

To formulate Mayer’s principle by giving it an absolute

meaning, we must extend it to the whole universe, and

then we  nd ourselves face to face with the very di -

culty we have endeavoured to avoid. To sum up, and

to use ordinary language, the law of the conservation of

energy can have only one signi cance, because there is

in it a property common to all possible properties; but

in the determinist hypothesis there is only one possible,

and then the law has no meaning. In the indeterminist

hypothesis, on the other hand, it would have a meaning

even if we wished to regard it in an absolute sense. It

would appear as a limitation imposed on freedom.

But this word warns me that I am wandering from theenergy and thermo-dynamics.151


subject, and that I am leaving the domain of mathemat-

ics and physics. I check myself, therefore, and I wish to

retain only one impression of the whole of this discussion,

and that is, that Mayer’s law is a form subtle enough for

us to be able to put into it almost anything we like. I

do not mean by that that it corresponds to no objective

reality, nor that it is reduced to mere tautology; since, in

each particular case, and provided we do not wish to ex-

tend it to the absolute, it has a perfectly clear meaning.

This subtlety is a reason for believing that it will last

long; and as, on the other hand, it will only disappear to

be blended in a higher harmony, we may work with con-

 dence and utilise it, certain beforehand that our work

will not be lost.

Almost everything that I have just said applies to the

principle of Clausius. What distinguishes it is, that it is

expressed by an inequality. It will be said perhaps that it

is the same with all physical laws, since their precision is

always limited by errors of observation. But they at least

claim to be  rst approximations, and we hope to replace

them little by little by more exact laws. If, on the other

hand, the principle of Clausius reduces to an inequality,

this is not caused by the imperfection of our means of

observation, but by the very nature of the question.    science and hypothesis152


General Conclusions on Part III.—The principles of

mechanics are therefore presented to us under two di er-

ent aspects. On the one hand, there are truths founded

on experiment, and veri ed approximately as far as al-

most isolated systems are concerned; on the other hand,

there are postulates applicable to the whole of the uni-

verse and regarded as rigorously true. If these postulates

possess a generality and a certainty which falsify the ex-

perimental truths from which they were deduced, it is

because they reduce in  nal analysis to a simple conven-

tion that we have a right to make, because we are certain

beforehand that no experiment can contradict it. This

convention, however, is not absolutely arbitrary; it is not

the child of our caprice. We admit it because certain ex-

periments have shown us that it will be convenient, and

thus is explained how experiment has built up the prin-

ciples of mechanics, and why, moreover, it cannot reverse

them. Take a comparison with geometry. The funda-

mental propositions of geometry, for instance, Euclid’s

postulate, are only conventions, and it is quite as unrea-

sonable to ask if they are true or false as to ask if the

metric system is true or false. Only, these conventions

are convenient, and there are certain experiments which

prove it to us. At the  rst glance, the analogy is com-energy and thermo-dynamics.153


plete, the rôle of experiment seems the same. We shall

therefore be tempted to say, either mechanics must be

looked upon as experimental science and then it should

be the same with geometry; or, on the contrary, geome-

try is a deductive science, and then we can say the same

of mechanics. Such a conclusion would be illegitimate.

The experiments which have led us to adopt as more

convenient the fundamental conventions of geometry re-

fer to bodies which have nothing in common with those

that are studied by geometry. They refer to the proper-

ties of solid bodies and to the propagation of light in a

straight line. These are mechanical, optical experiments.

In no way can they be regarded as geometrical experi-

ments. And even the probable reason why our geometry

seems convenient to us is, that our bodies, our hands,

and our limbs enjoy the properties of solid bodies. Our

fundamental experiments are pre-eminently physiological

experiments which refer, not to the space which is the ob-

ject that geometry must study, but to our body—that is

to say, to the instrument which we use for that study.

On the other hand, the fundamental conventions of me-

chanics and the experiments which prove to us that they

are convenient, certainly refer to the same objects or to

analogous objects. Conventional and general principles    science and hypothesis154


are the natural and direct generalisations of experimen-

tal and particular principles. Let it not be said that I

am thus tracing arti cial frontiers between the sciences;

that I am separating by a barrier geometry properly so

called from the study of solid bodies. I might just as well

raise a barrier between experimental mechanics and the

conventional mechanics of general principles. Who does

not see, in fact, that by separating these two sciences we

mutilate both, and that what will remain of the conven-

tional mechanics when it is isolated will be but very little,

and can in no way be compared with that grand body of

doctrine which is called geometry.

We now understand why the teaching of mechanics

should remain experimental. Thus only can we be made

to understand the genesis of the science, and that is in-

dispensable for a complete knowledge of the science itself.

Besides, if we study mechanics, it is in order to apply it;

and we can only apply it if it remains objective. Now,

as we have seen, when principles gain in generality and

certainty they lose in objectivity. It is therefore espe-

cially with the objective side of principles that we must

be early familiarised, and this can only be by passing

from the particular to the general, instead of from the

general to the particular.energy and thermo-dynamics.155


Principles are conventions and de nitions in disguise.

They are, however, deduced from experimental laws, and

these laws have, so to speak, been erected into prin-

ciples to which our mind attributes an absolute value.

Some philosophers have generalised far too much. They

have thought that the principles were the whole of sci-

ence, and therefore that the whole of science was conven-

tional. This paradoxical doctrine, which is called Nom-

inalism, cannot stand examination. How can a law be-

come a principle? It expressed a relation between two

real terms, A and B; but it was not rigorously true, it

was only approximate. We introduce arbitrarily an in-

termediate term, C, more or less imaginary, and C is by

de nition that which has with A exactly the relation ex-

pressed by the law. So our law is decomposed into an

absolute and rigorous principle which expresses the re-

lation of A to C, and an approximate experimental and

revisable law which expresses the relation of C to B. But

it is clear that however far this decomposition may be

carried, laws will always remain. We shall now enter into

the domain of laws properly so called.          PART IV.

          NATURE.

      CHAPTER IX.

    HYPOTHESES IN PHYSICS.

The Rôle of Experiment and Generalisation.—Exper-

iment is the sole source of truth. It alone can teach us

something new; it alone can give us certainty. These

are two points that cannot be questioned. But then, if

experiment is everything, what place is left for mathe-

matical physics? What can experimental physics do with

such an auxiliary—an auxiliary, moreover, which seems

useless, and even may be dangerous?

However, mathematical physics exists. It has ren-

dered undeniable service, and that is a fact which has to

be explained. It is not su cient merely to observe; we

must use our observations, and for that purpose we must

generalise. This is what has always been done, only as

the recollection of past errors has made man more and

more circumspect, he has observed more and more and

generalised less and less. Every age has sco ed at its

predecessor, accusing it of having generalised too boldly

and too naïvely. Descartes used to commiserate the Ioni-    hypotheses in physics.157


ans. Descartes in his turn makes us smile, and no doubt

some day our children will laugh at us. Is there no way

of getting at once to the gist of the matter, and thereby

escaping the raillery which we foresee? Cannot we be

content with experiment alone? No, that is impossible;

that would be a complete misunderstanding of the true

character of science. The man of science must work with

method. Science is built up of facts, as a house is built of

stones; but an accumulation of facts is no more a science

than a heap of stones is a house. Most important of all,

the man of science must exhibit foresight. Carlyle has

written somewhere something after this fashion. “Noth-

ing but facts are of importance. John Lackland passed

by here. Here is something that is admirable. Here is

a reality for which I would give all the theories in the
1
world.”Carlyle was a compatriot of Bacon, and, like

him, he wished to proclaim his worship of the God of

Things as they are.

But Bacon would not have said that. That is the lan-

guage of the historian. The physicist would most likely

have said: “John Lackland passed by here. It is all the

same to me, for he will not pass this way again.”

We all know that there are good and bad experiments.

1
V. Past and Present, end of Chapter I., Book II.—[Tr.]    science and hypothesis158


The latter accumulate in vain. Whether there are a hun-

dred or a thousand, one single piece of work by a real

master—by a Pasteur, for example—will be su cient to

sweep them into oblivion. Bacon would have thoroughly

understood that, for he invented the phrase experimen-

tum crucis; but Carlyle would not have understood it. A

fact is a fact. A student has read such and such a num-

ber on his thermometer. He has taken no precautions.

It does not matter; he has read it, and if it is only the

fact which counts, this is a reality that is as much enti-

tled to be called a reality as the peregrinations of King

John Lackland. What, then, is a good experiment? It

is that which teaches us something more than an iso-

lated fact. It is that which enables us to predict, and to

generalise. Without generalisation, prediction is impos-

sible. The circumstances under which one has operated

will never again be reproduced simultaneously. The fact

observed will never be repeated. All that can be a rmed

is that under analogous circumstances an analogous fact

will be produced. To predict it, we must therefore invoke

the aid of analogy—that is to say, even at this stage, we

must generalise. However timid we may be, there must be

interpolation. Experiment only gives us a certain number

of isolated points. They must be connected by a contin-    hypotheses in physics.159


uous line, and this is a true generalisation. But more is

done. The curve thus traced will pass between and near

the points observed; it will not pass through the points

themselves. Thus we are not restricted to generalising our

experiment, we correct it; and the physicist who would

abstain from these corrections, and really content himself

with experiment pure and simple, would be compelled to

enunciate very extraordinary laws indeed. Detached facts

cannot therefore satisfy us, and that is why our science

must be ordered, or, better still, generalised.

It is often said that experiments should be made with-

out preconceived ideas. That is impossible. Not only

would it make every experiment fruitless, but even if we

wished to do so, it could not be done. Every man has his

own conception of the world, and this he cannot so eas-

ily lay aside. We must, for example, use language, and

our language is necessarily steeped in preconceived ideas.

Only they are unconscious preconceived ideas, which are

a thousand times the most dangerous of all. Shall we

say, that if we cause others to intervene of which we are

fully conscious, that we shall only aggravate the evil? I

do not think so. I am inclined to think that they will

serve as ample counterpoises—I was almost going to say

antidotes. They will generally disagree, they will enter    science and hypothesis160


into con ict one with another, and ipso facto, they will

force us to look at things under di erent aspects. This is

enough to free us. He is no longer a slave who can choose

his master.

Thus, by generalisation, every fact observed enables

us to predict a large number of others; only, we ought not

to forget that the  rst alone is certain, and that all the

others are merely probable. However solidly founded a

prediction may appear to us, we are never absolutely sure

that experiment will not prove it to be baseless if we set

to work to verify it. But the probability of its accuracy is

often so great that practically we may be content with it.

It is far better to predict without certainty, than never

to have predicted at all. We should never, therefore, dis-

dain to verify when the opportunity presents itself. But

every experiment is long and di cult, and the labourers

are few, and the number of facts which we require to pre-

dict is enormous; and besides this mass, the number of

direct veri cations that we can make will never be more

than a negligible quantity. Of this little that we can di-

rectly attain we must choose the best. Every experiment

must enable us to make a maximum number of predic-

tions having the highest possible degree of probability.

The problem is, so to speak, to increase the output of    hypotheses in physics.161


the scienti c machine. I may be permitted to compare

science to a library which must go on increasing inde -

nitely; the librarian has limited funds for his purchases,

and he must, therefore, strain every nerve not to waste

them. Experimental physics has to make the purchases,

and experimental physics alone can enrich the library. As

for mathematical physics, her duty is to draw up the cat-

alogue. If the catalogue is well done the library is none

the richer for it; but the reader will be enabled to utilise

its riches; and also by showing the librarian the gaps in

his collection, it will help him to make a judicious use of

his funds, which is all the more important, inasmuch as

those funds are entirely inadequate. That is the rôle of

mathematical physics. It must direct generalisation, so

as to increase what I called just now the output of sci-

ence. By what means it does this, and how it may do it

without danger, is what we have now to examine.

The Unity of Nature.—Let us  rst of all observe that

every generalisation supposes in a certain measure a be-

lief in the unity and simplicity of Nature. As far as the

unity is concerned, there can be no di culty. If the dif-

ferent parts of the universe were not as the organs of the

same body, they would not react one upon the other; they

would mutually ignore each other, and we in particular    science and hypothesis162


should only know one part. We need not, therefore, ask

if Nature is one, but how she is one.

As for the second point, that is not so clear. It is not

certain that Nature is simple. Can we without danger

act as if she were?

There was a time when the simplicity of Mariotte’s

law was an argument in favour of its accuracy: when

Fresnel himself, after having said in a conversation with

Laplace that Nature cares naught for analytical di cul-

ties, was compelled to explain his words so as not to

give o ence to current opinion. Nowadays, ideas have

changed considerably; but those who do not believe that

natural laws must be simple, are still often obliged to act

as if they did believe it. They cannot entirely dispense

with this necessity without making all generalisation, and

therefore all science, impossible. It is clear that any fact

can be generalised in an in nite number of ways, and it

is a question of choice. The choice can only be guided

by considerations of simplicity. Let us take the most

ordinary case, that of interpolation. We draw a con-

tinuous line as regularly as possible between the points

given by observation. Why do we avoid angular points

and in exions that are too sharp? Why do we not make

our curve describe the most capricious zigzags? It is be-    hypotheses in physics.163


cause we know beforehand, or think we know, that the

law we have to express cannot be so complicated as all

that. The mass of Jupiter may be deduced either from

the movements of his satellites, or from the perturbations

of the major planets, or from those of the minor planets.

If we take the mean of the determinations obtained by

these three methods, we  nd three numbers very close

together, but not quite identical. This result might be

interpreted by supposing that the gravitation constant is

not the same in the three cases; the observations would

be certainly much better represented. Why do we reject

this interpretation? Not because it is absurd, but be-

cause it is uselessly complicated. We shall only accept it

when we are forced to, and it is not imposed upon us yet.

To sum up, in most cases every law is held to be simple

until the contrary is proved.

This custom is imposed upon physicists by the rea-

sons that I have indicated, but how can it be justi ed

in the presence of discoveries which daily show us fresh

details, richer and more complex? How can we even rec-

oncile it with the unity of nature? For if all things are

interdependent, the relations in which so many di erent

objects intervene can no longer be simple.

If we study the history of science we see produced two    science and hypothesis164


phenomena which are, so to speak, each the inverse of the

other. Sometimes it is simplicity which is hidden under

what is apparently complex; sometimes, on the contrary,

it is simplicity which is apparent, and which conceals

extremely complex realities. What is there more com-

plicated than the disturbed motions of the planets, and

what more simple than Newton’s law? There, as Fresnel

said, Nature playing with analytical di culties, only uses

simple means, and creates by their combination I know

not what tangled skein. Here it is the hidden simplic-

ity which must be disentangled. Examples to the con-

trary abound. In the kinetic theory of gases, molecules

of tremendous velocity are discussed, whose paths, de-

formed by incessant impacts, have the most capricious

shapes, and plough their way through space in every di-

rection. The result observable is Mariotte’s simple law.

Each individual fact was complicated. The law of great

numbers has re-established simplicity in the mean. Here

the simplicity is only apparent, and the coarseness of our

senses alone prevents us from seeing the complexity.

Many phenomena obey a law of proportionality. But

why? Because in these phenomena there is something

which is very small. The simple law observed is only the

translation of the general analytical rule by which the in-    hypotheses in physics.165


 nitely small increment of a function is proportional to

the increment of the variable. As in reality our incre-

ments are not in nitely small, but only very small, the

law of proportionality is only approximate, and simplic-

ity is only apparent. What I have just said applies to the

law of the superposition of small movements, which is so

fruitful in its applications and which is the foundation of

optics.

And Newton’s law itself? Its simplicity, so long un-

detected, is perhaps only apparent. Who knows if it be

not due to some complicated mechanism, to the impact

of some subtle matter animated by irregular movements,

and if it has not become simple merely through the play

of averages and large numbers? In any case, it is di cult

not to suppose that the true law contains complementary

terms which may become sensible at small distances. If

in astronomy they are negligible, and if the law thus re-

gains its simplicity, it is solely on account of the enor-

mous distances of the celestial bodies. No doubt, if our

means of investigation became more and more penetrat-

ing, we should discover the simple beneath the complex,

and then the complex from the simple, and then again

the simple beneath the complex, and so on, without ever

being able to predict what the last term will be. We must    science and hypothesis166


stop somewhere, and for science to be possible we must

stop where we have found simplicity. That is the only

ground on which we can erect the edi ce of our gener-

alisations. But, this simplicity being only apparent, will

the ground be solid enough? That is what we have now

to discover.

For this purpose let us see what part is played in our

generalisations by the belief in simplicity. We have veri-

 ed a simple law in a considerable number of particular

cases. We refuse to admit that this coincidence, so of-

ten repeated, is a result of mere chance, and we conclude

that the law must be true in the general case.

Kepler remarks that the positions of a planet observed

by Tycho are all on the same ellipse. Not for one moment

does he think that, by a singular freak of chance, Tycho

had never looked at the heavens except at the very mo-

ment when the path of the planet happened to cut that

ellipse. What does it matter then if the simplicity be

real or if it hide a complex truth? Whether it be due to

the in uence of great numbers which reduces individual

di erences to a level, or to the greatness or the smallness

of certain quantities which allow of certain terms to be

neglected—in no case is it due to chance. This simplicity,

real or apparent, has always a cause. We shall therefore    hypotheses in physics.167


always be able to reason in the same fashion, and if a

simple law has been observed in several particular cases,

we may legitimately suppose that it still will be true in

analogous cases. To refuse to admit this would be to at-

tribute an inadmissible rôle to chance. However, there

is a di erence. If the simplicity were real and profound

it would bear the test of the increasing precision of our

methods of measurement. If, then, we believe Nature to

be profoundly simple, we must conclude that it is an ap-

proximate and not a rigorous simplicity. This is what

was formerly done, but it is what we have no longer the

right to do. The simplicity of Kepler’s laws, for instance,

is only apparent; but that does not prevent them from

being applied to almost all systems analogous to the solar

system, though that prevents them from being rigorously

exact.

Rôle of Hypothesis.—Every generalisation is a hy-

pothesis. Hypothesis therefore plays a necessary rôle,

which no one has ever contested. Only, it should al-

ways be as soon as possible submitted to veri cation.

It goes without saying that, if it cannot stand this test,

it must be abandoned without any hesitation. This is,

indeed, what is generally done; but sometimes with a

certain impatience. Ah well! this impatience is not jus-    science and hypothesis168


ti ed. The physicist who has just given up one of his

hypotheses should, on the contrary, rejoice, for he found

an unexpected opportunity of discovery. His hypothesis,

I imagine, had not been lightly adopted, It took into

account all the known factors which seem capable of

intervention in the phenomenon. If it is not veri ed,

it is because there is something unexpected and extra-

ordinary about it, because we are on the point of  nding

something unknown and new. Has the hypothesis thus

rejected been sterile? Far from it. It may be even said

that it has rendered more service than a true hypothesis.

Not only has it been the occasion of a decisive experi-

ment, but if this experiment had been made by chance,

without the hypothesis, no conclusion could have been

drawn; nothing extraordinary would have been seen;

and only one fact the more would have been catalogued,

without deducing from it the remotest consequence.

Now, under what conditions is the use of hypothesis

without danger? The proposal to submit all to experi-

ment is not su cient. Some hypotheses are dangerous,—

 rst and foremost those which are tacit and unconscious.

And since we make them without knowing them, we can-

not get rid of them. Here again, there is a service that

mathematical physics may render us. By the precision    hypotheses in physics.169


which is its characteristic, we are compelled to formulate

all the hypotheses that we would unhesitatingly make

without its aid. Let us also notice that it is important not

to multiply hypotheses inde nitely. If we construct a the-

ory based upon multiple hypotheses, and if experiment

condemns it, which of the premisses must be changed? It

is impossible to tell. Conversely, if the experiment suc-

ceeds, must we suppose that it has veri ed all these hy-

potheses at once? Can several unknowns be determined

from a single equation?

We must also take care to distinguish between the

di erent kinds of hypotheses. First of all, there are those

which are quite natural and necessary. It is di cult not

to suppose that the in uence of very distant bodies is

quite negligible, that small movements obey a linear law,

and that e ect is a continuous function of its cause. I will

say as much for the conditions imposed by symmetry. All

these hypotheses a rm, so to speak, the common basis

of all the theories of mathematical physics. They are the

last that should be abandoned. There is a second cat-

egory of hypotheses which I shall qualify as indi erent.

In most questions the analyst assumes, at the beginning

of his calculations, either that matter is continuous, or

the reverse, that it is formed of atoms. In either case,    science and hypothesis170


his results would have been the same. On the atomic

supposition he has a little more di culty in obtaining

them—that is all. If, then, experiment con rms his con-

clusions, will he suppose that he has proved, for example,

the real existence of atoms?

In optical theories two vectors are introduced, one of

which we consider as a velocity and the other as a vortex.

This again is an indi erent hypothesis, since we should

have arrived at the same conclusions by assuming the

former to be a vortex and the latter to be a velocity.

The success of the experiment cannot prove, therefore,

that the  rst vector is really a velocity. It only proves

one thing—namely, that it is a vector; and that is the

only hypothesis that has really been introduced into the

premisses. To give it the concrete appearance that the

fallibility of our minds demands, it was necessary to con-

sider it either as a velocity or as a vortex. In the same

way, it was necessary to represent it by an x or a y, but

the result will not prove that we were right or wrong in

regarding it as a velocity; nor will it prove we are right

or wrong in calling it x and not y.

These indi erent hypotheses are never dangerous pro-

vided their characters are not misunderstood. They may

be useful, either as arti ces for calculation, or to assist    hypotheses in physics.171


our understanding by concrete images, to  x the ideas,

as we say. They need not therefore be rejected. The

hypotheses of the third category are real generalisations.

They must be con rmed or invalidated by experiment.

Whether veri ed or condemned, they will always be fruit-

ful; but, for the reasons I have given, they will only be

so if they are not too numerous.

Origin of Mathematical Physics.—Let us go further

and study more closely the conditions which have assisted

the development of mathematical physics. We recognise

at the outset that the e orts of men of science have always

tended to resolve the complex phenomenon given directly

by experiment into a very large number of elementary

phenomena, and that in three di erent ways.

First, with respect to time. Instead of embracing in its

entirety the progressive development of a phenomenon,

we simply try to connect each moment with the one im-

mediately preceding. We admit that the present state of

the world only depends on the immediate past, without

being directly in uenced, so to speak, by the recollection

of a more distant past. Thanks to this postulate, instead

of studying directly the whole succession of phenomena,

we may con ne ourselves to writing down its di erential

equation; for the laws of Kepler we substitute the law of    science and hypothesis172


Newton.

Next, we try to decompose the phenomena in space.

What experiment gives us is a confused aggregate of facts

spread over a scene of considerable extent. We must try

to deduce the elementary phenomenon, which will still

be localised in a very small region of space.

A few examples perhaps will make my meaning

clearer. If we wished to study in all its complexity the

distribution of temperature in a cooling solid, we could

never do so. This is simply because, if we only re ect

that a point in the solid can directly impart some of

its heat to a neighbouring point, it will immediately

impart that heat only to the nearest points, and it is

but gradually that the  ow of heat will reach other por-

tions of the solid. The elementary phenomenon is the

interchange of heat between two contiguous points. It is

strictly localised and relatively simple if, as is natural,

we admit that it is not in uenced by the temperature of

the molecules whose distance apart is small.

I bend a rod: it takes a very complicated form, the

direct investigation of which would be impossible. But

I can attack the problem, however, if I notice that its

 exure is only the resultant of the deformations of the

very small elements of the rod, and that the deformation    hypotheses in physics.173


of each of these elements only depends on the forces which

are directly applied to it, and not in the least on those

which may be acting on the other elements.

In all these examples, which may be increased with-

out di culty, it is admitted that there is no action at a

distance or at great distances. That is an hypothesis. It

is not always true, as the law of gravitation proves. It

must therefore be veri ed. If it is con rmed, even approx-

imately, it is valuable, for it helps us to use mathematical

physics, at any rate by successive approximations. If it

does not stand the test, we must seek something else that

is analogous, for there are other means of arriving at the

elementary phenomenon. If several bodies act simultane-

ously, it may happen that their actions are independent,

and may be added one to the other, either as vectors

or as scalar quantities. The elementary phenomenon is

then the action of an isolated body. Or suppose, again,

it is a question of small movements, or more generally of

small variations which obey the well-known law of mu-

tual or relative independence. The movement observed

will then be decomposed into simple movements—for ex-

ample, sound into its harmonics, and white light into its

monochromatic components. When we have discovered

in which direction to seek for the elementary phenom-    science and hypothesis174


ena, by what means may we reach it? First, it will often

happen that in order to predict it, or rather in order

to predict what is useful to us, it will not be necessary

to know its mechanism. The law of great numbers will

su ce. Take for example the propagation of heat. Each

molecule radiates towards its neighbour—we need not in-

quire according to what law; and if we make any suppo-

sition in this respect, it will be an indi erent hypothesis,

and therefore useless and unveri able. In fact, by the

action of averages and thanks to the symmetry of the

medium, all di erences are levelled, and, whatever the

hypothesis may be, the result is always the same.

The same feature is presented in the theory of elastic-

ity, and in that of capillarity. The neighbouring molecules

attract and repel each other, we need not inquire by what

law. It is enough for us that this attraction is sensible

at small distances only, and that the molecules are very

numerous, that the medium is symmetrical, and we have

only to let the law of great numbers come into play.

Here again the simplicity of the elementary phe-

nomenon is hidden beneath the complexity of the ob-

servable resultant phenomenon; but in its turn this

simplicity was only apparent and disguised a very com-

plex mechanism. Evidently the best means of reaching    hypotheses in physics.175


the elementary phenomenon would be experiment. It

would be necessary by experimental arti ces to disso-

ciate the complex system which nature o ers for our

investigations and carefully to study the elements as

dissociated as possible; for example, natural white light

would be decomposed into monochromatic lights by the

aid of the prism, and into polarised lights by the aid of

the polariser. Unfortunately, that is neither always pos-

sible nor always su cient, and sometimes the mind must

run ahead of experiment. I shall only give one example

which has always struck me rather forcibly. If I decom-

pose white light, I shall be able to isolate a portion of the

spectrum, but however small it may be, it will always

be a certain width. In the same way the natural lights

which are called monochromatic give us a very  ne ray,

but one which is not, however, in nitely  ne. It might be

supposed that in the experimental study of the properties

of these natural lights, by operating with  ner and  ner

rays, and passing on at last to the limit, so to speak, we

should eventually obtain the properties of a rigorously

monochromatic light. That would not be accurate. I

assume that two rays emanate from the same source,

that they are  rst polarised in planes at right angles,

that they are then brought back again to the same plane    science and hypothesis176


of polarisation, and that we try to obtain interference. If

the light were rigorously monochromatic, there would be

interference; but with our nearly monochromatic lights,

there will be no interference, and that, however narrow

the ray may be. For it to be otherwise, the ray would

have to be several million times  ner than the  nest

known rays.

Here then we should be led astray by proceeding to

the limit. The mind has to run ahead of the experiment,

and if it has done so with success, it is because it has al-

lowed itself to be guided by the instinct of simplicity. The

knowledge of the elementary fact enables us to state the

problem in the form of an equation. It only remains to

deduce from it by combination the observable and veri -

able complex fact. That is what we call integration, and it

is the province of the mathematician. It might be asked,

why in physical science generalisation so readily takes

the mathematical form. The reason is now easy to see.

It is not only because we have to express numerical laws;

it is because the observable phenomenon is due to the

superposition of a large number of elementary phenom-

ena which are all similar to each other; and in this way

di erential equations are quite naturally introduced. It

is not enough that each elementary phenomenon should    hypotheses in physics.177


obey simple laws: all those that we have to combine must

obey the same law; then only is the intervention of math-

ematics of any use. Mathematics teaches us, in fact, to

combine like with like. Its object is to divine the result of

a combination without having to reconstruct that com-

bination element by element. If we have to repeat the

same operation several times, mathematics enables us to

avoid this repetition by telling the result beforehand by

a kind of induction. This I have explained before in the

chapter on mathematical reasoning. But for that pur-

pose all these operations must be similar; in the contrary

case we must evidently make up our minds to working

them out in full one after the other, and mathematics

will be useless. It is therefore, thanks to the approxi-

mate homogeneity of the matter studied by physicists,

that mathematical physics came into existence. In the

natural sciences the following conditions are no longer

to be found:—homogeneity, relative independence of re-

mote parts, simplicity of the elementary fact; and that is

why the student of natural science is compelled to have

recourse to other modes of generalisation.      CHAPTER X.

THE THEORIES OF MODERN PHYSICS.

Signi cance of Physical Theories.—The ephemeral na-

ture of scienti c theories takes by surprise the man of

the world. Their brief period of prosperity ended, he

sees them abandoned one after another; he sees ruins

piled upon ruins; he predicts that the theories in fashion

to-day will in a short time succumb in their turn, and he

concludes that they are absolutely in vain. This is what

he calls the bankruptcy of science.

His scepticism is super cial; he does not take into

account the object of scienti c theories and the part they

play, or he would understand that the ruins may be still

good for something. No theory seemed established on

 rmer ground than Fresnel’s, which attributed light to

the movements of the ether. Then if Maxwell’s theory

is to-day preferred, does that mean that Fresnel’s work

was in vain? No; for Fresnel’s object was not to know

whether there really is an ether, if it is or is not formed

of atoms, if these atoms really move in this way or that;

his object was to predict optical phenomena.

This Fresnel’s theory enables us to do to-day as well

as it did before Maxwell’s time. The di erential equa-the theories of modern physics.179


tions are always true, they may be always integrated

by the same methods, and the results of this integra-

tion still preserve their value. It cannot be said that this

is reducing physical theories to simple practical recipes;

these equations express relations, and if the equations

remain true, it is because the relations preserve their re-

ality. They teach us now, as they did then, that there

is such and such a relation between this thing and that;

only, the something which we then called motion, we now

call electric current. But these are merely names of the

images we substituted for the real objects which Nature

will hide for ever from our eyes. The true relations be-

tween these real objects are the only reality we can attain,

and the sole condition is that the same relations shall ex-

ist between these objects as between the images we are

forced to put in their place. If the relations are known

to us, what does it matter if we think it convenient to

replace one image by another?

That a given periodic phenomenon (an electric oscil-

lation, for instance) is really due to the vibration of a

given atom, which, behaving like a pendulum, is really

displaced in this manner or that, all this is neither certain

nor essential. But that there is between the electric oscil-

lation, the movement of the pendulum, and all periodic    science and hypothesis180


phenomena an intimate relationship which corresponds

to a profound reality; that this relationship, this similar-

ity, or rather this parallelism, is continued in the details;

that it is a consequence of more general principles such

as that of the conservation of energy, and that of least

action; this we may a rm; this is the truth which will

ever remain the same in whatever garb we may see  t to

clothe it.

Many theories of dispersion have been proposed. The

 rst were imperfect, and contained but little truth. Then

came that of Helmholtz, and this in its turn was modi ed

in di erent ways; its author himself conceived another

theory, founded on Maxwell’s principles. But the re-

markable thing is, that all the scientists who followed

Helmholtz obtain the same equations, although their

starting-points were to all appearance widely separated.

I venture to say that these theories are all simultaneously

true; not merely because they express a true relation—

that between absorption and abnormal dispersion. In

the premisses of these theories the part that is true is

the part common to all: it is the a rmation of this or

that relation between certain things, which some call by

one name and some by another.

The kinetic theory of gases has given rise to many ob-the theories of modern physics.181


jections, to which it would be di cult to  nd an answer

were it claimed that the theory is absolutely true. But all

these objections do not alter the fact that it has been use-

ful, particularly in revealing to us one true relation which

would otherwise have remained profoundly hidden—the

relation between gaseous and osmotic pressures. In this

sense, then, it may be said to be true.

When a physicist  nds a contradiction between two

theories which are equally dear to him, he sometimes

says: “Let us not be troubled, but let us hold fast to the

two ends of the chain, lest we lose the intermediate links.”

This argument of the embarrassed theologian would be

ridiculous if we were to attribute to physical theories the

interpretation given them by the man of the world. In

case of contradiction one of them at least should be con-

sidered false. But this is no longer the case if we only

seek in them what should be sought. It is quite possi-

ble that they both express true relations, and that the

contradictions only exist in the images we have formed

to ourselves of reality. To those who feel that we are go-

ing too far in our limitations of the domain accessible to

the scientist, I reply: These questions which we forbid

you to investigate, and which you so regret, are not only

insoluble, they are illusory and devoid of meaning.    science and hypothesis182


Such a philosopher claims that all physics can be ex-

plained by the mutual impact of atoms. If he simply

means that the same relations obtain between physical

phenomena as between the mutual impact of a large num-

ber of billiard balls—well and good! this is veri able,

and perhaps is true. But he means something more, and

we think we understand him, because we think we know

what an impact is. Why? Simply because we have of-

ten watched a game of billiards. Are we to understand

that God experiences the same sensations in the contem-

plation of His work that we do in watching a game of

billiards? If it is not our intention to give his assertion

this fantastic meaning, and if we do not wish to give it the

more restricted meaning I have already mentioned, which

is the sound meaning, then it has no meaning at all. Hy-

potheses of this kind have therefore only a metaphorical

sense. The scientist should no more banish them than

a poet banishes metaphor; but he ought to know what

they are worth. They may be useful to give satisfaction

to the mind, and they will do no harm as long as they

are only indi erent hypotheses.

These considerations explain to us why certain theo-

ries, that were thought to be abandoned and de nitively

condemned by experiment, are suddenly revived fromthe theories of modern physics.183


their ashes and begin a new life. It is because they ex-

pressed true relations, and had not ceased to do so when

for some reason or other we felt it necessary to enunciate

the same relations in another language. Their life had

been latent, as it were.

Barely  fteen years ago, was there anything more

ridiculous, more quaintly old-fashioned, than the  uids

of Coulomb? And yet, here they are re-appearing un-

der the name of electrons. In what do these permanently

electri ed molecules di er from the electric molecules of

Coulomb? It is true that in the electrons the electricity is

supported by a little, a very little matter; in other words,

they have mass. Yet Coulomb did not deny mass to his

 uids, or if he did, it was with reluctance. It would be

rash to a rm that the belief in electrons will not also

undergo an eclipse, but it was none the less curious to

note this unexpected renaissance.

But the most striking example is Carnot’s principle.

Carnot established it, starting from false hypotheses.

When it was found that heat was indestructible, and

may be converted into work, his ideas were completely

abandoned; later, Clausius returned to them, and to him

is due their de nitive triumph. In its primitive form,

Carnot’s theory expressed in addition to true relations,    science and hypothesis184


other inexact relations, the débris of old ideas; but the

presence of the latter did not alter the reality of the

others. Clausius had only to separate them, just as one

lops o  dead branches.

The result was the second fundamental law of thermo-

dynamics. The relations were always the same, although

they did not hold, at least to all appearance, between the

same objects. This was su cient for the principle to re-

tain its value. Nor have the reasonings of Carnot perished

on this account; they were applied to an imperfect con-

ception of matter, but their form—i.e., the essential part

of them, remained correct. What I have just said throws

some light at the same time on the rôle of general princi-

ples, such as those of the principle of least action or of the

conservation of energy. These principles are of very great

value. They were obtained in the search for what there

was in common in the enunciation of numerous physical

laws; they thus represent the quintessence of innumer-

able observations. However, from their very generality

results a consequence to which I have called attention in

Chapter VIII.—namely, that they are no longer capable

of veri cation. As we cannot give a general de nition of

energy, the principle of the conservation of energy simply

signi es that there is a something which remains con-the theories of modern physics.185


stant. Whatever fresh notions of the world may be given

us by future experiments, we are certain beforehand that

there is something which remains constant, and which

may be called energy. Does this mean that the princi-

ple has no meaning and vanishes into a tautology? Not

at all. It means that the di erent things to which we

give the name of energy are connected by a true relation-

ship; it a rms between them a real relation. But then,

if this principle has a meaning, it may be false; it may

be that we have no right to extend inde nitely its appli-

cations, and yet it is certain beforehand to be veri ed in

the strict sense of the word. How, then, shall we know

when it has been extended as far as is legitimate? Simply

when it ceases to be useful to us—i.e., when we can no

longer use it to predict correctly new phenomena. We

shall be certain in such a case that the relation a rmed

is no longer real, for otherwise it would be fruitful; ex-

periment without directly contradicting a new extension

of the principle will nevertheless have condemned it.

Physics and Mechanism.—Most theorists have a

constant predilection for explanations borrowed from

physics, mechanics, or dynamics. Some would be sat-

is ed if they could account for all phenomena by the

motion of molecules attracting one another according    science and hypothesis186


to certain laws. Others are more exact: they would

suppress attractions acting at a distance; their molecules

would follow rectilinear paths, from which they would

only be deviated by impacts. Others again, such as

Hertz, suppress the forces as well, but suppose their

molecules subjected to geometrical connections analo-

gous, for instance, to those of articulated systems; thus,

they wish to reduce dynamics to a kind of kinematics. In

a word, they all wish to bend nature into a certain form,

and unless they can do this they cannot be satis ed. Is

Nature  exible enough for this?

We shall examine this question in Chapter XII., àpro-

pos of Maxwell’s theory. Every time that the principles of

least action and energy are satis ed, we shall see that not

only is there always a mechanical explanation possible,

but that there is an unlimited number of such explana-

tions. By means of a well-known theorem due to Königs,

it may be shown that we can explain everything in an un-

limited number of ways, by connections after the manner

of Hertz, or, again, by central forces. No doubt it may be

just as easily demonstrated that everything may be ex-

plained by simple impacts. For this, let us bear in mind

that it is not enough to be content with the ordinary mat-

ter of which we are aware by means of our senses, and thethe theories of modern physics.187


movements of which we observe directly. We may con-

ceive of ordinary matter as either composed of atoms,

whose internal movements escape us, our senses being

able to estimate only the displacement of the whole; or

we may imagine one of those subtle  uids, which under

the name of ether or other names, have from all time

played so important a rôle in physical theories. Often we

go further, and regard the ether as the only primitive, or

even as the only true matter. The more moderate con-

sider ordinary matter to be condensed ether, and there is

nothing startling in this conception; but others only re-

duce its importance still further, and see in matter noth-

ing more than the geometrical locus of singularities in

the ether. Lord Kelvin, for instance, holds what we call

matter to be only the locus of those points at which the

ether is animated by vortex motions. Riemann believes

it to be locus of those points at which ether is constantly

destroyed; to Wiechert or Larmor, it is the locus of the

points at which the ether has undergone a kind of torsion

of a very particular kind. Taking any one of these points

of view, I ask by what right do we apply to the ether

the mechanical properties observed in ordinary matter,

which is but false matter? The ancient  uids, caloric,

electricity, etc., were abandoned when it was seen that    science and hypothesis188


heat is not indestructible. But they were also laid aside

for another reason, In materialising them, their individ-

uality was, so to speak, emphasised—gaps were opened

between them; and these gaps had to be  lled in when

the sentiment of the unity of Nature became stronger,

and when the intimate relations which connect all the

parts were perceived. In multiplying the  uids, not only

did the ancient physicists create unnecessary entities, but

they destroyed real ties. It is not enough for a theory not

to a rm false relations; it must not conceal true rela-

tions.

Does our ether actually exist? We know the origin of

our belief in the ether. If light takes several years to reach

us from a distant star, it is no longer on the star, nor is

it on the earth. It must be somewhere, and supported,

so to speak, by some material agency.

The same idea may be expressed in a more mathe-

matical and more abstract form. What we note are the

changes undergone by the material molecules. We see,

for instance, that the photographic plate experiences the

consequences of a phenomenon of which the incandescent

mass of a star was the scene several years before. Now, in

ordinary mechanics, the state of the system under consid-

eration depends only on its state at the moment imme-the theories of modern physics.189


diately preceding; the system therefore satis es certain

di erential equations. On the other hand, if we did not

believe in the ether, the state of the material universe

would depend not only on the state immediately preced-

ing, but also on much older states; the system would

satisfy equations of  nite di erences. The ether was in-

vented to escape this breaking down of the laws of general

mechanics.

Still, this would only compel us to  ll the interplan-

etary space with ether, but not to make it penetrate

into the midst of the material media. Fizeau’s exper-

iment goes further. By the interference of rays which

have passed through the air or water in motion, it seems

to show us two di erent media penetrating each other,

and yet being displaced with respect to each other. The

ether is all but in our grasp. Experiments can be con-

ceived in which we come closer still to it. Assume that

Newton’s principle of the equality of action and reaction

is not true if applied to matter alone, and that this can

be proved. The geometrical sum of all the forces applied

to all the molecules would no longer be zero. If we did

not wish to change the whole of the science of mechan-

ics, we should have to introduce the ether, in order that

the action which matter apparently undergoes should be    science and hypothesis190


counterbalanced by the reaction of matter on something.

Or again, suppose we discover that optical and electri-

cal phenomena are in uenced by the motion of the earth.

It would follow that those phenomena might reveal to us

not only the relative motion of material bodies, but also

what would seem to be their absolute motion. Again, it

would be necessary to have an ether in order that these

so-called absolute movements should not be their dis-

placements with respect to empty space, but with respect

to something concrete.

Will this ever be accomplished? I do not think so,

and I shall explain why; and yet, it is not absurd, for

others have entertained this view. For instance, if the

theory of Lorentz, of which I shall speak in more detail

in Chapter XIII., were true, Newton’s principle would

not apply to matter alone, and the di erence would not

be very far from being within reach of experiment. On

the other hand, many experiments have been made on

the in uence of the motion of the earth. The results

have always been negative. But if these experiments have

been undertaken, it is because we have not been certain

beforehand; and indeed, according to current theories,

the compensation would be only approximate, and we

might expect to  nd accurate methods giving positivethe theories of modern physics.191


results. I think that such a hope is illusory; it was none

the less interesting to show that a success of this kind

would, in a certain sense, open to us a new world.

And now allow me to make a digression; I must ex-

plain why I do not believe, in spite of Lorentz, that more

exact observations will ever make evident anything else

but the relative displacements of material bodies. Exper-

iments have been made that should have disclosed the

terms of the  rst order; the results were nugatory. Could

that have been by chance? No one has admitted this;

a general explanation was sought, and Lorentz found it.

He showed that the terms of the  rst order should can-

cel each other, but not the terms of the second order.

Then more exact experiments were made, which were

also negative; neither could this be the result of chance.

An explanation was necessary, and was forthcoming; they

always are; hypotheses are what we lack the least. But

this is not enough. Who is there who does not think that

this leaves to chance far too important a rôle? Would it

not also be a chance that this singular concurrence should

cause a certain circumstance to destroy the terms of the

 rst order, and that a totally di erent but very oppor-

tune circumstance should cause those of the second order

to vanish? No; the same explanation must be found for    science and hypothesis192


the two cases, and everything tends to show that this ex-

planation would serve equally well for the terms of the

higher order, and that the mutual destruction of these

terms will be rigorous and absolute.

The Present State of Physics.—Two opposite tenden-

cies may be distinguished in the history of the develop-

ment of physics. On the one hand, new relations are con-

tinually being discovered between objects which seemed

destined to remain for ever unconnected; scattered facts

cease to be strangers to each other and tend to be mar-

shalled into an imposing synthesis. The march of science

is towards unity and simplicity.

On the other hand, new phenomena are continually

being revealed; it will be long before they can be assigned

their place—sometimes it may happen that to  nd them

a place a corner of the edi ce must be demolished. In the

same way, we are continually perceiving details ever more

varied in the phenomena we know, where our crude senses

used to be unable to detect any lack of unity. What we

thought to be simple becomes complex, and the march of

science seems to be towards diversity and complication.

Here, then, are two opposing tendencies, each of

which seems to triumph in turn. Which will win? If

the  rst wins, science is possible; but nothing provesthe theories of modern physics.193


this à priori, and it may be that after unsuccessful ef-

forts to bend Nature to our ideal of unity in spite of

herself, we shall be submerged by the ever-rising  ood

of our new riches and compelled to renounce all idea

of classi cation—to abandon our ideal, and to reduce

science to the mere recording of innumerable recipes.

In fact, we can give this question no answer. All that

we can do is to observe the science of to-day, and compare

it with that of yesterday. No doubt after this examination

we shall be in a position to o er a few conjectures.

Half-a-century ago hopes ran high indeed. The unity

of force had just been revealed to us by the discovery

of the conservation of energy and of its transformation.

This discovery also showed that the phenomena of heat

could be explained by molecular movements. Although

the nature of these movements was not exactly known, no

one doubted but that they would be ascertained before

long. As for light, the work seemed entirely completed.

So far as electricity was concerned, there was not so great

an advance. Electricity had just annexed magnetism.

This was a considerable and a de nitive step towards

unity. But how was electricity in its turn to be brought

into the general unity, and how was it to be included in

the general universal mechanism? No one had the slight-    science and hypothesis194


est idea. As to the possibility of the inclusion, all were

agreed; they had faith. Finally, as far as the molecular

properties of material bodies are concerned, the inclusion

seemed easier, but the details were very hazy. In a word,

hopes were vast and strong, but vague.

To-day, what do we see? In the  rst place, a step in

advance—immense progress. The relations between light

and electricity are now known; the three domains of light,

electricity, and magnetism, formerly separated, are now

one; and this annexation seems de nitive.

Nevertheless the conquest has caused us some sac-

ri ces. Optical phenomena become particular cases in

electric phenomena; as long as the former remained iso-

lated, it was easy to explain them by movements which

were thought to be known in all their details. That was

easy enough; but any explanation to be accepted must

now cover the whole domain of electricity. This cannot

be done without di culty.

The most satisfactory theory is that of Lorentz; it is

unquestionably the theory that best explains the known

facts, the one that throws into relief the greatest num-

ber of known relations, the one in which we  nd most

traces of de nitive construction. That it still possesses a

serious fault I have shown above. It is in contradictionthe theories of modern physics.195


with Newton’s law that action and reaction are equal and

opposite—or rather, this principle according to Lorentz

cannot be applicable to matter alone; if it be true, it must

take into account the action of the ether on matter, and

the reaction of the matter on the ether. Now, in the new

order, it is very likely that things do not happen in this

way.

However this may be, it is due to Lorentz that the

results of Fizeau on the optics of moving bodies, the laws

of normal and abnormal dispersion and of absorption are

connected with each other and with the other properties

of the ether, by bonds which no doubt will not be readily

severed. Look at the ease with which the new Zeeman

phenomenon found its place, and even aided the classi -

cation of Faraday’s magnetic rotation, which had de ed

all Maxwell’s e orts. This facility proves that Lorentz’s

theory is not a mere arti cial combination which must

eventually  nd its solvent. It will probably have to be

modi ed, but not destroyed.

The only object of Lorentz was to include in a sin-

gle whole all the optics and electro-dynamics of moving

bodies; he did not claim to give a mechanical explana-

tion. Larmor goes further; keeping the essential part of

Lorentz’s theory, he grafts upon it, so to speak, Mac-    science and hypothesis196


Cullagh’s ideas on the direction of the movement of the

ether. MacCullagh held that the velocity of the ether

is the same in magnitude and direction as the magnetic

force. Ingenious as is this attempt, the fault in Lorentz’s

theory remains, and is even aggravated. According to

Lorentz, we do not know what the movements of the ether

are; and because we do not know this, we may suppose

them to be movements compensating those of matter,

and re-a rming that action and reaction are equal and

opposite. According to Larmor we know the movements

of the ether, and we can prove that the compensation

does not take place.

If Larmor has failed, as in my opinion he has, does

it necessarily follow that a mechanical explanation is im-

possible? Far from it. I said above that as long as a

phenomenon obeys the two principles of energy and least

action, so long it allows of an unlimited number of me-

chanical explanations. And so with the phenomena of

optics and electricity.

But this is not enough. For a mechanical explanation

to be good it must be simple; to choose it from among

all the explanations that are possible there must be other

reasons than the necessity of making a choice. Well, we

have no theory as yet which will satisfy this condition andthe theories of modern physics.197


consequently be of any use. Are we then to complain?

That would be to forget the end we seek, which is not

the mechanism; the true and only aim is unity.

We ought therefore to set some limits to our ambition.

Let us not seek to formulate a mechanical explanation;

let us be content to show that we can always  nd one

if we wish. In this we have succeeded. The principle of

the conservation of energy has always been con rmed,

and now it has a fellow in the principle of least action,

stated in the form appropriate to physics. This has also

been veri ed, at least as far as concerns the reversible

phenomena which obey Lagrange’s equations—in other

words, which obey the most general laws of physics. The

irreversible phenomena are much more di cult to bring

into line; but they, too, are being co-ordinated and tend

to come into the unity. The light which illuminates them

comes from Carnot’s principle. For a long time thermo-

dynamics was con ned to the study of the dilatations

of bodies and of their change of state. For some time

past it has been growing bolder, and has considerably

extended its domain. We owe to it the theories of the

voltaic cell and of their thermo-electric phenomena; there

is not a corner in physics which it has not explored, and it

has even attacked chemistry itself. The same laws hold    science and hypothesis198


good; everywhere, disguised in some form or other, we

 nd Carnot’s principle; everywhere also appears that em-

inently abstract concept of entropy which is as universal

as the concept of energy, and like it, seems to conceal

a reality. It seemed that radiant heat must escape, but

recently that, too, has been brought under the same laws.

In this way fresh analogies are revealed which may

be often pursued in detail; electric resistance resembles

the viscosity of  uids; hysteresis would rather be like the

friction of solids. In all cases friction appears to be the

type most imitated by the most diverse irreversible phe-

nomena, and this relationship is real and profound.

A strictly mechanical explanation of these phenom-

ena has also been sought, but, owing to their nature, it

is hardly likely that it will be found. To  nd it, it has

been necessary to suppose that the irreversibility is but

apparent, that the elementary phenomena are reversible

and obey the known laws of dynamics. But the elements

are extremely numerous, and become blended more and

more, so that to our crude sight all appears to tend to-

wards uniformity—i.e., all seems to progress in the same

direction, and that without hope of return. The apparent

irreversibility is therefore but an e ect of the law of great

numbers. Only a being of in nitely subtle senses, suchthe theories of modern physics.199


as Maxwell’s demon, could unravel this tangled skein and

turn back the course of the universe.

This conception, which is connected with the kinetic

theory of gases, has cost great e ort and has not, on the

whole, been fruitful; it may become so. This is not the

place to examine if it leads to contradictions, and if it is

in conformity with the true nature of things.

Let us notice, however, the original ideas of M. Gouy

on the Brownian movement. According to this scientist,

this singular movement does not obey Carnot’s principle.

The particles which it sets moving would be smaller than

the meshes of that tightly drawn net; they would thus

be ready to separate them, and thereby to set back the

course of the universe. One can almost see Maxwell’s
1
demon at work.

To resume, phenomena long known are gradually be-

ing better classi ed, but new phenomena come to claim

their place, and most of them, like the Zeeman e ect,

 nd it at once. Then we have the cathode rays, the X-

rays, uranium and radium rays; in fact, a whole world

1
Clerk-Maxwell imagined some supernatural agency at work,
sorting molecules in a gas of uniform temperature into (a) those
possessing kinetic energy above the average, (b) those possessing
kinetic energy below the average.—[Tr.]    science and hypothesis200


of which none had suspected the existence. How many

unexpected guests to  nd a place for! No one can yet

predict the place they will occupy, but I do not believe

they will destroy the general unity: I think that they

will rather complete it. On the one hand, indeed, the

new radiations seem to be connected with the phenom-

ena of luminosity; not only do they excite  uorescence,

but they sometimes come into existence under the same

conditions as that property; neither are they unrelated

to the cause which produces the electric spark under the

action of ultra-violet light. Finally, and most important

of all, it is believed that in all these phenomena there

exist ions, animated, it is true, with velocities far greater

than those of electrolytes. All this is very vague, but it

will all become clearer.

Phosphorescence and the action of light on the spark

were regions rather isolated, and consequently somewhat

neglected by investigators. It is to be hoped that a new

path will now be made which will facilitate their com-

munications with the rest of science. Not only do we

discover new phenomena, but those we think we know

are revealed in unlooked-for aspects. In the free ether

the laws preserve their majestic simplicity, but matter

properly so called seems more and more complex; all wethe theories of modern physics.201


can say of it is but approximate, and our formulæ are

constantly requiring new terms.

But the ranks are unbroken, the relations that we

have discovered between objects we thought simple still

hold good between the same objects when their complex-

ity is recognised, and that alone is the important thing.

Our equations become, it is true, more and more com-

plicated, so as to embrace more closely the complexity

of nature; but nothing is changed in the relations which

enable these equations to be derived from each other. In

a word, the form of these equations persists. Take for in-

stance the laws of re ection. Fresnel established them by

a simple and attractive theory which experiment seemed

to con rm. Subsequently, more accurate researches have

shown that this veri cation was but approximate; traces

of elliptic polarisation were detected everywhere. But it

is owing to the  rst approximation that the cause of these

anomalies was found in the existence of a transition layer,

and all the essentials of Fresnel’s theory have remained.

We cannot help re ecting that all these relations would

never have been noted if there had been doubt in the  rst

place as to the complexity of the objects they connect.

Long ago it was said: If Tycho had had instruments ten

times as precise, we would never have had a Kepler, or    science and hypothesis202


a Newton, or Astronomy. It is a misfortune for a science

to be born too late, when the means of observation have

become too perfect. That is what is happening at this

moment with respect to physical chemistry; the founders

are hampered in their general grasp by third and fourth

decimal places; happily they are men of robust faith. As

we get to know the properties of matter better we see

that continuity reigns. From the work of Andrews and

Van der Waals, we see how the transition from the liquid

to the gaseous state is made, and that it is not abrupt.

Similarly, there is no gap between the liquid and solid

states, and in the proceedings of a recent Congress we

see memoirs on the rigidity of liquids side by side with

papers on the  ow of solids.

With this tendency there is no doubt a loss of simplic-

ity. Such and such an e ect was represented by straight

lines; it is now necessary to connect these lines by more

or less complicated curves. On the other hand, unity is

gained. Separate categories quieted but did not satisfy

the mind.

Finally, a new domain, that of chemistry, has been

invaded by the method of physics, and we see the birth of

physical chemistry. It is still quite young, but already it

has enabled us to connect such phenomena as electrolysis,the theories of modern physics.203


osmosis, and the movements of ions.

From this cursory exposition what can we conclude?

Taking all things into account, we have approached the

realisation of unity. This has not been done as quickly as

was hoped  fty years ago, and the path predicted has not

always been followed; but, on the whole, much ground

has been gained.      CHAPTER XI.

THE CALCULUS OF PROBABILITIES.

No doubt the reader will be astonished to  nd re ections

on the calculus of probabilities in such a volume as this.

What has that calculus to do with physical science? The

questions I shall raise—without, however, giving them

a solution—are naturally raised by the philosopher who

is examining the problems of physics. So far is this the

case, that in the two preceding chapters I have several

times used the words “probability” and “chance.” “Pre-

dicted facts,” as I said above, “can only be probable.”

However solidly founded a prediction may appear to be,

we are never absolutely certain that experiment will not

prove it false; but the probability is often so great that

practically it may be accepted. And a little farther on I

added:—“See what a part the belief in simplicity plays in

our generalisations. We have veri ed a simple law in a

large number of particular cases, and we refuse to admit

that this so-often-repeated coincidence is a mere e ect

of chance.” Thus, in a multitude of circumstances the

physicist is often in the same position as the gambler

who reckons up his chances. Every time that he reasons

by induction, he more or less consciously requires thethe calculus of probabilities.205


calculus of probabilities, and that is why I am obliged to

open this chapter parenthetically, and to interrupt our

discussion of method in the physical sciences in order to

examine a little closer what this calculus is worth, and

what dependence we may place upon it. The very name

of the calculus of probabilities is a paradox. Probability

as opposed to certainty is what one does not know, and

how can we calculate the unknown? Yet many eminent

scientists have devoted themselves to this calculus, and

it cannot be denied that science has drawn therefrom no

small advantage. How can we explain this apparent con-

tradiction? Has probability been de ned? Can it even be

de ned? And if it cannot, how can we venture to reason

upon it? The de nition, it will be said, is very simple.

The probability of an event is the ratio of the number of

cases favourable to the event to the total number of pos-

sible cases. A simple example will show how incomplete

this de nition is:—I throw two dice. What is the prob-

ability that one of the two at least turns up a 6? Each

can turn up in six di erent ways; the number of possi-

ble cases is 6   6 = 36. The number of favourable cases
          11
is 11; the probability is. That is the correct solution.
          36
But why cannot we just as well proceed as follows?—The    science and hypothesis206


                                6   7
points which turn up on the two dice form= 21
                                  2
di erent combinations. Among these combinations, six
                      6
are favourable; the probability is. Now why is the
                    21
 rst method of calculating the number of possible cases

more legitimate than the second? In any case it is not the

de nition that tells us. We are therefore bound to com-

plete the de nition by saying, “. . . to the total number of

possible cases, provided the cases are equally probable.”

So we are compelled to de ne the probable by the proba-

ble. How can we know that two possible cases are equally

probable? Will it be by a convention? If we insert at the

beginning of every problem an explicit convention, well

and good! We then have nothing to do but to apply the

rules of arithmetic and algebra, and we complete our cal-

culation, when our result cannot be called in question.

But if we wish to make the slightest application of this

result, we must prove that our convention is legitimate,

and we shall  nd ourselves in the presence of the very dif-

 culty we thought we had avoided. It may be said that

common-sense is enough to show us the convention that

should be adopted. Alas! M. Bertrand has amused him-

self by discussing the following simple problem:—“What

is the probability that a chord of a circle may be greaterthe calculus of probabilities.207


than the side of the inscribed equilateral triangle?” The

illustrious geometer successively adopted two conventions

which seemed to be equally imperative in the eyes of
                                    1
common-sense, and with one convention he  nds, and
                                    2
1
with the other. The conclusion which seems to follow
3
from this is that the calculus of probabilities is a useless

science, that the obscure instinct which we call common-

sense, and to which we appeal for the legitimisation of

our conventions, must be distrusted. But to this conclu-

sion we can no longer subscribe. We cannot do without

that obscure instinct. Without it, science would be im-

possible, and without it we could neither discover nor

apply a law. Have we any right, for instance, to enun-

ciate Newton’s law? No doubt numerous observations

are in agreement with it, but is not that a simple fact

of chance? and how do we know, besides, that this law

which has been true for so many generations will not be

untrue in the next? To this objection the only answer you

can give is: It is very improbable. But grant the law. By

means of it I can calculate the position of Jupiter in a

year from now. Yet have I any right to say this? Who

can tell if a gigantic mass of enormous velocity is not

going to pass near the solar system and produce unfore-

seen perturbations? Here again the only answer is: It is    science and hypothesis208


very improbable. From this point of view all the sciences

would only be unconscious applications of the calculus

of probabilities. And if this calculus be condemned, then

the whole of the sciences must also be condemned. I shall

not dwell at length on scienti c problems in which the in-

tervention of the calculus of probabilities is more evident.

In the forefront of these is the problem of interpolation, in

which, knowing a certain number of values of a function,

we try to discover the intermediary values. I may also

mention the celebrated theory of errors of observation,

to which I shall return later; the kinetic theory of gases,

a well-known hypothesis wherein each gaseous molecule

is supposed to describe an extremely complicated path,

but in which, through the e ect of great numbers, the

mean phenomena which are all we observe obey the sim-

ple laws of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac. All these theories

are based upon the laws of great numbers, and the cal-

culus of probabilities would evidently involve them in its

ruin. It is true that they have only a particular interest,

and that, save as far as interpolation is concerned, they

are sacri ces to which we might readily be resigned. But

I have said above, it would not be these partial sacri ces

that would be in question; it would be the legitimacy of

the whole of science that would be challenged. I quite seethe calculus of probabilities.209


that it might be said: We do not know, and yet we must

act. As for action, we have not time to devote ourselves

to an inquiry that will su ce to dispel our ignorance.

Besides, such an inquiry would demand unlimited time.

We must therefore make up our minds without knowing.

This must be often done whatever may happen, and we

must follow the rules although we may have but little

con dence in them. What I know is, not that such a

thing is true, but that the best course for me is to act as

if it were true. The calculus of probabilities, and there-

fore science itself, would be no longer of any practical

value.

Unfortunately the di culty does not thus disappear.

A gambler wants to try a coup, and he asks my advice.

If I give it him, I use the calculus of probabilities; but

I shall not guarantee success. That is what I shall call

subjective probability. In this case we might be content

with the explanation of which I have just given a sketch.

But assume that an observer is present at the play, that

he knows of the coup, and that play goes on for a long

time, and that he makes a summary of his notes. He

will  nd that events have taken place in conformity with

the laws of the calculus of probabilities. That is what I

shall call objective probability, and it is this phenomenon    science and hypothesis210


which has to be explained. There are numerous Insur-

ance Societies which apply the rules of the calculus of

probabilities, and they distribute to their shareholders

dividends, the objective reality of which cannot be con-

tested. In order to explain them, we must do more than

invoke our ignorance and the necessity of action. Thus,

absolute scepticism is not admissible. We may distrust,

but we cannot condemn en bloc. Discussion is necessary.

I. Classi cation of the Problems of Probability.—In

order to classify the problems which are presented to us

with reference to probabilities, we must look at them

from di erent points of view, and  rst of all, from that

of generality. I said above that probability is the ratio

of the number of favourable to the number of possible

cases. What for want of a better term I call general-

ity will increase with the number of possible cases. This

number may be  nite, as, for instance, if we take a throw

of the dice in which the number of possible cases is 36.

That is the  rst degree of generality. But if we ask, for

instance, what is the probability that a point within a

circle is within the inscribed square, there are as many

possible cases as there are points in the circle—that is to

say, an in nite number. This is the second degree of gen-

erality. Generality can be pushed further still. We maythe calculus of probabilities.211


ask the probability that a function will satisfy a given

condition. There are then as many possible cases as one

can imagine di erent functions. This is the third degree

of generality, which we reach, for instance, when we try

to  nd the most probable law after a  nite number of

observations. Yet we may place ourselves at a quite dif-

ferent point of view. If we were not ignorant there would

be no probability, there could only be certainty. But our

ignorance cannot be absolute, for then there would be

no longer any probability at all. Thus the problems of

probability may be classed according to the greater or

less depth of this ignorance. In mathematics we may set

ourselves problems in probability. What is the probabil-

ity that the  fth decimal of a logarithm taken at random

from a table is a 9. There is no hesitation in answering
          1
that this probability is. Here we possess all the data
          10
of the problem. We can calculate our logarithm without

having recourse to the table, but we need not give our-

selves the trouble. This is the  rst degree of ignorance.

In the physical sciences our ignorance is already greater.

The state of a system at a given moment depends on

two things—its initial state, and the law according to

which that state varies. If we know both this law and

this initial state, we have a simple mathematical prob-    science and hypothesis212


lem to solve, and we fall back upon our  rst degree of

ignorance. Then it often happens that we know the law

and do not know the initial state. It may be asked, for

instance, what is the present distribution of the minor

planets? We know that from all time they have obeyed

the laws of Kepler, but we do not know what was their

initial distribution. In the kinetic theory of gases we as-

sume that the gaseous molecules follow rectilinear paths

and obey the laws of impact and elastic bodies; yet as we

know nothing of their initial velocities, we know nothing

of their present velocities. The calculus of probabilities

alone enables us to predict the mean phenomena which

will result from a combination of these velocities. This

is the second degree of ignorance. Finally it is possible,

that not only the initial conditions but the laws them-

selves are unknown. We then reach the third degree of

ignorance, and in general we can no longer a rm any-

thing at all as to the probability of a phenomenon. It

often happens that instead of trying to discover an event

by means of a more or less imperfect knowledge of the

law, the events may be known, and we want to  nd the

law; or that, instead of deducing e ects from causes, we

wish to deduce the causes from the e ects. Now, these

problems are classi ed as probability of causes, and arethe calculus of probabilities.213


the most interesting of all from their scienti c applica-

tions. I play at écarté with a gentleman whom I know

to be perfectly honest. What is the chance that he turns
    1
up the king? It is. This is a problem of the probability
    8
of e ects. I play with a gentleman whom I do not know.

He has dealt ten times, and he has turned the king up six

times. What is the chance that he is a sharper? This is a

problem in the probability of causes. It may be said that

it is the essential problem of the experimental method. I

have observed n values of x and the corresponding values

of y. I have found that the ratio of the latter to the former

is practically constant. There is the event; what is the

cause? Is it probable that there is a general law according

to which y would be proportional to x, and that small

divergencies are due to errors of observation? This is the

type of question that we are ever asking, and which we

unconsciously solve whenever we are engaged in scienti c

work. I am now going to pass in review these di erent

categories of problems by discussing in succession what I

have called subjective and objective probability.

II. Probability in Mathematics.—The impossibility

of squaring the circle was shown in 1885, but before

that date all geometers considered this impossibility as

so “probable” that the Académie des Sciences rejected    science and hypothesis214


without examination the, alas! too numerous memoirs on

this subject that a few unhappy madmen sent in every

year. Was the Académie wrong? Evidently not, and it

knew perfectly well that by acting in this manner it did

not run the least risk of sti ing a discovery of moment.

The Académie could not have proved that it was right,

but it knew quite well that its instinct did not deceive

it. If you had asked the Academicians, they would have

answered: “We have compared the probability that an

unknown scientist should have found out what has been

vainly sought for so long, with the probability that there

is one madman the more on the earth, and the latter

has appeared to us the greater.” These are very good

reasons, but there is nothing mathematical about them;

they are purely psychological. If you had pressed them

further, they would have added: “Why do you expect a

particular value of a transcendental function to be an

algebraical number; if   be the root of an algebraical

equation, why do you expect this root to be a period

of the function sin 2x, and why is it not the same with

the other roots of the same equation?” To sum up, they

would have invoked the principle of su cient reason in

its vaguest form. Yet what information could they draw

from it? At most a rule of conduct for the employmentthe calculus of probabilities.215


of their time, which would be more usefully spent at

their ordinary work than in reading a lucubration that

inspired in them a legitimate distrust. But what I called

above objective probability has nothing in common with

this  rst problem. It is otherwise with the second. Let

us consider the  rst 10;000 logarithms that we  nd in

a table. Among these 10;000 logarithms I take one at

random. What is the probability that its third decimal

is an even number? You will say without any hesitation
          1
that the probability is, and in fact if you pick out in
          2
a table the third decimals in these 10;000 numbers you

will  nd nearly as many even digits as odd. Or, if you

prefer it, let us write 10;000 numbers corresponding to

our 10;000 logarithms, writing down for each of these

numbers +1 if the third decimal of the corresponding

logarithm is even, and 1 if odd; and then let us take

the mean of these 10;000 numbers. I do not hesitate

to say that the mean of these 10;000 units is probably

zero, and if I were to calculate it practically, I would

verify that it is extremely small. But this veri cation is

needless. I might have rigorously proved that this mean

is smaller than 0:003. To prove this result I should have

had to make a rather long calculation for which there is

no room here, and for which I may refer the reader to    science and hypothesis216


an article that I published in the Revue générale des Sci-

ences, April 15th, 1899. The only point to which I wish

to draw attention is the following. In this calculation I

had occasion to rest my case on only two facts—namely,

that the  rst and second derivatives of the logarithm re-

main, in the interval considered, between certain limits.

Hence our  rst conclusion is that the property is not

only true of the logarithm but of any continuous func-

tion whatever, since the derivatives of every continuous

function are limited. If I was certain beforehand of the

result, it is because I have often observed analogous facts

for other continuous functions; and next, it is because I

went through in my mind in a more or less unconscious

and imperfect manner the reasoning which led me to

the preceding inequalities, just as a skilled calculator

before  nishing his multiplication takes into account

what it ought to come to approximately. And besides,

since what I call my intuition was only an incomplete

summary of a piece of true reasoning, it is clear that

observation has con rmed my predictions, and that the

objective and subjective probabilities are in agreement.

As a third example I shall choose the following:—The

number u is taken at random and n is a given very large

integer. What is the mean value of sinnu? This problemthe calculus of probabilities.217


has no meaning by itself. To give it one, a convention is

required—namely, we agree that the probability for the

number u to lie between a and a+da is  (a)da; that it is

therefore proportional to the in nitely small interval da,

and is equal to this multiplied by a function  (a), only

depending on a. As for this function I choose it arbitrar-

ily, but I must assume it to be continuous. The value

of sinnu remaining the same when u increases by 2 , I

may without loss of generality assume that u lies between

0 and 2 , and I shall thus be led to suppose that  (a) is

a periodic function whose period is 2 . The mean value

that we seek is readily expressed by a simple integral,

and it is easy to show that this integral is smaller than

            2 MK
                ;
            nK

MKbeing the maximum value of the Kth derivative

of  (u). We see then that if the Kth derivative is  nite,

our mean value will tend towards zero when n increases
                            1
inde nitely, and that more rapidly than.
                            nK+1
The mean value of sinnu when n is very large is there-

fore zero. To de ne this value I required a convention,

but the result remains the same whatever that convention

may be. I have imposed upon myself but slight restric-    science and hypothesis218


tions when I assumed that the function  (a) is continuous

and periodic, and these hypotheses are so natural that we

may ask ourselves how they can be escaped. Examina-

tion of the three preceding examples, so di erent in all

respects, has already given us a glimpse on the one hand

of the rôle of what philosophers call the principle of su -

cient reason, and on the other hand of the importance of

the fact that certain properties are common to all contin-

uous functions. The study of probability in the physical

sciences will lead us to the same result.

III. Probability in the Physical Sciences.—We now

come to the problems which are connected with what

I have called the second degree of ignorance—namely,

those in which we know the law but do not know the ini-

tial state of the system. I could multiply examples, but

I shall take only one. What is the probable present dis-

tribution of the minor planets on the zodiac? We know

they obey the laws of Kepler. We may even, without

changing the nature of the problem, suppose that their

orbits are circular and situated in the same plane, a plane

which we are given. On the other hand, we know abso-

lutely nothing about their initial distribution. However,

we do not hesitate to a rm that this distribution is now

nearly uniform. Why? Let b be the longitude of a minorthe calculus of probabilities.219


planet in the initial epoch—that is to say, the epoch zero.

Let a be its mean motion. Its longitude at the present

time—i.e., at the time t will be at + b. To say that the

present distribution is uniform is to say that the mean

value of the sines and cosines of multiples of at + b is

zero. Why do we assert this? Let us represent our minor

planet by a point in a plane—namely, the point whose

co-ordinates are a and b. All these representative points

will be contained in a certain region of the plane, but

as they are very numerous this region will appear dotted

with points. We know nothing else about the distribu-

tion of the points. Now what do we do when we apply

the calculus of probabilities to such a question as this?

What is the probability that one or more representative

points may be found in a certain portion of the plane?

In our ignorance we are compelled to make an arbitrary

hypothesis. To explain the nature of this hypothesis I

may be allowed to use, instead of a mathematical for-

mula, a crude but concrete image. Let us suppose that

over the surface of our plane has been spread imaginary

matter, the density of which is variable, but varies con-

tinuously. We shall then agree to say that the probable

number of representative points to be found on a cer-

tain portion of the plane is proportional to the quantity    science and hypothesis220


of this imaginary matter which is found there. If there

are, then, two regions of the plane of the same extent,

the probabilities that a representative point of one of our

minor planets is in one or other of these regions will be

as the mean densities of the imaginary matter in one or

other of the regions. Here then are two distributions, one

real, in which the representative points are very numer-

ous, very close together, but discrete like the molecules of

matter in the atomic hypothesis; the other remote from

reality, in which our representative points are replaced by

imaginary continuous matter. We know that the latter

cannot be real, but we are forced to adopt it through our

ignorance. If, again, we had some idea of the real distri-

bution of the representative points, we could arrange it so

that in a region of some extent the density of this imag-

inary continuous matter may be nearly proportional to

the number of representative points, or, if it is preferred,

to the number of atoms which are contained in that re-

gion. Even that is impossible, and our ignorance is so

great that we are forced to choose arbitrarily the func-

tion which de nes the density of our imaginary matter.

We shall be compelled to adopt a hypothesis from which

we can hardly get away; we shall suppose that this func-

tion is continuous. That is su cient, as we shall see, tothe calculus of probabilities.221


enable us to reach our conclusion.

What is at the instant t the probable distribution of

the minor planets—or rather, what is the mean value

of the sine of the longitude at the moment t—i.e., of

sin(at+b)? We made at the outset an arbitrary conven-

tion, but if we adopt it, this probable value is entirely

de ned. Let us decompose the plane into elements of

surface. Consider the value of sin(at + b) at the centre

of each of these elements. Multiply this value by the

surface of the element and by the corresponding density

of the imaginary matter. Let us then take the sum for

all the elements of the plane. This sum, by de nition,

will be the probable mean value we seek, which will thus

be expressed by a double integral. It may be thought

at  rst that this mean value depends on the choice of

the function   which de nes the density of the imagi-

nary matter, and as this function   is arbitrary, we can,

according to the arbitrary choice which we make, ob-

tain a certain mean value. But this is not the case. A

simple calculation shows us that our double integral de-

creases very rapidly as t increases. Thus, I cannot tell

what hypothesis to make as to the probability of this or

that initial distribution, but when once the hypothesis is

made the result will be the same, and this gets me out    science and hypothesis222


of my di culty. Whatever the function   may be, the

mean value tends towards zero as t increases, and as the

minor planets have certainly accomplished a very large

number of revolutions, I may assert that this mean value

is very small. I may give to   any value I choose, with

one restriction: this function must be continuous; and,

in fact, from the point of view of subjective probability,

the choice of a discontinuous function would have been

unreasonable. What reason could I have, for instance, for
                                         
supposing that the initial longitude might be exactly 0,
                      
but that it could not lie between 0and 1?

The di culty reappears if we look at it from the point

of view of objective probability; if we pass from our imag-

inary distribution in which the supposititious matter was

assumed to be continuous, to the real distribution in

which our representative points are formed as discrete

atoms. The mean value of sin(at+b) will be represented

quite simply by

      1X
            sin(at + b);
      n

n being the number of minor planets. Instead of a double

integral referring to a continuous function, we shall have

a sum of discrete terms. However, no one will seriously

doubt that this mean value is practically very small. Ourthe calculus of probabilities.223


representative points being very close together, our dis-

crete sum will in general di er very little from an integral.

An integral is the limit towards which a sum of terms

tends when the number of these terms is inde nitely in-

creased. If the terms are very numerous, the sum will

di er very little from its limit—that is to say, from the

integral, and what I said of the latter will still be true of

the sum itself. But there are exceptions. If, for instance,
                   
for all the minor planets b = at, the longitude of
                  2
                           
all the planets at the time t would be, and the mean
                          2
value in question would be evidently unity. For this to

be the case at the time 0, the minor planets must have

all been lying on a kind of spiral of peculiar form, with

its spires very close together. All will admit that such an

initial distribution is extremely improbable (and even if

it were realised, the distribution would not be uniform at

the present time—for example, on the 1st January 1900;

but it would become so a few years later). Why, then, do

we think this initial distribution improbable? This must

be explained, for if we are wrong in rejecting as improb-

able this absurd hypothesis, our inquiry breaks down,

and we can no longer a rm anything on the subject of

the probability of this or that present distribution. Once    science and hypothesis224


more we shall invoke the principle of su cient reason, to

which we must always recur. We might admit that at

the beginning the planets were distributed almost in a

straight line. We might admit that they were irregularly

distributed. But it seems to us that there is no su cient

reason for the unknown cause that gave them birth to

have acted along a curve so regular and yet so compli-

cated, which would appear to have been expressly chosen

so that the distribution at the present day would not be

uniform.

IV. Rouge et Noir.—The questions raised by games of

chance, such as roulette, are, fundamentally, quite analo-

gous to those we have just treated. For example, a wheel

is divided into a large number of equal compartments, al-

ternately red and black. A ball is spun round the wheel,

and after having moved round a number of times, it stops

in front of one of these sub-divisions. The probability
                        1
that the division is red is obviously. The needle de-
                        2
scribes an angle  , including several complete revolutions.

I do not know what is the probability that the ball is

spun with such a force that this angle should lie between

  and  +d , but I can make a convention. I can suppose

that this probability is  ( )d . As for the function  ( ),

I can choose it in an entirely arbitrary manner. I havethe calculus of probabilities.225


nothing to guide me in my choice, but I am naturally in-

duced to suppose the function to be continuous. Let   be

a length (measured on the circumference of the circle of

radius unity) of each red and black compartment. We

have to calculate the integral of  ( )d , extending it on

the one hand to all the red, and on the other hand to

all the black compartments, and to compare the results.

Consider an interval 2  comprising two consecutive red

and black compartments. Let M and m be the maxi-

mum and minimum values of the function  ( ) in this

interval. The integral extended to the red compartments
      P
will be smaller thanM ; extended to the black it will
  P
be greater thanm . The di erence will therefore be
P
smaller than(M m) . But if the function   is sup-

posed continuous, and if on the other hand the interval  

is very small with respect to the total angle described by

the needle, the di erence Mm will be very small. The

di erence of the two integrals will be therefore very small,
                          1
and the probability will be very nearly. We see that
                          2
without knowing anything of the function   we must act
          1
as if the probability were. And on the other hand it ex-
          2
plains why, from the objective point of view, if I watch a

certain number of coups, observation will give me almost

as many black coups as red. All the players know this    science and hypothesis226


objective law; but it leads them into a remarkable error,

which has often been exposed, but into which they are

always falling. When the red has won, for example, six

times running, they bet on black, thinking that they are

playing an absolutely safe game, because they say it is a

very rare thing for the red to win seven times running. In
                            1
reality their probability of winning is still. Observation
                            2
shows, it is true, that the series of seven consecutive reds

is very rare, but series of six reds followed by a black are

also very rare. They have noticed the rarity of the series

of seven reds; if they have not remarked the rarity of six

reds and a black, it is only because such series strike the

attention less.

V. The Probability of Causes.—We now come to the

problems of the probability of causes, the most impor-

tant from the point of view of scienti c applications. Two

stars, for instance, are very close together on the celes-

tial sphere. Is this apparent contiguity a mere e ect of

chance? Are these stars, although almost on the same

visual ray, situated at very di erent distances from the

earth, and therefore very far indeed from one another? or

does the apparent correspond to a real contiguity? This

is a problem on the probability of causes.

First of all, I recall that at the outset of all problemsthe calculus of probabilities.227


of probability of e ects that have occupied our attention

up to now, we have had to use a convention which was

more or less justi ed; and if in most cases the result was

to a certain extent independent of this convention, it was

only the condition of certain hypotheses which enabled

us à priori to reject discontinuous functions, for example,

or certain absurd conventions. We shall again  nd some-

thing analogous to this when we deal with the probability

of causes. An e ect may be produced by the cause a or

by the cause b. The e ect has just been observed. We

ask the probability that it is due to the cause a. This

is an à posteriori probability of cause. But I could not

calculate it, if a convention more or less justi ed did not

tell me in advance what is the à priori probability for

the cause a to come into play—I mean the probability of

this event to some one who had not observed the e ect.

To make my meaning clearer, I go back to the game of

écarté mentioned before. My adversary deals for the  rst

time and turns up a king. What is the probability that
                                        8
he is a sharper? The formulæ ordinarily taught give,
                                        9
a result which is obviously rather surprising. If we look

at it closer, we see that the conclusion is arrived at as if,

before sitting down at the table, I had considered that

there was one chance in two that my adversary was not    science and hypothesis228


honest. An absurd hypothesis, because in that case I

should certainly not have played with him; and this ex-

plains the absurdity of the conclusion. The function on

the à priori probability was unjusti ed, and that is why

the conclusion of the à posteriori probability led me into

an inadmissible result. The importance of this prelimi-

nary convention is obvious. I shall even add that if none

were made, the problem of the à posteriori probability

would have no meaning. It must be always made either

explicitly or tacitly.

Let us pass on to an example of a more scienti c

character. I require to determine an experimental law;

this law, when discovered, can be represented by a curve.

I make a certain number of isolated observations, each

of which may be represented by a point. When I have

obtained these di erent points, I draw a curve between

them as carefully as possible, giving my curve a regular

form, avoiding sharp angles, accentuated in exions, and

any sudden variation of the radius of curvature. This

curve will represent to me the probable law, and not only

will it give me the values of the functions intermediary to

those which have been observed, but it also gives me the

observed values more accurately than direct observation

does; that is why I make the curve pass near the pointsthe calculus of probabilities.229


and not through the points themselves.

Here, then, is a problem in the probability of causes.

The e ects are the measurements I have recorded; they

depend on the combination of two causes—the true law

of the phenomenon and errors of observation. Know-

ing the e ects, we have to  nd the probability that the

phenomenon shall obey this law or that, and that the

observations have been accompanied by this or that er-

ror. The most probable law, therefore, corresponds to the

curve we have traced, and the most probable error is rep-

resented by the distance of the corresponding point from

that curve. But the problem has no meaning if before

the observations I had an à priori idea of the probability

of this law or that, or of the chances of error to which

I am exposed. If my instruments are good (and I knew

whether this is so or not before beginning the observa-

tions), I shall not draw the curve far from the points

which represent the rough measurements. If they are in-

ferior, I may draw it a little farther from the points, so

that I may get a less sinuous curve; much will be sacri-

 ced to regularity.

Why, then, do I draw a curve without sinuosities?

Because I consider à priori a law represented by a con-

tinuous function (or function the derivatives of which to    science and hypothesis230


a high order are small), as more probable than a law not

satisfying those conditions. But for this conviction the

problem would have no meaning; interpolation would be

impossible; no law could be deduced from a  nite number

of observations; science would cease to exist.

Fifty years ago physicists considered, other things be-

ing equal, a simple law as more probable than a compli-

cated law. This principle was even invoked in favour

of Mariotte’s law as against that of Regnault. But this

belief is now repudiated; and yet, how many times are

we compelled to act as though we still held it! However

that may be, what remains of this tendency is the be-

lief in continuity, and as we have just seen, if the belief in

continuity were to disappear, experimental science would

become impossible.

VI. The Theory of Errors.—We are thus brought to

consider the theory of errors which is directly connected

with the problem of the probability of causes. Here again

we  nd e ects—to wit, a certain number of irreconcilable

observations, and we try to  nd the causes which are, on

the one hand, the true value of the quantity to be mea-

sured, and, on the other, the error made in each isolated

observation. We must calculate the probable à posteri-

ori value of each error, and therefore the probable valuethe calculus of probabilities.231


of the quantity to be measured. But, as I have just ex-

plained, we cannot undertake this calculation unless we

admit à priori—i.e., before any observations are made—

that there is a law of the probability of errors. Is there

a law of errors? The law to which all calculators assent

is Gauss’s law, that is represented by a certain transcen-

dental curve known as the “bell.”

But it is  rst of all necessary to recall the classic dis-

tinction between systematic and accidental errors. If the

metre with which we measure a length is too long, the

number we get will be too small, and it will be no use to

measure several times—that is a systematic error. If we

measure with an accurate metre, we may make a mistake,

and  nd the length sometimes too large and sometimes

too small, and when we take the mean of a large num-

ber of measurements, the error will tend to grow small.

These are accidental errors.

It is clear that systematic errors do not satisfy Gauss’s

law, but do accidental errors satisfy it? Numerous proofs

have been attempted, almost all of them crude paralo-

gisms. But starting from the following hypotheses we

may prove Gauss’s law: the error is the result of a very

large number of partial and independent errors; each par-

tial error is very small and obeys any law of probability    science and hypothesis232


whatever, provided the probability of a positive error is

the same as that of an equal negative error. It is clear

that these conditions will be often, but not always, ful-

 lled, and we may reserve the name of accidental for er-

rors which satisfy them.

We see that the method of least squares is not legit-

imate in every case; in general, physicists are more dis-

trustful of it than astronomers. This is no doubt because

the latter, apart from the systematic errors to which

they and the physicists are subject alike, have to contend

with an extremely important source of error which is en-

tirely accidental—I mean atmospheric undulations. So it

is very curious to hear a discussion between a physicist

and an astronomer about a method of observation. The

physicist, persuaded that one good measurement is worth

more than many bad ones, is pre-eminently concerned

with the elimination by means of every precaution of the

 nal systematic errors; the astronomer retorts: “But you

can only observe a small number of stars, and accidental

errors will not disappear.”

What conclusion must we draw? Must we continue to

use the method of least squares? We must distinguish.

We have eliminated all the systematic errors of which

we have any suspicion; we are quite certain that therethe calculus of probabilities.233


are others still, but we cannot detect them; and yet we

must make up our minds and adopt a de nitive value

which will be regarded as the probable value; and for

that purpose it is clear that the best thing we can do is

to apply Gauss’s law. We have only applied a practical

rule referring to subjective probability. And there is no

more to be said.

Yet we want to go farther and say that not only the

probable value is so much, but that the probable error in

the result is so much. This is absolutely invalid: it would

be true only if we were sure that all the systematic errors

were eliminated, and of that we know absolutely nothing.

We have two series of observations; by applying the law

of least squares we  nd that the probable error in the

 rst series is twice as small as in the second. The second

series may, however, be more accurate than the  rst, be-

cause the  rst is perhaps a ected by a large systematic

error. All that we can say is, that the  rst series is prob-

ably better than the second because its accidental error

is smaller, and that we have no reason for a rming that

the systematic error is greater for one of the series than

for the other, our ignorance on this point being absolute.

VII. Conclusions.—In the preceding lines I have set

several problems, and have given no solution. I do not re-    science and hypothesis234


gret this, for perhaps they will invite the reader to re ect

on these delicate questions.

However that may be, there are certain points which

seem to be well established. To undertake the calcula-

tion of any probability, and even for that calculation to

have any meaning at all, we must admit, as a point of

departure, an hypothesis or convention which has always

something arbitrary about it. In the choice of this con-

vention we can be guided only by the principle of su -

cient reason. Unfortunately, this principle is very vague

and very elastic, and in the cursory examination we have

just made we have seen it assume di erent forms. The

form under which we meet it most often is the belief in

continuity, a belief which it would be di cult to justify

by apodeictic reasoning, but without which all science

would be impossible. Finally, the problems to which the

calculus of probabilities may be applied with pro t are

those in which the result is independent of the hypothe-

sis made at the outset, provided only that this hypothesis

satis es the condition of continuity.                      1
    CHAPTER XII.

  OPTICS AND ELECTRICITY.

Fresnel’s Theory.—The best example that can be chosen

is the theory of light and its relations to the theory of elec-

tricity. It is owing to Fresnel that the science of optics

is more advanced than any other branch of physics. The

theory called the theory of undulations forms a complete

whole, which is satisfying to the mind; but we must not

ask from it what it cannot give us. The object of math-

ematical theories is not to reveal to us the real nature

of things; that would be an unreasonable claim. Their

only object is to co-ordinate the physical laws with which

physical experiment makes us acquainted, the enuncia-

tion of which, without the aid of mathematics, we should

be unable to e ect. Whether the ether exists or not mat-

ters little—let us leave that to the metaphysicians; what

is essential for us is, that everything happens as if it ex-

isted, and that this hypothesis is found to be suitable for

the explanation of phenomena. After all, have we any

other reason for believing in the existence of material ob-

1
This chapter is mainly taken from the prefaces of two of my
books—Théorie Mathématique de la lumière (Paris: Naud, 1889),
and Électricité et Optique (Paris: Naud, 1901).    science and hypothesis236


jects? That, too, is only a convenient hypothesis; only, it

will never cease to be so, while some day, no doubt, the

ether will be thrown aside as useless.

But at the present moment the laws of optics, and

the equations which translate them into the language of

analysis, hold good—at least as a  rst approximation. It

will therefore be always useful to study a theory which

brings these equations into connection.

The undulatory theory is based on a molecular hy-

pothesis; this is an advantage to those who think they

can discover the cause under the law. But others  nd

in it a reason for distrust; and this distrust seems to

me as unfounded as the illusions of the former. These

hypotheses play but a secondary rôle. They may be sac-

ri ced, and the sole reason why this is not generally done

is, that it would involve a certain loss of lucidity in the

explanation. In fact, if we look at it a little closer we

shall see that we borrow from molecular hypotheses but

two things—the principle of the conservation of energy,

and the linear form of the equations, which is the general

law of small movements as of all small variations. This

explains why most of the conclusions of Fresnel remain

unchanged when we adopt the electro-magnetic theory of

light.    optics and electricity.237


Maxwell’s Theory.—We all know that it was Maxwell

who connected by a slender tie two branches of physics—

optics and electricity—until then unsuspected of having

anything in common. Thus blended in a larger aggre-

gate, in a higher harmony, Fresnel’s theory of optics did

not perish. Parts of it are yet alive, and their mutual

relations are still the same. Only, the language which we

use to express them has changed; and, on the other hand,

Maxwell has revealed to us other relations, hitherto un-

suspected, between the di erent branches of optics and

the domain of electricity.

The  rst time a French reader opens Maxwell’s book,

his admiration is tempered with a feeling of uneasiness,

and often of distrust.

It is only after prolonged study, and at the cost of

much e ort, that this feeling disappears. Some minds of

high calibre never lose this feeling. Why is it so di cult

for the ideas of this English scientist to become accli-

matised among us? No doubt the education received by

most enlightened Frenchmen predisposes them to appre-

ciate precision and logic more than any other qualities. In

this respect the old theories of mathematical physics gave

us complete satisfaction. All our masters, from Laplace

to Cauchy, proceeded along the same lines. Starting    science and hypothesis238


with clearly enunciated hypotheses, they deduced from

them all their consequences with mathematical rigour,

and then compared them with experiment. It seemed to

be their aim to give to each of the branches of physics

the same precision as to celestial mechanics.

A mind accustomed to admire such models is not eas-

ily satis ed with a theory. Not only will it not tolerate

the least appearance of contradiction, but it will expect

the di erent parts to be logically connected with one an-

other, and will require the number of hypotheses to be

reduced to a minimum.

This is not all; there will be other demands which

appear to me to be less reasonable. Behind the mat-

ter of which our senses are aware, and which is made

known to us by experiment, such a thinker will expect to

see another kind of matter—the only true matter in its

opinion—which will no longer have anything but purely

geometrical qualities, and the atoms of which will be

mathematical points subject to the laws of dynamics

alone. And yet he will try to represent to himself, by an

unconscious contradiction, these invisible and colourless

atoms, and therefore to bring them as close as possible

to ordinary matter.

Then only will he be thoroughly satis ed, and he will    optics and electricity.239


then imagine that he has penetrated the secret of the

universe. Even if the satisfaction is fallacious, it is none

the less di cult to give it up. Thus, on opening the pages

of Maxwell, a Frenchman expects to  nd a theoretical

whole, as logical and as precise as the physical optics that

is founded on the hypothesis of the ether. He is thus

preparing for himself a disappointment which I should

like the reader to avoid; so I will warn him at once of

what he will  nd and what he will not  nd in Maxwell.

Maxwell does not give a mechanical explanation of

electricity and magnetism; he con nes himself to show-

ing that such an explanation is possible. He shows that

the phenomena of optics are only a particular case of

electro-magnetic phenomena. From the whole theory of

electricity a theory of light can be immediately deduced.

Unfortunately the converse is not true; it is not always

easy to  nd a complete explanation of electrical phenom-

ena. In particular it is not easy if we take as our starting-

point Fresnel’s theory; to do so, no doubt, would be im-

possible; but none the less we must ask ourselves if we

are compelled to surrender admirable results which we

thought we had de nitively acquired. That seems a step

backwards, and many sound intellects will not willingly

allow of this.    science and hypothesis240


Should the reader consent to set some bounds to

his hopes, he will still come across other di culties.

The English scientist does not try to erect a unique,

de nitive, and well-arranged building; he seems to raise

rather a large number of provisional and independent

constructions, between which communication is di -

cult and sometimes impossible. Take, for instance, the

chapter in which electro-static attractions are explained

by the pressures and tensions of the dielectric medium.

This chapter might be suppressed without the rest of the

book being thereby less clear or less complete, and yet it

contains a theory which is self-su cient, and which can

be understood without reading a word of what precedes

or follows. But it is not only independent of the rest of

the book; it is di cult to reconcile it with the fundamen-

tal ideas of the volume. Maxwell does not even attempt

to reconcile it; he merely says: “I have not been able to

make the next step—namely, to account by mechanical

considerations for these stresses in the dielectric.”

This example will be su cient to show what I mean;

I could quote many others. Thus, who would suspect

on reading the pages devoted to magnetic rotatory po-

larisation that there is an identity between optical and

magnetic phenomena?    optics and electricity.241


We must not  atter ourselves that we have avoided

every contradiction, but we ought to make up our minds.

Two contradictory theories, provided that they are kept

from overlapping, and that we do not look to  nd in

them the explanation of things, may, in fact, be very

useful instruments of research; and perhaps the reading

of Maxwell would be less suggestive if he had not opened

up to us so many new and divergent ways. But the fun-

damental idea is masked, as it were. So far is this the

case, that in most works that are popularised, this idea

is the only point which is left completely untouched. To

show the importance of this, I think I ought to explain in

what this fundamental idea consists; but for that purpose

a short digression is necessary.

The Mechanical Explanation of Physical Phenom-

ena.—In every physical phenomenon there is a certain

number of parameters which are reached directly by ex-

periment, and which can be measured. I shall call them

the parameters q. Observation next teaches us the laws

of the variations of these parameters, and these laws

can be generally stated in the form of di erential equa-

tions which connect together the parameters q and time.

What can be done to give a mechanical interpretation

to such a phenomenon? We may endeavour to explain    science and hypothesis242


it, either by the movements of ordinary matter, or by

those of one or more hypothetical  uids. These  uids

will be considered as formed of a very large number of

isolated molecules m. When may we say that we have

a complete mechanical explanation of the phenomenon?

It will be, on the one hand, when we know the di eren-

tial equations which are satis ed by the co-ordinates of

these hypothetical molecules m, equations which must,

in addition, conform to the laws of dynamics; and, on

the other hand, when we know the relations which de ne

the co-ordinates of the molecules m as functions of the

parameters q, attainable by experiment. These equa-

tions, as I have said, should conform to the principles

of dynamics, and, in particular, to the principle of the

conservation of energy, and to that of least action.

The  rst of these two principles teaches us that the

total energy is constant, and may be divided into two

parts:—

(1) Kinetic energy, or vis viva, which depends on the

masses of the hypothetical molecules m, and on their

velocities. This I shall call T. (2) The potential en-

ergy which depends only on the co-ordinates of these

molecules, and this I shall call U. It is the sum of the

energies T and U that is constant.    optics and electricity.243


Now what are we taught by the principle of least ac-

tion? It teaches us that to pass from the initial position

occupied at the instant t0to the  nal position occupied at

the instant t1, the system must describe such a path that

in the interval of time between the instant t0and t1, the

mean value of the action—i.e., the di erence between the

two energies T and U, must be as small as possible. The

 rst of these two principles is, moreover, a consequence

of the second. If we know the functions T and U, this

second principle is su cient to determine the equations

of motion.

Among the paths which enable us to pass from one po-

sition to another, there is clearly one for which the mean

value of the action is smaller than for all the others. In

addition, there is only one such path; and it follows from

this, that the principle of least action is su cient to de-

termine the path followed, and therefore the equations of

motion. We thus obtain what are called the equations of

Lagrange. In these equations the independent variables

are the co-ordinates of the hypothetical molecules m; but

I now assume that we take for the variables the parame-

ters q, which are directly accessible to experiment.

The two parts of the energy should then be expressed

as a function of the parameters q and their derivatives;    science and hypothesis244


it is clear that it is under this form that they will appear

to the experimenter. The latter will naturally endeavour

to de ne kinetic and potential energy by the aid of quan-
                1
tities he can directly observe.If this be granted, the

system will always proceed from one position to another

by such a path that the mean value of the action is a min-

imum. It matters little that T and U are now expressed

by the aid of the parameters q and their derivatives; it

matters little that it is also by the aid of these param-

eters that we de ne the initial and  nal positions; the

principle of least action will always remain true.

Now here again, of the whole of the paths which lead

from one position to another, there is one and only one

for which the mean action is a minimum. The principle

of least action is therefore su cient for the determination

of the di erential equations which de ne the variations

of the parameters q. The equations thus obtained are

another form of Lagrange’s equations.

To form these equations we need not know the re-

lations which connect the parameters q with the co-

1
We may add that U will depend only on the q parameters,
that T will depend on them and their derivatives with respect to
time, and will be a homogeneous polynomial of the second degree
with respect to these derivatives.    optics and electricity.245


ordinates of the hypothetical molecules, nor the masses

of the molecules, nor the expression of U as a function

of the co-ordinates of these molecules. All we need know

is the expression of U as a function of the parameters q,

and that of T as a function of the parameters q and

their derivatives—i.e., the expressions of the kinetic and

potential energy in terms of experimental data.

One of two things must now happen. Either for a

convenient choice of T and U the Lagrangian equations,

constructed as we have indicated, will be identical with

the di erential equations deduced from experiment, or

there will be no functions T and U for which this identity

takes place. In the latter case it is clear that no mechan-

ical explanation is possible. The necessary condition for

a mechanical explanation to be possible is therefore this:

that we may choose the functions T and U so as to sat-

isfy the principle of least action, and of the conservation

of energy. Besides, this condition is su cient. Suppose,

in fact, that we have found a function U of the parame-

ters q, which represents one of the parts of energy, and

that the part of the energy which we represent by T is a

function of the parameters q and their derivatives; that

it is a polynomial of the second degree with respect to

its derivatives, and  nally that the Lagrangian equations    science and hypothesis246


formed by the aid of these two functions T and U are

in conformity with the data of the experiment. How can

we deduce from this a mechanical explanation? U must

be regarded as the potential energy of a system of which

T is the kinetic energy. There is no di culty as far as

U is concerned, but can T be regarded as the vis viva of

a material system?

It is easily shown that this is always possible, and

in an unlimited number of ways. I will be content with

referring the reader to the pages of the preface of my

Électricité et Optique for further details. Thus, if the

principle of least action cannot be satis ed, no mechan-

ical explanation is possible; if it can be satis ed, there

is not only one explanation, but an unlimited number,

whence it follows that since there is one there must be

an unlimited number.

One more remark. Among the quantities that may

be reached by experiment directly we shall consider some

as the co-ordinates of our hypothetical molecules, some

will be our parameters q, and the rest will be regarded

as dependent not only on the co-ordinates but on the

velocities—or what comes to the same thing, we look on

them as derivatives of the parameters q, or as combina-

tions of these parameters and their derivatives.    optics and electricity.247


Here then a question occurs: among all these quan-

tities measured experimentally which shall we choose to

represent the parameters q? and which shall we prefer

to regard as the derivatives of these parameters? This

choice remains arbitrary to a large extent, but a mechan-

ical explanation will be possible if it is done so as to

satisfy the principle of least action.

Next, Maxwell asks: Can this choice and that of the

two energies T and U be made so that electric phenom-

ena will satisfy this principle? Experiment shows us

that the energy of an electro-magnetic  eld decomposes

into electro-static and electro-dynamic energy. Maxwell

recognised that if we regard the former as the poten-

tial energy U, and the latter as the kinetic energy T,

and that if on the other hand we take the electro-static

charges of the conductors as the parameters q, and the

intensity of the currents as derivatives of other parame-

ters q—under these conditions, Maxwell has recognised

that electric phenomena satisfy the principle of least ac-

tion. He was then certain of a mechanical explanation.

If he had expounded this theory at the beginning of his

 rst volume, instead of relegating it to a corner of the

second, it would not have escaped the attention of most

readers. If therefore a phenomenon allows of a complete    science and hypothesis248


mechanical explanation, it allows of an unlimited num-

ber of others, which will equally take into account all the

particulars revealed by experiment. And this is con rmed

by the history of every branch of physics. In Optics, for

instance, Fresnel believed vibration to be perpendicular

to the plane of polarisation; Neumann holds that it is

parallel to that plane. For a long time an experimentum

crucis was sought for, which would enable us to decide

between these two theories, but in vain. In the same way,

without going out of the domain of electricity, we  nd

that the theory of two  uids and the single  uid theory

equally account in a satisfactory manner for all the laws

of electro-statics. All these facts are easily explained,

thanks to the properties of the Lagrange equations.

It is easy now to understand Maxwell’s fundamental

idea. To demonstrate the possibility of a mechanical ex-

planation of electricity we need not trouble to  nd the

explanation itself; we need only know the expression of

the two functions T and U, which are the two parts of

energy, and to form with these two functions Lagrange’s

equations, and then to compare these equations with the

experimental laws.

How shall we choose from all the possible explana-

tions one in which the help of experiment will be want-    optics and electricity.249


ing? The day will perhaps come when physicists will no

longer concern themselves with questions which are inac-

cessible to positive methods, and will leave them to the

metaphysicians. That day has not yet come; man does

not so easily resign himself to remaining for ever ignorant

of the causes of things. Our choice cannot be therefore

any longer guided by considerations in which personal

appreciation plays too large a part. There are, however,

solutions which all will reject because of their fantastic

nature, and others which all will prefer because of their

simplicity. As far as magnetism and electricity are con-

cerned, Maxwell abstained from making any choice. It is

not that he has a systematic contempt for all that posi-

tive methods cannot reach, as may be seen from the time

he has devoted to the kinetic theory of gases. I may

add that if in his magnum opus he develops no complete

explanation, he has attempted one in an article in the

Philosophical Magazine. The strangeness and the com-

plexity of the hypotheses he found himself compelled to

make, led him afterwards to withdraw it.

The same spirit is found throughout his whole work.

He throws into relief the essential—i.e., what is common

to all theories; everything that suits only a particular the-

ory is passed over almost in silence. The reader therefore    science and hypothesis250


 nds himself in the presence of form nearly devoid of

matter, which at  rst he is tempted to take as a fugi-

tive and unassailable phantom. But the e orts he is thus

compelled to make force him to think, and eventually he

sees that there is often something rather arti cial in the

theoretical “aggregates” which he once admired.    CHAPTER XIII.

      ELECTRO-DYNAMICS.

The history of electro-dynamics is very instructive from

our point of view. The title of Ampère’s immortal work

is, Théorie des phénomènes electro-dynamiques, unique-

ment fondée sur expérience. He therefore imagined that

he had made no hypotheses; but as we shall not be long

in recognising, he was mistaken; only, of these hypotheses

he was quite unaware. On the other hand, his successors

see them clearly enough, because their attention is at-

tracted by the weak points in Ampère’s solution. They

made fresh hypotheses, but this time deliberately. How

many times they had to change them before they reached

the classic system, which is perhaps even now not quite

de nitive, we shall see.

I. Ampère’s Theory.—In Ampère’s experimental

study of the mutual action of currents, he has oper-

ated, and he could operate only, with closed currents.

This was not because he denied the existence or possi-

bility of open currents. If two conductors are positively

and negatively charged and brought into communication

by a wire, a current is set up which passes from one to

the other until the two potentials are equal. According    science and hypothesis252


to the ideas of Ampère’s time, this was considered to be

an open current; the current was known to pass from

the  rst conductor to the second, but they did not know

it returned from the second to the  rst. All currents

of this kind were therefore considered by Ampère to be

open currents—for instance, the currents of discharge of

a condenser; he was unable to experiment on them, their

duration being too short. Another kind of open current

may be imagined. Suppose we have two conductors

A and B connected by a wire AMB. Small conducting

masses in motion are  rst of all placed in contact with

the conductor B, receive an electric charge, and leav-

ing B are set in motion along a path BNA, carrying

their charge with them. On coming into contact with A

they lose their charge, which then returns to B along the

wire AMB. Now here we have, in a sense, a closed circuit,

since the electricity describes the closed circuit BNAMB;

but the two parts of the current are quite di erent. In

the wire AMB the electricity is displaced through a  xed

conductor like a voltaic current, overcoming an ohmic

resistance and developing heat; we say that it is dis-

placed by conduction. In the part BNA the electricity

is carried by a moving conductor, and is said to be dis-

placed by convection. If therefore the convection current    electro-dynamics.253


is considered to be perfectly analogous to the conduction

current, the circuit BNAMB is closed; if on the contrary

the convection current is not a “true current,” and, for

instance, does not act on the magnet, there is only the

conduction current AMB, which is open. For example, if

we connect by a wire the poles of a Holtz machine, the

charged rotating disc transfers the electricity by convec-

tion from one pole to the other, and it returns to the

 rst pole by conduction through the wire. But currents

of this kind are very di cult to produce with appreciable

intensity; in fact, with the means at Ampère’s disposal

we may almost say it was impossible.

To sum up, Ampère could conceive of the existence

of two kinds of open currents, but he could experiment

on neither, because they were not strong enough, or be-

cause their duration was too short. Experiment therefore

could only show him the action of a closed current on a

closed current—or more accurately, the action of a closed

current on a portion of current, because a current can be

made to describe a closed circuit, of which part may be

in motion and the other part  xed. The displacements

of the moving part may be studied under the action of

another closed current. On the other hand, Ampère had

no means of studying the action of an open current either    science and hypothesis254


on a closed or on another open current.

1. The Case of Closed Currents.—In the case of the

mutual action of two closed currents, experiment revealed

to Ampère remarkably simple laws. The following will be

useful to us in the sequel:—

(1) If the intensity of the currents is kept constant,

and if the two circuits, after having undergone any dis-

placements and deformations whatever, return  nally to

their initial positions, the total work done by the electro-

dynamical actions is zero. In other words, there is an

electro-dynamical potential of the two circuits propor-

tional to the product of their intensities, and depending

on the form and relative positions of the circuits; the

work done by the electro-dynamical actions is equal to

the change of this potential.

(2) The action of a closed solenoid is zero.

(3) The action of a circuit C on another voltaic cir-
0
cuit Cdepends only on the “magnetic  eld” developed

by the circuit C. At each point in space we can, in fact,

de ne in magnitude and direction a certain force called

“magnetic force,” which enjoys the following properties:—

(a) The force exercised by C on a magnetic pole is

applied to that pole, and is equal to the magnetic force

multiplied by the magnetic mass of the pole.    electro-dynamics.255


(b) A very short magnetic needle tends to take the

direction of the magnetic force, and the couple to which

it tends to reduce is proportional to the product of the

magnetic force, the magnetic moment of the needle, and

the sine of the dip of the needle.
        0
(c) If the circuit Cis displaced, the amount of the
                                      0
work done by the electro-dynamic action of C on Cwill

be equal to the increment of “ ow of magnetic force”

which passes through the circuit.

2. Action of a Closed Current on a Portion of Cur-

rent.—Ampère being unable to produce the open current

properly so called, had only one way of studying the ac-

tion of a closed current on a portion of current. This was

by operating on a circuit C composed of two parts, one

movable and the other  xed. The movable part was, for

instance, a movable wire  , the ends   and  of which

could slide along a  xed wire. In one of the positions of

the movable wire the end   rested on the point A, and

the end  on the point B of the  xed wire. The current

ran from   to —i.e., from A to B along the movable

wire, and then from B to A along the  xed wire. This

current was therefore closed.

In the second position, the movable wire having
                                  00
slipped, the points   and  were respectively at Aand B    science and hypothesis256


on the  xed wire. The current ran from   to —i.e.,
000
from Ato Bon the movable wire, and returned from B
                                      0
to B, and then from B to A, and then from A to A—all

on the  xed wire. This current was also closed. If a simi-

lar circuit be exposed to the action of a closed current C,

the movable part will be displaced just as if it were acted

on by a force. Ampère admits that the force, apparently

acting on the movable part AB, representing the action

of C on the portion   of the current, remains the same

whether an open current runs through  , stopping at

  and , or whether a closed current runs  rst to  and

then returns to   through the  xed portion of the circuit.

This hypothesis seemed natural enough, and Ampère in-

nocently assumed it; nevertheless the hypothesis is not

a necessity, for we shall presently see that Helmholtz

rejected it. However that may be, it enabled Ampère,

although he had never produced an open current, to lay

down the laws of the action of a closed current on an

open current, or even on an element of current. They

are simple:—

(1) The force acting on an element of current is ap-

plied to that element; it is normal to the element and to

the magnetic force, and proportional to that component

of the magnetic force which is normal to the element.    electro-dynamics.257


(2) The action of a closed solenoid on an element of

current is zero. But the electro-dynamic potential has

disappeared—i.e., when a closed and an open current of

constant intensities return to their initial positions, the

total work done is not zero.

3. Continuous Rotations.—The most remarkable

electro-dynamical experiments are those in which con-

tinuous rotations are produced, and which are called

unipolar induction experiments. A magnet may turn

about its axis; a current passes  rst through a  xed wire

and then enters the magnet by the pole N, for instance,

passes through half the magnet, and emerges by a sliding

contact and re-enters the  xed wire. The magnet then

begins to rotate continuously. This is Faraday’s exper-

iment. How is it possible? If it were a question of two
                          0
circuits of invariable form, C  xed and Cmovable about

an axis, the latter would never take up a position of con-

tinuous rotation; in fact, there is an electro-dynamical

potential; there must therefore be a position of equi-

librium when the potential is a maximum. Continuous
                                        0
rotations are therefore possible only when the circuit Cis

composed of two parts—one  xed, and the other movable

about an axis, as in the case of Faraday’s experiment.

Here again it is convenient to draw a distinction. The    science and hypothesis258


passage from the  xed to the movable part, or vice versâ,

may take place either by simple contact, the same point

of the movable part remaining constantly in contact with

the same point of the  xed part, or by sliding contact,

the same point of the movable part coming successively

into contact with the di erent points of the  xed part.

It is only in the second case that there can be contin-

uous rotation. This is what then happens:—the system

tends to take up a position of equilibrium; but, when at

the point of reaching that position, the sliding contact

puts the moving part in contact with a fresh point in the

 xed part; it changes the connexions and therefore the

conditions of equilibrium, so that as the position of equi-

librium is ever eluding, so to speak, the system which is

trying to reach it, rotation may take place inde nitely.

Ampère admits that the action of the circuit on the
    00
movable part of Cis the same as if the  xed part of C

did not exist, and therefore as if the current passing

through the movable part were an open current. He con-

cluded that the action of a closed on an open current, or

vice versâ, that of an open current on a  xed current, may

give rise to continuous rotation. But this conclusion de-

pends on the hypothesis which I have enunciated, and to

which, as I said above, Helmholtz declined to subscribe.    electro-dynamics.259


4. Mutual Action of Two Open Currents.—As far as

the mutual action of two open currents, and in particular

that of two elements of current, is concerned, all exper-

iment breaks down. Ampère falls back on hypothesis.

He assumes: (1) that the mutual action of two elements

reduces to a force acting along their join; (2) that the ac-

tion of two closed currents is the resultant of the mutual

actions of their di erent elements, which are the same as

if these elements were isolated.

The remarkable thing is that here again Ampère

makes two hypotheses without being aware of it. How-

ever that may be, these two hypotheses, together with

the experiments on closed currents, su ce to determine

completely the law of mutual action of two elements.

But then, most of the simple laws we have met in the

case of closed currents are no longer true. In the  rst

place, there is no electro-dynamical potential; nor was

there any, as we have seen, in the case of a closed cur-

rent acting on an open current. Next, there is, properly

speaking, no magnetic force; and we have above de ned

this force in three di erent ways: (1) By the action

on a magnetic pole; (2) by the director couple which

orientates the magnetic needle; (3) by the action on an

element of current.    science and hypothesis260


In the case with which we are immediately concerned,

not only are these three de nitions not in harmony, but

each has lost its meaning:—

(1) A magnetic pole is no longer acted on by a unique

force applied to that pole. We have seen, in fact, the

action of an element of current on a pole is not applied

to the pole but to the element; it may, moreover, be

replaced by a force applied to the pole and by a couple.

(2) The couple which acts on the magnetic needle is

no longer a simple director couple, for its moment with

respect to the axis of the needle is not zero. It decom-

poses into a director couple, properly so called, and a

supplementary couple which tends to produce the con-

tinuous rotation of which we have spoken above.

(3) Finally, the force acting on an element of a current

is not normal to that element. In other words, the unity

of the magnetic force has disappeared.

Let us see in what this unity consists. Two systems

which exercise the same action on a magnetic pole will

also exercise the same action on an inde nitely small

magnetic needle, or on an element of current placed at

the point in space at which the pole is. Well, this is true

if the two systems only contain closed currents, and ac-

cording to Ampère it would not be true if the systems    electro-dynamics.261


contained open currents. It is su cient to remark, for

instance, that if a magnetic pole is placed at A and an

element at B, the direction of the element being in AB

produced, this element, which will exercise no action on

the pole, will exercise an action either on a magnetic nee-

dle placed at A, or on an element of current at A.

5. Induction.—We know that the discovery of electro-

dynamical induction followed not long after the immortal

work of Ampère. As long as it is only a question of closed

currents there is no di culty, and Helmholtz has even

remarked that the principle of the conservation of energy

is su cient for us to deduce the laws of induction from the

electro-dynamical laws of Ampère. But on the condition,

as Bertrand has shown,—that we make a certain number

of hypotheses.

The same principle again enables this deduction to

be made in the case of open currents, although the re-

sult cannot be tested by experiment, since such currents

cannot be produced.

If we wish to compare this method of analysis with

Ampère’s theorem on open currents, we get results which

are calculated to surprise us. In the  rst place, induction

cannot be deduced from the variation of the magnetic

 eld by the well-known formula of scientists and practi-    science and hypothesis262


cal men; in fact, as I have said, properly speaking, there

is no magnetic  eld. But further, if a circuit C is sub-

jected to the induction of a variable voltaic system S, and

if this system S be displaced and deformed in any way

whatever, so that the intensity of the currents of this sys-

tem varies according to any law whatever, then so long

as after these variations the system eventually returns to

its initial position, it seems natural to suppose that the

mean electro-motive force induced in the circuit C is zero.

This is true if the circuit C is closed, and if the system S

only contains closed currents. It is no longer true if we

accept the theory of Ampère, since there would be open

currents. So that not only will induction no longer be

the variation of the  ow of magnetic force in any of the

usual senses of the word, but it cannot be represented by

the variation of that force whatever it may be.

II. Helmholtz’s Theory.—I have dwelt upon the conse-

quences of Ampère’s theory and on his method of explain-

ing the action of open currents. It is di cult to disregard

the paradoxical and arti cial character of the proposi-

tions to which we are thus led. We feel bound to think “it

cannot be so.” We may imagine then that Helmholtz has

been led to look for something else. He rejects the funda-

mental hypothesis of Ampère—namely, that the mutual    electro-dynamics.263


action of two elements of current reduces to a force along

their join. He admits that an clement of current is not

acted upon by a single force but by a force and a cou-

ple, and this is what gave rise to the celebrated polemic

between Bertrand and Helmholtz. Helmholtz replaces

Ampère’s hypothesis by the following:—Two elements of

current always admit of an electro-dynamic potential, de-

pending solely upon their position and orientation; and

the work of the forces that they exercise one on the other

is equal to the variation of this potential. Thus Helmholtz

can no more do without hypothesis than Ampère, but at

least he does not do so without explicitly announcing it.

In the case of closed currents, which alone are accessible

to experiment, the two theories agree; in all other cases

they di er. In the  rst place, contrary to what Ampère

supposed, the force which seems to act on the movable

portion of a closed current is not the same as that acting

on the movable portion if it were isolated and if it consti-
                                      0
tuted an open current. Let us return to the circuit C, of

which we spoke above, and which was formed of a mov-

able wire sliding on a  xed wire. In the only experiment

that can be made the movable portion   is not isolated,

but is part of a closed circuit. When it passes from AB
00
to AB, the total electro-dynamic potential varies for two    science and hypothesis264


reasons. First, it has a slight increment because the po-
00
tential of ABwith respect to the circuit C is not the

same as that of AB; secondly, it has a second increment

because it must be increased by the potentials of the el-
00
ements AAand BB with respect to C. It is this double

increment which represents the work of the force acting

upon the portion AB. If, on the contrary,   be iso-

lated, the potential would only have the  rst increment,

and this  rst increment alone would measure the work

of the force acting on AB. In the second place, there

could be no continuous rotation without sliding contact,

and in fact, that, as we have seen in the case of closed

currents, is an immediate consequence of the existence of

an electro-dynamic potential. In Faraday’s experiment, if

the magnet is  xed, and if the part of the current external

to the magnet runs along a movable wire, that movable

wire may undergo continuous rotation. But it does not

mean that, if the contacts of the wire with the magnet

were suppressed, and an open current were to run along

the wire, the wire would still have a movement of contin-

uous rotation. I have just said, in fact, that an isolated

element is not acted on in the same way as a movable ele-

ment making part of a closed circuit. But there is another

di erence. The action of a solenoid on a closed current    electro-dynamics.265


is zero according to experiment and according to the two

theories. Its action on an open current would be zero ac-

cording to Ampère, and it would not be zero according to

Helmholtz. From this follows an important consequence.

We have given above three de nitions of the magnetic

force. The third has no meaning here, since an element

of current is no longer acted upon by a single force. Nor

has the  rst any meaning. What, in fact, is a magnetic

pole? It is the extremity of an inde nite linear magnet.

This magnet may be replaced by an inde nite solenoid.

For the de nition of magnetic force to have any meaning,

the action exercised by an open current on an inde nite

solenoid would only depend on the position of the ex-

tremity of that solenoid—i.e., that the action of a closed

solenoid is zero. Now we have just seen that this is not

the case. On the other hand, there is nothing to prevent

us from adopting the second de nition which is founded

on the measurement of the director couple which tends to

orientate the magnetic needle; but, if it is adopted, nei-

ther the e ects of induction nor electro-dynamic e ects

will depend solely on the distribution of the lines of force

in this magnetic  eld.

III. Di culties raised by these Theories.—Helmholtz’s

theory is an advance on that of Ampère; it is necessary,    science and hypothesis266


however, that every di culty should be removed. In

both, the name “magnetic  eld” has no meaning, or, if

we give it one by a more or less arti cial convention, the

ordinary laws so familiar to electricians no longer apply;

and it is thus that the electro-motive force induced in

a wire is no longer measured by the number of lines

of force met by that wire. And our objections do not

proceed only from the fact that it is di cult to give up

deeply-rooted habits of language and thought. There is

something more. If we do not believe in actions at a

distance, electro-dynamic phenomena must be explained

by a modi cation of the medium. And this medium

is precisely what we call “magnetic  eld,” and then the

electro-magnetic e ects should only depend on that  eld.

All these di culties arise from the hypothesis of open

currents.

IV. Maxwell’s Theory.—Such were the di culties

raised by the current theories, when Maxwell with a

stroke of the pen caused them to vanish. To his mind,

in fact, all currents are closed currents. Maxwell ad-

mits that if in a dielectric, the electric  eld happens

to vary, this dielectric becomes the seat of a particular

phenomenon acting on the galvanometer like a current

and called the current of displacement. If, then, two con-    electro-dynamics.267


ductors bearing positive and negative charges are placed

in connection by means of a wire, during the discharge

there is an open current of conduction in that wire; but

there are produced at the same time in the surrounding

dielectric currents of displacement which close this cur-

rent of conduction. We know that Maxwell’s theory leads

to the explanation of optical phenomena which would

be due to extremely rapid electrical oscillations. At that

period such a conception was only a daring hypothesis

which could be supported by no experiment; but after

twenty years Maxwell’s ideas received the con rmation

of experiment. Hertz succeeded in producing systems of

electric oscillations which reproduce all the properties of

light, and only di er by the length of their wave—that

is to say, as violet di ers from red. In some measure

he made a synthesis of light. It might be said that

Hertz has not directly proved Maxwell’s fundamental

idea of the action of the current of displacement on the

galvanometer. That is true in a sense. What he has

shown directly is that electro-magnetic induction is not

instantaneously propagated, as was supposed, but its

speed is the speed of light. Yet, to suppose there is no

current of displacement, and that induction is with the

speed of light; or, rather, to suppose that the currents of    science and hypothesis268


displacement produce inductive e ects, and that the in-

duction takes place instantaneously—comes to the same

thing. This cannot be seen at the  rst glance, but it is

proved by an analysis of which I must not even think of

giving even a summary here.

V. Rowland’s Experiment.—But, as I have said above,

there are two kinds of open conduction currents. There

are  rst the currents of discharge of a condenser, or of any

conductor whatever. There are also cases in which the

electric charges describe a closed contour, being displaced

by conduction in one part of the circuit and by convection

in the other part. The question might be regarded as

solved for open currents of the  rst kind; they were closed

by currents of displacement. For open currents of the

second kind the solution appeared still more simple.

It seemed that if the current were closed it could only

be by the current of convection itself. For that purpose it

was su cient to admit that a “convection current”—i.e.,

a charged conductor in motion—could act on the gal-

vanometer. But experimental con rmation was lacking.

It appeared di cult, in fact, to obtain a su cient inten-

sity even by increasing as much as possible the charge and

the velocity of the conductors. Rowland, an extremely

skilful experimentalist, was the  rst to triumph, or to    electro-dynamics.269


seem to triumph, over these di culties. A disc received

a strong electro-static charge and a very high speed of

rotation. An astatic magnetic system placed beside the

disc underwent deviations. The experiment was made

twice by Rowland, once in Berlin and once at Baltimore.

It was afterwards repeated by Himstedt. These physi-

cists even believed that they could announce that they

had succeeded in making quantitative measurements. For

twenty years Rowland’s law was admitted without objec-

tion by all physicists, and, indeed, everything seemed to

con rm it. The spark certainly does produce a mag-

netic e ect, and does it not seem extremely likely that

the spark discharged is due to particles taken from one of

the electrodes and transferred to the other electrode with

their charge? Is not the very spectrum of the spark, in

which we recognise the lines of the metal of the electrode,

a proof of it? The spark would then be a real current of

induction.

On the other hand, it is also admitted that in an

electrolyte the electricity is carried by the ions in mo-

tion. The current in an electrolyte would therefore also

be a current of convection; but it acts on the magnetic

needle. And in the same way for cathode rays; Crookes

attributed these rays to very subtle matter charged with    science and hypothesis270


negative electricity and moving with very high velocity.

He looked upon them, in other words, as currents of con-

vection. Now, these cathode rays are deviated by the

magnet. In virtue of the principle of action and reac-

tion, they should in their turn deviate the magnetic nee-

dle. It is true that Hertz believed he had proved that

the cathodic rays do not carry negative electricity, and

that they do not act on the magnetic needle; but Hertz

was wrong. First of all, Perrin succeeded in collecting

the electricity carried by these rays—electricity of which

Hertz denied the existence; the German scientist appears

to have been deceived by the e ects due to the action of

the X-rays, which were not yet discovered. Afterwards,

and quite recently, the action of the cathodic rays on the

magnetic needle has been brought to light. Thus all these

phenomena looked upon as currents of convection, elec-

tric sparks, electrolytic currents, cathodic rays, act in the

same manner on the galvanometer and in conformity to

Rowland’s law.

VI. Lorentz’s Theory.—We need not go much further.

According to Lorentz’s theory, currents of conduction

would themselves be true convection currents. Electricity

would remain indissolubly connected with certain mate-

rial particles called electrons. The circulation of these    electro-dynamics.271


electrons through bodies would produce voltaic currents,

and what would distinguish conductors from insulators

would be that the one could be traversed by these elec-

trons, while the others would check the movement of the

electrons. Lorentz’s theory is very attractive. It gives a

very simple explanation of certain phenomena, which the

earlier theories—even Maxwell’s in its primitive form—

could only deal with in an unsatisfactory manner; for

example, the aberration of light, the partial impulse of

luminous waves, magnetic polarisation, and Zeeman’s ex-

periment.

A few objections still remained. The phenomena of an

electric system seemed to depend on the absolute veloc-

ity of translation of the centre of gravity of this system,

which is contrary to the idea that we have of the relativ-

ity of space. Supported by M. Crémieu, M. Lippman has

presented this objection in a very striking form. Imagine

two charged conductors with the same velocity of transla-

tion. They are relatively at rest. However, each of them

being equivalent to a current of convection, they ought

to attract one another, and by measuring this attraction

we could measure their absolute velocity. “No!” replied

the partisans of Lorentz. “What we could measure in

that way is not their absolute velocity, but their relative    science and hypothesis272


velocity with respect to the ether, so that the principle of

relativity is safe.” Whatever there may be in these objec-

tions, the edi ce of electro-dynamics seemed, at any rate

in its broad lines, de nitively constructed. Everything

was presented under the most satisfactory aspect. The

theories of Ampère and Helmholtz, which were made for

the open currents that no longer existed, seem to have

no more than purely historic interest, and the inextrica-

ble complications to which these theories led have been

almost forgotten. This quiescence has been recently dis-

turbed by the experiments of M. Crémieu, which have

contradicted, or at least have seemed to contradict, the

results formerly obtained by Rowland. Numerous investi-

gators have endeavoured to solve the question, and fresh

experiments have been undertaken. What result will they

give? I shall take care not to risk a prophecy which might

be falsi ed between the day this book is ready for the

press and the day on which it is placed before the public.


          THE END.



THE WALTER SCOTT PUBLISHING CO., LIMITED, FELLING-ON-TYNE.End of Project Gutenberg’s Science and hypothesis, by Henri Poincaré

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS ***

***** This file should be named 37157-t.tex or 37157-t.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/1/5/37157/

Produced by Andrew D. Hwang

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work          license.II


(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project          license.III


Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the          license.IV


Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that          license.V



- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.          license.VI


1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth          license.VII


in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation          license.VIII


and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt          license.IX


status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations. To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.          license.X



Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.