STEKEL

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Depths of the Soul: Psycho-Analytical Studies
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Depths of the Soul: Psycho-Analytical Studies

Author: Wilhelm Stekel

Translator: Samuel A. Tannenbaum

Release date: June 4, 2018 [eBook #57272]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Turgut Dincer, Emmanuel Ackerman and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        book was produced from images made available by the
        HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEPTHS OF THE SOUL: PSYCHO-ANALYTICAL STUDIES ***




Produced by Turgut Dincer, Emmanuel Ackerman and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)









  THE DEPTHS
  OF THE SOUL

  PSYCHO-ANALYTICAL STUDIES




  _Dedicated
  to his dear friends
  BESS AND OSCAR BLUMENTHAL
  in remembrance of
  his delightful stay
  in Chicago, 1921_

                        THE AUTHOR




  THE DEPTHS
  OF THE SOUL

  PSYCHO-ANALYTICAL STUDIES

  BY
  DR. WILLIAM STEKEL

  AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION
  BY
  DR. S. A. TANNENBAUM

  LONDON
  KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD.
  BROADWAY HOUSE, 68-74 CARTER LANE, E.C.
  1921




PREFACE


An old proverb says that every parent loves the ugly duckling most. My
book, _The Depths of the Soul_, was, from its beginning, my favourite.
It was written in the beautiful years in which the first rays of
analytic psychognosis penetrated the darkness of the human soul. The
reader may find between the lines the exuberant joy of a discoverer.
First impressions are the strongest. It is an unfortunate fact that
subsequent impressions lack the vividness, the intensity, the warmth,
and the colours of the first emotions.

The great success of this book in many foreign languages has given me
incalculable pleasure, because it has served to confirm my own blind
love. No other book has brought me so many friends from far and near.

I am happy that my friend Dr. Tannenbaum has devoted his knowledge of
the art of translation to my favourite child, and I hope that this
translation will bring me many new English friends.

                                                             THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS


                                    PAGE

  DEDICATION                          ii

  PREFACE                              v

  CONTENTS                           vii

  THE SECOND WORLD                     1

  GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE           11

  UNPACKING ONE’S HEART               20

  LAZINESS                            29

  THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE             38

  WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO             46

  INDEPENDENCE                        57

  JEALOUSY                            65

  CHILDHOOD FRIENDSHIP                73

  EATING                              80

  ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS?           91

  RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME              98

  DEAD-HEADS                         108

  IDENTIFICATION                     115

  REFUGE IN DISEASE                  125

  WHY WE TRAVEL                      133

  MOODY PERSONS                      143

  OVERVALUED IDEAS                   152

  AFFECTIONATE PARENTS               161

  WHY THEY QUARREL                   171

  LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE            180

  LOOKING BACKWARD                   191

  ALL-SOULS                          201

  MIRROR SLAVES                      210

  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE




THE SECOND WORLD


To poets it is a familiar world. The ordinary mortal wanders about
in its wonderful gardens as if he were blind; he lives in it without
knowing it. He does not know where the real world stops and where
the fantasy world begins. In the treadmill of grey day the invisible
boundaries between these two worlds escape him.

The second world! What would our life be without it? What a vale of
tears would this globe be were it not for this heaven on earth!

The reader probably guesses what I mean. All of us, the poorest and the
richest, the smallest and biggest, rarely or never find contentment in
our daily routine. We need a second sphere, a richer life, in which we
may dream of everything that is denied us in the first sphere. Ibsen
called this “The Great Life-Lie.” But is it always a lie? Did not Ibsen
go too far with this characterization? Who could doubt that the lie is
not one of those eternal truths that is so incorporeal that we cannot
grasp it, so colourless that we cannot see it, so formless that we
cannot describe it.

The child finds its second world in play. The little duties of
everyday life are for it only unnecessary interruptions in its play in
the second world. Here the child’s fantasy has ample room. It is a
soldier, king, and robber, cook, and princess; it rides through a wide
world on steaming express trains, it battles courageously with dragons
and giants, it snatches the treasures of the earth from their guardian
dwarfs, and even the stars in the heavens are not beyond its reach in
its play. Then comes the powerful dictum called education and snatches
the child out of its beloved second world and compels it to give heed
to the first world and to learn things necessary to it in its actual
life. The child learns of obligations and submits unwillingly to the
dictates of its teachers. The first world is made up of duties. The
second world knows no duties; it knows only freedom and unrestrained
freedom of thought. This is the root of the subsequent great conflict
between feelings and duties. In our childhood we find duties a
troublemaker who interferes with our playing; this childish hostility
continues with us all through life. Our vocation, the sphere of our
duties, can never wholly satisfy us. It is our first world; and even
though we seem to accept it wholly, a little remnant of this hostility
remains and this constitutes a part of our second world.

Primitive people find their second world in religion. From their
primitive fears for the preservation of their lives they flee to their
gods, whom they love and fear, punish and reward. The same thing is
true of all those simple souls whom culture has not robbed of their
religious belief. To them religion is the second world which gives
them rich consolation and solace for the pains of the first world. In
his book “Seelenkunde,” Benedict attributes anarchism to an absence of
consolatory life-lies. He says: “Our free-thinking times have stopped
up this source and it is the duty of society to create a consoling
life-truth, otherwise that psychic inner life which hoards up bitter
hatred will not cease.”

The more highly developed a person’s mind is, the more complicated is
his second world. People often express surprise at the fact that so
many physicians devote themselves passionately to music or the other
fine arts. To me it seems very simple. All day long they see life in
its most disagreeable aspects. They see the innocent sufferings, the
frightful tortures which they cannot relieve. They look behind the
curtain of the “happy family”; they wade through all the repellant
and disgusting filthiness of this petty world, and they would have to
become dull and non-partisan animals did they not have their second
world.

There is first of all music, which is so dear to all of us because it
is an all-embracing mother which absorbs all the emotions of hatred,
anger, love, envy, fear, and despair, and fuses them all into one
great rhythm, into one great vibrating emotion of pleasure. On its
trembling waves the thoughts of the poor tortured human soul are borne
out into the darkness of uncomprehended eternity and the eternally
incomprehensible.

Then there is literature. We open a book and at once we are transported
into the second world of another ego, a world which in a few minutes
becomes our own. Happy poets, who have been endowed with the gift of
saying what they see, of giving form to what they dream, of freeing
themselves from their energies, of abreacting their secret sufferings
and of making others happy by opening up to them a second world!

Then there are the thousand and one forms of play; sports and in fact
everything that tears us away from our daily grind. What is the lottery
ticket to the poor wage-earner but an instalment on the pleasures of
the second world, or the purchased right of joyous hope?

There is the devotion to clubs and fraternal associations. The
henpecked husband flees wrathfully to his club where he can freely and
fearlessly launch all those fine argumentative speeches which he has to
suppress at home. Here he can rule, here he can play the role of the
independent master. For many thousands the club is nothing more than an
opportunity to work off their energies, to get rid of unused emotions
and to play that role which life in the first sphere has denied them.

And thus everyone has his second world. One who does not have it stands
on the level of animals, or is the happiest of the happy. By happiness
I mean the employment of one’s energies in the first sphere. There is
a wide gulf between happiness and the consciousness of happiness. The
consciousness of happiness is such a fugitive moment that the poorest
wage-slave in his second world can be happier than the truly happy who
does not happen to be thinking of his happiness. Happiness is like
the possession of a beautiful wife. If we are in danger of losing her
we tremble. Before we have obtained her and in moments of jealousy
we guard her possession as fortune’s greatest gift. But in the
consciousness of undisturbed possession can we be saying to ourselves
every second: I possess her, I am happy? No! no! Happiness is the
greatest of all life’s lies and one who has had least of it may be the
happiest in his second world.

Rose-coloured hope! Queen of all pleasurable emotions, our
all-preserving and all-animating goddess! You are the sovereign of the
second world and beckon graciously the unhappy weeping mortal who in
the first world sees the last traces of you disappear.----

Marital happiness depends very largely upon whether the two spheres of
the couple partly overlap or touch each other at a few points. In the
first world they must live together. But woe if the second world keeps
them asunder! If the two spheres touch each other even only in one
point and have only one feeling tangent between them, that will bring
them closer together than all the cares and the iron constraint of
the first world. Women know this instinctively, especially during the
period of courtship. They enthuse about everything over which the lover
enthuses; they love and hate with him and want to share everything with
him. Beware, you married women, of destroying your husband’s second
world! If after the day’s toil he soothes his tired nerves in the
fateful harmonies of Beethoven, do not disturb his pious mood; enthuse
with him, do not carry the petty cares and the vulgar commonplaces of
life into the lofty second world. Do you understand me, or must I speak
more plainly? Do not let him go alone on his excursions into the second
world! A book that he reads alone, understands alone, enjoys alone,
may be more dangerous to you than the most ardent glances of a wanton
rival. Art must never become the man’s second world. No! It must become
the child of both the lovers if the beats of their souls are to be
harmonious.

True friendship is so lofty, so exalting, because it is dependent
upon a congruence of the second spheres. Love is a linking of the
first worlds and if it is to be permanent it must journey forth into
the second world. Genuine friendship is born in the second world and
affects the first world only retroactively.

The second world need not necessarily always be the better world even
though to its possessor it may appear to be the more beautiful and the
more desirable. Rarely enough it is the supplement to the first world
but frequently the contrast and the complement to it. Pious chaste
natures may often give their coarser instincts undisturbed expression
in the second world. Day-dreams are frequently the expression of life
in the second world. But on careful analysis even the dreams of the
night prove to be an unrestricted wallowing in the waters of the second
world. Dreams are usually wish fulfillments, but in their lowest levels
we find the wishes of the second world which are only rarely altered by
unconscious thought processes.

One who dreams during the day flies from the first world into the
second. If he fails to find his way back again into the first world his
dreams become delusions and we say that he is insane. How delicate are
the transitions from sanity to insanity! Inasmuch as all of us live
in a second world, all of us are insane at least a few seconds every
day. What distinguishes us from the insane is the fact that we hold in
our hands the Ariadne thread which leads us out of the labyrinth of
thoughts back into the world of duties.

It is incredible how happy an insane person can be. Proudly the
paranoid hack writer marches up and down in his pitiful cell. Clothed
in rags, he is king and commands empires. His cot is a heavenly couch
of eiderdown; his old dilapidated stool is a jewel-bedecked throne.
The attendants and the physicians are his servants. And thus in his
delusion he is what he would like to be.

The world is only what we think it; the “thing itself” is only a
convention of the majority. A cured maniac assured me that the period
of his insanity had been the happiest in his life. He saw everything
through rose-coloured glasses and the awful succession of wild thoughts
was only a succession of intensely pleasurable emotions. Obviously
those, on the other hand, who suffer from melancholia and delusions
of inferiority are the unhappiest creatures. The invalid who thinks
himself made of glass trembles apprehensively for his life with every
step. The unhappy experiences of the first world have become so fixed
in his brain that they follow him into the second world and transform
even this into their own image.

Every impression in our life affects our soul as if it were made of
wax and not one such impression can be lost. That we forget so many
impressions is due to the fact that we have repressed them out of our
consciousness. Repression is a protective device but at the same time
a cause for many serious nervous disorders. A painful impression, an
unpleasant experience in the first or the second world, is so altered
as to be unrecognizable in consciousness. As a reaction to this
serious nervous disturbances, especially hysterical alterations of the
psyche, may occur,--conditions which can be cured only by tracing out
the dark pathways of the repressed emotions and reintroducing them
into consciousness. They are conjured out of the dark realm of the
unconscious into the glaring light of day and, lo! the ghosts vanish
for all time and with them all those unpleasant symptoms which have so
exercised the physician’s skill.

If the psychotherapeutist is to fulfill his difficult task he must
acquaint himself with the patient’s second world even more thoroughly
than with the first. And so, too, a judge ought never to pronounce
sentence without first having thoroughly penetrated the second world of
the condemned. In that world are the roots of good and evil in human
life. In his “Crime and Punishment” Dostoyevsky’s genius shows in a
masterly way the relationship between the two worlds of a criminal. And
so, too, Tolstoy, in his “Resurrection,” in an endeavour to enlist our
sympathies in her behalf, describes the second world of a courtesan. It
is her life-lie that she makes all the men in her embrace blessed. And
in sooth, a spark of truth seems to slumber in this life-lie.

Physicians, judges, lawyers, and ministers ought all to have a
thorough training in psychology. Not psychology in the sense of that
school philosophy which flourishes in theoretical phraseology and in
theoretical facts remote from the green tree of life. Life can learn
only from life. One who knows the secrets of the second world will not
be surprised by any happenings that the day may bring forth. He will
understand the weaknesses of the great and the strength of the small.

He will see virtue and vice coalesce in one great stream whose murky
waters will flow on into unknown regions.




GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE


Very few people perceive the ridiculous element in the frequent
complaints about the wickedness of human nature. “Human beings are
ungrateful, false, untrustworthy,” and so forth. Yes, but we are all
human. We ought, therefore, logically speaking, complain: “We human
beings are ungrateful, we are false, we are untrustworthy.” But
naturally this requires a measure of self-knowledge that is seldom
to be found in those bearing the vesture of humanity. Let us make a
modest beginning; let us try to look truth in the face. Let us not put
ourselves on a pinnacle above the others till we know how high or low
we ourselves stand.

We like to deceive ourselves, and, above all, not to see our faults.
That is the most prevalent of all weaknesses. We look upon ourselves
not only as cleverer but also as better than all others. We forget
our faults so easily and divide them by a hundred, whereas our
virtues are ever present to our mind and multiplied by a thousand.
To himself everybody is not only the first but also the wisest and
the best of mortals. That is why we complain about the ingratitude of
our fellow-men, because we have forgotten all the occasions on which
we proved ungrateful,--in exactly the same manner in which we manage
wholly to forget everything calculated to awaken painful emotions in
ourselves.

The complaint about man’s ingratitude is as old as the history of man
himself. The Bible, ancient legends, the folk-songs, and the proverbs
of all nations, ancient and modern, bewail man’s ingratitude. It is
“the touch of nature that makes the whole world kin.” A trait that is
so widely distributed, investing the egoist with the glory of supreme
worldly wisdom and branding the altruist as half a fool, must be
founded deep in the souls of men. It must be an integral part of the
circumstances conditioning the life of the individual. It must send its
roots down into the unconscious where the brutal instincts of primal
man consort with humanity’s ripened instincts.

But if ingratitude is a genuinely (psychologically) established fact
then we must be able to determine the dark forces that have it in them
to suppress the elementary feeling of gratitude. For even to the most
casual observation it is apparent that the first emotion with which
we react to a kindness is a warm feeling of recognition, gratitude.
So thoroughly are we permeated by it that it seems impossible ever to
withhold this gratitude from our benefactor, let alone repay him with
ingratitude. The first reaction with which the human soul requites
a kind deed is a firm purpose “ever” to be grateful therefor. But
purpose, “the slave to memory,” is only the puffed sail that drives
the boat until the force of the storm and the weakness of the rudder
compel a different course. So, too, the intent to prove grateful is
driven about fitfully by the winds of life. Of course, not at once.
It requires the lapse of a certain latency period ere gratitude is
converted to ingratitude. In the beginning the feeling of gratitude
reigns supreme. Slowly it grows fainter and fainter, is inaudible for a
time, then on suitable occasions is heard again but ever more faintly.
After a while, quite unawares, ingratitude has taken its place. All
those pleasurable emotions that have accompanied gratitude have
been transformed into their opposites: love into hatred, attraction
into aversion, interest into indifference, praise into censure, and
friendship into hostility.

How does this come about? Where lie the sources of these hidden streams
that drive the wheels of our emotions?

We pointed out at the very beginning that everybody regards himself
as the wisest, the best, and the most capable of men. Our weaknesses
we acknowledge very reluctantly. A losing chess-player is sure to
say in ninety-nine out of a hundred instances: “I did not play this
game well.” The opponent’s superiority is always denied; defeat is
attributed to a momentary relaxation of the psychic tension, to
carelessness, to some accident, etc. And if an individual is compelled
to admit another’s superiority, he will do so only with reference
to some one point. He will always make reservations leaving himself
some sphere of activity in which he is king. That constitutes a man’s
secret pride: the sphere in which he thinks he excels all others.
This self-consciousness, this exaggerated apperception of the ego is
a natural basis of life, a protective device of the soul which makes
life bearable, which makes it easier to bear our fardels and endure
the pricks of destiny, and which compensates us for the world’s
inadequate recognition of us and for the failure of our efforts which
must inevitably come short of our intentions. “The paranoid delusion
of the normal human being,” as Philip Frey aptly named it, is really
the individual’s “fixed idea” which proves him to be in a certain sense
pathologic and justifies the opinion that the whole world is a great
madhouse.

This exaggerated self-consciousness manifests itself with pathological
intensity especially in these times. The smaller the individual’s
share in the real affairs of the world is, the more must his fantasy
achieve so as to magnify this function and have it appear as something
of vital importance. In those cases in which individuality is crushed,
a hypertrophied delusion of greatness is developed. Everyone thinks
himself important, everyone is indispensable, everyone thinks himself
an important power in the play and interplay of forces. Our era has
created the type of the “self-made man.” Everyone is willing to be
indebted only to himself, his qualifications, his power of endurance,
his energy, his individual efforts for his achievements. “By his own
efforts”--so runs the much-abused phrase,--does each one want to get to
the top.

All want it--but how few really make it come true! Who can know to-day
what is his own and what another’s? Who knows how much he had to take
before he was able to give anything? But no one wants to stop for an
accounting. Each one wants to owe everything to himself.

Something of this is in every one of us. And this brings us to the
deepest root of ingratitude. The feeling of being indebted to another
clashes with our self-confidence; the unpleasant truth contrasts
sharply with the normal’s deep-rooted delusions of greatness. In this
conflict of emotions there is only an either ... or. _Either_ once for
all to renounce this exaggerated self-consciousness, _or_ to forget
the occasion for gratitude, to repress this painful memory, to let the
ulcerous wound on the proud body of the “ego” heal to a scar. (The
exceptions that prove the rule in this matter, too, we shall consider
later.)

The first road that assures us eternal gratitude is chosen only by
those who by the “bludgeonings of fate” have been wholly stunned, who
are life-weary,--feel themselves goaded to death,--the wholly crushed.
These unfortunates no longer need the play of their hidden psychic
forces. The need of the body has strangled the cry of the soul. These
are grateful, grateful from conviction, grateful from necessity. Their
dreams are veritable orgies of benefactions. For them the benefactor is
the deliverer from bodily torment. They see “dead souls” whom everyone
who so desires may purchase.

But one who has not for ever renounced the fulfillment of his inmost
longings will rarely be capable of gratitude. His ego resents being
indebted to anyone but himself. But this ego will never permit itself
to face the naked brutal fact of its ingratitude. It seeks for causes
and motives, for justification. In this case the proverb again
proves true: “seek and you shall find,” the kindness is scrutinised
from every side till a little point is found which reveals a bit of
calculating egoism from which the kindness takes on a business aspect.
And what human action does not permit of many interpretations? Our
self-preservation impulse then chooses the interpretation that suits us
best, the interpretation that relieves us of the oppressive feeling of
gratitude. Such is the first step in the transformation of gratitude
into ingratitude. Rarely does the matter rest there. Usually it
requires also a transformation of the emotion into its opposite ere the
galling feeling of gratitude can be eradicated. What execrable wretches
would we not appear even to ourselves if we could not work out reasons
for the changes in our feelings? And so we convert the good deed into a
bad one; if possible, we discover stains and blots in our benefactor’s
present life or pursuits that can blacken the spotlessness of his past.
Not until we have done this are we free from the oppressive feeling of
gratitude. Thus, with no further reason for being grateful left, our
personal pride survives unshaken, the bowed ego again stands proudly
erect.

This explanation of the psychology of ingratitude draws the veil from
a series of remarkable phenomena which we pass by in our daily life
without regard or understanding. We shall cite only a few instances
from the many at our disposal: the ingratitude of servants and all
subordinates,--a species of ingratitude that is so obvious that if
an exception occurs the whole world proclaims it as an exception;
the ingratitude of pupils to the teacher to whom they owe all (this
explains the common phenomenon that pupils belittle the scientific
attainments of the teacher,--a phenomenon that may almost be designated
“the pupil’s neurosis”); the deep hatred with which artists regard
those of their predecessors to whom they are most indebted; the tragedy
of the distinguished sons whose fathers paved the way for them; the
great injustice of invalids towards the physicians to whom they owe
their lives; the historic ingratitude of nations to their great leaders
and benefactors; the stubborn ignoring of the living great ones and
the measureless overvaluation of the dead; the perpetual opposition to
whatever administration may be in power, whence is derived a fragment
of the psychology of discontent; the quite frequent transformation of a
friendship into its opposite.

Verily, one who counts upon gratitude is singularly deficient in
knowledge both of human nature and of his own nature. In this
connection, we must consider also the fact that owing to an excessive
overvaluation of the performance of our most obvious duties, we demand
gratitude even when there is no reason for expecting it. I refer to
only one example: Is there not an obvious obligation on parents to
provide to the best of their ability for the child that they have
brought into the world? Notwithstanding this we daily preach to our
children: “You must be grateful to us for all that we do for you, for
your food, your clothes, your education.” And is it not a fact that
this insistence upon the duty of children to be grateful begets the
opposite: ingratitude? Should we not rather strive to hold our children
with only one bond, _love_?

Let us be just and also admit that really grateful human beings are to
be found; persons whom life has not wearied and who lose none of their
dignity though they are grateful. These are the spiritually pre-eminent
individuals who have forced themselves to the recognition of the fact
that no one is an independent unit, that our valuation of ourselves is
false, individuals who have succeeded, by the aid of psychoanalytic
self-knowledge, to reduce the normal person’s delusional greatness to
the moderation warranted by reality.

Such persons are grateful because their valuation of themselves is fed
by other springs. The knowledge of the frailties of humanity in general
compensates them for the failing of the human in the individual.
The greatest number of grateful persons will be found in the ranks
of the geniuses, whereas talented persons are generally addicted to
ingratitude. Genius can easily be grateful inasmuch as the frank
recognition of one’s weaknesses and the secret knowledge of one’s
achievements do not permit the suppression of the greatness of others.
One who has so much to give need not be ashamed to have accepted
something. And more especially as he knows with certainty that in life
everyone must accept....

Truly great men are notably modest. Modesty is the knowledge of one’s
own shortcomings. Vanity, the overvaluation of one’s endowments.
Gratitude is the modesty of the great; ingratitude the vanity of the
small. Only those are grateful who really have no occasion for being
so. A genuine benefactor finds his thanks in good works. In dealing
with this theme one must think of Vischer’s verses:--

          “If poison and gall make the world bitter,
          And your heart you would preserve;
          Do deeds of kindness! and you will learn
          That doing good rejoices.”




UNPACKING ONE’S HEART


The average human being finds it helpful to free himself from his
impressions by “pouring out his heart” to someone. Like a sponge, the
soul saturates itself; like a sponge, it must be squeezed dry before
it can fill itself up again. But now and then it happens that the
soul cannot rid itself of its impressions. Such persons, we say, are
soul-sick and we recognise those who suffer from soul-sickness by the
fact that they sedulously shun new impressions. Every disease of the
soul rests ultimately upon a secret.

Children exhibit in clear and unmistakable ways the reactions of their
elders. In the presence of a secret they behave exactly as the normal
person ought to behave. They cannot keep it to themselves. I recall
very distinctly that as a child I was unable to sit a quarter of an
hour without speaking. Repeatedly my parents promised me large rewards
if I would sit a quarter of an hour without asking them a question or
making some remark. The promised reward was increased from day to day
because I never was quiet for more than half of the allotted period.
But the obligation to keep a “secret” was even more discomforting to
me. On one occasion my brother was to be given a silver watch for
his birthday. For three days I went about oppressed and restive as
if something was seriously amiss. I prowled around him, watching him
intently with suppressed excitement, so that he finally noticed my
strange behaviour and demanded to know what I wanted. On the day before
his birthday I could contain myself no longer and while we were at
dinner I burst out with, “Oh, you don’t know that you are going to get
a silver watch to-morrow!”

All children are, doubtless, like that. A secret is to them an
unbearable burden. When the time comes that they must keep some matters
secret from their parents because an inexplicable shyness makes them
ashamed to talk everything over with them freely, they change their
attitude towards their parents and seek out a companion of their own
age, some friend with whom they can discuss their secret.

Adults are really as little capable of going about with a secret as
children are. It tortures and oppresses them like a heavy burden; and
they are happy to rid themselves of it one way or another. If they
cannot speak of it openly and frankly then they do so in some hidden,
secret, or symbolic way. I could cite numerous illustrations of this
but shall content myself with only one. A woman who had committed the
unpardonable sin became troubled with a remarkable compulsive action.
She was continually washing her hands. Why? Because she was dominated
by the feeling that she was dirty, that she had become unclean. She
could not tell any one in the world what she had done; she would have
loved to say to her husband and to the whole household: “Do not
touch me! I am impure, unclean, an outcast!” She had found a means
of making this confession, but she did so in a form which only the
expert can understand. At every appropriate and inappropriate occasion
she washed her hands. If she was asked why she washed her hands she
answered, “Because they are not clean.” Such symbolic actions are
extremely common and constitute a kind of “speech without words” (to
use Kleinpaul’s apt words). But a symbolic action is nothing but a
substitution, a compromise between antagonistic psychic currents. It
bears, however, no comparison with the freeing effect of pouring one’s
heart out in words to a person, a confidant one can trust.

We know from the statements of convicts that nothing is so hard to bear
in prison as the impossibility of “getting things off their chest.”
And why is it that when touring foreign countries we so readily make
friends with our townspeople whom we happen to meet, though at home we
are quite indifferent to them? Because they furnish the opportunity for
a good talk, because to a certain extent they become receptacles into
which we may empty our soul’s accumulations. The profound yearning that
we all harbour for friendship, for a sympathetic soul, emanates from
the imperative need for pouring our hearts out. By means of a good
talk of this sort, we “abreact,” or throw off a part of our pent-up
excitement. Children are much more fortunate than we in this regard.
How easily they find a friend! The first-best playfellow becomes a
friend and confidant within half an hour. But for us grown-ups the
matter is much more difficult. Before we can take any one into our
confidence, take him to our bosom, he must satisfy certain social and
ethical requirements. But in reality we disclose only the surface and
retain our most oppressive secrets deep down at the bottom of the soul
unless a sudden storm of passion overcomes us; then the sluice-gates
burst open and the dammed up waters pour out in turgid torrents,
carrying everything before them.

The tremendous power of the Roman Catholic Church is even to-day due
to the fact that it enables its members to confess their most secret
sufferings from time to time and to be absolved. Dr. Muthmann calls
attention to the fact that suicides are most frequent in Protestant
countries, and least frequent among Roman-Catholic peoples, and
he thinks that this is to be attributed to the influence of the
confessional, one of the greatest blessings for numberless people.

The psycho-analytic method of treating nervous diseases has not only
made the incalculable benefit of confession its own but has united
with it the individual’s spiritual education inasmuch as it teaches
him how to know himself and to turn his eyes into the darkest depths
of his soul. But there is also a kind of speaking out that is almost
equivalent to confession--self-communion. That is, one’s communings
with oneself. For, as Grillparzer says, every heart has its secrets
that it anxiously hides even from itself. Not all of us know how to
detect such secrets. The poet has this gift. As Ibsen beautifully says:
“To live is to master the dark forces within us; to write is to sit in
judgment on ourselves.” But only a poet is able to sit in judgment on
his own soul. Not every person has the capacity for self-communion.
Most of the diseases of the soul depend upon the peculiar mechanism
that Freud has called “repression.” This “repression” is a
semi-forgetting of displeasing impressions and ideas. But only a
half-forgetting. For a part of the repressed idea establishes itself in
some disguised form as a symptom or as some form of nervous disease.
In these cases the psychotherapeutist must apply his art and teach the
invalid to know himself.

Goethe knew the value of confession. He reports that he once cured
a Lady Herder by confession. On September 25th, 1811, he wrote to
Mrs. Stein: “Last night I wrought a truly remarkable miracle. Lady
Herder was still in a hypochondriacal mood in consequence of the
unpleasantnesses she had experienced in Carlsbad, especially at the
hands of her family. I had her confess and tell me everything, her
own shortcomings as well as that of the others, in all their minutest
details and consequences, and at last I absolved her and jestingly
made her understand that by this ritual these things had now been
disposed of and cast into the deeps of the sea. Thereupon she became
merry and is really cured.” Here we have the basic principles of modern
psychotherapy. Unconsciously, by virtue of the hidden power of his
genius, the poet accomplished what modern therapeutists also attempt.

Nietzsche, too, fully understood the value of confession. We are
accustomed at once to associate with Nietzsche the concept of the
Antichrist. That he has accurately conceived the essence of the true
priest he shows in his description of the priestly temper in his book,
“The Joyful Wisdom.” He says, “the people honour a wholly different
kind of man, ... They are the mild, earnest, simple, and modest
priestly natures ... before whom one may pour out one’s heart with
impunity, upon whom one may unload one’s secrets, one’s worries, and
what’s even worse.” (The man who shares himself with another frees
himself from himself; and one who has acknowledged, forgets.)

It would be impossible to state the value of confession more
beautifully and more clearly. It will not be long ere this view which
knocks commandingly at the door of science and which has already been
productive of good will be generally accepted. It will not be long ere
it will furnish us a deep insight into the genesis of the “endogenetic
mental diseases,” excepting, of course, those “exogenetic” maladies
that follow some of the infectious diseases. We shall look upon the
“endogenetic” diseases, even delusions, as a disturbance of the psychic
circulation, and it will be our task to ascertain the causes that bring
these maladies about.

There are numbers of substitutes which are equivalent to a kind of
confessing to oneself. These are art, reading of newspapers, music,
literature, and, least but not last, the theatre. The ultimate effect
of a dramatic presentation depends, in reality, upon the liberation
in us of affects that have been a long time pent up within us. It is
not without good reason that humanity throngs to witness tragic plays
during the performance of which it can cry to its heart’s content. When
the spectators are apparently shedding tears over the unhappy fate of a
character on the stage they are really crying over their own pain. And
the woman who laughs so heartily at the awkward clumsiness of a clown,
that the tears run down her cheeks, is perhaps laughing at her husband,
who, though she will not acknowledge it, appears to her just as stupid
and clumsy; she is thereby excusing to herself her own sins which she
has possibly committed only in fantasy. The theatre serves as a kind
of confessional; it liberates inhibitions; awakens many memories,
consoles, and perhaps renews in us hopes of secret possibilities as to
whose fulfillment we have long since despaired.

We have become accustomed of late to suspect sex-motives behind
friendship. Even if we accept the theory that these motives are
present, but hidden in the unconscious, it is a far from adequate
explanation for the longing for friendship. The unconscious sex-motive
unquestionably co-operates in a significant measure in the choice of
a friend. It may be the determining factor in what we call sympathy
and antipathy, although it would have to be proved with regard to the
latter, and the theme is deserving of separate consideration, for it is
quite possible that our antipathies are only reactions to an excessive
attraction and therefore are evidence of repression. Looked at from
this point of view, sympathy and antipathy are one feeling, one affect,
having in the former case a positive sign and in the latter a negative
sign. This secret tendency may be the deciding factor in the choice of
a friend. But the need for a friend surely is in direct relation to the
need for confession.

It is customary to ridicule the Germans’ passion for forming clubs, and
societies of all kinds. But do these founders of fraternal associations
seek for anything but an opportunity to fraternise, to have a good
talk, something from which they are barred at home? The innumerable
speeches that are delivered during the course of a year, and which
are being poured out every second in an endless stream in some house
at some meeting are apparently being spoken only for the benefit of
the auditors. But every speech is a kind of relief to the speaker’s
“I,” and people who have the craving to speak before the whole world
are very often the keepers of a great secret which they must conceal
from the world and which they are imparting in this indirect way in
homœopathic doses. Just as a dye that is dissolved in a large quantity
of fluid is so completely lost that the naked eye can detect no trace
of it, so do occasional particles of the great secret which must
forever remain hidden find their way into the elocutionary torrent.




LAZINESS


There are commonplace maxims which people go on repeating
thoughtlessly, and in the light of which they determine their conduct
without once stopping to consider whether the assumed truth, looked
at in the light of reason, may not turn out to be a lie. We know,
of course, that there are many “truths” which may under certain
circumstances prove to be falsehoods. Everything is in a state of flux!
Truth and falsehood are wave crests and wave troughs, an endless stream
driving the mills of humanity.

Such notorious maxims as the following are trumpeted into our ears
from the days of our youth: “Work makes life sweet”; “Satan finds
some mischief still for idle hands to do”; “the life of man is
three-score-and-ten, and if it has been a happy one it is due to work
and striving.” These truisms are beaten into us, drummed into us, and
hammered into us from all sides; we hear them wherever we go, till
finally we accept them, completely convinced.

And it is well that it is so. What would the world look like if
everybody pressed his claim to laziness? Think of the hideous chaos
that would ensue if the wheels of industry came to a stop!

The admonition to work has its origin in humanity’s instinct of
self-preservation. It does not spring from one’s own needs but only
from the needs of others. Apparently we all work for ourselves, but in
reality we are always working for others. How very small is the number
of those who do their work gladly and cheerfully! How very many give
vent to their aversion to work by means of apparent dissatisfaction
with their calling! And where can we find a man nowadays who is
contented with his calling?

Let us begin our study of man with that period of his life in which
he was not ashamed to show his impulses to the light of day, in
which repression and education had not yet exerted their restraining
influences,--in other words, let us begin with the observation of
childhood. With astonishment we note, first, that the child’s impulse
to idleness is stronger than the impulse to work. Play is for a long
time the child’s idleness as well as its work. A gymnast who proudly
swings the heaviest dumb-bells before his colleagues would vent
himself in curses, deep if not loud, if he had to do this as work; the
heavy-laden tourist who pants his way up steep mountain paths would
curse his very existence if he had to travel these difficult trails in
the service of mankind in the capacity of--let us say--letter-carrier;
the card player who works in the sweat of his brow for hours in the
stuffy café to make his thousand or ten thousand points would complain
bitterly at his hard lot and at the cruelty of his employers if he had
to do an equivalent amount of work in the office. Anything that does
not bear the stamp of work becomes in the play-form recreation and a
release from almost unbearable tyranny.

The child’s world is play. Unwillingly and only on compulsion does it
perform imposed tasks. (It would have even its education made a kind of
play.) Many parents worry about this and complain that their children
take no pleasure in work, seem to have no sense of duty, forget to do
their school work, and have to be forced to do their exercises. Stupid
parents! If they only stopped to think they would realise that this
frank display of an impulse to laziness is a sign of their children’s
sanity. For we often enough observe the opposite phenomenon. Children
who take their duties too seriously, who wake too early in the morning
lest they should be late for school, who are always poring over their
books, scorning every opportunity to play, are usually “nervous”
children. Exaggerated diligence is one of the first symptoms of
neurosis.

One who can look back upon his own childhood must admit that the
impulse to indolence is stronger than any other childhood impulse.
I recall how unwillingly I went to high-school. Once I read in a
newspaper that a high-school had burned to the ground and that the
pupils would not be able to go to school for several weeks. For days I
and my friends were disappointed as we looked at our own grey school
building that stood there safe and sound. Had it not burned down yet?!
Were we not to have any luck at all?!

Who is not acquainted with the little sadistic traits that almost all
children openly manifest? Such a sadistic motive was our secret hope
that this or that teacher would get sick and we would be excused from
attendance at school. What a joy once possessed the whole class when
we discovered that the Latin teacher was sick just on the day when we
should have had to recite in his subject! That was a grand prize!

And how the child detests always being driven to work! Always the same
disagreeable questions: “Have you no lessons to do to-day?” “Have you
done all your lessons?” The profoundest wish of all who do not yet have
to provide for themselves is once to get a chance to be as lazy as
their hearts might desire.

But we adults, too, who know the pleasure of work and of fulfilled
obligations, long for idleness. For us, too, the vice of laziness is an
exquisite pleasure. We find it necessary continually to overcome the
tendency to laziness by new little resolutions. In the morning laziness
whispers; stay a little longer in your warm bed; it’s so comfortable.
Another few seconds and the sense of duty prevails over the desire for
idleness. In the afternoon we would love to spend an hour in pleasant
day-dreams. Work conquers this wish too. And with what difficulty
we get out of the performance of some task in the evening! It is an
everlasting conflict even though it is in most cases a subconscious
conflict with the sweet seducer of mankind: laziness.

That is why the lawgivers have ordained days on which the urge for
laziness may be gratified. These are called holidays. Religion has made
of this right to laziness a duty to God. The more holidays a religion
has, the more welcome must it appear to labouring humanity. That is
why the various religious systems so readily take over one another’s
holidays. The Catholic Church appropriated ancient heathenish feasts,
and Jews bow to the Sunday’s authority just as the Christian does.

Persons who suppress the inclination to laziness get sick. Their nerves
fail soon and their capacity for work suffers serious diminution. And
then we say that they had overworked. Not at all infrequently illness
is only a refuge in idleness, a defence against a hypertrophied impulse
to work. This is frequently observable in persons afflicted with
nervousness. They are unfit for work, waste themselves away in endless
gloomy broodings, in bitter self-reproaches, and in hypochondriacal
fears. They do not tire of repeatedly protesting how happy they would
be if they could get back to work again. But if their unconscious
mental life is analyzed one discovers with astonishment that the
greatest resistance to a cure is offered by their laziness, the fear
of work. This is one of the greatest dangers for the nervous patient.
If a neurotic has once tasted of the sweets of laziness it is a very
difficult matter to get him to work again. All the varieties of fatigue
“cramps” known to neurologists, _e.g._, writer’s cramp, pianist’s
cramp, violinist’s cramp, typewriter’s cramp, etc., are rebellions on
the part of the tendency to laziness. A return to work is possible only
if, in the absence of an actual organic malady, the psychic element we
have called “refuge in disease” (q.v.) is taken into consideration and
given due weight.

This reluctance to work is most frequently noticeable in the puzzling
“traumatic neuroses,” the so-called “accident or compulsion hysterias”
in which the so-called “hunger for damages” plays the most important
role. Since labourers have acquired the right to recover damages for
accidental injuries, the number of traumatic neuroses has increased so
tremendously that insurance companies can scarcely meet the claims.
This is also true of the neuroses following railway and street car
accidents. Only seldom can objective injuries be demonstrated in these
cases. But notwithstanding this, the injured person becomes depressed,
moody, sleepless, and utterly unfit for any work. Yet it would be
very unjust to consider them simulators. They are really sick. Their
psychic make-up has suffered a bad shaking-up. The pleasure in work
has suffered a rude shock because of the unconscious prospect of
pecuniary “damages,” _i.e._ of an opportunity for laziness. Repressed
desires from childhood are re-animated. Why should you work, says the
alluring voice of the unconscious, when you can lounge about and live
on an income? Don’t be a fool! Get sick like the others who loll about
idly and need not work! And consciousness, in its weakness, takes no
note of the conflict in the unconscious, is frightened by the unknown
restlessness and sleeplessness and gets sick.... It is an obstinate
conflict between laziness and industry from which only too often the
former emerges triumphant....

Finally, the need for laziness becomes overpowering in all of us from
time to time. We long for a vacation. We want to recuperate from
work. Well, there are a few sensible people. These go off into a
corner somewhere and are as lazy as they can be. They lie in the grass
and gaze at the heavens for hours; or they go fishing in some clear
stream,--one of the best ways of wasting time; they sit in a rowboat,
letting someone else do the rowing or just keeping the boat in motion
with an occasional stroke. In this way day after day is spent in _dolce
far niente_ until one wearies of laziness and an intense longing for
work fills one’s whole being. Variety is the spice of life. Without
idleness work loses its charm and value.

Others employ their vacation for new work. These are the eternally
restless, industrious, indefatigable ones for whom idleness does not
exist. The impulse to laziness which was once so strong, is suppressed
and converted into its opposite. These are usually persons who had
their fill of laziness in childhood and who thoroughly enjoyed their
youth. (We may refer briefly to a few well-known instances of this:
there was Charles Darwin who began to work only after he left college;
Bismarck, whose student days were a period of riot and idleness; John
Hunter was another striking example.)

These continue with their work even while they are on their vacation.
They make work even of their visits to art galleries, museums,
show-places, and of their breathless flying trips hither and thither.
This is really not the kind of idleness that means a relaxation of
tension. It’s only a variation in the kind of impressions. A sea-voyage
would be a compromise between the two antagonistic tendencies. That is
why Englishmen prefer a sea-voyage to other forms of rest. On board
ship a person must be lazy. He sits on deck and stares at the waves.
The vastness of the sea stands between him and his work. He must be
idle. Impressions fly by him; he does not have to go in search of them.

The right to laziness is one of the rights that sensible humanity will
learn to consider as something self-evident. For the time being we
are still in conflict with ourselves. We shun the truth. We look upon
laziness as something degrading. We still stand in too much awe of
ourselves to be able to find the right measure. Our mothers’ voices
still ring in our ears: “Have you done your lessons?”




THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE


I am at the Circus with my children. They are laughing and clapping
their hands in glee. They are delighted with the grotesque antics of
the stupid clown. In vain I try to kindle my own enthusiasm at theirs
as a means of banishing the unpleasant feeling of being bored. The
peculiar odour of a menagerie pervades the great building and brings
back to me, by way of the obscure paths that connect our thoughts,
memories of days long since dead. I am myself a child again, my cheeks
hot and flushed, sitting in the topmost gallery at the Circus, as
excited as if I were beholding the greatest of all earthly wonders.

It is just when one of the star attractions is being given. A skilled
athlete is vaulting over very great obstacles. He leaps over ten men
in a row, five horses, a little garden. His faultless dress-suit shows
scarcely a wrinkle after this feat. This too must be counted among
the advances made by modern art. In my boyhood days athletes still
wore a gay uniform and “worked” in costume. To-day every juggler and
prestidigitator is a pattern of a drawing-room gentleman. Some may be
making a virtue of necessity and gladly escape the exhibiting of their
none too handsome bodies.

These reflections are suddenly interrupted by a blare of noisy music.
Everybody is excited, for this seems to indicate that the athlete’s
most wonderful trick is coming. True; something out of the ordinary is
happening. Through a wide gate an old-fashioned comfortable, drawn by
a weary nag, is brought into the arena and our valiant athlete leaps
over horse and rider amidst the thunderous applause of the enthusiastic
youngsters and of those of their elders who have remained children in
spirit.

The easy-going driver turns his vehicle towards the exit. Again the
portals open wide. Bands of bright daylight pour into the half-darkened
amphitheatre. In the glare one catches sight, for a moment, of a little
section of the life that swarms round about the fringe of the Circus.
There is the soda-water vendor with his gay-coloured cart, a labourer,
a few servant girls, and some twenty little children staring with big
eyes eagerly into the darkness of the arena in the hope of catching a
glimpse of all this magnificence.

I shall never forget the sight. Those children’s eyes, opened so
tremendously wide, longing to catch a bit of happiness! How they envy
the fortunate ones sitting in here and beholding real fairy-tale
wonders!

I lapse into a day-dream again. I too am one of those little ones
standing out there; I count the richly-caparisoned horses that
are being led in; for the twentieth time I read the large placard
announcing an “élite performance”; I am so happy as the beautiful
equestrienne passes right by me; the muffled sounds of the music
penetrate to my ears; I hear the animated applause and the bravos. One
thought possesses me: I must get in! Cost what it may, I must go in!

Oh, I could have committed a theft to enable myself to get in there
and share in the applause! And I thought to myself, if I am ever a
rich man I shall go to the Circus every day. How excitedly I go home
then, talking about all the wonderful things I have seen, and how in my
dreams all my wishes are realized--all these things take on a tangible
shape before my mind’s eye.

I note that it was the most beautiful period of my life, the time when
I used to stand outside. In those days I still had a sense of the
wonderful. There was a touch of secret magic about everything. Even
dead things had a message for me. Before me was an endless wealth of
possibilities; and there stretched before me kingdoms of the future
over which my childish wishes flew like migratory birds.

Verily--happiness is only anticipating possibilities, denying
impossibilities. Life is filled up with dreams of the future. What
we know seems trivial when measured by the knowledge we would like
to acquire. Possession kills desire; realization slays fantasy and
transforms the wonderful into the commonplace.

All the beauty of this world lies only in the fantasies which reality
can never approximate. The marvels of the present are seen only by
those who stand outside.

Every time that one of the portals that had been locked from our
youthful eyes opened, every time longing became fulfilment, we became
one pleasure poorer and one disappointment richer. Only with the aid of
the stilts supplied us by philosophy can we rise above the depressing
disillusionment of experience. Or, in playing our part in the great
drama of life, we cling to the one role we have studied and keep on
repeating it to ourselves until we, too, almost believe it. Then we
succeed again in seizing a fringe of the magnificent purple mantle with
which we aspired to adorn our life.

Those outside see everything on a much larger scale, finer, and
grander. That is why we envy others their possessions, their
realities, their calling. Because we project the inevitable
disappointments of life upon the thing that is readiest at hand--and
that is unquestionably our vocation. Our wishes circle around others’
possibilities.

Involuntarily an experience from my youth occurs to me. I had for
the first time in my life made the acquaintance of a poet. He was a
well-known lyrist of that day and his delightful verses had charmed
me for years. He did not in any way come up to the ideal that I had
conceived of what a poet ought to be. The edges of his eyelids were
red, his face was commonplace, and he had a large paunch. The manner in
which he drank his coffee disgusted me. A little coffee dripped down on
his dirty grey beard and with the movements of his big upper jaw some
cake crumbs danced up and down on his moustache.

And that was the poet who wrote those passionate little lyrics!
Overcoming my disappointment, I entered into conversation with him and
let him perceive something of my admiration. He was to be envied for
possessing the gift of transforming his moods and experiences into
works of art!

To my astonishment the poet began to describe with palpable resentment
the shortcomings of his calling. If he had only become an honest
craftsman ere he had devoted himself to writing! He was sick of the
hard struggle. To be ever at loggerheads with the public, the critics,
the publishers, and editors--those were the compensations of his
calling. He envied me for being a physician. That’s a great, a noble,
an ideal calling. A physician can do something for humanity! If he
were not too old he would at once take up the study of medicine. To
mitigate the pains of an invalid is worth more than writing a hundred
good lyrics!

In those days I was not a little proud of the profession I had chosen.
The poet was only saying openly what I thought in secret. “The
physician is mankind’s minister.” How often later on have I heard these
and similar words which were calculated to add fuel to the flame of
idealism.

Ye gods! In real life how sad is the physician’s lot! Those outside
cannot conceive it. The first thing to realize is the rarity of the
instances in which the physician really snatches the victim from the
clutches of Death; how rarely he eliminates suffering; how frequently,
discouraged and bewildered, he fails to halt the ravages of disease.
How his idealism makes him suffer! He is painfully aware that the
craftsman comes nearer to his ideals than the artist. He becomes
familiar with man’s limitless ingratitude and realizes that unless he
is to go into bankruptcy he must adopt the “practical” methods of the
business man. He is the slave of his patients, has no holidays, not
a free minute in which he is not reminded of his dependance. He sees
former colleagues and friends who have accumulated fortunes in business
or in the practice of the law, whereas he has to worry about his future
and, with but few exceptions, live from hand to mouth. But he must
continue to play the role of the “idealistic benefactor” unless he is
to lose the esteem of those who--stand outside.

Not long ago I read a fascinating description of a “sanatorium.” How
within its walls fear blanches the cheeks of the inmates, how Death
lurks behind the doors, how even the physicians avoid speaking above
a whisper and glide with solemn and noiseless steps through the house
of pain! Very pretty and sentimental; but utterly false,--as false
as the observations of a littérateur who stands outside can make it.
From within the thing looks quite different! While the surgeon is
scrubbing and sterilising his hands someone is telling the latest
joke, the assistants converse lightly and merrily, not at all as if a
matter of life and death were going to be decided in a few minutes.
And it is well for the patient that it is so. The surgeon and the
assistants need their poise; they must not be moved by timidity, fear,
or sympathy--emotions which cloud the judgment. Where one needs all
one’s senses, there the heart must be silent. The public feels this
instinctively. I have found that those physicians who practised their
profession in a plain matter of fact way, as a business, were the
most popular and the busiest. And, on the other hand, I know learned
physicians who are all soul, whom everybody praises, esteems, heeds,
but whom no one calls. The more highly the physician values his
services, from a material point of view, the more highly he is regarded
as an idealist, and vice versa.

That is how the idealism of the medical profession looks in real
life. For many physicians their ideals are superfluous ballast. It
often takes years before they find the golden mean between theory and
practice, between ethics and hard facts.

And how is it with other vocations? In every case in which it is
possible to look behind the curtains it will appear that the envious
natures of those who stand outside magnify the advantages and overlook
the unpleasant aspects.

All life is a continual game between hope and fulfilment, between
expectation and disappointment. And therein lies our good fortune--that
we can still be deceived. Were we in possession of all truth and all
knowledge, life would lose its value and its charm. Only because, in
a certain sense, we all stand outside, because the fullness of life
and “the thing itself” will continue to be a riddle, are we capable of
continuing on our journey and approaching erectly the valley of death
in which the shades dwell.

“Father, the show is over!” A child’s sweet voice wakes me from my
revery. Outside I again look at the children still standing there and
staring with large, hungry eyes into the Circus....




WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO


Who can say when the first wish opens its pious eyes in the child’s
soul? The child probably sleeps away the first few weeks of its
existence without a single wish, all its behaviour being probably only
manifestations of its inherited instincts. Suddenly the first wish
awakens and the humanization of the little animal has begun. And with
it begins the wild succession of desires, mounting ever higher and
higher and finally aspiring even to the stars. How few of the things
we have been dreaming of does life fulfil! Wish after wish, stripped
of its purple mantle, sinks to the ground in a state of “looped and
windowed raggedness,” till the last wish of all--the longing for peace,
eternal peace--puts an end to the play.

Our childhood wishes determine our destiny. They die only with our
bodies. They go whirling through our dreams, are the masters of our
unconscious emotions, and determine the resonance of the most delicate
oscillations of our souls. It certainly seems worth while taking a
closer look at these wishes. Unfortunately we are deprived of the best
source of such knowledge: the observation of ourselves. For we forget
so easily, and our earliest desires lie far behind us, hidden in thick
mist. Only the dream pierces the thick veil and brings us greetings
from a long forgotten era.

From the study of our children we can learn of only one kind of desire.
A desire that can be easily observed, that the child betrays most
easily in the games it plays.

“And what are you going to be?” That is the question one most often
puts to children and which they very seldom allow to go unanswered.

Right here we must draw a distinction between boys and girls. The
girl’s first wish almost invariably betrays the influence of the sexual
instinct. All little girls want to be “mothers”; some would be content
with being “nurses.” The phylogenetic law of the biologist applies
also to desires. The desires of individual human beings reproduce the
evolution of mankind in this regard. Just as, according to recent
researches (Ament), the first speech attempts of children depict the
primitive speech of man, so the first wishes of human beings depict the
primitive wishes of humanity. Children’s wishes may therefore be said
to be the childhood wishes of humanity and to manifest unmistakeably
the primitive instincts of the sexes.

The little girls want to become “mothers.” They play with dolls,
rocking, fondling, and petting them as if they were children. In this
way they betray their most elemental qualification. My little daughter
once said: “Mother! I want to be a mother, too, some day and have
babies.” “I would be so unhappy if I could not have any babies!” Being
asked whether she would not like to be a doctor, she replied: “Yes! I
would love to be a doctor[1]! But only like mamma.” That is, only the
wife of a doctor.

[1] To understand what follows, the English reader should know that
the German word for a female physician (“Doktorin”) is also the title
whereby a physician’s wife is addressed.

In marked contrast with this is the fact that boys never wish to be
fathers. That is: their fathers are often enough their ideals and they
would like to be like them, to follow the same profession or vocation.
But it’s only a matter of vocation, not of family. I have never yet
heard a boy express a wish for children. There is no doubt however,
that there are boys who like to play with dolls and whose whole being
has something of the feminine about it. They have feminine instincts.
They love to cook and prefer to play with little girls. In the same way
one also encounters girls who are described as “tomboys.” These girls
are wild, unruly, disobedient, boisterous, and like to play at soldiers
and robbers. One cannot go wrong in concluding that a strong, perhaps
even an excessive homosexual element enters into their psychic make-up.
At any rate the biographies of homosexuals invariably make mention of
these remarkable infantile traits. They are boys with female souls
and girls with a masculine soul. Such boys may even manifest various
disguised indications of the instinct for race preservation.

The first stage of girlish wishes does not last long. Usually the
process of repression begins rather early. The little girls notice
that their desires are a source of mirth to their elders, and that
their remarks evoke a kind of amused though embarrassed smirking in the
people about them. So they begin to conceal and to repress the nature
of their desires and to disclose only what is perfectly innocent. And
they tell us they want to become “maids of all work,” housewives.
That does not sound as bad as wanting to be “mother.” One can be a
housewife without having children. As such they go marketing, manage
the home, cook, order the servants about, etc. Then they are attracted
by the splendours of being a cook. A cook is the goddess of sweets
and delicacies and can cook anything she likes. On the same egoistic
principle they then want to be store-keepers, proprietresses of candy
stores, pastry shops, and ice cream parlours. As such they would have
at their sole disposal all the sweets and delicious things a child’s
palate craves for. To possess a store in which one can sell these
wonderful delicatessens and weigh them out to customers is one of the
most ardent wishes of little girls.

Of course as soon as they go to school a new ideal begins to take
possession of the childish soul. Up there in her tribunal sits the
teacher, omniscient and omnipotent, invested with such authority that
the parental authority pales into insignificance in comparison with it.
Parental authority extends only to their children. But the teacher’s!
She has command over so many children! With sovereign munificence she
distributes her gracious favours. She designates one child to act as
“monitor” (oh, what exalted pre-eminence!); another may carry her
books home; the third is permitted to restore the stuffed owl into the
teacher’s cabinet, or to clean the blackboard; the fourth has the rare
privilege of being sent out to purchase the teacher’s ham sandwich! And
then there are the various punishments the teacher can inflict upon the
children entrusted to her. Oh, it’s just grand to be a teacher!

But, above all, the desire is to rule over many. Have I omitted to
mention the “princess”? Incredible! Only few children are so naive
as to betray this wish. But all would love to become “queens,”--ay,
with all their hearts. The fairy tales are full of them. How the proud
prince came and helped the poor girl mount his steed, saying: “Now
you’ll sit by me and be my Queen!” Innumerable Cinderellas in the north
and in the south, in the east and in the west, sit at their compulsory
tasks and dream of the prince who is to free them.

All have one secret dread: To be lost in the vast multitude. They want
to accomplish something, want to stand out over the others. Vanity
causes more suffering than ambition. Soon, too soon, they learn that,
these sober days princes do not go roaming about promiscuously as in
the golden days of fairydom. But hope finds a way and soars on the
wings of fantasy into the realm of the possible and yet wonderful.
Are there not queens in the world of arts? Do they not rule like real
queens their willingly humble subjects? Haven’t they everything that
a queen has: Gold, fame, honour, recognition, admiration, envy? Almost
every girl goes through this stage. She wants to become a great artist.
A prima donna such as the world has never yet known; a danseuse, who
shall have the tumultuous applause of houses filled to the last seat;
a celebrated actress whose finger-tips princes shall be permitted to
kiss; a violinist whose bow shall sway the hearts of men more than the
golden sceptre of a queen ever could.

This dream runs through the souls of all girls. It yearly furnishes
the art dragon with thousands and thousands of victims. The happy
parents believe it is the voice of talent crying imperatively to be
heard. In reality it is only the beginning of a harassing struggle
to get into the lime-light, a struggle that all women wage with in
exhaustible patience as long as they live. And thus numberless amateur
female dilettanti vainly contend for the laurel because they are so
presumptuous as to try to transform a childish dream into a waking
reality.

It is even more interesting to make a survey of what girls just past
puberty do not wish to become. Not one wants to marry. (Reasons can
always be found.) Not one wants to be an ordinary merchant’s wife. And
life then takes delight in bringing that to pass which seemingly they
did not wish....

In boys the matter is more complicated. The sex-urge is not manifested
so clearly in them as in girls. It requires great skill in the
understanding of human conduct to discover in the games that boys play
the symbolic connection with the natural impulses. It is remarkable
that boys’ earliest ideals are employments that are in some way or
other related to locomotion. All little boys first want to be drivers,
conductors, chauffeurs, and the like. Motion seems to fascinate the boy
and to give him more pleasure than anything else. A ride in a street
car or a bus which seems to us elders so obviously wearisome is such
a wonderful thing for a child. Just look at the solemn faces of the
little boys as they sit astride the brave wooden steed in the carousal!
“Sonny, don’t you like it? Why aren’t you laughing?” exclaims the
astonished mother.

A child is still at that stage of development when motion seems
something wonderful. Is it possible that in this a secret (unconscious)
sex-motive, such as is often felt by one when being rocked or swung
in a swinging boat, does not play a part? Many adults admit this
well-known effect of riding. This is in all probability one of the
most potent and most hidden roots of the passion for travelling. Freud
very frankly asserts in his “Contributions to a sexual theory” that
rhythmical motion gives rise to pleasurable sensations in children.
“The jolting in a travelling wagon and subsequently in a railway train
has such a fascination for older children that all children, at least
all boys, sometimes in their life want to be conductors and drivers.
They show a curious interest in everything connected with trains and
make these the nucleus of an exquisite system of sexual symbolism.”

Be this as it may. The fact is that all the little ones want to become
drivers of some vehicle, that they can play driver, rider, chauffeur,
car, train, etc., for hours at a time, that in the first years of
their lives their fantasies are fixed only on objects possessing the
power of motion, beginning with the baby-carriage and ending with the
aeroplane.

This stage lasts a variable period in different children. In some
cases up to puberty and some even beyond this. I know boys who have
almost attained to manhood who are still inordinately interested in
automobiles and railways. In these cases we are dealing with a fixation
of an infantile wish which will exercise a decisive influence on the
individual’s whole life. In most cases the first ideal loses its
glamour before the magic of a uniform. The first uniform that a child
sees daily is that of the “letter-carrier.” In his favour, too, is
the fact that he is always on the go, going from house to house. The
“policeman” too, promenading up and down in his uniform, engages the
child’s fantasy. So too the dashing “fireman.” Needless to say all
these are very soon displaced and wholly forgotten in favour of the
“soldier.”

The love to be a soldier has its origin in many sources. Almost all
boys pass through a period when they want to be soldiers. The wish to
be a soldier is a compromise for various suppressed wishes. A soldier
has been known to become a general and even a king. That fact is
narrated in fairy tales, chronicled in sagas and recorded in history.
One can manifest one’s patriotism. Then there is the beautiful coloured
uniform that the girls so love--and one is always going somewhere. For
one is never just an ordinary soldier but a bold, dashing trooper,
and--this above all!--one has a big powerful sword. Under the influence
of these childish desires children plead to go to the military schools
and the parents give their consent in the belief that it is the
children’s natural bent that speaks. Why, I tried to take this step
when I was fifteen years old but--heaven be praised for it--was found
physically unfit. My more fortunate friends who were accepted have for
the most part subsequently discovered that they had erred in their
youth.

The same thing happens with respect to the other wishes of children,
whether they become engineers, teachers, physicians, or ministers. The
voice of the heart is deceptive and rarely betrays the individual’s
true gift. The biographies of great men may now and then give
indications of talent manifested in childhood. But the contrary is also
easily to be found. Very often hidden desires are concealed or masked
behind one’s choice of a calling. I know a man who became a physician
because he longed to go far away, to go to the metropolis. In youth he
had to be driven to practice his music--and yet music was his great
talent and he should have become a musician.

What our children want to become ... seldom denotes that they have a
natural aptitude for a particular calling. They are to be regarded
only as distorted symbols behind which the almost utterly insoluble
puzzles of the childhood soul are concealed. When we are mature enough
to know what we really want to become it is usually too late. Then we
are children no longer. But then we would love to be children again and
shed a furtive tear for the beautiful childhood that’s dead.... If we
could be children again we’d know what we would like to be. No illusory
wish would then tempt us from the right path, luring us like a will o’
the wisp into the morass of destruction.

And this wish too is fulfilled. We become children again if we live
long enough. But then, alas! our wishes have ceased to bloom. Over the
stubble-field of withered hopes we totter to our inevitable destiny.
Everything seems futile, for all paths lead to one goal. Then we know
what children would like to become, what they must become.




INDEPENDENCE


A pale, dark-complexioned young man, elegantly attired, sits before
me. His hair is neatly parted on the side and boldly thrown back over
his forehead; he is clearly half snob and half artist; in short, one
of that remarkable type of young man that is so common in a modern
metropolis. His complaints are the customary complaints of the
modern neurotic. He is tired and weak, incapable of prolonged mental
application. He is a clerk in an office, and has already lost one
position because of his inability to use his brains any longer. With
some difficulty his father had secured a position for him in a bank
where a bright future seems to await him but where a dull present
bears him down. All day it’s nothing but figures, figures, figures. He
cannot endure that. His patience is almost exhausted; the figures swim
before his eyes, and he makes more mistakes than is tolerable in an
official of a bank. He begs me for a certificate that will officially
vouch for his unendurable condition and make it possible for him to
resign from his office in an honourable way before he is discharged for
incompetence.

“Yes, and what will you do then? Have you another position in prospect?”

“Certainly,” he replied, with a certain alacrity which was in striking
contrast with his careless melancholy. “I want to make myself
independent. I am not fitted for office work, and I can’t bear to be
bossed around and instructed by every Tom, Dick, or Harry who happens
to have been on the job a few years longer than I.”

“Ah! now I understand your inability to figure. You are living in a
state of permanent psychic conflict. Because you have no desire to work
you cannot work. But what kind of business do you wish to go into? What
have you learned?”

“Learned? To tell the truth, only what one learns in a trade school. I
don’t want to go into business. I only want the certificate to show my
father that my health will not permit me to work in an office. Do you
think it’s good for anybody to work from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., with only
one hour for luncheon?”

“That would be only eight hours work a day! I assure you that there are
thousands who would be happy to work only so little. Shall you work
less when you are independent?”

“Certainly. Then I won’t have to work at all.”

“So!” I replied in amazement. “I am curious to know what sort of
business that is where one doesn’t have to work. What do you intend to
do when your father gives you money?”

A blissful smile passed over the interesting youth’s face like a beam
of celestial light. “I know all about sports. I’m going to play the
races!”

I must admit I was considerably taken aback. I know how reluctant to
work many a modern man is whose whole energy is expended in dreams. But
that a sensible man should think of such a thing was new to me. Such a
peculiar motivation for the purpose of becoming independent. The matter
kept running through my head a long time. I soon noticed that this
youth was only an extreme type of a very common species--a species that
expresses itself in a passion for independence. When we investigate the
deeper causes of this passion we invariably find the desire to secure
for oneself the utmost amount of pleasure from a very small investment.
But independence is only apparently the coveted ideal; behind it
lies not only the desire for freedom, not only the proud feeling of
self-reliance. No, in many cases the kernel of the matter is--laziness.

Independence! Proud, brazen word! How many sacrifices hast thou not
demanded and dost still demand daily! Who is ignorant of these little
daily tragedies of which no newspaper makes mention! The salesman who,
after he had for years enjoyed a care-free and assured position, has
fallen a victim to the craving for independence, and has to contend
with cares and worries so long that at last, broken down and battered,
he renounces his beautiful dream and willingly submits his once proud
neck to the yoke; the writer who starts his own newspaper and sees his
hard-saved gold flow away in beautifully printed sheets; the actor
who becomes the director of his own company; the merchant who builds
his own factory,--an endless procession of men who wished to make
themselves independent.

It would be one-sided not to admit that in addition to the
aforementioned element of wanting to make one’s work easier there is
also a certain ambition to get ahead of one’s neighbours. Modern man
is linked to life by a thousand bonds. He is only a little screw in a
vast machine--a screw that has little or no influence on the working
efficacy of the complicated apparatus, that can be lightly thrown aside
or replaced. We all feel the burden of modern life, and instinctively
we all fret under it and work against it. We long to sever the link
that ties us to commonplace day and to become the lever that sets the
machinery in motion.

Stupid beginning! Hopeless and thankless! Who can be independent and
absolute nowadays? Is there any calling that can boast of standing
outside life? It is a delusive dream which beckons and betrays us. We
change masters only. That’s very simple. But we are far from becoming
independent thereby. We have a hundred masters instead of one. The
employee who has made himself “independent” has lost his master but
becomes the slave of innumerable new tyrants to whose wills he must
bow: his customers. Therein he resembles the so-called free professions
which are in reality not free. The physician is dependent upon the
whims of his patients; the lawyer woos the favour of his clients; the
writer groans under the knout of the cruelest of all tyrants: the
public. And, strange to say, it is this last calling that appeals
to most persons as the ideal of independence. It is almost a weekly
occurrence to see some discontented youngster or an unhappy girl with
a thick manuscript in his or her portfolio, begging to be recommended
to some publisher and thus open a writer’s career to them. They want to
become self reliant, independent. It is vain to point out to them that
an author’s bread is not sweetened with the raisins of independence.
Others who have never written a line suddenly make up their minds to
become journalists. They think that the will to become a journalist
is all that is needed to be so. Evidences of adequate preparation
and qualification they find in the excellence of their school
compositions. They do not suspect that the journalist’s independence
is a myth that is credited only by those who have never smelled to
journalism. That the journalist is the slave not only of the public
but also of the hour. That not a minute of the day is his, and that he
would gladly exchange his pen for any other, more massy tool, if such a
thing were possible.

Dissatisfaction with one’s calling is also one of the factors that sets
the feeling for independence in motion. Who is nowadays satisfied with
his calling, or with himself?! This may be easily proved by referring
to a striking phenomenon. In doing so we need not sing the praises
of the “good old days.” But happiness in one’s work and contentment
with one’s calling were certainly much more common than they are now.
Otherwise it could never have come to pass that the father’s calling
should be transmitted to the sons generation after generation. How is
it with us to-day? The physician cries: My son may be anything but a
physician. The public official: My son shall be more fortunate than I;
under no circumstances shall he be a public official. The actor: Be
what you will, my son, but not an artist; art is the bitterest bread.
The merchant wants to make a lawyer of his son, the lawyer a merchant,
etc.

We envy others because we are all dissatisfied with ourselves and
unhappy. The great ideal that floats before our eyes is to become a
clipper of coupons. Money alone guarantees the road to independence.
But if we were to ask the rich about this we would hear some
surprising things. I know a lady who possesses a vast fortune and
who is the absolute slave of her money. I recommended her to take a
trip for her health’s sake. She replied: “Do you think that I can
go away for a week? You have no idea of all the work I have to do.
Now it’s something with the bureau of taxes, now it’s engaging a new
superintendent! Then there are the receptions! I am busy from morning
till night.” When I advised her to hire a manager she laughed merrily:
“I’d be in a fine fix if I did that! Then I would lose the only
recompense I have: my independence!”

Wherever we look, the higher we go, the less of true independence do
we find. What does the psychology of modern social feelings teach us?
It shows us everywhere the same cry for independence which in the
single individual we have described as the basic feeling of his social
attitude. Norway wanted its independence and got it. Hungary stormily
clamoured for independence. Ireland, Poland, Persia, India, Egypt, and
numerous colonies are struggling for independence. In the structure of
the State the urge for independence begets continual turmoil. Austria
can sing a plaintive song as to this. The demand of certain states for
autonomy is the outcome of the same motive.

Political tune--scurvy tune. However--wholly unintentionally our
analysis brings us from the consideration of the individual to that
of the group. That a modern state can never again attain that measure
of independence that it once enjoyed is as clear to the political
economist as to the sociologist. What we have said of the individual
applies also to peoples.

Must we then conclude that there is no independence? Isn’t it possible
then for man to elevate himself above his environment and take a
loftier point of view?

There certainly is such a thing as independence. But we must draw a
sharp line of distinction between two different kinds of independence.
There is an inner and an outer independence. But it is only the inner
independence that one can hope to attain wholly. It alone is capable of
giving us that modicum of outward independence which may be laboriously
wrested from life. A healthy philosophy of life that frees the spirit,
makes renunciation easier and wishing harder, and a certain spiritual
and bodily freedom from wanting for things,--these alone can give us
that independence that the world affords. That is why the poorest of
the poor is more independent than the richest of the rich.

We all know the beautiful story of the king whose physicians promised
him health if he could wear the shirt of a happy man. Messengers
searched every corner of the world but, alas! could not find a happy
man, till finally they came upon a merry hermit in the thickest part of
a dark forest who seemed to be perfectly happy. But he, the only happy
man in the wide world, had no shirt!

We would have to divest ourselves of many shirts to become independent
within. We wear and lug about with us numberless suits, wrappings,
which cover up our true selves and apparently safeguard us, whereas in
reality they drag us down to the base earth.




JEALOUSY


Has any one counted the victims of jealousy? Daily a revolver cracks
somewhere or other because of jealousy; daily a knife finds entrance
into a warm body; daily some unhappy ones, racked by jealousy and
life-weary, sink into fathomless depths. What are all the hideous
battles narrated by history when compared with the endless slaughters
caused by this frightful passion! It enslaves man as no other passion
does; degrades him, humiliates him, and makes him taste the hell of
many other passions, such as envy, mistrust, revengefulness, fear,
hate, anger, and poisons the meagre pleasure-cup that imparts a touch
of sweetness to bitter life.

What is jealousy? Whence flow its tributaries? Is this the Danaidean
gift to humanity? Is it the twin sister of love? Do we acquire it or
is it born with us? It is surely worth while to consider every one of
these questions and to attempt to determine the nature of this unholy
passion.

To understand jealousy we must go far, very far back into the history
of man’s origin. Yes, far beyond man, as far as the animal world!
For certain animals, intelligent animals, show clearly evidences of
jealousy. Pet dogs resent it if their masters pet another dog. They are
even jealous if the master caresses human beings. There are dogs who
begin to whine if their master plays with or fondles his children. Very
much the same thing is told of cats. Who of us on reading Freiligrath’s
gruesome ballad, “The Lion’s Bride,” has not felt the terror of the
beast’s furious jealousy?

Our observation of animals has taught us one of the fundamental
characteristics of jealousy. Animals know very definitely what is
theirs. They have a fine perception for what is theirs. Most dogs snarl
even at their masters if they attempt to take their food from them.
Their jealousy is the mood in which they express their possession,
the egoism of their share. They defend as their possession even the
affection to which they think themselves solely entitled.

The emotional life of the young shows the same phenomenon. They too
do not know the distinction between thine and mine. What they happen
to have in their hands is theirs and will defend it with their weak
powers and loud howls. Many psychologists, including Percy, Compayné,
Sully, Anfosse, Schion, Ziegler, consider the child an unmitigated
egoist. Even in its love it is out and out egoistic and therefore
extremely jealous. Young children’s jealousy may attain an incredible
degree of intensity. A little two-year-old girl cried incessantly if
her mother took the baby brother in her arms. A little boy was so
jealous of his younger sister that he used to pinch her leg at every
opportunity; having been smartly punished for it on one occasion he
spared the little girl thereafter, but became afflicted with a peculiar
compulsion neurosis: he pinched the legs of adults. Such experiences
are of profound significance. They give us a glimpse of the primitive
times when man had no idea yet of altruism. The whole world was his as
far as his power, his strength, went. Man’s jealousy developed out of
this primary ego-feeling, out of his right to sole possession. Before
man could be civilised this tremendous barrier had to be overcome.
The first community, the first social beings, were the first stages of
altruism and civilization.

From this period emanate the subterranean sources from which jealousy
is fed. We have probably all become more or less altruistic. But always
in conflict with ourselves, in conflict with the beast, in conflict
with the savage within us. Even to this day the whole world belongs to
each one of us. Our desires extend our property to infinity. What would
we not own? What do we not desire? The wealth of the rich, the honour
of the distinguished, the triumphs of the artist, to say nothing of his
sexual triumphs. The less we can fulfil these desires the more do we
cling to what we have, or, somewhat more accurately, could have had.
For jealousy does not concern only what one actually possesses. Women
may be jealous of men they do not love and do not even possess. They
simply begrudge the other woman her conquest. Don Juans know this very
well. The best way of conquering a woman is still the old, old way:
to make love to her friend. In this case wounded vanity plays a part,
of course. But what is vanity but the over-estimation of the Me, the
striking emphasis laid on one’s own value? And thus we again come back
to the root of all jealousy: the pleasure in one’s own possession, in
one’s embellished egoism.

Jealousy need not always have a sexual motive. A woman may be jealous
of her husband’s friend because he has been more successful than her
husband. Her husband is her possession. He ought to be the foremost, he
ought to have achieved the others’ successes, so that his fame should
revert to her too. Pupils are jealous of one another even though not
a trace of a sexual motive may be demonstrable. We may be jealous of
another’s horses, dogs, furniture, virtues, honours, friendships,
responsibilities, etc. Behind it there always is our brutal egoism, the
desire for another’s possessions, or at least the fear of losing one’s
own possession.

Jealousy is generally regarded as a pre-eminently feminine quality.
Erroneously so. It would be more nearly correct to say that the heroic
side of jealousy is to be found only in men. It is not a matter merely
of chance that we have no feminine counterpart to Othello, Herod and
the Count in Hauptmann’s “Griselda.” Jealousy in women has received a
social valuation from men; it always has a smack of the ridiculous,
pathological, or unjustified. It is a subject for satire, and is more
often a comedy motive than a tragic reproach. This is due to the fact
that woman’s love is monopolised by men, whereas a man’s loyalty
is demanded by most women but attained only by very few. A man’s
infidelity is not a dramatic reproach because it is a daily occurrence
and wholly in accord with the lax conception of the majority. A woman’s
infidelity is an offence against the sacred mandates imposed by--men.
And therefore the jealousy of a man--be the subject of the passion a
fool, a fop, an old man, or some other laughable type destined for
cuckoldry--is a struggle for just possession, a conflict which always
has an heroic effect, whereas a woman’s jealousy is always a dispute
for the sole possession of a man, a right which is disputed by a great
majority (namely, the men, and even some women).

But there are men and women who are not jealous even though they love
intensely. And with this we hit upon a second and important root of
jealousy. Only one who contemplates an act of disloyalty against the
object of his jealousy, or who, as a result of doubts about his own
erotic powers, thinks he cannot gratify that object can be jealous.
Of course I am not now speaking of justified jealousy based on facts,
but of baseless, unjustified jealousy. Whence comes the suspicion that
attributes infidelity to the beloved being? What is the driving power
in these cases? Only the knowledge of one’s true nature. Only they can
be jealous, jealous without cause, who cannot guarantee for themselves.
In other words: jealousy is the projection of one’s own shortcomings
upon the beloved.

If we find a woman who is all her life torturing her husband with her
jealousy, complaining now that he has been looking at some woman too
long, now that he stayed out too long, now that he was too friendly
with one of her friends, etc., then it is the woman who has seen
the weakness of her own character and who, in thought, is guilty of
every infidelity which she will not admit even to herself. And in
the same way faithless husbands who love their wives make the most
jealous husbands. That is the vermuth potion which leaves with them a
bitter after-taste as soon as they have made another conquest. Their
own experiences entitle them to be jealous. Bachelors who had been
philanderers and can boast of many conquests usually marry plain or
unattractive women--alleging, by way of explanation, that they want to
have the woman for themselves and not for others, meanwhile forgetting
how often they themselves had been caught in the nets of homely
women. For almost any woman who will permit herself to do so can find
admirers, and ugliness is no protection against dramatic or comic
marital infidelities.

The absence of jealousy in cases of intense affection usually, but not
always, indicates a nature immune against all assaults. But those who
are free from this passion need not therefore be puffed up. We are
poor sinners all, and the time may come sooner or later for any of
us in which we shall transfer our weaknesses upon others and become
jealous. But it also happens that freedom from jealousy is a sign not
of security but of stupidity, unlimited vanity. The woman is regarded
as a paragon of all the virtues, without a touch of frailty. The
husband may be an ideal specimen of an otherwise frivolous species. In
these cases one’s inadequacy is so covered up by our over-estimation of
our endowments that comparisons are never instituted and projection is
impossible.

Consequently baseless jealousy and baseless confidence will always
be. And therefore we shall not follow Bleuler in his estimation of
jealousy as one of the “unconscious commonplaces” which makes love
valueless as “the plant-louse does the rose-bud.” We shall recognise
in it, when it is baseless, a disease of the soul occurring in persons
whose cravings and realities do not coincide and who have with a heavy
heart been forced to the recognition after cruel inner conflicts that
their virtue is only an over-emphatic opposition to their weakness.
Their jealousy has taken on a pathological (neurotic) character because
of this repression and this relegating of their own desires into the
unconscious. That is why all the logic of realities is effectless when
opposed to the logic of the unconscious. One might almost say that
jealousy is a cultural disease which results from the restrictions on
our love-life imposed by law and morality. If so-called “free love”
ever becomes a fact there will be far fewer cases of jealousy than we
have to-day. That sounds plausible. But will life be more worth living
when there will be no more jealousy? We gladly put up with jealousy if
only our costly treasure of love continues secure. Would a life free
from all jealousy and pain, a life without passions, be worth while?
Is it not a fact that our possessions are most highly valued by us at
the moment when we fear to lose them?... The sweetest harmonies are to
be found only in contrasts. The wagon of life rolls with greater tempo
over the endless lonely roads when it is harnessed to the passions.




CHILDHOOD FRIENDSHIP


An indescribably sweet breeze blows over the friendships of childhood.
They are tender, delicate, pale blue petals that tremble with each
stir of the childish soul and whose roots even then already penetrate
down to the deep layers in which inherited instincts and tempting
desires fertilise the soil of the passions. Its first friendship
is a revelation for the child. Till then it loved its parents, its
surroundings, its teacher. But behind this love the educational
tendency was always in evidence. “You must love your parents because
they are so good to you. You must respect your teacher because from him
you get the knowledge that is indispensable to you in your life.” Thus
we make that love a duty for the child which ought, on the contrary, to
make it conscious of its duties.

How different it all is in the case of friendship. Here the child
can follow its natural inclinations. Here it can choose according to
its own standards without having to listen to the dictates of its
educators. And indeed one has thousands of opportunities to observe
that a child is much more cautious than adults in the selection of its
friends, that it will not accept a friend assigned it by its parents
unless he meets with its approval, unless an unconscious urge pleads in
his behalf.

How peculiar children are in their choice of a friend! Either he is
the nicest or the finest, the quietest or the noisiest, the best or
the worst, the strongest or the weakest. They prefer one whose traits
are clearly and sharply defined, rather than one who is neither one
thing nor the other. There must be something about the friend that they
can admire; he must excel them in something. But it is not a bar to
friendship that they excel the other in something.

Let no one say that it is an easy matter to read the souls of children!
That their emotions are simple, that their soul’s an open book! We can
discover all the puzzling roots of love, even in the friendships of
children, _e.g._, sympathy, cruelty, desire, humility, and subjection.

It is my belief that we adults cannot love with the love we were
capable of in childhood. We cannot hate so, cannot be so resentful, and
cannot be so self-sacrificing. Alas! even our emotions become pallid
with the years and can make a show of colour only with the aid of
memory.

Let us watch a child that has entered into a close friendship. Is it
not playing the same game that we adults later on designate as love?
Have we forgotten the feverish impatience with which we awaited the
hour of the friend’s coming and how jealous we were if he stopped to
converse with another? How we hated him then and how terribly unhappy
we were? How we would have loved to cry aloud, if we had not been
ashamed to betray such weakness. Have we forgotten how the hours flew
when we were playing together, how we whispered dreadful and mysterious
things to each other in the twilight, how passionately we embraced
each other, and kissed, and how ready we were to give up our little
treasures to our friends? There is but one time that resembles this
friendship:--the time when a happy love makes a wooer a sweet child
again.

Even in a child’s soul the hunger for love cries aloud and will not be
stilled. For a love that is more than a love of parents, for a love
that is touched with that dark power which at a later period shapes the
life of man to its will.

Oh! blessed time, in which our yearning for a second human being is so
easily gratified! Blessed time, in which we do not yet feel the hot
breath of burning desires when the arm of a beloved being entwines us,
in which the threatening fist of Destiny does not pin us to the ground
at the moment when we think we are plucking down the sky! The mirror of
our soul still reflects pure innocence; we do not yet suspect that the
passions that set the waters in motion must also stir up the muddy ooze
that lies at the bottom.

Childhood friendship is the school of love. Without such friendship the
child is impoverished and forever loses the power to love. Look at the
mothers’ darlings whose mothers took the place of friends! See how they
are bound to their mothers by all their emotions, by all the bonds of
their souls, incapable of breaking loose from the love for the mother
and founding another generation. The stupidest dream of parents is the
wish to be the friends of their children. But are we not deceiving
ourselves? Is such a thing possible? Is there not between ourselves and
our children a world of disappointments and buried hopes? Are there
not here yawning chasms in whose depths wild torrents carry away the
residue of past years, chasms which cannot be bridged? Say what we
will, only a child can be a child’s friend!

And there is much food for reflection in this. The child is surrounded
by so much authority, so much school, so much dignity, so much law,
that it would have to break down under the weight of all these
restraints if it were not saved from such a fate by meeting with a
friend. In secret conferences, at first in whispers and only in hints,
but subsequently more and more clearly and distinctly, the road to life
is outlined. The gods are dethroned, or, at any rate, are not feared so
much; little jokes about the teacher are the beginning, and gradually
the excess of parental authority goes tumbling till it assumes just
proportions. The way to freedom of thought, the way to independence,
the way to individuality is opened. What the child could not have
accomplished alone was a mere toy with the help of another. And the
friendship grows ever prouder and more intimate the more the child
loses the feelings enforced upon it.

One great mystery, the child’s eternal question, occupies its mind
more than most parents, most persons, will believe: the question about
the origin of man, the question which is customarily answered with a
childish tale about a stork (or a big tree in heaven, a large cabbage,
or a department store), a tale with which the clever little ones make
fools of their elders who go on repeating for many years a story they
had long ago ceased to believe. Behind all the child’s curiosity there
lurks the one great question: “Where do children come from?” One will
never go wrong in concluding that a child who is plaguing his elders
with a thousand stupid and clever questions is suffering from a kind of
obsession, an obsessive questioning, behind which lies the one great
and important question that troubles all children. On this subject the
child cannot speak with its parents. Instinctively it feels that here
is a great mystery that is being withheld from it and whose solution
the parents have put off for a future time. It is during childhood
friendship and in connection with this question that sexuality plays
its first trump. It is a pity that human beings so easily forget their
own childhood, else parents would not be so blind in this regard. In
the northern psychologist’s, Arne Gaborg’s, best work “By Mama” there
is a wonderful scene copied direct from nature: Two little girls are
sitting on the basement stairs whispering to each other their latest
bit of information about the great mystery; gradually it grows dark
and an inexplicable dread of something great, threatening, mysterious,
fills their trembling souls; it is that fear which faithfully
accompanies love throughout life and whose dark wing has just barely
brushed their innocent childhood.

The child gets older and friendship changes its nature. Life and
its claims interpose their authority. Into the quiet and unselfish
friendship of childhood, into the pure and simple childish harmonies
there penetrate various over- and under-tones whose inharmonious
character is not discovered until long after. Envy, egoism,
covetousness, cunning, distrust,--all these feelings steal their way
into the childhood friendship, and finally friendship degenerates into
what Moebius has so aptly named _Phantom-practice_. Young obstetricians
train their unskilled hands on “phantoms” (or mannikins) to fit them
for the serious requirements of their art. Something exactly like this
is the conduct of young adolescents, especially girls, who are still
half-child and already half-woman. To a girl the admiration of a girl
friend takes the place of a lover’s wooing; to be kissed by her results
in a dream of being kissed by a man. Recently biology has developed
the idea, erroneously attributed to Otto Weininger, that every human
being is a mixture of both sexes. Before puberty the two elements
_M._ and _F._, male and female, must balance. The child is bisexually
constituted, and therefore every friendship is in a certain sense a
love affair. About the time of sexual maturity the sexuality of every
individual triumphantly asserts itself. This is the great moment when
childhood friendship has fulfilled its mission. It is as if the child
were now freeing itself from the yoke of its own sex and entering the
arena equipped for the battle of love.

This also explains why childhood friendships so seldom are preserved
and carried over into adult life. The friendships of adults are based
upon different foundations. Now it is the thinking, reflecting,
conscious being who seeks a fellow combatant who he hopes will fully
understand (and sympathise with) him. Higher interests determine
their friendships. But it is no longer so deeply rooted as childhood
friendship. It no longer requires the co-operation of the instinctive
emotions.

Now and then one comes across persons who are always children, whom not
even the bitterest experiences can strip off the pollen linked with
their emotions. They are the only ones capable of true friendship even
in their old age. They spread friendship with the sweet smile of the
child; they do not love for the sake of the advantages to be derived;
they do not even ask whether they are their friends’ friend. Ah! If we
could be such a child again! Or if we could but find it!




EATING


I was once invited to the house of a certain writer who had made a
name for himself by several very clever novels and had acquired a
fortune by the publication of a successful journal. He was now living
on an estate in the country, retired from active life, spending his
days in luxurious peace. Much too soon, as I very quickly found
out. For he was in no sense old. A man about fifty whose eyes still
looked challengingly at the world. His look had in it nothing of the
asceticism of one who is tired of life. No; here the fire of secret
passions still blazed; here one could still detect power, ambition, and
desires.

Much in his conduct seemed puzzling to me. A stony calm, a certain
lassitude in his movements,--an enforced pose calculated to conceal the
internal restlessness which his eyes could not help betraying.

Only when the time to eat came he became all life. Then he stretched
his neck aloft, that he might see clearly the dish that was being
brought in. His nostrils dilated as if the sooner to inhale the
delightful aroma. His mouth made remarkable twitching movements and his
tongue moved over his thin lips with that peculiar rapid movement that
one may observe in a woman when she is engaged in animated conversation
with a man. He became restless, fidgetted nervously in his chair, and
followed tensely the distribution of the food by his wife, a corpulent,
energetic and almost masculine woman, who, very naturally and to his
secret distress, helped her guests first. Finally--much too late to
suit him--he received his portion. First he regarded his food with the
eye of an expert, turning it from side to side with his knife and fork.
Then he cut off a small piece and rolled it about in his mouth with
audible clucking and smacking of his tongue, let it rest on his tongue
awhile, his face the meantime assuming an expression of visionary
ecstasy. It was easy to see that for him eating had become the day’s
most important task. During the meal he never stopped talking of the
excellence of the food, all the while smacking his tongue and lips, and
literally expounding a system of culinary criticism.

When finally, to my great relief, the grace after dinner had been
pronounced, I hoped at last to be done with the wearying, unpleasant
chatter about eating. But this time I had really reckoned without my
host.

“What shall we serve our guests to-morrow, my dear?” the gourmand
inquired of his sterner half.

“To-morrow? The big white goose with the black patch.”

“The big white goose with the black patch! Ah! She’ll taste wonderful!
You don’t know how childishly happy it makes me. Come, let me show you
the white goose with the black patch!”

Resistance was useless. I had to go into the poultry-yard, where my
host stopped in front of a well-fed goose. “She’ll make a fine roast! I
am greatly pleased with this goose.”

No matter what subject was discussed, political, literary, or economic,
the main motif kept recurring: “I love to think of the big white goose
with the black patch!”

The meaning of gourmandism then suddenly flashed on me. What passions
must this man have suppressed, how much must he have renounced, before
his craving for pleasure had found new delights in this roundabout way!
Behind this monomaniac delight in eating, thought I, there must lurk a
great secret.

And such was indeed the case. My amiable host was really his wife’s
prisoner. While he was residing in the capital he had begun to indulge
in a perversion. His vice grew on him to such an extent that it
threatened to destroy everything, health, fortune, mind, ambition,
personality, spirit, everything. There was nothing left for him to do
but to tell his wife all and implore her assistance in saving him. The
virile woman soon hit on the only remedy. He became her prisoner. They
broke off all relationships that bound them to their social group. Most
of the year they spent in the country and lived in the city only two or
three winter months. The time was spent in eating and card playing, to
which fully half of the day was devoted. He was never alone. At most he
was permitted to take a short walk in the country. His wife had charge
of the family treasury, with which he had nothing to do. Of course,
this did not cure his pathological craving, but it made gratification
impossible. And gradually there began to develop in him the pleasure
for delicate dishes. In this indirect way he satisfied a part of his
sensuous craving. Thus he transformed his passion. His meals took the
place of the hours spent in the embraces of a lover. For him eating was
a re-coinage of his sexuality.

Is this an exceptional case, or is this phenomenon the rule? This is
the first question that forces itself on our attention. An answer to it
would take us into the deeps of the whole sexual problem. But let us
limit ourselves for the present only to what is essential for an answer
to our immediate question. Between hunger and love there is an endless
number of associations. The most important is this: both are opposed by
one counter-impulse, namely, disgust. Both love and hunger are desires
to touch, (to incorporate or to be incorporated with the desired
object); disgust is the fear of doing so. Love is accompanied with a
counter-impulse, a restraining influence, which we call shame. But this
very feeling, shame, is manifested by certain primitive peoples in
connection with eating. In Tahiti, says Cook, not even the members of
the family eat together, but eat seated several metres apart and with
their backs to one another. The Warua, an African tribe, conceal their
faces with a cloth while they are drinking. The Bakairi are innocent
of any sense of shame in connection with nakedness, but never eat
together.

The Viennese psychiatrist Freud, the Englishman Havelock Ellis (“The
Sexual Impulse”), and the Spanish Sociologist Solila, regard the
sucking of the breast by an infant as a kind of sexual act which
creates permanent associations between hunger and love. And the
language we speak has coined certain turns of expression which bring
these connections out unmistakably and which have great interest for
us as fossilisations of primitive thought processes and as rudiments
of cannibalism. Note, for example, the following expressions: “I could
bite her”; or, “I love the child so I could eat it up!” But we express
even disgust, aversion and hatred in terms of eating, _e.g._, “I can’t
stomach the fellow,” or, “he turns my stomach,” “she is not to my
taste,” etc.

On the other hand the names of certain dishes reveal connections with
other emotional complexes than the pure pleasure of eating. There is
an everyday symbolism which we all pass by blindly. Let him who has
any interest in this subject read Rudolph Kleinpaul’s book, “Sprache
ohne Worte” (Language without Words). This symbolism plays a much more
important rôle than we are wont to admit. For it alone is capable of
interpreting the puzzling names of the various delicacies on the bill
of fare. We are cannibals, for we eat “Moors in their ‘Jackets’” (a
fine revenge on the tawny cannibals!) “poor knights,” “master of the
chase,” “apprentice-locksmith,” and many more of the same kind. “Bridal
roast” holds an important place in the menus of the whole world. Social
inferiority is compensated for by numerous royal dishes ... _e.g._,
steak-a-la-king, cutlet-a-la-king, chicken-a-la-king, royal pudding,
etc., etc. One who will take the trouble, as Kleinpaul did in his
“Gastronomic Fairy-tale,” to follow up these things, will discover many
remarkable links with unconscious ideas. We are really hemmed in on
every side by fairy tales. Every word we speak, every name we utter,
has its story. And the many fairy tales in which children are devoured
by wolves, witches, man-eaters, and sea-monsters, together with the
tales in which so much is said about man-eating cannibals, reveal to
us a fragment of our pre-historic past in which love and hate actually
resulted in persons being eaten. In their naïveté our children betray
this very clearly. When the little ones eat maccaroni, noodles, or
similar dishes, they often make believe they are eating up somebody.

But, “something too much of this.” Let us turn our attention again to
the epicures, the little progeny of a great race. It is not difficult
to divide them into five classes according to which one of the five
senses is being chiefly gratified during the eating process. First,
there are the “Voyeurs,” to use the term so aptly coined by the French
with reference to a phenomenon in the sexual sphere. They must “see”
before they can enjoy. To see is the important thing with them. The
dishes must be served neatly and must look inviting. They are the
admirers of the many-coloured adornments on patisserie, of torts,
cakes, and puddings built in the shape of houses, churches, towers,
animals, wedding-bells, etc. They reckon their pleasures by the colour
nuances of their foods. Their chief delight is in the fore-pleasure
derived through the eyes. (This is clearly implied in the popular
phrase “a feast for the eyes.”)

Not quite as common are the listeners “who are thrown into a mild
ecstasy by the sizzling of a roast, the cracking of dry crumbs, and the
fiz of certain liquids.” Numberless are the “smellers” whose sensitive
noses drink in the aroma of the foods as their chief delight, whereas
the eating, as such, is performed mechanically, as an unavoidable
adjunct. Such persons can revel in the memories of a luscious dish,
and many of their associations are linked with the olfactory organ.
The pleasure in offensive odours, such as arise from certain cheeses,
garlic, rarebits, and wild game is to some extent a perversion
nutritional instinct and betrays innate relationships to sexual
aberrations, as are unequivocally indicated by certain popular ditties
and college songs. The folk-lore of all nations teems with hints at
such things.

An important group, the fourth, is that of the “toucher.” As we know
the tongue of man is the most important of the gustatory organs, even
though it has not that primacy and importance which it has in many
animals. Such “touchers” derive their greatest pleasure from the mere
touching of the food with the tongue. They prefer smooth and slippery
foods, _e.g._, oysters which they can suck down, and they love to roll
the food around in their mouths. It goes without saying that these
persons are also “tasters,” as indeed the majority of eaters are. But
for all that, these have their own peculiar traits; whereas the feeling
of fullness or satiety is to many persons a kind of discomfort, and a
full stomach gives rise to a disagreeably painful sensation, to these
“touchers” a full stomach means the most delightful sensation the day
has to offer.

Of the “gourmands” (literally “the relishers”) we need not say much.
The whole world knows them; to describe them many words and phrases
have been coined, _e.g._, sweet-toothed, cat-toothed, epicures, etc.

As might have been expected, these various forms are often combined in
one person, and your genuine gourmand eats with all his senses. We need
only keep our eyes open at a restaurant to observe that most persons
show some trace of epicurism. Very few resist the temptation to follow
the platter the waiter is carrying to some table. (Almost every one
likes to see what his neighbour is eating.) We may be discussing art,
politics, love, or what not, yet watch carefully how much the person
serving is taking for himself or dishing out for the others, and how
little he is leaving for us. Most of the time in these cases we are the
victims of an optical deception. Our neighbour’s portion always seems
bigger than ours. Hunger and envy magnify the other person’s portion
and minimise ours. And is it not an everyday experience that we order
what our neighbour is eating? “Waiter, what is that you served the man
over there? Bring me the same!”

How a person eats always reveals something of his hidden personality.
In the case of most human beings at meals the same thing happens that
one may observe at the menagerie during feeding-time: the peacefully
reposing lion becomes a beast of prey. That is why beautiful women
become ugly when they eat and lose their charm, cease to become
interesting when they are seen eating. It is not a meaningless custom
that we honour distinguished persons by dining them. By so doing we
create a situation in which there is no superiority and in which we
feel ourselves at one with the great man and on a level with him.

Much more complicated than the psychology of the ordinary eater is
that of the gourmand, who always seems even to himself to be an
exceptional kind of person and who has in unsuspected ways enlarged
the sphere of possible pleasures. In most of these cases we shall find
that they are persons of whom life has demanded many renunciations.
Just as the habitual drinker rarely stupifies himself because of the
pleasure he takes in drinking but mostly out of a desire to drown in
unconsciousness a great pain, to draw the veil over some humiliation,
disillusionment, failure, or disappointment, so the gourmand likewise
compensates himself for his lost world. He has the same right to the
pleasures of life that others have. Well for him that he is capable of
securing his portion in this way!

Inexperienced humanitarians long for the time when eating will be
superfluous, when a few pills of concentrated albumin combined with a
few drops of some essential ferment will supply the necessary energy
for our mental and physical labours. What a stupid dream! If such a
time ever came, how unhappy humanity would be! The most of mankind,
truth compels me to say, live only to eat. For them “eating” is
synonymous with “life.” With the discovery of such pills the wine of
life would be drawn. No! No! No! If there were no such thing as eating
we should have to invent it to save man from despairing. Eating enables
one who has suffered shipwreck on Life’s voyage to withdraw into a
sphere which once meant the greatest happiness to all human beings and
still means it to all animals. One takes refuge in the primal instincts
where one is safe and comfortable, until Mother Earth again devours and
assimilates him before she awakes him to new life. We are all eternal
links in an unending chain of links.

And that is the whole meaning of eating: life and death. Every bite we
eat means a quick death for myriads of living things. They must die
that we may live. And so we live by death until our death gives life to
others.

It’s no mere accident that Don Juan is summoned from the feast to his
death.




ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS?


There is no sharp dividing line between health and disease. One shades
off into the other by imperceptible gradations. Disease grows out of
health organically. There are a thousand transitions from the one to
the other; a thousand fine threads link them together, and often not
even the best physicians can determine where health ceases and disease
begins. As Feuchtersleben says, there is no lyric leap in the epic of
life. Nor do delusions make their entry unheralded into a well ordered
mental life. Delusions slumber in all of us and wait for their prey.
The quiet normal being is just as subject to them as the raving maniac
with rolling congested eyes. We need only open our eyes understandingly
upon the bustle and tumult of life to be able to exclaim with Hans
Sachs: “Madness! Everywhere madness!”

Every form of insanity, one may say, has a physiological prototype.
Melancholia takes for its model the little depressive attacks of
everyday life; mania has its prototype in the unrestrained enthusiasm
of the baseball “fan”; and even the various forms of paranoia, the true
insanity, have their typical representatives among normal persons.
To bring out this kinship we need no better example than that offered
by the delusion of greatness. This delusion is so bound up with the
requirements of the human psyche, so organically knit together with
the ego, that it constitutes an indispensable element of our ethical
consciousness. Every one of us thinks himself the wisest, best, most
conscientious, and so forth. Each one thinks himself indispensable.
It is this delusional greatness of the normal person which makes life
tolerable under even the hardest conditions. It gives us the strength
to bear all our humiliations, disappointments, failures, and the “whips
and scorns of time.”

Of course we are very careful to conceal this delusional greatness from
the rest of the world. We all have our secret chapels in which we offer
daily prayers and into which no one, not even our nearest, is permitted
even to glance. In this chapel our idol sits enthroned, the prototype
of majesty, “our ego,” before whom we bend our knees in humble
supplication. But out there--in the world without--it is different.
There we play the role of the humble, respectful, subservient fellow.
We swear allegiance to alien gods and mock our ego and its powers.

But sometimes the delusional greatness breaks out with pathological
elementary force. We ought to keep our light under a bushel, trudge
along with the multitude, day in, day out. Then all would be well.
But destiny must not lift us to heights where our behaviour cannot
escape observation and every one of our thoughts will be deduced from
our actions. Success must not narcotise us to the extent of depriving
us of that vestige of self-criticism which we so imperatively need
in whatever situation life may place us. Success does not pacify the
roaring of our megalomania. Success goads it with a thousand lashes
of the whip so that it becomes restive and escapes from the security
of the preserves of the soul. Is this still a healthy manifestation?
Or are we already in the realm of the pathological? Is it the first
delusion or the ultimate wisdom?

The delusion of greatness penetrates whole classes of humanity,
infecting them like a subtle poison against which there is almost
no immunity. We have only to refer to the “affairs” of all kinds of
artists of the first, second, and third rank. The delusional greatness
of the artist usually appears along with the belittling mania displayed
by his confreres, his immediate competitors. The higher we esteem
ourselves, the more we depreciate our fellow climbers. That is the
reason why the artist, drunk with his own ego, loses the power to be
just, to measure the work of others by any but an egocentric standard.
Should any one venture to show this megalomania its true image in the
calm mirror of justice, he would be characterized a malicious enemy.
In the struggle to maintain the hypertrophied ego-consciousness the
delusion of greatness is assisted by a willing servant: the delusion of
persecution.

Along with the artist class there are many other vocations which to a
certain extent gratify the delusion of greatness. In some callings this
is a kind of idealistic compensation for the poor material returns. The
megalomania of the Prussian officer, or the American professor (who are
the butts of even the so-called harmless comic-journals) is an example.
A close second to this is the megalomania of certain exclusive student
organizations, patriotic megalomania, etc.

We can no longer escape a generalization. We note that delusional
greatness is a compensation for some privation or hardship. This is
especially illuminating with reference to that patriotic delusional
greatness which has nothing whatever to do with a wholly justifiable
self-consciousness. The self-consciousness of the Briton emanates from
his proud history and the imposing power of his nation. But we note
that it is especially small nations, who ought in reason to be very
modest, who are guilty of a tremendous self-overestimation. And they do
not scruple to invent an illustrious past which is calculated to lend
some show of historic justification for the national delusion. _Exempla
sunt odiosa._

This mechanism teaches us how to estimate folk-psychology. A people
behaves like an individual. So that our findings with reference to the
psychology of individuals may be applied to whole races, and _vice
versa_.

And here we note that the individual’s delusional greatness invariably
has one and the same root: it is an over-compensation for an oppressive
diminution of the ego-consciousness. The daily life about us offers
innumerable proofs of this assertion. Persons particularly prone to
delusional greatness are those who suffer from certain defects and
who in youth had been subjected to painful, derisive, scornful, or
depreciative criticism. Amongst these we find especially the halt, the
lame, the partly blind, the stutterer, the humpbacked, the red-haired,
the sick, etc.--in short, persons with some stigma. By the mechanism of
over-compensation such individuals may manifest inordinately ambitious
natures. Is it accidental that so many celebrated generals--Cæsar,
Napoleon, Prince Eugene, Radetzky--were of small stature? Was it not
precisely this smallness of stature which furnished the driving power
that made them “great”? Instead of looking for the essence of genius in
peculiar bodily proportions (which Popper finds to be in a long trunk
and short legs!) it would prove a more gratifying task to ferret out
those primary factors that have brought about an unusual expenditure of
psychic energy in one particular direction.

A very brilliant and suggestive hypothesis (advanced by Dr. Alfred
Adler) attempts to account for all superior human gifts as an
over-compensation for some original “inferiority.” Even if this
principle may not prove true in every case, it can be demonstrated to
have played a part in the development of many a case of superior merit
in some field of mental endeavour. We are all familiar with largely
authentic anecdotes about distinguished scholars, who have just managed
to squeeze through in their final professional examinations. In their
case, too, by over-compensation a conviction of their inferiority
brought about a heightened interest in their work and this interest
then became permanently fixed.

Unawares we have wandered from the delusional greatness to true
greatness. But who will presume to decide what is true greatness and
what delusion? How many discoverers and inventors were ridiculed
and their imposing greatness stigmatized as delusion, and how many
intellectual ciphers rejoiced in the applause and the worship of their
contemporaries! It is this fact which encourages a megalomaniac to
permit the criticism of his contemporaries to “fly by him as the idle
wind which he respects not.” If it is not true that all greatness is
ignored, the opposite is true: every ignored person is one of the great
ones. At least he is so to himself. Delusional greatness unites both
criticism and recognition in a single tremendous ego-complex.

The roots of this delusion, as of all purely psychic maladies, are
infantile. There was a time in the lives of all of us when we were the
victims of a genuinely pathological delusion of greatness. In the days
of our childhood we were consumed by a longing to be “big.” At first it
was only the desire to be a “big man,” to be grown up. A little later
and our desires fluttered across the sea of our thoughts like sea-gulls
or flew like falcons into the unknown vast. We were kings, ministers
of state, princes, ambassadors, generals, trapeze artists, conductors,
firemen, or even butlers.

And yet we are all surprised when a butler plants himself squarely
before the door and assumes the easy port of a person of some standing
and identifies himself with the master of the house and graciously
dispenses his domestic favours. Are we then, much better, more
sensible, or freer from prejudice? We too stand before the doors of our
desires and act as if we believed that they are realities which we are
obliged to guard.




RUNNING AWAY FROM THE HOME


Once more the physician felt the young woman’s pulse. “But it’s
impossible: you must not go out to-day; you are running the risk of a
relapse. You stay in your beautiful home that you have furnished so
cosily, so comfortably, and with such good taste. I have no objection,
however, to your inviting a few friends, having a little music,
chatting, gossiping, but--stay home!”

The pretty self-willed woman pursed her lips at this and though her
grimace was very becoming to her it seemed a little to vex her old
doctor who had known her from her infancy. Somewhat irritated, he
continued:--

“I don’t just know what you mean by the moue. Must I point out the
dangers of exposing yourself to a ‘fresh cold’? Do you insist on making
a Sunday of every week-day? First, it’s a café, then, a restaurant!
From a hot room into the cold, moist, windy atmosphere of a winter
night!”

“But staying home is so stale and unprofitable,” wailed the young
woman. “Home! I’m home all the live-long week! Sunday, one wants a
change! I want to see human beings! You are very disagreeable to-day,
Doctor!”

The old doctor gently patted the young woman’s cheek. “Still the same
self-willed, obstinate child that will butt its head against the wall.
Ah, you seem to have forgotten how nice and sociable your parents’ home
was. Those never-to-be-forgotten Sundays! How we used to congregate
there, a group of intimates--the young ones chatting and singing while
the older ones played cards,--and every Sunday was a real holiday!
And when things got a little more lively, then young and old romped
together. Do you remember? Now and then someone would read us a new
poem or the latest novel. How we did enjoy those Sundays! And how
unforced and unconventional it all was! We would get our cup of tea
or coffee and were as happy as happy as could be. But the things that
are going on now seem to me, in my rôle as physician, to be a kind of
neurosis, a something that I should call ‘the flight from home!’”

“But, my dear doctor, must it be a neurosis? Is it necessary to brand
everything as a disease?”

“But it is a disease and its character as such is very clearly
established by this one element: its compulsive character. The flight
from the home is a compulsive idea, that is, an idea against which
logic, persuasion, and appeals are of no avail.”

“I think you are going too far,” replied the young woman. “If I insist
upon going to the café to-day, I do it not because I do not like my
home; no, I do it because at the café I get a kind of stimulation
which I do not get at home. There I can look through various journals
and papers that I cannot afford to have at home. I get a chance to
see friends and acquaintances whom I could not receive at home so
often. And the main thing, at any rate for a young woman who still
wishes to please--and that, I am sure you won’t resent, you dear
old psychologist!--the main thing is that there I see new people
and--am seen by them. I know that in return I must put up with a few
unpleasantnesses. Yes, there is the stuffy and smoky atmosphere, the
continual din and noise, and so forth. But I really do think that we
moderns need these things. We are not born to rest.”

The physician shook his head.

“No! Never! You will pardon, I hope, my telling you that yours is a
very superficial psychology and does not go down to the heart of the
problem. To the modern civilized human being his home seems to be an
extremely disagreeable place. All his life he is fleeing from his
home, from his environment, and--yes!--even from himself. An inner
restlessness, a discontent that cannot be quenched, a nervous stress
permeates the people of our time. What they possess seems to them
stale, worthless. What they pursued madly disappoints them when they
have attained it. They crave for change because they do not know how to
make the best use of the present and of their possessions. How else can
we understand the phenomenon that the whole world is happy to get away
from the home and those who are incapable of running away long to do
so? For, I am sure if you will give it careful thought you will confess
that you call ‘experience’ only what happens to you away from home. The
days at home don’t count. Am I right?”

“Only partly so, my dear doctor. It does not tally with the
facts--because nothing can be experienced at home. And I would be only
too happy to receive my friends here daily, if it were possible. Don’t
you know that servants would rebel at it? That they want to have their
day off? That I must not expect them to do such work as waiting on my
guests every Sunday? Why even on week days the invitation of guests
causes a little rebellion in the ordinary household!”

“And why must there be invitations? Must your visitors always be
guests? Just look at Paris! There you may drop in on any of your
acquaintances after 9 p.m. You may or you may not get a cup of tea. You
chat a few hours and then depart. With us that’s impossible, because
our so-called ‘Teas’ have assumed proportions which were formerly
unknown. You invite one to come and have tea with you but instead
of that you serve a luncheon and make a veritable banquet of it,
going to a lot of trouble and expense, a course which must have bad
consequences.”

“Do you know, doctor, I think you are a magician! It’s only
conventional politeness that makes us receive our guests cordially. But
you must serve your friends something when you invite them for a little
chat, mustn’t you?”

“There you are again! How beautifully you chatter away so
superficially! No, my dear! Nowadays one no longer invites friends to
spend a pleasant time with them, but to show them a new gown or to
impress them with the new furnishings. The main thing is to poison the
friend’s peace of mind. If the guest’s face betrays all the colours
of envy then the hostess has attained the acme of delight. One might
almost say that their dissatisfaction with their lot in life drives
human beings on to stir up discontent in the hearts of others. This
sowing of dragon’s teeth bears evil fruit. For at the next ‘tea’ the
friend has a more beautiful dress, perhaps some other new sensation,
and her husband’s achievements and income mount to supernatural
heights, if one is to believe the hostess’ eloquent speeches. Finally,
there is no possibility of out-trumping her and there is nothing left
to do but, in a more moderate tone, to fight out the rivalry on a
neutral soil. The restaurant or the café is this neutral soil.”

“And what are your objections to this neutral soil?”

“My objections? The people lose the greatest pleasure that they could
derive from one another. At home it must happen now and then that the
walls which separate the inmates from one another fall, the wrappings
that encase our inmost being burst, and soul speaks to soul. At home
it is possible to devote the time to the nobler delights that life has
to offer. At one time there can be--as there was in your own parents’
home--a reading, on another occasion singing or music. And would it be
such a terrible misfortune to spend one’s holiday with one’s family, to
be one with them, reviewing the week that is past or playing with the
children and being a child again? Don’t you see that you are giving up
the gold of home-life and pursuing the fool’s-gold of pleasure outside
the home? You do see it, you know I am right, and a little voice within
you implores and pleads: ‘Stay home! Stay home! here you are safe and
comfortable!’ But another power, a power that is stronger than you,
drives you out, rushes you away from peace and quiet to restlessness,
and whirls you about. And this whirl, you call ‘life.’ What have these
empty pleasures to offer us? What inspiration for the work-a-day life
do they leave behind? Is this anything less than just simply killing
the hours? I don’t want to spin out the old stuff about the dangers
of pleasures, getting over-heated, catching cold, overtaxing one’s
nervous energies, losing one’s sleep, etc. As to these things, I must
admit, there is a great deal of exaggeration. One ought not to fly from
pleasures. But they ought to serve as inspiring exceptions to break, as
it were, the day, just as a trip does.”

“But, my dear doctor, now you’ve caught yourself in your own springe.
Is not a trip a flight from the home?”

The young woman laughed hilariously. But the doctor--now that he had
assumed the rôle of preacher--did not permit himself to be put off or
confused.

“Of course, the ordinary journey does belong to my theme. A trip may,
in fact, constitute the crisis in our neurosis. A crisis that we must
all go through, for we all--I am sorry to say, I too--suffer from this
compulsive idea. As after every other crisis the invalid is for a time
restored to health, so is it also after a trip. But only for a short
time. A few weeks--and the compulsive idea is again manifest and the
flight from the home begins again.”

“Come, now, doctor!” interrupted the convalescent, “travelling is a
necessity. As you so aptly said, we want to break the monotony of the
day--to get out of the customary environment.”

“That’s just what I want to designate as the chief symptom of the
neurosis of our time. Everyone wants to get away from the customary
environments. Everybody makes attempts at flight. Whether they succeed
depends upon other social factors. Why is the customary environment
repugnant to you?”

“Because I crave a change. I do not know why. But I have an instinctive
longing for it.”

“There you have it, my dear. It’s just as I said: It’s a compulsive
idea. The flight from one’s environment, from one’s home, from one’s
furniture, is the same as the flight from one’s house. To me every
piece of furniture that I have used a long time has become so dear
and so much a part of myself that I do not like to give them away and
can only with difficulty part with them. And if I were to come into
possession of a vast fortune to-day I could not renounce these dear
associates to whom I am bound by so many memories. With all their
shortcomings and modesty they are a thousand times dearer to me than
the most beautiful English or secessionist furnishings. I’ll confess
that in these matters I am not at all modern. For the moderns are glad
when they can change something, and so they change their furniture,
their carpets, their pictures, etc. About every ten years there is a
change in the fashions and your housewife cannot bear not to be in
style. One day you enter her house and you find new rooms. And just
as the furnishings in the house are changed from time to time, so the
residence too must be changed frequently--in fact, everything that can
be changed is changed: The servants, the family physician, the music
teacher, and, where it is possible, the husband and even the wife.”

The young woman reflected a little. “There is much truth in what you
say. It is in fact a tremendous flight that we see enacted everywhere
about us, a flight from oneself and from one’s environment. If I were
to judge by my own feelings I should say that this fleeing has its
origin in our life’s needs. We women all have a large ‘Nora’ element
in us and are waiting for the ‘miracle.’ Inasmuch as we cannot find
it at home we look for it elsewhere. Believe me, doctor, most women
do not fall because of sensual appetites. No! they fall because they
crave for some experience. We experience too little. The monotony of
the days asphyxiates us. And this great whirl of life, this senseless
running after a change--as you call it--is only because our hearts
are discontented, because our spirits are wrecked by the monotony and
insipidity of our lives. Do you think that it will ever be different?”

“Why not, pray? Some day a great physician must arise, an apostle of
human love, whose voice will pierce the whirl and who will be capable
of opening man’s stupid eyes: A new religion would do it, a religion
that would satisfy all of humanity’s longings, a religion of work
and the joy of life. Our time is ripe for a Messiah. Whether he will
come----.”

“Ah, he has come,” said the charming young woman, her face beaming.
“For me you are the Messiah of domesticity! You have cured me of my
flight neurosis. I shall stay home to-day, and as often as I can do so.”

The old doctor took his leave with animated steps. With the power of
his words he had once again reformed a human being.

But his joy was short-lived. That afternoon, as he walked by a café on
the main thoroughfare his eyes fell on a vivacious group within. And
there he saw his recalcitrant patient who had evidently gone out only
to get a chance to discuss thoroughly with her friends the theme: “The
flight from the house.”




DEAD-HEADS


“Are there any people who still pay for tickets?” I was asked in all
seriousness by a man, who, as a result of his numerous connections,
had been able to develop the art of getting passes to its utmost
possibilities.

Ridiculous though the question may sound to some, there is,
nevertheless, something very profound in it. The pursuit after passes
is in our day a favourite “sport” of residents of large cities. To most
such people a journalist or a writer is not an artist who laboriously
strives to give adequate expression to his thoughts, who has to listen
to the secret voices within his breast and to translate them into the
language of every day. No, in their mind a writer is the Croesus of
passes. He only sits in front of his desk, as there accumulate before
him green, blue, and red tickets, the magic keys that open the doors
to all the temples of art without having to go to the trouble of
digging into his money bag and experiencing the pleasure of paying out
his shining coins. And they take it ill of the Croesus that he is so
niggardly as to guard his treasures so greedily and not make everybody
he comes in contact with happy by distributing the little papers. For
to them getting a pass is considered a great piece of good fortune,
almost like drawing a grand small prize in a lottery. It enables one
to temporarily enjoy the greatest sensation in life: pleasure without
cost. That is, it should so enable one.

With a pass one gets everything,--the respect of the upper classes, the
right to be rude and the enforcement of courtesy. If it were possible
to say of certain young women that for a ride they would part with
their honour, then one might aptly vary the phrase and say: for a pass,
with everything.

There are human beings, persons with so-called “good connections,”
who lead a wonderful life with the aid of passes. The physician who
is at their beck and call throughout the year is compensated for his
efforts by the presentation from time to time of a box or a pair of
seats for the theatre. So, too, the lawyer. The Cerberus rage of the
most terrifying of all apartment-house superintendents melts into the
gentlest humility at the prospect of a pass. We expect a thousand
little favours from our fellow-citizens who assume the obligation to
render these favours by the acceptance of a pass.

There are probably only very few persons who feel any shame on going on
a trip with a pass. These exceptional beings have not yet discovered
that nowadays it is only the person who pays who is looked down upon.
Every one takes his hat off to the possessor of a pass. The train
conductor makes a respectful bow because he does not know whether the
“dead-head” is an officer of the company or some other “big gun.” The
ticket collector does the same because experience has taught him that
the dead-head usually overcomes by a treat the social inferiority
associated with “enjoyment without payment.” In short, a pass invests
its possessor with the mysterious air of a great power and weaves about
his head a halo which lifts him above the _misers plebs contribuens_.

But you must not think that the possessor of passes constitutes that
part of the public that is particularly grateful for and appreciative
of the artistic offerings. On the contrary! Artistic enjoyment in the
theatre requires a certain capacity for illusion, and the purchase of
a ticket exercises a considerable influence on this capacity. For one
who has dearly paid for his seat has imposed the moral obligation upon
himself to be entertained.

Down in his subliminal self there dwell forces that may be said to have
been lessoned to applaud. The higher the price, the more painfully the
pleasure was purchased, the greater is the willingness to be carried
away by the work of art and the artists. The poor student who has stood
for hours in front of the opera house and been lucky enough to secure
admission to standing room in the gallery will have a better time than
his rich colleague down in the orchestra, and a very much better time
than the envied possessor of a free seat. For his capacity for illusion
has been tremendously heightened. He expects a reward commensurate
with the trouble he went to and the money he sacrificed. His tension
being much higher, the relaxation of that tension must yield him a much
greater quantity of pleasure. The greater the restraints that one has
to overcome the greater the pleasure in having succeeded in overcoming
them.

The necessity for illusion is absent in the possessor of a pass. There
is nothing to make it incumbent on him to be entertained; he has not
paid anything. He can even leave the performance before it is concluded
if it does not please him. He is more sceptical, more critical, and
less grateful.

Any dramatist who at a _première_ would fill the theatre with his
good friends by giving them passes would have little knowledge of
human nature; certain failure would await him. Not only because
these so-called good friends, in obedience to their unconscious envy,
frankly join the enemy’s ranks, but because the possessors of passes
involuntarily get into the psychic condition which is characteristic
of “dead-heads,” viz: indifferent critical smugness and a diminished
capacity for illusion.

I know of a striking example of this that came under my own
observation. One of my friends, a young playwright, invited his
tailor and his wife to go to his _première_, and not to be backward
in expressing their approval. He had distributed a sufficiently large
number of friends in the orchestra, but the gallery had not been
provided for. He had, naturally, also sent two tickets to one of his
competitors. It so chanced that I was in the thick of it, because I was
interested in seeing how the simple public would receive the piece. I
sat right behind the doughty tailor couple, who, of course, did not
know me. Several times during the performance we almost came to blows.
The married couple hissed with might and main, whereas I applauded with
all my power. We exchanged angry words and otherwise acted in a manner
characteristic of such a situation and of such a youthful temper as
mine then was. The play was a failure. Later we discussed the reason
for this failure. One said that the play was not deep enough for the
enlightened public. I challenged this contention, and referred to the
simple people who sat in front of me and whose names and station I had
discovered from some neighbours. My friend would not believe me at
first until I had convinced him by a detailed description of the couple
that the tailor who had for so many years made his clothes had felt it
incumbent on him to repay the author’s gift of a pass by contributing
to the failure of his play.

To be under obligations always oppresses us. We have the instinctive
impulse to disregard them. A pass is an obligation to acknowledge
the excellence of the offered entertainment, to confirm that it is
worth the price of admission. In addition to the absence of a need
for illusion from material considerations we have to reckon with the
impulse to disregard this obligation. These two psychic factors serve
to bring about in the heart of the possessor of a pass the defence
reaction that I have previously described.

Notwithstanding this, the craving for passes, which formerly was the
privilege of the few exceptional personages, keeps growing more and
more, infecting other levels of society, and would easily become a
serious menace to the directorate of the theatres if these had not
hit upon an adequate remedy in distributing passes on the homœopathic
principle. They fight the “pass with the pass.” They distribute passes
and reduced rate tickets very lavishly for the days on which they
know the receipts will be poor and for plays which no longer draw
large audiences. The exaction of a small fee on the presentation of
the coupon serves to cover part of the running expenses; the house is
filled and the many’s fire for passes is quenched. On the following
days the people are much more willing to buy their tickets because they
think that they can afford to be so extravagant, inasmuch as they had
seen one or more performances free or practically so, and are swayed
by the unconscious instinct that a purchased pleasure is sure to prove
more delightful.

One would have to be a second limping Mephisto to be able to follow
the invisible stream of passes in a large metropolis. The romance of
a pass is still to be written. It would yield us an insight into the
psychology of modern man that would be second to none. It would prove
that one of the most important impulses of our time is the desire not
to have to work for one’s pleasures. I say “not to work for one’s
pleasures” rather than “not to pay for one’s pleasures,” because
money always means an equivalent for our work. The most industrious
persons are in reality those who are most averse to work. For behind
their zeal to accumulate money there is the burning desire to hoard
up as much as will ensure an income sufficient to purchase enjoyment
without additional work. In the language of every day this would be:
a care-free old age. But, in sooth, worry is the main source of our
pleasures. Were there no cares the variegated colours of the spectrum
that constitute the light of life would be replaced by dull monotonous
grays that resemble each other as closely as the two links that unite
the two ends of a chain converting it into a whole.

The pursuit after passes is only a small fragment of that mad pursuit
after “pleasure without work” that is being enacted all around us. I
have gone into the subject so minutely only because it is a typical
example of mankind’s stupid beginning to free itself from the iron
bonds of material dependence. For the more free we think ourselves, the
more enslaved we really are.




IDENTIFICATION


I know a man who suffered a great deal from his wife’s moods. No
matter how much he tried he could never please her. If he was happy
and contented she called him “Mr. Frivolous” and would say what a
fine figure he’d cut in a Punch and Judy show; if, on the contrary,
cares troubled him and his face betrayed his anxiety, she called him
“Old Grouch” and railed at him for making her life bitter. If he
wanted to go to the theatre, she thought they ought to stay home; if
he longed for the peace of the home, she egged him on to take part
in all sorts of senseless pastimes. Is it any wonder that the poor
man became “nervous”? that he lost his peace of mind and his hitherto
imperturbable good humour?

In those painful days his comfort was his quiet daughter who seemed
to be in all respects the opposite of her moody mother. He sought
sanctuary with her, and over and over again she had to listen to his
cries for peace.

Finally his nervous condition got so bad that a physician had to be
consulted. The physician being fully aware of the patient’s domestic
relations did not have to consider very long and ordered the sick man
to take a trip. More easily prescribed than done. For our patient had
one very bad habit: he could not be alone. It was a cruel punishment
for him to have to look after his small daily wants away from home.
What was he to do? His wife would gladly have gone along with him. But
there were numerous objections to that. Besides, the wise physician
would not hear of it. In this quandary the distressed man thought of
his gentle, affectionate, young daughter. Everybody rejoiced at this
happy solution; the anxious physician, the jealous wife, and, not
least, the sensible daughter who had not yet seen anything of the world
and whose secret dreams of youth had been disturbed by the erratic
educational methods of her mother, in which exaggerated love and
pitiless sternness alternated.

Great excitement marked the time for departure. Mother changed her
plans ten times over. First she wanted to drop everything and accompany
her husband; then she wanted to induce the unhappy husband to give up
the trip, and so on. Finally the time for departure arrived. They were
on the platform at the station and were saying the last good-byes.
Mother had an unlimited number of things to say and suggestions to
make. Then the conductor gave the last warning and there was no time to
lose. Through the little window the happy father and the still happier
daughter looked out on the source of their woes who had been suddenly
converted into an inexhaustible fountain of tears. Was she so grieved
because the objects upon whom she was wont to project the discontent of
her unresting heart were gone? With a sudden movement she wiped away
her tears and called after her daughter in stentorian tones: “Freda,
now you’ll take the place of your mother! Remember that!”--What else
she said was lost in the din of the moving train whose shrill whistle
drowned the asthmatic woman’s commanding tones. During the next few
seconds they waved their last greetings and then the scene so painful
to all was over.

Father and daughter looked at each other, their faces beaming. For a
little while, at any rate, they would be free and have nothing else
to do but to enjoy life. The mother’s last words rang in their ears.
Involuntarily the man smiled and remarked tenderly to his daughter:
“Well--I shall be curious to see how my little sunshine will take her
mother’s place.” The little one looked at her father seriously and
replied: “Papa, I shall try to do so to the best of my power, surely.”
And deep within her she rejoiced at the thought that strangers might
think her really the young wife of this fine-looking man.

After a few minutes Freda began to complain that it was getting very
cold. “There is a draught! It’s terribly cold!” The anxious father at
once closed the window. After a little while she complained that the
compartment was unbearably stuffy. Why had not the conductor assigned
them a more spacious one? Had papa given him a tip? She had been told
by a friend who had just returned from a wedding trip in Italy that
conductors are respectful and accommodating only to those who give
liberal tips. She was not so inexperienced as a certain papa seemed to
think. If he gave the man the tip they would surely be transferred to a
more comfortable car. Somewhat irritated, the father complied with his
daughter’s wish. After considerable trouble they were transferred from
their small cosy compartment in which they could sit alone, to a large
one into which a stout elderly gentleman entered at the next station
and plumped himself down beside them. Freda had an insurmountable
repugnance to fat old gentlemen. She reproached her father; he had not
given the conductor a large enough tip.

Why waste words? After a few hours the poor man saw only too clearly
that his daughter was bent on taking her mother’s place in the true
sense of the word. She pestered him with her moods and gave him not
a minute’s rest. He tried to console himself with the thought that
Freda was not herself owing to the excitement of the last few days,
and that she would soon be herself again. Vain hope! The girl was as
if transformed. From a quiet, amiable child, she had become a moody,
fractious torment. The trip which had been intended as a cure became an
unmitigable torture. For at home he knew how to adapt himself quietly
to his wife’s tyranny. But here, away from home, he was constantly
getting into all sorts of unpleasant situations. Finally, he pretended
to be too sick to continue the trip and after a few days they returned
home.

I have narrated this tragic-comical history in such detail because
it makes the meaning of “Identification” clearer than any definition
could. What had happened to the young girl to transform her so quickly?
Her mother had enjoined her to take her place. She had to some extent
taken upon herself her mother’s duties. She identified herself with
her mother. She played the role of mother exactly as she had for years
seen it played at home, though, in secret, she had disapproved of her
mother’s conduct. This identification nullified her own personality and
replaced it with another.

This is a phenomenon that takes the most surprising forms among the
victims of hysteria. But it would be erroneous to think that it occurs
only among hysterics. Almost all persons, especially women, succumb
to the seductive power of identification. I wonder if it is because
of this that all of us secretly bear a measure of neurosis with us
throughout life! At home, Freda might have concealed her hysteria
as a kind of reaction to her mother’s conduct. It was only when she
had to play the mother’s role that the neurosis, in consequence of
an unconscious affect, became manifest. It is thus that epidemics of
hysteria break out. If a neurosis is capable of transferring an affect,
it can arouse another, slumbering neurosis. For to-day we know, from
Bleuler’s studies, that suggestion is not the transference of an idea
but an affect.

The phenomenon that the above case brings out so clearly and
unequivocally may be seen in everyday life behind various motives,
catchwords, tendencies, and strivings. Notwithstanding these disguises
the eye of the investigator will not find it difficult to recognize
the mechanism of identification and the element of the neurosis in the
normal person. But if this is so everybody is neurotic. Let us not get
excited about this conclusion. There is no such thing as a normal human
being. What we call disease and abnormality are only the highest peaks
of a mountain chain that rises to various heights above the sea-level
of the normal. Every person has his weak spots, physical and psychical.
We can reckon only relative heights, never the absolute, inasmuch as a
standard of the normal is really never at our disposal.

There is no difficulty in finding illustrations of the process of
identification in the so-called normal. Take, for example, the valet of
the nobleman. How thoroughly imbued he is with his master’s pride of
ancestry! With what imperturbable scorn he looks down upon the common
rabble! It never enters his mind that he is one of the masses. He has
no glimmer of appreciation of the absurdity of his airs, because the
mechanism of identification has clouded his intellect and an emotion
has strangled his logic. He even gives verbal expression to his feeling
of identification. He seems to have become fused into a unity with
his master, for he submerges his individuality, his ego, and on every
occasion speaks of “we” and “us.”

“We are starting south to-day,” he announces to the neighbours. “We
shall stay home,” he declares oracularly to visitors.

We see the same thing in the school child. It takes a little time
before he can free himself from the influence of his teachers and of
the school. Not infrequently he cannot do so owing to the permanent
fixation of his identification with them. Horace’s “Jurare in verba
magistri” (_i.e._, to echo the sentiments of one’s master) is nothing
but the result of a completely successful identification. One who
cannot free himself from this affect and substitute for the confident
“we” of the school the uncertain “I” of individuality can never hope to
become an independent personality.

Some feelings, such as so-called party spirit, pride of ancestry,
solidarity, national pride, etc., are only identifications. The German
identifies himself with his great national heroes, e.g., Schiller,
Goethe, Bismarck, etc., and is then as proud of being a German as if
that implied that he had himself been responsible for their great
achievements. The well-known and almost ridiculous pride of the
Englishman is only the product of an extreme identification. But, as
a matter of fact, the British Government also identifies itself with
the humblest of its subjects and protects him in whatever corner of
the earth he may happen to be. The officer who takes great pride in
his regiment, the pupil who is all enthusiasm for the colours of his
school, and the ordinary citizen who can see no element of goodness in
any but his own political party, all bear witness to the great power
of identification. It is in this way that socialism has become such
a tremendous power. Not because it furnishes the proletariat with
a dream of a happier future, not because it has supplied it with a
religion. (The Church supplies this want better.) No! Only because
it has enabled the individual, the weak one, to feel himself one with
a tremendous majority, to identify himself with an organization that
is world-wide. Socialism is the triumph of identification and the
death-knell of individualism.

The most beautiful instance of identification is furnished by love.
One who is in love has completely identified himself with the beloved.
“Two souls with but a single thought; two hearts that beat as one.” Has
not Rückert designated his beloved as his “better self”? (Or Kletke’s
very popular song: “What is thine and what is mine?”) A lover almost
literally transfers his whole ego into another’s soul. He projects all
his yearning upon that one object. He is oblivious of his mistakes
until the identification is over. Then the intoxicating dream, too, is
over.

With the aid of identification a lover can transfer his passion upon
any object that stands in some sort of relationship to his beloved.
It is in this way that fetichism sometimes results. That is why love
for a woman so easily leads to a love for her kindred. There is a
Slavic proverb which says: “He who loves his wife also cherishes his
mother-in-law.” And, on the other hand, a discontent with one’s wife
is often concealed behind a stubborn hatred of her relatives. In many
instances the feeling against mothers-in-law cannot be interpreted in
any other way.

Thus there runs through the soul of mankind an endless chain of
identifications ranging from the normal to the pathological. The child
that puts its father’s hat on its head identifies itself with him
just as certainly as the lunatic who thinks himself Napoleon. Both
have realized their wishes. But there is this difference between
them: In the normal the identification is held under control by
the force of facts, whereas in the lunatic the identification has
suffered a fixation. A delusion is frequently only a wholly successful
identification in the interests of the desire to escape from painful
realities. Delusion and truth are plastic conceptions. Who could
presume to define where truth ceases and delusion begins? From
Schopenhauer’s point of view our whole world-philosophy might be said
to be only a process of identification. And truth is nothing but the
transference of our own limited knowledge upon the outer world.




REFUGE IN DISEASE


The psychological study of disease is still, alas! a very young
and immature science. We have been held so long in the thrall of
the materialistic delusion of having to look for bacilli and other
micro-organisms behind all diseases that we have almost wholly
neglected the psychic factor in disease. It now seems that these
psychic factors play the chief role in the so-called “nervous”
diseases, whereas all the other “causes,” namely, the predisposition,
heredity, infection, etc., it now turns out, do play a certain role,
not an unimportant one, it is true, but yet a secondary one. The
influence of emotional disturbance upon these diseases has only
recently received careful study.

We have learned that psychic causes may play a great role in the
occurrence and the prevention of disease. We may confidently assert
that without the presence of a psychic component which invokes
the disease hardly a single case of nervous disease could occur.
Paradoxical as this may sound it is nearer the truth than the orthodox
teachings of our day. For who does not recollect times in his childhood
when he longed to be sick that he might not have to go to school, and
that he might at the same time be petted and indulged by his parents? A
little of this infantilism persists with us throughout life. Hysterics
especially are distinguished by the infantilism of their thoughts,
their feelings, and their ideas. This being so, we must agree with
Bleuler when he asserts that the most common cause of hysteria is
the desire to take refuge in disease. It will be of interest here
to reproduce Bleuler’s report of one of his cases (from his book on
“affectivity, suggestibility, and paranoia,” published by Karl Marhold
in 1906).

“A _paterfamilias_ suffers an injury in a railway accident. How
terrible it would be if he were so disabled that he could no longer
provide for his family and if he had to go through life that way,
suffering all the time, and half the time unable to work! How much
better it would be if he were dead or wholly disabled. His attorney
informs him that his annual earnings equal the interest on 80,000
francs, and that he could bring an action for that amount--a sum which
would insure his family against want for the rest of their lives.
Are there not indications enough that he will need this sum? Isn’t
it a fact that he is already suffering from insomnia? Work fatigues
him--his head aches--railway journeys make him apprehensive and even
cause attacks of anxiety; how helpful it would be, nay, how absolutely
necessary it would be, to prove that he is very sick and to get
that 80,000 francs! And now the traumatic neurosis or psychosis is
established, and will in all probability not be curable until the
lawsuit is satisfactorily settled.” Bleuler does not mince matters
but roundly asserts that in this case the wish caused the neurosis.
Would it be proper to call these people malingerers? By no means! For,
naturally, all these wishes are not clearly known to these individuals;
they suffer in good faith. The wish emanates from unconscious levels.
Consciousness vehemently resents any imputation of the thought of
simulation. Such invalids usually protest vehemently their desire to
be well. “How happy would I be if only I had my health! Then I would
gladly dispense with damages!”

Here I should like to report two cases from my own experience which
serve to illustrate the refuge in disease even better than the case
described by the distinguished Swiss psychiatrist. The first was a very
sick woman who had been bed-ridden for six years. No organic malady
could be discovered. The diagnosis was hysteria. The deeper cause of
her malady was as follows: Her husband was a coarse, brutal fellow,
continually upbraiding her for something or other and raising fearful
rows; but when she was sick his whole nature underwent a change. Then
he became amiable, affectionate and attentive. As soon as she was
well he became the old, unendurable, domestic tyrant. Finally, there
was nothing for this delicate, weak woman to do but to take refuge in
disease. Her limbs used to tremble and refuse their function, so that
she had to stay in bed or be rolled about in an invalid chair. All the
skill of her physicians--and she had the best the metropolis had to
offer--proved unavailing. Naturally the cure of such a case is hardly
possible unless one can remove the cause for the refuge in disease. In
this case this solution was out of the question, and so the woman goes
on enjoying the blessed fruits of her invalidism, complainingly but
not unhappily, exulting within, but miserable without.

Our everyday life furnishes numerous petty examples of refuge in
disease: the nervous wife who breaks out in a hysterical crying spell
if her husband reproaches her; the schoolboy who complains of headache
when he cannot get his lessons done; the husband who gets pains in
the stomach every time his wife makes life unbearable;--they all take
refuge in disease as a means of escape from their persecutor. How often
is this phenomenon observed among soldiers, for whom a few days of
illness means the most delightful change! In these cases even the most
experienced military physicians often find it impossible to distinguish
between wish and reality.

A physician who does not know of the phenomenon we have designated as
“refuge in disease” will be helpless in the handling of most cases of
hysteria. A blooming young girl had for two years consulted specialists
of the highest repute about the raging headaches with which she was
afflicted. All the usual remedies, such as antipyrin, phenacetin,
pyramidon, and even morphine, failed to give her even slight temporary
relief. The experts thought of a tumor in the brain and of other
dangerous maladies as the possible cause of these obstinate headaches.
But it turned out that this headache, too, was only a refuge in
disease. A casual remark of the father’s betrayed the true nature of
the trouble: “My daughter is about to be married; she has been engaged
for two years, and the young man is anxiously waiting for the wedding;
but I can’t let her marry while she is suffering from such a severe
disease.”

The headache was obviously the means of getting out of a hateful
marriage. Of course one who would have been content with her first
story would never have discovered the truth. What stories she told
about her wonderful love! How ardently she loved her betrothed! There
was nothing she longed for more than the wedding-day! How unhappy she
would be if she lost him! But a careful psychoanalysis brought forth
ample and convincing confirmation of the above-mentioned suspicion.
The girl had been engaged once before; in fact she had not yet
completely broken off her relations with her former lover. In addition
thereto there were confessions about the death of all erotic feelings
during the second engagement, as to which we cannot go into details.
It was quite clear that her malady was a refuge in invalidism. I
advised breaking the engagement. The advice was not followed. On the
contrary, the family hoped that a speedy marriage might bring about a
cure of the hysterical condition. But the young woman is still going
about, complaining and whimpering, with her malady (from which her
husband, notwithstanding his inexhaustible patience, suffers more than
she). Will she ever be well? If she ever learns to love her husband
she may recover her health. But where such powerful, unconscious
counter-impulses, such powerful instincts, contend against an
inclination, it is scarcely possible that this inclination will develop
into full sovereignty of the soul.

What we have just said of the neurosis is also true of the delusions
of insanity. A delusion also is a fleeing from this world into another
one in which some particular overvalued idea represses all other ideas
and dominates the mind. It will not be long ere this conception will
be an accepted doctrine of all psychiatrists. For the time being it is
the common property of creative literary artists, who, because of their
intuitive insight into human nature, have frequently given expression
to this idea. It is perhaps most beautifully expressed by Georges
Rodenbach, the Flemish artist, unfortunately too early deceased, who
says in one of his fine posthumous novels (“Die Erfüllung,” Dresden,
1905):--

“The insane have nothing to complain of. Often they achieve their
purposes only in this way. They become what they have longed for and
what they would otherwise never have become. They obtain the coveted
goal and their plans are fulfilled. They live what once they dreamed.
Their delusion is, to all intents and purposes, their inner fruition,
inasmuch as it corresponds to their most ardent desires and their most
secret yearnings. Thus the ambitious one ascends in his delusions the
heights that have beckoned to him; he possesses endless treasures,
orders the destinies of great nations, and moves only among the great
rulers of the earth. Religious delusion brings its victim to the throne
of God and makes life in Paradise a tangible reality. So that delusion
always realises the goal that each has longed for. It gratifies our
desires to the utmost limit. Sympathetically it takes a hand in our
affairs and completes the altogether too pretentious destiny of those
upon whom fulfillment never smiles.”

What a beautiful idea! Delusion is a wish-fulfilment exactly as the
dream is. The madhouse is the paradise of thoughts, the heaven in which
wishes meet with unlimited fulfilment. And human beings sicken so
often, and madness increases with such uncanny rapidity, because our
most secret wishes are never gratified, because in these dull times the
miraculous has died, and because life demands so much renunciation and
yields so little happiness.

Let us draw these lessons from the foregoing remarks: to keep one’s
desires within bounds means to assure one’s spiritual health.
Inordinate ambition, which foolish parents kindle in their children’s
hearts, is often the cause of an early breakdown. We must school
ourselves and our children to wish only for the attainable and to
attain our desires. Our ideals must live in our breasts, not in the
outer world. Then we may find in ourselves what the world denies us.
They who can find refuge in their health will escape having to take
refuge in disease.




WHY WE TRAVEL


Why do we not know why we travel? Haven’t we the imperative obligation
to recuperate? Does not our malady enforce a trip to a health resort?
Are we not thirsty for new countries, new people, a new environment?

Peace! peace! No, we do not know! Or rather, we do not wish to know.
Naturally, we always have a few superficial motives at our disposal
when it suits us to mask our unconscious secrets from ourselves and
from the world. Why do we travel? Psychologists have given many
reasons, but they do not go beyond such superficial motives as “the
desire for a change,” “a craving for excitement,” “curiosity,”
“fatigue, the need for a rest,” “flight from the home,” etc. Some go
further and attribute the desire to travel to the elementary pleasure
of being in motion. For these psychologists the little child’s first
step is its first journey, the last step of the weary aged their last
journey. Others again veritably classify journeys and distinguish
between trips undertaken for health reasons, business trips, scientific
trips, etc.

Vain beginning! In reality one trip is like another. If we would
understand the elementary feelings associated with a trip we must go
back to our youth. In youth we still have a sense of the wonderful;
in youth the horizon of our fantasies is aglow with wondrous visions.
But of course the world about us is solemn and wearisome, full of
duties and obligations. But ah, the wide world without! There dangerous
adventures smile alluringly; there unrestrained freedom beckons; there
deeds may be achieved that may make kings of us. In our thoughts we
build a small skiff that will take us out of the narrow channel of
our homes into the vast sea; we battle on the prairie with the brave
and crafty Indians; we seek out the sun-burned gold-fields in the new
world; we put a hurried girdle round about the earth, and--when at top
speed--we would even attempt a flight to the moon.

Nothing that makes an impression on the human mind is ever lost. Our
youth with its fantasies and childish desires exerts an important
influence on us all our life. Henceforth all our excursions are
journeys into the realm of youth. All, all are alike. Life hems us
in with innumerable obstacles, bonds, and walls. The older we grow
the greater becomes the weight that loads us down. In the depths of
the soul the tintinnabulation of youth is ringing and speaking to
us of life and freedom, and keeps on ringing alluringly till weary
man surrenders and takes a trip. The tinkling music of the soul works
strongest on the mind of youth. He, fortunate he, knows not the
difference between the music of his heart and the hum of the world
without. He knows not yet that the world is everywhere the same, the
people everywhere the same, and the mountains, the lakes, the seas,
with but slight variations, the same. His longings carry him out, far
out, and he seeks their fulfilment.

The adult lives a life of bitter disappointments. He never seeks the
new. He longs only to get rid of the old. And the aged wanderer, having
reached the end of the vale of life, follows his buried wishes, his
memories of the beautiful days in which there was still something to
hope for, in which he was not beyond self-deception.

It is not to be denied that ours is _the_ travelling age. This is
partly due to the fact that we experience so little, as we have already
said, in our craving for excitement. The many inventions that have
conquered time and space have made it possible for us to fly over the
whole world, and thus the primary purpose of travelling, the hunger for
experience, shrinks into trivial, merry or vexatious hotel adventures.
But in every such trip one may discover a deeply hidden kernel of the
voyages of the old Vikings. Every journey is a tour of conquest. Here
at home we have found our level; our neighbours know us and have passed
their irrevocable judgment on our person. To travel means to conquer
the world anew, to make oneself respected and esteemed. Every new
touring acquaintance must stand for a new conquest. We display all our
talents for which we no longer have any use at home and all our almost
rusty intellectual weapons, our amiability, our courteousness, our
gallantry, are again taken out of the soul’s lumber chamber and put to
use in conquering new persons. This secret foolery compensates us for
all the plans of conquest that we have long ago given up. To conquer
persons without having to depend on one’s social background is one of
the greatest delights of travelling.

How strange! As in ordinary life we seek ourself and are overjoyed to
find ourself in our environment and get most out of the individual
who is most like ourself, so everywhere abroad we seek our own home.
How happy we are on beholding a familiar face even though it be that
of a person who has been ever so unsympathetic or indifferent. We are
delighted with him and greet him like a trusted friend--only because
he represents for us a fragment of our home which we have been seeking
out here and which we have found, to some extent, in him. That is why
such discoveries make us happiest as revealing identities with our
home. Even in this the infantile character of travelling is shown.
Just as in our youth we had to learn many things that we had to forget
subsequently so we act with regard to our journeys; every new city,
every new region is a kind of primer whose fundamentals we have to make
our own no matter how much it goes against our grain to do so. The
faithful visiting of all the objects of interest with our Baedeker in
our hands, the profound sense of an obligation to have seen so-and-so
is clearly such an infantile trait and has about it much of the
youthfulness and school-boyishness of the time in which the teacher’s
authority meant compelling knowledge to follow a set norm.

Much might be said about the technique of travelling. The manner in
which the thought springs from the unconscious, gently and with
tender longing, takes on more definite shape and apparently suddenly
breaks out during the night with the violence of a deed, presents
almost a neurotic picture, and one is justified, from this point of
view, in speaking of a “touring neurosis.” Every repression begets
a compulsive idea. The repression of the emotions of youth begets a
touring neurosis. The compulsion is strongest in the first few days
during which difficult internal conflicts have to be overcome. The
threads that bind us to our home, our vocation, and our beloved, must
first be wholly severed. This happens only after several days, after
the so-called “travel-reaction.” That is the name I would propose for
that unpleasant feeling that overcomes us after a few days. Suddenly
we feel lonesome and alone, curse the desire that prompted us to leave
our home, and play with the idea whether it would not be better to
terminate the trip and go back home. It is only when this reaction
has been overcome, when the conflict between the present and the past
has been decided in favour of the latter, only then has one acquired
the correct attitude to travelling, an attitude which depends upon a
complete forgetting of our social and individual obligations. It is,
for all the world, as if after this reaction we had suppressed all our
relations to our home and freed all our inhibitions. Only then can we
enjoy the pleasure of travelling, but, alas, it lasts only a short
time. For soon there rises before our eyes, like a threatening monster,
the time when we must again resume our obligations. The sense of duty
gets stronger and stronger, the desire for travelling gets weaker
and weaker, and after a short but decisive conflict, the fever for
travelling abates, leaving behind it a little heap of ashes in which
the feeble coals of memory gradually die.

It is a profound feeling of bliss that we feel at home, for down at
the bottom of the heart we have always been faithful to the home. We
see everything in the new colours with which our journey has beautified
the dull gray of daily life; alas! they are only temporary joys,
borrowed harmonies, which lose their intensity in the day’s progress
and are bound to return to their former dulness.

Particular mention must be made of the journeys of married couples.
These, too, are trips into the realm of youth, into the beautiful
country of the betrothal period, and thus every such trip is a new
honeymoon. The energies which had hitherto been devoted to the
discharge of their duties have now been freed and burst powerfully into
the amatory sphere; but they may also intensify components of aversion
and hatred, and are just as likely to emphasize antagonisms as, under
circumstances, they may build bridges over bottomless depths. Inasmuch
as _en tour_ thought and feeling are dominated by infantile traits, and
inasmuch as to a certain extent a new spring of love awakens with the
youthful fire and youthful tenderness, a journey may--just because of
these results--result in disappointments such as cannot otherwise be
brought to light in staid old age.

Let us also make mention of the opportunity a journey gives one of
living a purely physical existence, of enjoying the rare pleasure of
feeling oneself a creature of muscles, a thing all backbone and little
brain. Let us also mention the delight of feeling oneself a stranger,
of shaking off every irritating constraint, of being able to break with
impunity the rules of propriety and good breeding, and we have, in
comparison with all the really important psychological motives, touched
only a small part of the surface psychology of travelling.

And now I come to the really important point of my thesis. What I
have hitherto said is of general validity, applying to the generality
of travelling people. But I believe that every individual has also a
secret, deep-lying motive of which he himself is unaware and which one
rarely is in a position to discover. Now and then one may succeed in
discovering such a motive and one is then astonished at the strange
things that may be hidden behind the passion of travelling.

There are so many things that we seek all our life and that, alas! we
can never find. One is on the hunt for a friend who will “understand”
him; another for a beloved whom he can comprehend; the third for a
place where he may find the people he has dreamed of. Which of us
has not his secret, dark desires and longings which really belong
to “the other one” within us and not to the outer personage on whom
the sun shines? What is denied us by the environment may possibly be
found somewhere beyond. What withers here may bear luxuriant blossoms
somewhere beyond....

The deepest-lying, repressed desires are the driving power in the fever
for travelling. We are infected--infected by the seeds that have been
slumbering within us for years and which have now with mysterious power
engendered the ardour that drives us on to travel. Behind every journey
there lies a hidden motive. It will, of course, be a difficult matter
to discover in every case this deeply hidden motive, this innermost
spring of action. In some cases one succeeds, however, and lights
upon most remarkable things. One may hit upon some exciting touring
experience of earlier days, upon a strange fantasy, upon some sweet
wish that seems to be too grotesque to be spoken of openly. No one has
yet fathomed just what constitutes happiness. It is never the present,
always the future. A trip is a journey into the future, a hunting after
happiness.

The best light on the psychology of the “touring neurosis” is thrown by
a consideration of the opposite phenomenon--the “fear of travelling.”
There are many persons who are afraid of every journey, for whom
a railroad trip is a torture, for whom going away from home is a
punishment. There are persons who have compromised with the present
and have given up all hope of a future; who have no happiness to
lose and therefore have no wish to achieve any; who fear any great
change and who have become wrapped up in themselves. They are the
great panegyrists of home, the enthusiastic patriots, the contemners
of everything foreign. They behave exactly like the fox for whom the
grapes were too sour. Because their fears won’t let them travel they
prove to themselves and to the world at large that travelling is
nonsensical, that the city they live in is the best of all places to
live in. The fear of travelling also has a hidden motive which not
rarely is fortified by justifiable and unjustifiable consciousness of
guilt. Why we do not travel is often a much more interesting problem
than why we do travel.

Fear and desire are brother and sister and emanate from the same primal
depths. The wish often converts to fear and fear to wish. One who is
incapable in his heart to fly from himself and his environment bears
a heavy and unbreakable chain within his soul. So do we all. But we
break it now and then. The future may perhaps create free human beings.
Then there may perhaps be no abysms of the soul. Just at present
darkness surrounds us. The mysteries of the soul are barred to us.
Its depths are unfathomable. Even if we have illumined some hidden
corner and brought something that was long concealed to the light of
consciousness, it is only like a drop snatched from the infinity of the
ocean. The real reason why we travel can be told us only by our “other
self,” that “other one” whom we buried in our remote youth. Whither we
travel is quite clear. Large and small, young and old, fools and wise
men--all journey to the realm of youth. Life takes us into the kingdom
of dreams, and the dream takes us back again into life, into that
life to which we have been assigned and to which our deepmost desires
belong. What desires? Those are the secrets we anxiously conceal from
ourselves.




MOODY PERSONS


A beautiful warm summer day. The churchyard lies dreamily in the sultry
noonday atmosphere. All nature seems to be possessed by the desire to
imitate the sleep of those interred in the womb of earth. Suddenly
there is heard a grinding sound in the fine gravel and a curly,
rosy-cheeked, dark-haired lad is seen leaping over hedges and over
mounds after a gilded butterfly....

Wondrous images loom up before me like large great question marks in
the trembling air. Similar scenes from the distant mirage of my own
youth come to mind. Like a hot, long-dammed-up stream my emotions
break from the unconsciousness into consciousness. I am overcome by a
long-forgotten yearning. Is not my heart beating faster? Is there not a
wild pleasure in the melancholy that oppresses me?

How strange! A little while ago I lay lost in cheerful reflections
in the tall grass, delighting in the noiseless pace of time, and now
I am excited, restless, disturbed, and sad, but not unhappy. My mood
has undergone a complete change. What has brought this transformation
about? Surely, only the appearance of the beautiful boy who was trying
to catch a butterfly with his green net. Why did this scene excite me
so? There must have been set up in my mind a thinking process of which
I was not conscious. Some secret power that drives the wheels of the
emotions had set into action a long-inhibited and hidden spring.

Gradually the shadowy thoughts came into the bright light of
comprehension. The boy was to me a symbol of my life. An echo of my
distant youth. And the slumbering cemetery, my inevitable future. My
heart too is a cemetery. Numberless buried hopes, too early slain,
unblown buds, longings goaded to death, unfulfilled wishes lie buried
here within and no cross betrays their presence. And over all these
dead possibilities I, too, am chasing a gilded butterfly. And when I
catch it in my net I seize it with my rude heavy hands, doing violence
to the delicate dust on its wings, and throw the lusterless remainders
among the dead. Or it is destined to a place in a box, transfixed
with the fine needle named “impression” and constituting one of the
collection of dead butterflies which go to make up “memory.”

It really was an “unconscious” thought, then, that transformed my
mood from _dur_ into _moll_. And the truth dawns on me that all our
“incomprehensible” moods are logical and that they must all have a
secret psychic motivation. Moody persons are persons with whom things
are not in order. Their consciousness is split up into numerous
emotionally-toned “complexes.” An unconscious complex is like a state
within a state. A sovereign power, too repressed, too weak, and too
tightly fettered to break into consciousness without having to unmask,
but strong enough to influence the individual’s conduct. Moody persons
have their good and their bad days. The bad days are incomprehensible
puzzles to them. Simple souls speak of being under the influence
of demons; poets share their pains with the rest of the world and
“sublimate” their petty individual woes into a gigantic world-woe;
commonplace souls place the responsibility for their moods upon
“nature,” the bad weather, the boss, the husband, or wife, their cook,
their employment, and what not.

In the grasp of an incomprehensible mood we are ill at ease and
anxious, very much like a brave person who finds himself threatened in
a dark forest by a vindictive enemy whom he cannot see. To muster up
courage we deceive ourselves, just as the little child that falteringly
proclaims: “Please, please! I am good. The bogey man won’t come!”
But the bogey man does come, for a certainty. He always comes again
because everything that is repressed must take on the characteristics
of a psychic compulsion. If we do not want him to come again we
must bravely raise our eyelids and look at him fixedly with eyes of
understanding and realise that he is nothing but a phantom of our
excited senses, that he does not exist and has not existed. The bogey
man cannot long endure this penetrating look; slowly he dissolves into
grey shadows and disappears for ever.

Modern psychologists have pointed out the relationship between
unmotived moods and the periodical character of certain phenomena of
life. It is, of course, a fact that we are all subject to certain
partly known and partly unknown periodical influences. But whether
this alone is sufficient reason for attacks of depression does not
seem to me to have been proved. My own experiences speak against it.
Just as a stone, thrown into a body of water, causes the appearance of
broad circular ripples which gradually get feebler and feebler until
they disappear with a scarcely perceptible undulation of the surface,
so does a strong impression continue to work within us, giving rise
to ever wider but ever feebler circles. Only when these circles set a
floating mine in motion does the water shoot up, the mud is thrown on
high, and the clear surface is muddied. These floating mines are the
split off, unconscious complexes. The secret thought must not be put in
motion.

But enough of metaphors! Let us take an example from our daily life.
A woman is suffering from frequently-recurring incomprehensible
depressions. She has everything that a childish, spoiled heart can
desire. And she is not a spoiled child, for she had been a poor
seamstress when she made her husband’s acquaintance. Now she lives
in a magnificent palace, wears costly garments, has a houseful of
servants, adorns herself with the finest laces; her husband clothes
her like a doll, pampers and coddles her, treats her with the greatest
affection--in short, worships her. And this woman, the envy of her
associates as she rides by them in her splendid automobile, has days
on which she cries for hours. Our first guess is she does not love her
husband. You are wrong, you psychologists of the old school! She does
love her husband, she is as happy with her finery and wealth as a child
with a toy; she can assign no cause for her melancholy.

Notwithstanding this, her depression was of psychic origin. When we
investigated carefully the experiences and excitements that ushered
in one of these attacks it became clear that subterranean bridges led
to secret (suppressed) desires. Quite often the immediate occasion
was of a trifling nature. She had seen a poor woman pass her in the
street. Alone? No--with a young man, very happy, care-free, their arms
affectionately intertwined. On another occasion she had been reading
of a pair of lovers who had drowned themselves. Suicide was a subject,
beyond all others, which she could not bear to hear. At the theatre she
once sat in a box on the third tier. Suddenly she looked down into the
orchestra and was seized with horror. That was a yawning abyss! What if
her opera glass fell down there! Or if she lost her balance and toppled
over! A shudder passed through her. She put the opera glass aside and
became greatly depressed.

The mystery surrounding her melancholy was soon solved. Her husband,
fifteen years her senior, is not adapted to her temperamentally. In
secret she longs for a life rich in emotions, full of sin and perhaps
also of vice. Nature probably intended her for a fast woman, not for
an eminently respectable lady. Alluring melodies beckon her to the
metropolis. She would rather lose her breath in an endless dance in the
tight embrace of a pair of coarse arms than ride sedately down the main
avenue. She loves her husband, but sometimes she hates him. He’s the
obstacle. She knows how terribly jealous he is. He was very sick once;
just then the wicked thought entered her mind: “If he died now I’d be
rich and free!” The reaction was not long in coming. She saw herself as
a dreadful sinner. Life had no more interest for her. Since then she
has been suffering from periodical attacks of depression.

What happened in this case in the wake of powerful repressions happens
a little in all moody persons. An unconscious motive for the depression
can always be demonstrated. In most instances it is secret reproaches
that provoke the change in mood. In young people they are the sequel
of exaggerated warnings about not injuring their health. Sins against
religion and morality. Reproaches for too readily yielding to one’s
impulses. But also the opposite! Many an attack of depression is
nothing but the expression of regret at having to be virtuous.

A girl suffers from violent (psychically), apparently wholly unmotived
crying spells. The last one lasted half a day. I inquired whether
she had excited herself in some way. Had she any reason for being
depressed? No! Was she sure? A trifling matter--“of no particular
significance”--occurs to her. On one of the city bridges a very
elegant, young gentleman had addressed her. Would she permit him to
accompany her? Indignantly she repelled him. What did he think she
was! But he persisted in his role; he painted in glowing colours
the delights of a rendezvous, till finally she found the courage to
exclaim: “If you do not leave me at once, I shall call a policeman!”
Then, flushed, bathed in perspiration, she rushed home, ate her meal
in silence and soon thereafter gave vent to an almost unending crying
spell.

And now I discover that her first attack of crying followed a similar
occurrence. She was coming home from the country and had to travel at
night. She asked the conductor to point out the ladies’ coupé. To her
horror a tall, blonde lieutenant entered her coupé at the next station.
She at once protested vigorously at the intrusion. The officer very
politely offered his apologies, explaining that the train was full and
that he would be quite satisfied with a modest corner. He would be
greatly obliged to her for her kindness. But so anxious was she about
her virtue that she was proof against his entreaties. She appealed to
the conductor and insisted on her rights. The spruce officer had to
leave the coupé and for the rest of the night she was not molested. But
the occurrence had so excited her that she could not fall asleep and
she lay awake till dawn. The following day she had the first attack of
depression and crying. She bewailed her cruel fate that compelled her
to be virtuous while all the hidden voices within clamoured for a gay
life. She did not find herself strong enough to conquer her ethical
inhibitions. She was too weak to sin and not strong enough to be really
virtuous.

I could cite many such examples. They all show convincingly that there
are no “inexplicable” psychic depressions, that consciousness does not
embrace all the psychic forces that govern and direct us.

The classification of human beings into those that are free and
those that are not was determined by a social or ethical canon. But
in reality most human beings are the slaves of their unconscious
complexes. Only he can be free who knows himself thoroughly, who has
dared to look unafraid into the frightful depths of the unconscious.
Most persons are under the yoke of their “other self” who, with his
biting whip, drives them to pains and to pleasures, compels them to
leave the table of life and goads them into the arms of crime.

The greatest happiness in life is to have achieved one’s inner freedom.
This thought is still expressed in an old aphorism. “Everyone may have
his moods; but his moods must not have him.”

Moody persons are the slaves of their past, masters of renunciation
and assuredly bunglers in the art of life. Their only salvation is in
learning the truth or in the art of transforming their depression into
works of art. Most of the time they glide through life’s turbulence
like dreamers. Their ears are turned inward and thus it comes about
that life’s call is perceived but faintly by them. They are chasing
butterflies in cemeteries....




OVERVALUED IDEAS


Ideas resemble coins which have a certain exchange value according
to written and unwritten laws. Some are copper coins, so defaced and
dirty that no one would suspect from their looks that they had once
sparkled like bright gold. Others shine even to-day, after a lapse of a
thousand years, and a commanding figure proudly proclaims its origin.
One might even more aptly say that ideas resemble securities that are
highly valued to-day and may be worthless to-morrow; one day they
promise their possessor wealth and fame, and the next day there comes
a spiritual break, he is impoverished, and is left with an apparently
worthless piece of paper....

There is as yet, alas! no standard by which the values of different
ideas might be measured. Every man constructs for himself without much
ado a canon whereby to value his own thoughts. As a rule he swims with
the tide of current opinion; more rarely he goes with the minority
and very rarely he independently makes his own measure wherewith
to judge matters. Strange! In the end the conflict of minds turns
altogether about ideas and their estimation. What else do geniuses,
the pathfinders of mankind, accomplish but to disseminate a hitherto
neglected or even unknown idea and cause it to be generally accepted or
to cause ideas that have hitherto stood high in the world’s estimation
to topple from their thrones?

Just as everything else in life runs a circuitous course, in which
beginning and end touch, so is it also with the valuation of ideas.
Not only the genius, but the fool also strips old, highly esteemed
ideas and overvalues others that he has created for himself. The genius
and the fool agree in that they permit themselves to be led by the
“overvaluation” of their ideas. This expression was coined in a happy
moment by the psychiatrist Wernicke. It tells more in its pregnant
brevity than a long-winded definition would. Formerly it was the custom
to speak of the “fixed ideas” of the sufferers from the peculiar form
of insanity which physicians call “paranoia,” the mental disease which
the laiety knows better and understands less than any other psychosis.
A delusion was regarded as a fixed idea which neither experience nor
logic could shake. To-day we have penetrated deeper into the problems
of delusions. We know that ideas differ from one another tremendously.
Some are anemic and colourless, come like pale shadows and so depart.
Others have flesh and blood and scintillate in brilliant colours. Long
after they have vanished, their image still trembles in our souls in
gently dying oscillations. The explanation for this phenomenon is very
simple. Our attention is dependent upon our emotions. Pale thoughts are
indifferent and have no emphasis. Coloured ideas are richly endowed
with emotions, being either pleasurable or painful.

As a rule ideas are in continual conflict with one another. The
instincts surge upward from the depth, the inhibitions bear down from
above, and between them--owing to stimuli from within and without--the
sea of ideas rocks up and down, during which time another idea rises to
the mirror-like surface of consciousness. Suddenly one remains on top
and becomes stationary, like a buoy anchored deep to the sea’s bottom.
This is the “fixed idea” of older writers and the “overvalued ideas” of
modern psychotherapeutists.

This idea is really deeply anchored. At the bottom of the unconscious
lie the great “complexes” which impart a corresponding accent to our
various ideas. An overvalued idea is anchored in a “complex” which has
repressed all other “complexes.” It is accompanied or invested with a
powerful affect which has stripped other ideas of their affects.

A very old example--if one may so call it--of physiological insanity
is the condition known as “being in love.” A German psychiatrist has
taken the wholly supererogatory pains to prove anew that a lover is
a kind of madman and he designates love as “physiological paranoia.”
But, unfortunately, he makes no distinction between loving and being
in love. But it is just through this distinction that we are enabled
precisely to define the conception of an overvalued idea. Like an
example from a text-book. For love is an idea whose value is generally
acknowledged. We love our parents, our teacher, our country, art, our
friends, etc.

But as regards being in love it is quite a different matter. As to
this the environment does not accept the exaggerated valuation of
the emotions. Here love becomes an overvalued idea. Arguing with one
who is in love about common sense, religion, education, station, or
politics will not affect him in the least. He is dominated solely by
the love-complex. This alone determines the resonance of his thoughts
and feelings. The attraction to the chosen object has attracted all
the other affects to it, has placed all the impulses at the service of
one overvalued idea. He loves life but only if he be together with his
beloved; he is jealous, but only with reference to the love-object;
he is interested only in such matters as are in some way related to
that object. The fool who is being dominated by an overvalued idea
acts exactly in the same way. The lunatic who imagines himself the
king of the world, and in whom a childhood wish had overpoweringly
established itself as a fact in his consciousness, has interest only
for such things as find access to this wish; the victim of ideas
of persecution discovers in the news items of the daily papers the
important communication that his enemies are laying traps for him;
the unfortunate love-sick youth who imagines that Princess X wants to
give him her hand in marriage sees in all sorts of advertisements of
love-hungry ladies secret communications from his princess.

These poor fools bring everything they see and everything they feel
into relationship with the overvalued idea which, projected outward in
the shape of an hallucination, sounds to their ears like a spiritual
echo and blinds their eyes like a vision.

A lover acts essentially like this. That is why the world says of a
person in love that he makes himself ridiculous. A handkerchief or a
glove, or anything belonging to the beloved, becomes a fetich which can
evoke the most ecstatic emotions. Anything that can be associated with
love is overvalued.

Another question involuntarily presents itself. Is love, in the form
known as “being in love,” the only overvalued idea with which a normal
person may be afflicted? Are there any other forms of “physiological
insanity”--if we may use the term coined by Lower and subsequently
imitated by Moebius?

The answer to these questions is not difficult. A backward look
teaches us what unspeakable evils overvalued ideas have wrought in
man’s history. For overvalued ideas are sources of great danger. They
are richly endowed with emotions and consequently lend themselves to
suggestion more readily than almost any other idea. Bleuler has proved
that suggestion is nothing but the transference of an emotion. And such
overvalued ideas can be hurled with great suggestive force among the
multitude and change the individual--and even whole communities--into
a fool. That is how the psychoses of whole nations have arisen. The
tremendous power of overvalued ideas can be understood if one thinks of
the crusades, the witchcraft persecutions, hysterical epidemics, the
Dreyfus affair, anarchism, etc.

It is a sad fact that none of us can be free from overvalued ideas.
In this sense there is really no difference between fools and healthy
persons. Everyone of us bears within himself a hidden quantity of
neurosis and psychosis. What saves us from the insane asylum is perhaps
only the circumstance that we hide our overvalued ideas or that so many
persons share our folly and that the multitude accepts it as wisdom.

There are innumerable aphorisms, the crystallised precipitations of
thousands of years, experience, that express this truth. “Every man has
his little crack, his dross and his sliver.” (In the German saying the
overvalued idea is compared to a splinter in the brain. An excellent
metaphor!) “If you see a fool take hold of your own ears.” “You cannot
name a wise man who was not guilty of some folly.” (The reader will
find ample material on this subject in Dr. Moenkenmöller’s book on
‘mental disease and mental weakness in satire, proverb, and humour,’
published in 1907.) In other words: We all suffer from a false and
subjective valuation of our ideas. We all drag overvalued ideas about
with us.

It is the dream of all great minds to revise these overvalued ideas.
Nietzsche’s life work was a struggle with overvalued ideas. While so
engaged, he himself became the victim of an overvalued idea, and his
superman will forever remain a literary myth. But if the twilight of
Gods could once set in for the overvalued ideas then only could we do
full justice to his rhapsodies in “Beyond Good and Evil.” For in no
other sphere is there such luxuriance of overvalued ideas as in the
ethical. All progress has been brought about by the suppression of the
natural impulses. All our education, using the word in its true sense,
consists in investing our instincts and impulses with don’ts. The sum
total of these inhibitions we call morality. Progress consists in
getting pleasure out of the inhibition, in converting the displeasure
of being inhibited into ethical pleasure. The striving for this goal
results in a kind of ethical burdening. One who has had the opportunity
to study neurotics will be amazed at the many agonizing conscious pangs
they suffer from owing to their ignorance of man’s true nature. These
times pant under the burden of morality as an overvalued idea. They
are in danger of asphyxiating under the ethical burden. A false and
hypocritical morality, by disseminating an unhealthy conception of our
dispositions (instincts), has turned our views on what constitutes sin
topsy-turvy. The consequences are only too evident. On the one hand,
we behold, as evidences of suppression, indulgence in frivolities,
pleasure in the piquant, a delight in indelicate jokes, which forcibly
intrude into life and art; on the other hand, as the natural reaction
to this, an over-luxuriance of scientific and pseudo-scientific sexual
literature. And all because morality became a ruinously overvalued
idea. I do not wish to be misunderstood. Morality will always remain
the goal of noble souls, but only that kind of morality which
harmonizes with man’s nature. Where morality does violence to nature
it becomes natural, and brings about not ethical freedom but ethical
burdening.

But morality is not the only overvalued idea that turns the half of
mankind into fools. If we survey the chaos of modern social life we
shall easily find everywhere evidences of the endless disputes and
irritating conflicts caused by overvalued ideas. Scientists may prove
that the theory of races is no longer tenable, that the asserted
purity of races is a fable, etc. Notwithstanding all that, the German
Workurka and the Czech rustic are always at each other’s throats. Why
cite other examples? In racial, religious, national, and other discords
it is always an overvalued idea that makes a harmonious evolution
impossible. Verily, the whole world is an insane asylum because the
essential factor in delusions, an overvalued idea, pervades the air
like infectious psychic germs.

Will the world ever be better? From a survey of the past we are
justified only in being coldly sceptical and discouragingly dubious.
A conflict of ideas will continue as long as there are dissensions
between human beings. Ideas to wage a war for existence. A few survive
longer than others, are highly esteemed till their course is run and
are discovered to have been overvalued. But as long as they have the
mastery they change credulous men into foolish children.

From this endless round there is no escape. And folly and wisdom lead
the never-ending dance until the dark, wide open gates of the future
swallow them.




AFFECTIONATE PARENTS


The last few years the child has become the centre of interest.
Funny as it may sound, it may almost be asserted that we had just
rediscovered the child. Congresses are held, artists devote their
talents to portraying the life of the child, expositions acquaint
us with the many aspects of the advances that have been made in the
new knowledge. Is it any wonder then that we have suddenly been made
acquainted with the abuses of children? That we have shudderingly
learned that there are children who are tortured by their own mothers?
There were loud cries of horror. The fountain of humanity became a
broad stream which must drive the mills of a new social organization in
the interests of the defenceless child. Who would withhold his approval
of this movement? Who would oppose it? For truly there is no sadder
spectacle than a child tortured to death by its own parents. The whole
instinct for race preservation cries out against it....

But this theme may also be regarded from another angle, and I purpose
showing from the point of view of the physician and the pedagog that
the reverse of abuse, viz., excessive affection, has a dark side,
that it, too, is capable of ruining a child’s life and condemning an
innocent being to lifelong suffering.

At a private gathering of physicians not long ago the subject of
the last congress for the protection of children was discussed from
its more serious as well as lighter aspects. A Viennese neurologist
ventured the following remark: “I regard it as a great misfortune
if a woman’s affection for her husband is expended upon her child.
A misfortune for humanity, for, in this way, the number of nervous
persons will be incalculably increased.”

One is strongly inclined at first energetically to attack this opinion.
What! A tender, affectionate bringing up will make a child neurotic?
Who can prove that a happy childhood results in an unhappy life? Shall
parents be afraid to show their children love? To hug them, kiss them,
pet them? Is not nervousness rather the sequel to draconic sternness,
tyrannical compulsion?

Nonsense! Nonsense! I shall attempt to answer these obtrusive
questions seriatim.

But, first, one remarkable fact has to be postulated. Parents are
really becoming more and more affectionate from year to year. Such
fanatically affectionate parents as are quite common now were formerly
the exception. To-day the parents’ thoughts all centre around the
child: How to feed it, bring it up, dress it hygienically, harden it,
how to instruct it in sexual matters.... A flood of books and magazines
scarcely suffices to meet the tremendous concern about these matters.
Can this emanate solely from the fact that the pressing movement for
emancipation of woman has displaced the woman’s interest from the man
to the child? I think that herein the neurologist is in error. That
cannot possibly be the sole cause.

The cause for the hypertrophied love of the child is adduced from
the consideration of those cases which even in former times offered
instances of an exaggerated parental affection amounting to doting
love. The over-indulged child was almost invariably an only child whom
popular speech designates a “trembling joy.”

It is to be regretted that most modern families are made up of
such “trembling joys.” “Neo-Malthusianism” has infected the whole
world. In consequence of the employment of innumerable and more or
less generally employed anti-conceptives the birth rate is steadily
declining. “Two-children families” is the rule, and families with
many children--especially among the well-to-do--the exception. Even
the vaunted fecundity of the Germans which is always being held up
as a model to the French will soon be a thing of the past. In former
decades 1,000 married women in Berlin gave birth to 220 children and
from 1873 to 1877 the number even rose to 231. Since then the birth
rate is declining from year to year, so that in 1907 1,000 women only
had 111 children. In other large cities matters are even worse than
in Berlin in this regard. But it would be decidedly wrong to infer
that there is a diminution in the number of marriages. In Prussia
the number of marriages from 1901 to 1904 was at the rate of 8 per
1,000, whereas in 1850 it was somewhat less, to wit: 7.8 per 1,000.
Sociologists have detected in this state of affairs a great danger for
the mental prospects of the race inasmuch as matters in this regard are
much better in the country and, consequently, they say, the progeny of
the farmer class will in a not remote period tremendously exceed the
intelligent descendants of urban people in number. The country will get
the best of the city and not vice versa. But we must not wander away
from our subject. Let us take this fact for granted: The “two-children
system” is the cause for the excessive parental affection we have
described. But wherein is this dangerous?

I shall not attempt here a detailed statement of the well-known
dangers. We all know that coddled children very often become helpless,
dependent persons, that they cannot find their place in life, and do
not seem to be armed against adversity. It seems superfluous to dwell
at greater length on this. Of greater significance is the phenomenon
that the exaggerated affection lavished on the child creates a
correspondingly large need for affection in it. A need for affection
that is tempestuous in its demand for gratification. As long as
these children are young so long is this demand fully satisfied. The
parents, and especially mothers, are so overjoyed at their children’s
manifestations of love that out of their overflowing hearts they
reward them by overwhelming them with caresses. Thus the measure of
affectionate demonstrations rises instead of gradually sinking. And now
the time comes for the child to go to school. And for the first time
in its life it stands in the presence of the will of a stranger who
demands neither petting nor love, only work done without grumbling. How
easily this situation gives rise to conflict! The child thinks it is
not loved by the teacher, it is terrified by a harsh word and begins to
cry. School becomes odious to it; it learns unwillingly. It asks for
another school and for other teachers. If its wish is gratified the
same thing is soon repeated.

Matters get much worse when these children grow up. They have an
unquenchable craving for caresses. From them are developed the women
who kill their husband’s love by their own immoderate love. Every day
they want to be told that their husbands still love them. Daily--nay,
hourly--they wish to be the recipients of sweets, loving words, private
pet names and kisses without number. The men, on the other hand,
who had been so coddled in their childhood, are only in the rarest
instances satisfied with their wives; sooner or later they seek to
compensate outside of the home for the insufficient affection shown by
the wife; or they transfer this requirement upon the children who thus
become seriously (though not congenitally) burdened. But even this is
not the worst.

The greatest dangers of excessive affection are known to only very
few persons. They consist in a premature excitation of the erotic
emotions. We are so prone to forget unpleasant experiences. Hence comes
it that most adults have no recollection of their own youthful erotic
experiences. Parents especially are very forgetful in this regard--so
much so that their forgetfulness amounts almost to a pathological
condition bordering on hysterical amnesia. Thence comes it that most
mothers will take an oath on their daughters’ innocence and fathers on
their sons’ purity. They talk themselves into the belief that their
children are exceptions, that they are incredibly simple, still believe
in the stork myth and other similar stupidities.

That the sexual enlightenment of the child is an important problem
and of far-reaching significance for its whole life is proved in
numberless books and essays dealing with the subject. We are told that
open scientific instruction should take the place of secret knowledge
obtained from turbid channels. Very fine! But the world must not
believe that the child’s first erotic knowledge is awakened as a result
of such instruction. That is a widespread superstition. The sexual life
of the child does not begin with puberty, the old books to the contrary
notwithstanding, but with the day of its birth.

On the occasion of a sad criminal trial in which children were charged
with being prostitutes, public opinion was horrified at the wickedness
of these poor creatures. And yet most of them were victims of their
environment. Does any one really believe that such occurrences are rare
exceptions? That is a myth. We talk ourselves into the belief that
the little child that is still unable to speak is not receptive to
erotic impressions. How do we know this? The brain of a child is like
a photographic plate that greedily catches impressions, independently
of whether they are intelligible or not, impressions whose influence
may be operative throughout its life. As we know, there is a large
group of investigators which traces all perverse manifestations of the
sexual impulses back to a fixation of the earliest erotic experience.
Erotic stimulation can subsequently be brought about only by way of
an association with this early impression. This explanation certainly
does seem to fit the curious phenomenon known as fetichism. In this way
children’s experiences influence their whole life. In sexual matters
human beings behave with incredible naïveté. They close their eyes and
will not see. Frank Wedekind is perfectly right in deriding a world
that has secrets even from itself. So infantile sexuality is a secret
which every intelligent person knows.

If parents only kept this in their mind’s eye! Then it would not happen
that children ten years of age and older would be permitted to sleep in
their parents’ bedrooms that the anxious father and mother might watch
over the gentlest breath of their precious darlings. These parents do
not want to consider the possibility that the children may in this
way receive impressions which may prove very injurious to them. Many
a case of obstinate insomnia in childhood or of nocturnal attacks
of apprehension is explained in this way. I have repeatedly cured
sleepless children by the simple remedy of ordering them to sleep in
separate bedrooms.

Let us assume then that all children are susceptible to erotic stimuli
and that such stimulation may harm them. For the later a person’s
conscious sexual life begins the greater the prospects of his becoming
a healthy, mentally well-balanced individual. Among the factors capable
of permanently arousing erotic emotions we must include excessive
affection. Between the affections of one who loves and of a mother
there are really no differences. Both kiss, caress, fondle, hug,
embrace, pet, etc. That the excitement is transmitted to the same
central organs is obvious.

In this way the child receives its first erotic sensations from its
nurse. Interpret it as we may the nurse, the attendant, the mother,
the father are the child’s first love, the first erotic love, as our
psychoanalysis has convincingly demonstrated. But this must not be
interpreted to mean that I wish to condemn the affectionate management
of children. On the contrary! A certain quantity of affection is,
as a matter of fact, essential to the normal development of the
individual. But the affection lavished on them must not be excessive.
For if it is the child will be prematurely brought into a condition of
erotic overstimulation. It grows older and begins to feel the power
of education. To restrain and curb the force of the natural impulses
powerful inhibitions are erected. As a reaction to the premature sexual
stimulation there begins a remarkable process which may be designated
as “sexual repression.” This repression may succeed so well that even
the child forgets its early experiences or the repression does not
succeed and the individual’s erotic requirements grow from year to
year. In the latter case there develops in the child a serious psychic
conflict between sexual longing and sexual renunciation and thus the
soil in which a neurosis may grow is prepared. Perhaps the conflict is
the neurosis.

We shall mention only in passing that such exaggerated affection begets
in many children the habit of securing for themselves a certain amount
of pleasurable sensations by way of certain auto-erotic actions. It
is not possible, nor necessary, to enter into a detailed discussion
of these matters here. For most people know that our experiences in
childhood influence our whole life. But it is a tragic commentary on
human strivings that excessive parental love may bring sickness upon
the child, that a happy present is replaced by an unhappy future, that
the roses a mother strews in her child’s path only later show their
thorns.

We cannot say it too often: We fuss too much with our children. There
is too much theory in this matter of bringing up children. We pay
too much attention to our children. Let us leave them their peaceful
childhood, their merry games, the wondrous product of their untiring
phantasy. Let us clearly realize that with our excessive affection we
give ourselves a great deal of pleasure but that at the same time we
are doing the children a great injury. Let no one discourage mothers
from being affectionate to their children, from expending loving
attentions on them, from making their youth as pleasant as possible.
But the parents’ affection should not expend itself mechanically. It
should be a uniformly warm fire that only warms, kindles no fire, and
bursts into a bright flame only on life’s great holidays.




WHY THEY QUARREL


When a happy married couple laughingly assures me that the heaven
of their marriage was always cloudless and that there were no
thunder-storms and no lightning flashes I accept it as self-evident,
but to myself I think: they are lying. When two friends assure me that
they have never quarrelled I think the same thing. I know that they
have not been telling the truth. That is, they are liars without
the consciousness of lying. They are firmly convinced that they
were telling only what was true, because they have “repressed” the
unpleasant, the painful, the objectionable. And thus it comes to pass
that lovers forget all the “scenes” that had occurred between them,
and that friends become oblivious of the little unpleasantnesses that
had caused them so much suffering, and that they can assert, with the
utmost conviction, that they had never quarrelled. We do not quaff the
lethe-potion of oblivion at our life’s end. No, we sip it daily, and
it is this that enables us to maintain that optimism which ever looks
hopefully into the future and anticipates thornless roses.

There are people who must always be quarrelling, whose exuberant energy
must be discharged in this way, to whom life does not seem worth while
if it runs along smoothly. These are the everlastingly unsatisfied who
have not found the ideals of their youth, who have not attained their
dreams. They project their discontent, their internal distraction, upon
all their daily experiences. That is why they so often appear to be
overcharged with emotion; that is why the intensity of their excitement
is incomprehensible to us. For it is a fact that they fly into rages
about trivial matters. But it is this very intensity of emotion that
shows that there is more behind these little rows than they will
ordinarily admit, that the quarrel derives its fuel from a deeper
source than appears on the surface.

It has struck many observers that the external provocation to
quarrelling is often very trivial. Of course we frequently hear a man
or his wife declare that they would gladly avoid a quarrel if it were
possible to do so. Either one says something that seems to be quite
innocent, and yet it will be the occasion for a heated altercation, a
great domestic scene with all its unpleasant consequences.

This is due to the fact that most persons do not distinguish between
cause and provocation. The provocation to a quarrel is easily found if
hidden unconscious forces seek for it, if a deeper cause, acting as a
driving power, sets the wheels of passion in motion.

A somewhat careful investigation of every quarrel easily brings the
conviction that it is invariably the secret, unconscious emotions
that bring about the conflict of opinions. Where this deep resonance
of the unconscious is lacking we playfully pass over differences.
Unfortunately there are probably no two human beings whose souls
vibrate so harmoniously that there never occurs a discord. This
phenomenon is altogether too deeply rooted in human nature for an
exception ever to occur. And paradoxical as it may sound, it is lovers
who love each other most who cause each other the greatest pain. The
great intensity which their emotions attain is due only to the fact
they have repressed a series of experiences and feelings. They are
blind to the faults of the beloved because they do not wish to see
these faults. But the suppressed forces have not yet lost their power
over the soul. These bring about the quarrel, and are capable, even if
only for a few seconds, to transform love into hatred.

But a few practical examples will do more to make this subject clear
than all our theoretical explanations. Mr. N. S., a pious, upright man,
asserts that his present ailment dates from a quarrel that had been
frightfully upsetting him for months. He had inherited from his father
a large library rich in manuscripts, and had also succeeded him in
his position. One day his brother came to him and stormily demanded
the return of the books. But inasmuch as he was the older he felt
himself entitled to be the sole heir. A violent quarrel ensued, during
which he exclaimed: “I’ll die before I give up any of these books!”
After the quarrel he became very neurotic. He tortures himself with
self-reproaches; he is convinced that with that exclamation he had been
guilty of an act of impiety; he is very unhappy and finds no rest, no
peace, either at home or in his office.

Many persons may be satisfied with the superficial explanation offered
by the patient himself that he is an ardent bibliophile and collector
of ancient manuscripts. But the physician who treats sick souls must
not be so easily satisfied.

We know that every collector is an unconscious Don Juan who has
transferred his passion from an erotic upon a non-erotic sphere. But
we also know that the passion with which the collected objects are
loved emanates from the erotic domain. And what did our psychoanalysis
of the above case bring out? Remarkably enough a rivalry between the
two brothers which went back all the way to their youth. The older
one had the privileges of the first-born and was a good-for-nothing.
The younger one was a pattern of what a child ought to be. From their
childhood they had been rivals for the affection of their parents, and
more especially of the mother. We encounter here the so-called “Oedipus
motive,” a son’s love for his mother--a motive whose instinctive
force and urge are still too imperfectly appreciated. The two had
been rivals, the older one being jealous of the parents’ preference
for the younger one, and the younger jealous of the older one’s
privileges. In this we have the first of the deeper motives for the
quarrel. Further investigation brought a second and a third motive to
light. The older had, very naturally, married first, and repeatedly
boasted in the presence of his younger and unmarried brother of his
wife’s charms and virtues. In fact, he had even led him into his wife’s
bedroom that he might see for himself what a treasure he possessed.
(You see the motives of such stories as “Gyges and his Ring” and “King
Candaules” occurring even nowadays.) At that moment a great passion
for his sister-in-law flared up in the younger brother’s breast. Here
we have then a second cause for dissension. But other factors are also
involved. Our pious young man married a beautiful woman and would
have been happy if he had not been the victim of a jealous passion.
Jealousy always has its origin in the knowledge of one’s inferiority.
He thought he noticed that his older brother was too devoted to his
wife. And during an excursion into the country they had been in the
woods a little too long, as he thought, and it occurred to him--and
here we have the fourth motive--to tempt his sister-in-law. He is a
Don Juan who runs after every petticoat and wants to drain life in
large draughts. N. S. was a pious virtuous man who knew how to turn his
sinful cravings to good account for the success of his business and to
bad account as far as his health was concerned. The brother whom he
despised openly he envied in secret. But we could mention still other
motives for their quarrel if Mrs. Grundy considerations did not bar the
way....

Unconscious sexual motives lurk behind many quarrels, one might almost
say behind most quarrels. We have already hinted that dissensions
between brothers or sisters are due to rivalry. But even in the
quarrels between parents and children we may frequently enough
demonstrate the identical undertone for the disharmony. The infant son
sees in his father a rival for the mother’s favour. The reverse also
occurs, though not so frequently. I was once the witness to a violent
quarrel between a father and his son. The father had, as it seemed to
me, not the slightest cause for grievance against the son, and yet
a little trifle led to a violent altercation that ended in a tragic
scene. At the height of the row the father screamed to his wife: “You
are to blame for it all! You robbed me of my son’s love!”

Naturally one would think that this lava stream belched forth in a
great burst of passion from a volcano would contain the truth in its
torrid current. And so it does, but in a disguised form. The true
reproach should have been directed at the son, and should have been:
“You have robbed me of my wife’s love!”

We see in this a “transference” of a painful emotion from one person
upon another. Such transferences or “displacements” are extremely
common in everyday life, and it is only with their aid that we can
account for the many domestic conflicts. A man will rarely admit that
he erred in the choice of a wife. The feeling of hatred that his wife
engenders in him he transfers upon others. Upon whom? The answer is
obvious. Upon her next of kin. Most frequently upon her mother, the
most immediate cause of her existence. This is the secret meaning of
the many mother-in-law jokes, a never-failing and inexhaustible and
perpetual theme for wits.

So that, for example, if we hear a young woman complain that she cannot
bear her husband’s family but that she loves him beyond bounds we may
with perfect safety translate this in the language of the unconscious
thus: “I would not care a rap about my husband’s family if I did not
have to love my husband.”

The rows with servants, well-known daily occurrences, become
intelligible only if we know the law of transference. An unfaithful
wife, who had been betrayed and deserted by her lover, suddenly
began to watch her servant girls suspiciously, and to strike them on
the slightest provocations. The woman had for years employed “help”
without having had more than the customary quarrels with them. After
a short sojourn with her husband the rage of the abandoned woman, who
would have loved to give her faithless lover a good thrashing in true
southern fashion, was transferred upon her servants. And exactly like
this the resentment of many a housewife is discharged through these
more or less innocent lightning rods, and thus is brought about the
phenomenon so common in modern large cities which may be designated as
“servant-girl neurosis.”

Obviously the deeper motives slumber in the unconscious, and if
they ever become conscious they are looked upon as sinfulness
and bad temper. Freud has become the founder of a wholly new
psychology by virtue of his discovery of the laws of repression and
of transference--a psychology which will be indispensable to the
criminologist of the future. What is nowadays brought to light in our
halls of justice as the psychological bases for conflicts is generally
only superficial psychology.

This is strikingly illustrated by one of the saddest of legal
proceedings of last year. I mean the trial for murder in the
Murri-Boumartini case, in consequence of which an innocent victim--so I
am convinced--the Countess Linda Boumartini is languishing in prison.
Her brother Tullio, who had murdered his brother-in-law, was accused
of an illicit relationship with his sister, for otherwise the murder
would have been inexplicable. One who has carefully read Linda’s
memoirs and her letters, which are now before the public, as well as
the confessions of the imprisoned Tullio, will be sure to laugh at the
accusation, which unquestionably owed its origin to a clerical plot.
What may have really happened is that unconscious brotherly love which
deep down under consciousness in all likelihood takes its origin from
the sexual but whose flowers appear on the surface of consciousness as
the loftiest manifestations of ethical feeling. It was brotherly love,
the primal motive which Wagner immortalised in his “Valkyrie,” that
forced the dagger into Tullio Murri’s hand. He saw his sister suffer
and go to pieces because of the brutal stupidity of his brother-in-law.
What lay hidden behind his pure fraternal love may never have entered
his consciousness.

Oh, we unfortunates, doomed to eternal blindness! What we see of the
motives of great conflicts is usually only the surface. Even in the
case of the little domestic quarrels, the irritating frictions of
everyday life, the vessel of knowledge sails only over the easily
excited ripples. But what gives these waters their black aspect
is the deep bed over which they lie. Down there, at the bottom of
the sea which represents our soul, there ever abide ugly, deformed
monsters--our instincts and desires--emanating from the beginnings
of man’s history. When they bestir their coarse bodies the sea too
trembles and is slightly set in motion. And we stupid human beings
think it is the surface wind that has begot the waves.




LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE


It was getting late. The last guests had left the café. The waiters,
tired and sleepy, were prowling around our table with a peculiar
expression in their countenances which clearly challenged us to call
for our checks....

We took no notice of them. Or rather, we refused to take notice. The
sudden death of one of our dearest friends had aroused something
incomprehensible in us which made us very restless. We were speaking
about premonitions, and that peculiar intangible awe which one feels
in the presence of the incomprehensible, the supernatural, which at
certain times overcomes even the most confirmed sceptic, sat at our
table.

The journalist--who could not deny a slight tendency to mysticism--was
of the opinion that he would certainly not die a natural death. That
was all we could get him to say on the subject at this time. Finally
however he confessed, with pretended indifference, that he has the
certain premonition that he will one day be trampled to death by
frightened horses.

“Nonsense!”--“Nursery tales!”--“Superstition!” several voices exclaimed
simultaneously.

But the physician shook his head gravely. “Strange! Very strange! Do
you put any stock in this looking into the future?”

The journalist blushed so slightly that it could hardly be noticed,
the way men blush when they fear that they had betrayed a weakness.
Cautiously he replied: “And why not? Can you prove the contrary? Have
we not until only a few years ago pooh-poohed the idea of telepathy
and called it superstition? But nowadays that the X-rays, wireless
telegraphy and other marvels have revolutionised our ideas about
matter and energy and even space, we no longer laugh pityingly at
the poor dreamers who, like Swedenburg, the northern magician, see
things that are beyond the field of vision of their bodily eyes. Why
then should I doubt the possibility of somebody some day finding an
explanation for the ability to ‘look into the future’?”

“Bosh!” exclaimed the lawyer. “That’s all fantastic piffle! I can cite
you an example from my own experience which is as interesting as it is
instructive. I was very sick and confined to bed. Suddenly I awoke,
my heart palpitating, and heard a loud voice screaming these words
right into my ears: ‘You will live fourteen days more! Take advantage
of this period!’ Just fourteen days later I was sailing on the ocean.
A frightful sirocco wind was tossing our little steamer from right
to left and from left to right so violently that we could not retain
our upright positions. And suddenly my prophecy--which I had almost
completely forgotten--came back to me. But I remained very cool, like a
scientist who is on the eve of making a great discovery and risking his
life to do so. As you see I did not die, and the ship came safely into
port. But had I accidentally perished, and if my prophetic dream--the
outward projection of my unconscious fear--my unpleasant hallucination
had been known to the people about me--the matter would have been
construed as a new confirmation of the truth of premonitions. We have
so many premonitions that are never fulfilled that the few that happen
accidentally to come true do not really matter. Lots of things in
life are that way. We speak of our ‘hard luck’ because we forget the
times when we have been lucky. Luck rushes by so swiftly! Bad luck
creeps, oh, so slowly! And, coming down to facts, I do not know of a
single instance of an undoubted fulfillment of a prophecy. For I must
confess that all these American and Berlin prophets who have recently
given such striking proofs of their ‘second sight’ do not impress me.
They have not uttered a single prophecy precisely and accurately, and
oracular speeches delivered in general terms are as elastic as a rubber
band, and can be applied to almost anything. A great conflagration,
a destructive earthquake, or a cruel war will rarely disappoint a
prophet. Somewhere or other in this wide world there is a conflagration
some time during the year, the earth rocks somewhere, and somewhere
machine guns are being fired. I therefore do not believe that our
friend will be trampled to death by frightened horses. At the most what
will happen will be that his pegasus, growing tired of being abused by
him, will suddenly throw him down.”

For a little while there was silence. We had the feeling that the
counsellor’s malicious witticism was out of place at this time. The
doctor broke the silence. “What will you say, my dear friends, if I
tell you that a prominent scientist and psychologist has reported a
case which seems to prove the possibility of looking into the future.
I say ‘seems’ only because there is an explanation which re-transforms
the supernatural into the natural. The physician in question, the
well-known Dr. Flournoy, had frequently been consulted by a young man
who was suffering from peculiar attacks of apprehension. Day and night
he was haunted by the idea that he would fall from a high mountain
into a deep precipice, and so be killed. Logic and persuasion were
of no avail in dealing with this obsession. It was easy enough for
Flournoy to point out that all the young man had to do was to keep
away from mountains, and there would be no possibility of his meeting
such a frightful end. The patient grew very melancholic, and could
not be persuaded to enjoy life as formerly. Imagine this experienced
psychologist’s amazement on reading in his newspaper one day that his
patient had been instantly killed by accidentally falling from a steep
but easily passable ridge while he was taking a walk in a sanitarium in
the Alps.”

The journalist exclaimed triumphantly: “Doctor, you’ve disproved your
own theory. If what you’ve just told us doesn’t prove the power to look
into the future, then nothing does.”

“Pish! Pish!” replied the physician. “Haven’t I said that the
explanation is to follow?”

We were all very curious to hear how such a strange occurrence could
be explained without the aid of the supernatural. The physician
lit another cigar and continued: “What, coming down to facts, is
fear? You all know what it is, for I have told you often enough:
fear--anxiety--apprehension--is a repressed wish. Every time that two
wishes are in conflict as to which one is to have mastery over the
individual the wish that has to yield is perceived in consciousness
as apprehension. A young girl is apprehensive when she finds herself
for the first time alone in a room with her sweetheart. For the time
being she is afraid of what later on she may wish for. Dr. Flournoy’s
melancholic young man was clearly tired of life. The wish may have come
upon him once to make an end of his life by throwing himself from a
great height--from such a height as would make failure of the suicidal
attempt impossible. This wish may have come to him at night in a dream,
or perhaps just before he fell asleep, while he was in a state between
sleep and waking. Who knows? But it must have prevailed before the
will to live had repressed it and converted it into apprehension. And
his prophetic premonitions were nothing but the misunderstood voice
from within. And his mysterious death was nothing but--suicide. I have
forgotten to tell you that, according to the newspaper reporters,
he had sat down on the edge of a precipice and fallen asleep. He had
fallen down while asleep. As if the voices in his dream had whispered
to him: ‘Come! do what you so earnestly yearn to do! Die! Now you have
a fine opportunity!’ The moment had come when the fear had become the
stronger wish.”

The journalist was pale. The doctor’s explanation seemed to have
stirred up something in the deepest layers of his soul. His voice
box was seen to make that automatic movement which we all make when
we are embarrassed, as if we wished to speak but could not find the
right word. Finally, after he had coughed a little several times, as
if to clear his vocal cords, he remarked in a somewhat heavy voice:
“That would throw a peculiar light upon many accidental falls in the
mountains. You recall, no doubt, that a short time ago a well-known
tourist had fallen from a relatively safe cliff. He carried a lot of
insurance, and the insurance companies were very anxious to prove it a
case of suicide. Is it possible that in this case, too, an ‘unconscious
power’ co-operated?”

“Certainly!” exclaimed the physician. “Certainly! At any rate, it is my
conviction that many persons seek nothing but death in the mountains.
I have certainly met many tourists who had nothing more to hope for
from life. One who does not fear death no longer loves life, or, at
any rate, no longer loves it to such an extent as not to be willing to
gamble with it. Have any of you an idea how many of our actions have
their origin in ‘unconscious’ motives? All our life our shadow, our
other self, walks by our side and has its say in everything we do.
As long as it is only a shadow it is not dangerous. But, woe, if the
shadow materialises, as the spiritualists say. The tourist makes a
false step and falls into an abyss. Who or what guided his foot? Was it
chance--or the unacted wish that slumbered so long beyond the threshold
of consciousness? Or shall we say that while one was climbing up a
steep mountain path his strength failed him, and he was precipitated
into the depths below? Who can decide in such a case as to just what
happened? For a little moment the climber must have had the thought ‘if
you are not careful now you will fall and be killed.’ The next moment
there may have issued from the repressed ‘complexes’ the command: ‘Do
it! Then you are free and rid of all your troubles!’ So our young
man could have continued to live on the even ground, as Flournoy had
advised him to do. But he preferred to go to the mountains. Perhaps
it would be better to say that something drew him to the mountains.
It was the same power that precipitated him into the abyss: his
life-weariness. The trip he took to the country for the sake of his
health was from the very beginning a flight into the realm of death. He
pursued his shadow just as----”

He did not finish his sentence. His cigar had gone out. He lit it
again, and with wide open eyes gazed into the distance as if he had
more to say but could not find the right word.

There was silence for a time, and finally the counsellor ventured to
say: “Very interesting case! I wonder if its psychology could not be
generalised? Isn’t it possible that a large number of the other daily
fatal accidents could not be instances of ‘unconscious suicide’? There
is, for example, the case of the man who is run over by a cable-car
because he did not hear the bell, the unlucky swimmer who is overcome
by cramps, the victim of the fellow who did not know the revolver
was loaded. Haven’t all these little and big accidents their shadowy
motivation?”

“Of course they have,” replied the physician. “Of course! We really
know so little of the things we do and even less why we do them. Our
emotions, our feelings, are really only the resultants of numerous
components; they are only tensions giving shadowy testimony of ripening
forces. We think we are directing these forces, but we are being
driven by them; we think we make our decisions, but we only accept the
decisions of ‘the other fellow’ in us. Professor Freud has assured
himself a place amongst the immortals with his psychological theory
concerning so-called ‘symptomatic acts.’ He has substituted a ‘secret
inner will’ for ‘blind chance.’”

“And what about looking into the future?” inquired the journalist.

“Why, that’s only looking backward. We can easily predict for ourselves
anything we long for, and can easily have presentiments about what we
do not wish to avert. The facts which permit us to glimpse the future
are gleaned from our yesterdays. Our childhood wishes determine our
subsequent history. All of us could readily read our future could we
call into new life our childhood emotions. What we dreamed of in
childhood we wish to experience as adults. And if we cannot experience
it we are drawn back into the realm of eternal dreams. This is as true
of humanity as a whole as of man individually. Only when we study our
past can we see the future of our present, then can we predict that
our modern, ultra-modern time with its innumerable stupidities, with
its conflicts and ideals, with its strivings and discoveries, will be
as far outstripped as we imagine ourselves to have outstripped our
ancestors. Science and art, politics and public life--all a perpetual
circle tending towards an unknown future....”

“So then, to return to my glimpse of the future,” the journalist
interrupted, “that I shall be crushed by runaway horses?”

The physician smiled superiorly. “Just try to think back and see
whether your presentiment has not its roots in the past!”

“Something now occurs to me,” exclaimed the mystic; “my mother used to
prophesy that I would not die a natural death. I was a very wild youth,
and managed to spend a lot of time with the horses in our stable. In
great anger my dear little mother would then launch all sorts of gloomy
predictions concerning my destiny.”

His mysterious look into the future was now explained. The doctor
ventured to remark that this “case” also illustrated how intimately
superstition and a consciousness of guilt are linked together. The
imaginary glimpse into the future was in his friend’s case also only a
glimmer out of the past. He referred to the remarkable fact that our
earliest recollections represent a reflection of our future....

“There are facts”--he said slowly, hesitatingly, as if the words had
to be forced out of his interior--“which one can hardly explain. I once
loved a woman with such an intense love as I have not felt for any
woman since. We spent a wonderful day together. Then we bade each other
good-night. I remained standing, looking after her. She was walking
through the high reeds in a meadow. Her graceful figure was getting
smaller and smaller. With a slight turn in the road she disappeared
from my view but soon reappeared. Then for a while I saw her shadowy
outline until a clump of trees again hid her from my view. Then I saw
her again, but very small. I saw something white--her handkerchief. At
this moment a shiver went through me, and I thought: that’s how you
will lose her; gradually you will cease to see her; twice she will
re-appear, and then she will be gone for ever!--Nonsense, said I to
myself, and spun bold plans for the future.... But the future proved
that my presentiment had been true. Everything happened as I had felt
it that evening. A glimpse into the future! And yet! Sometimes I think
to myself that I had only realised the impossibility of a union between
us. What I felt as a presentiment may have been only clearer inner
comprehension.”

The waiter yawned loud. This time we took the hint and paid. We went
home, and something oppressive, unspoken, weighed us all down. As if we
were not quite satisfied with the solution of the mystery--as if the
shuddering sweetness of a superstitious belief in supernatural powers,
a belief in a something above and beyond us would be more to our
liking. Silently we took our way through the quiet streets. We felt,
for all the world, like children who had been told by their mother that
the beautiful story was only a story--that the prince and the princess
had never really lived.

We had been robbed of one of life’s fairy tales. Fie! Fie on this
naked, sober, empty reality! How much nicer it would be if we could
look into the future!




LOOKING BACKWARD


Around Christmas of every year a pale woman clad in black consults me
and bewails her fate. It is a pitiful tale that she narrates tearfully.
A ruined life, a ruined marriage! One of those fearful disappointments
experienced by women who, utterly unacquainted with the world, and
not brought up to be independent, entrust all their dammed-up longing
for happiness and love to the first man who happens to cross their
path. The first time she came I was touched with pity and could
have wept with her. The best advice I could give her was wholly to
separate from her husband, forget the past, and to build up a new
life. The second time she came I was somewhat unpleasantly surprised,
because the unfortunate woman had not yet screwed her courage to the
sticking-point and was wasting her life in gloomy broodings about the
incomprehensibleness of her destiny. But this time she promised to
employ all the means and resources at her disposal to get out of her
fruitless conflict and useless complainings.... Since her first visit
ten years have passed, but she still stands on the ruins of her hopes
and laments her wasted life. Her figure, which was once slender and
sinewy, looks as if it were broken in many parts; her face shows the
first traces of age. Now she has additional cause for grieving. She
looks into the mirror and is unhappy that she has changed so. “What
has become of me and the beauty that so many admired?” Before her
mind’s eye she sees again the men who once wooed her and whom she had
rejected. Every one of them would probably have made her happier than
the one she had chosen!

She augments her complainings and emphasizes her despair. All her
friends and all her relatives, her physicians and her confidants,
know her sad lot and have no new words of consolation for her,
only conventional phrases and stereotyped gestures. Because of her
complainings she is becoming a nuisance to everybody. Her pain has
reached that dangerous point where the tragic becomes the comic.
In vain she tries to move her hearers by heightening the dramatic
description of the unalterableness of her situation. She becomes aware
that human beings can become partisans only in the presence of fresh
conflicts and very quickly become accustomed to others’ unhappiness.
And this, of course, gives her additional reason for thinking herself
lonesome, misunderstood, and forsaken, and thus a new melody is added
to her stale song. If she had before this compared herself with her
happier sisters, her consciousness of still possessing youth and beauty
afforded her a certain comfort. Hope gently whispered to her: “You can
still change it! you are still young and desirable! you will yet find
a man to appreciate you and to give you the happiness which the other
destroyed!”

Gradually there crept into her embittered soul envy of the youth and
beauty of others and augmented the poison of her depression. There was
no longer any escape from this labyrinth of woes! In whatever direction
she looked, she saw only grey clouds; everywhere she saw dark and
confused roads losing themselves in the darkness of a ruined life. One
would suppose that by this time she would have resolutely determined to
end her sufferings and remove herself from a world which had nothing
more to offer her.

One who supposes any such thing is not acquainted with this type of
person. He has not yet discovered the secret of “sweet sorrow,” the
delights of self-pity. This woman, too, found her pleasure in the
tragic role which life had temporarily assigned her and to which she
was clinging spasmodically with all her power. She virtually drank
herself drunk with the thought that she was the unhappiest woman in
the world. She directed over her own wounds all the streams of love
that flowed from her warm heart. She tore these wounds open again
and again so as to be unhappy and pity herself. If it did not sound
so paradoxical, I would say that this woman would be unhappy if one
deprived her of her unhappiness. I wonder whether an unconscious
religious motive did not play a role in this self-assumed suffering.
Did she hope for compensation in the life to come for all the happiness
that she had missed in this world? Was her everlasting looking
backwards only a voluntarily maintained attitude behind which was
concealed the anticipation of never-ending looking into a radiant
eternity?

All my attempts to restore her to an active life failed. The surest
of all therapeutic remedies, work, failed because she never took the
matter seriously. She stubbornly maintained herself in the position of
looking backward, and from this position no power on earth could move
her....

One who looks upon the Bible as a poetic account of eternal conflicts
and has learned to recognise the symbolic significance of legendary
lore will have no difficulty in recognizing in the story of Sodom
and Gomorrah the significance of looking backwards. The woman who
was converted into a pillar of salt because she looked back into the
burning city--what a wonderful symbolisation of losing oneself in the
past! Everyone has his secret Sodom, his Gomorrah, his disappointments,
his defeats, his fearful judgments! Woe to him who looks back into
the dangerous moments of his life! And does not one of von Schwab’s
legends warn us against the dangers of past terrors? Does it not tell
us that we are flying madly over abysses, that the perils of the road
are concealed and that it is dangerous to retain in the mind’s eye the
perils that are past?

There will be no difficulty now in comprehending my formula that to
be well is to have overcome one’s past. I know of no better means of
distinguishing the neurotic from the healthy. The healthy person also
suffers disappointments--who can escape them?--he too suffers many a
fall when he thinks he is rushing on to victory, but he will raise the
tattered flag of hope and continue on his way to the assured goal.
The neurotic does not get done with his past. All experiences have a
tenfold seriousness for him. Whereas the healthy person throws off
the burden of past disappointments, and occasionally even transforms
the recollection of them to sources of pleasure, and is stimulated to
new efforts by the contrasts between the pleasureable present and the
sad past, the nervous person includes in his burdensome present the
difficulties of the past. His memories become more and more oppressive
from year to year.

It is for all the world as if the neurotic’s soul were covered over
with some dangerous adhesive material. Everything sticks to it and does
not permit itself to be loosed from it, becomes organically united to
it, wraps itself up in it, blinds his clear vision and cripples his
freedom of motion. This not getting done with the past betrays itself
also in his inability to forgive, in his craving for revenge and in his
resentments. A neurotic is capable of reproaching one for some trifling
humiliation or for some unconsidered word many years after the event.
He treasures up these humiliations and defeats and does not lose sight
of them for a single day. It might almost be said that he enacts daily
the whole repertoire of the past.

How often are we amazed to find people who continue to make the
same mistakes over and over again and whom experience seems never
to teach anything. Nietzsche says: “If one has character he has his
experience which keeps on recurring.” In reality all that life is
capable of depends upon this ability to forget the past. Of course
some experiences continue to live as lessons and warnings and go
to make up that uncertain treasure which we call Experience. True
greatness, however, shows itself in being able to act in spite of one’s
experiences, in overcoming latent mistrust.

What would become of us if all of us permitted our unhappy experiences
to operate as inhibitions! We should resemble a person who avoided an
article of diet because it had once disagreed with him. Experience may
be that which no one can learn unless one has been born with it: to
find the appropriate mean from one’s experiences and one’s inclinations.

The nervous individual becomes useless as far as life is concerned
because his experience becomes a source of doubt for him and
intensifies his wanting will-power. In the presence of a new task he
takes his past into consideration and makes his unhappy experiences
serve as warnings, hesitates, vacillates, weighs, and finally does
nothing. How much could any of us do if we lacked the courage to
venture? What could we accomplish if we never thought the game worth
the candle? I have often been enabled to prove that the neurotic’s will
is weak because his will is divided. I must supplement this with the
statement that his will is oppressed by the burden of his past.

Let us after this disgression turn back to the unhappy woman with
whom we began. I intimated that it was within her power to alter her
destiny. Virile and kindly disposed men offered her a helping hand. But
her unhappy experience begot a fear of a second disillusionment. She
preferred to be unhappy rather than to venture a second time and again
be unhappy.

But it is not only our past unhappiness that is dangerous. Past
happiness, too, must be overcome and grow pale. Who does not know
persons who are ever speaking of the past, the good old days that never
return? This is a particularly striking phenomenon with reference to
childhood. Some people do not seem to be capable of forgetting their
blissful childhood. There is an important hint here for parents and
educators who wish to assure their children a beautiful childhood.
One must be careful that it is not made too beautiful! Because of the
pleasureable initiation into life the later disharmonies prove too
painful and awaken a longing for childhood which can be fulfilled only
in fruitless dreams!

Recollections must not be permitted to kill the present. We must not be
permitted to be ever lured back into the past and forever to be making
comparisons. Every one of us carries the key to his past about in his
bosom and opens the secret portals in order to roam about in it during
the night in his dreams. In the morning, just before awaking, he locks
the shrine and his daily duties resume their career. But there are
people who cannot tear themselves away from their dreams and are ever
harkening back to the voices of the past.

In insanity this absorption in one’s past may easily be observed. The
invalids become children again, with all their failings, their childish
prattle, their childish pranks, and their childish games. They have
come upon the road to childhood and lost the way so that they cannot
get back again into the world of the grown-ups. They have looked
backwards so long that finally they went backwards.

This “return to childhood” may also be observed in nervous people
who have retained their critical faculty. I recall a woman of forty
who employed a maid to dress and undress her, also to wash her, and
who did not perform certain personal functions without the company
and assistance of the maid. And I must not forget to mention the
twenty-four-year-old youth who was brought to me by his mother because
he was incapable of doing any work and who was not ashamed in my
presence to take a good swallow of milk every five minutes from an
ordinary baby’s milk-bottle. This kind of “infantilism” often attains
grotesque proportions. To-day the aforementioned woman laughs at the
“incomprehensible malady,” and the grown-up suckling is an industrious
official who supports his family very comfortably. Both of them wished
to defeat nature and return to childhood. Not infrequently a bodily
change accompanies this mental state. The hair falls out, the features
become softer, and the signs of adult masculinity undergo regressive
changes. In all probability this condition is associated with certain
disturbances of the internal metabolism. But who can say positively
whether the impulse to these disturbances did not proceed from the
stubborn look backwards, the yearning for childhood, and the enraptured
glance into the depths of the past?

All the wisdom of life consists in the manner of our forgetting. What
fine overtones of the harmonies and discords of the past must accompany
the concords of the day! But every day has a right to its melody.
Each one lives its own life and is a preparation for the future. One
who fills his day with the delights and the pains of the past murders
it. Only on appropriate occasions may we, must we, direct our eyes
backwards, survey the path we have traversed, and again concentrate our
gaze on the milestones of memory.

All ye who are ever bewailing your lot and are incapable of rising
above your fate--hearken unto me and know that ye no longer live, that
ye died ere the law of destruction robbed ye of life! Let me tell ye
what ye may find writ in burning letters in the firmament of knowledge:
_it is never too late!_ Only he has lost his life who thinks he has
lost it. Forgive and forget! Drink of the lethe of work and solicitude
for others! Ye are egoists! For even the mirror of your woes on which
your eyes are riveted shows you only your own agonized image. And
measure your pains by the infinity of pain that fills the world.




ALL-SOULS.


I am not crying for the dead who have died but who are still alive
for me. I am crying for the dead who are still alive but who are dead
for me. When I look back upon the long succession of years that I
have travelled, and think of all my lovers who accompanied me part
of the way, and then left me to wander alone, I feel as if a heavy
fog were enveloping everything that otherwise appears beautiful and
delightful....

But the dead have clung to me. They live with me, feel with me, and
speak to me. When the noise of the day dies out and when the bells
within begin to ring, when shapeless forms emerge from the unconscious
with strange questions and uncanny gestures, when I turn from the
world of reality into that of mystery, then my dead friends are with
me and I hold converse with them. With every question I wish I had
asked another, and I get the conviction that this other one would have
answered my question, or, that other one would have understood me.

Ah! there is really so little that we desire: we wish to be understood,
and do not know that we are demanding the impossible, the unattainable.
For we must know ourselves ere others can comprehend us. But the urge
to share ourselves with another, the longing for a heart attuned to
ours deceives us as to our own inadequacy. What we do not possess we
would find in another. And we compress all our stupid cravings into the
one wish which appears to us as the wish for friendship.

Frightful is the thought how many friends I have lost, how many persons
whom I had once thought so valuable and unreplaceable have died as far
as I am concerned. And even more painful is the thought that this
is the experience of all of us. Every one of us finds persons who
accompany us a short distance, their hands in ours, their arms about us
lovingly, and we think this will continue for ever, and then we come
to a turn in the road and they have vanished. Or they travel along a
road that seems to run very near our own. So near one another do we
travel that we can almost touch hands even though our paths are not the
same. And gradually our paths diverge. We are still within sight of
one another. We can still converse with one another. Then this, too,
becomes impossible. If we shout we may make ourselves heard on the
other highway, but there is no reply. They are gone!

First, there were the friends of our childhood! Among these there were
some whom we termed friends but who were really only a plaything, like
the rocking-horse and the wooden sword. They were created only for the
purpose of playing a role in the rich world of our fantasies. There
was something impersonal about our friend--he did not yet cling to us.
Mother used to say to us: “To-day you have a new friend!” And we were
ready to accept him as such at once unless he was unsympathetic to us
or obstinate or inclined to lord it over us. Of course no one could be
forced on us, no matter how earnestly mother demanded it. Gradually
there developed in us that dark and puzzling concept, made up of the
fusion of numerous primary impulses, which we call “friendship.”

Then one came along who was more to us than all the others. In his
presence life was much more beautiful and richer than we had supposed;
when he was absent we longed for him. When he came all our pains were
forgotten. Ah, what great loves and hatreds we were capable of in the
blessed era of our first friendship!

It is incomprehensible to me that I have lost the friend of my early
youth. On one occasion our teachers interfered and separated us. Why
they did so I do not know. But I was a wild, unruly youngster; they
may have feared that by my example I might poison the inexperienced
soul of my friend. But of what avail were prohibitions in the presence
of our great friendship! We met secretly behind dark hedges, where no
teacher’s eyes could discover us. As evening approached we roamed out
upon the meadow beyond the city, as far as the cemetery wall upon the
gentle slope of the mountain, where we could lie down at our ease and
gaze up at the stars, while we discussed the many serious questions
which were beginning to trouble the souls of the maturing youngsters.
When night came and wrapped the white buildings and the green gardens
in a dark veil, and when the distant trumpet summoned the soldiers to
their barracks, and at the sound there sprang from many an obscure
nook frightened couples who quickly embraced again and said hurried
farewells, we grasped each other’s hands feverishly, and it seemed
as if we could never, never be separated. Once we were angry at each
other. It had been a serious dispute. Both of us were obstinate, for
months we sulked and did not speak to each other. But one day my
friend’s heart melted. He confessed that he had suffered the tortures
of jealousy, and that he made up only because he feared he might lose
me for ever.

He was quite right. Slowly I had become half a man. Instinctively I had
found among the High School pupils one who had my own inclinations,
who spent sleepless nights with me in measuring verses on our fingers,
fearing we might be too late for immortality. If it was the sensuous
that had to be disposed of formerly, it was now the supersensuous that
forced itself between the innocent pleasures of life. Now we could sit
in the moonlight for hours speculating on the mysteries of existence,
infinity, and immortality. Every time we discovered something beautiful
we were happy for days thereafter.

He was not our only friend in those days of youthful enthusiasms. Then
we had many, many friends. And when we sat in the close cafés and
with palpitating hearts sang the old student-songs, and the pitcher
filled with beer was passed around, we spoke of “eternal friendship”
and “eternal loyalty.” The “eternal” pledge was sealed by the shaking
of hands, and we really felt like brothers. Every one had his good
qualities which were admired, his weaknesses which were smiled at
indulgently, and his strength which was feared. Each one seemed
unreplaceable, and once when death snatched one of our friends from our
midst we all cried like little children who want their mother.

And when we scattered in the directions of the winds, one going to the
High School, the second into the army, the third into a vocation, our
passion flared up again, and we swore to come together again after a
certain number of years had gone by. What merry, spirited, and lusty
boys we were!...

If only I had not seen them again, these friends! If only they could
have continued to live in my memory as a precious heritage from a
period that was rich in hopes and poor in disillusionments. It is
with a shudder that I recall the evening, when, after many years of
separation, we had a reunion. Were these my living friends? No, these
had been dead many years. I sat among corpses, among alien corpses
who spoke a language that was not mine. One whom fortune had made a
millionaire sat there vain and self-conscious. Absorbed in himself
and morose sat one who clung to his grandiose fantasies in the modest
station he occupied. A third kept looking at his watch uneasily because
he had promised his wife to be home before ten o’clock. The fourth
stroked his paunch and was absorbed in the mysteries of the menu. A
fifth gazed at his highly-polished finger-nails and yawned. The sixth
and the seventh--but enough! They looked at one another strangely, and
on the lips of all was the unuttered question: “Why in--did we come
here?”

These were friendships which had been made when we were still in our
childhood. Later on the matter was not quite so simple, and it took
a long time before we found one with whom we could become as one. In
reality, we are still like children. We want to find a playmate for
our thoughts and feelings. We let each other speak and we listen, and
we call that “being understood.” That is not so easy as one would like
to believe. There are people who cannot listen and people to whom we
cannot listen. But ultimately one finds the right person, one to whom
we can entrust our secrets, one with whom we share our joys and our
woes. But for how long? How strange! The fate of these friendships is
sealed the moment a third person acquires the right to participate: a
woman. Marriage is the rock on which most friendships split. What was
formerly a question for two is now a question for three. And if the
friend too marries it becomes a question for four. But how difficult
it is to find four persons whose hearts beat harmoniously! What new
elements now enter into the previous requirements “to understand each
other!” Vanity, jealousy, envy, disfavour.

And thus we lose one friend after the other. And one day we find
ourselves in an all-souls’ mood, and place wreaths on the graves of the
dead who are dead to us. We ask ourselves anxiously whose the fault was
that we are so lonesome. And if we are not honest we blame the others.
But if we are honest we see that we were not free from guilt and from
all the hateful things that human beings say about one another, and we
realize that it is man’s destiny to be alone. The more pronounced our
individuality becomes, the more sharply our qualities are outlined, the
more difficult is it to lose oneself in a crowd. We are not capable of
keeping our friends. We demand instead of giving. And that is why we
lose them and weep at their graves.

I had one friend who was true to me through all the vicissitudes of
life. Fate drove this one friend far away, and when we got the chance
occasionally to see each other it was only for a few hours, which fled
like seconds--so much did we have to say to each other. It was our
earnest yearning once to get a chance to go away during the summer and
spend a vacation together, free and unhampered, satiate ourselves with
each other, and then have enough for a whole year. At the cost of many
sacrifices we succeeded in having our dream fulfilled. But I would not
make the attempt again. I am afraid I would lose my friend altogether.

When we found the long days before us and heard ourselves again and
wanted to open our hearts to each other, we became aware--with secret
horror--that we had become different in many respects. And occasionally
in those beautiful hours we were conscious of something like a shudder
at the thought that something fine and delicate that had been anxiously
guarded might die. We separated sooner than we had planned or had
originally wished. We were happy that we had parted, for we were
still carrying home with us a precious heritage from our youth: our
friendship--which had not yet been destroyed, but slightly bruised
by rude and heavy hands. We shuddered how near we were to including
ourselves among the dead.

Was that anything wonderful? Years had passed. Each one of us had
experienced thousands of impressions, and what had once been common
and had borne the same image had become so different that it would
have been impossible to recognize them as having had a common origin.
And thus it is that we stand on the roads that once were so near each
other but are now so wide apart and that we call to each other like
frightened children seeking flowers in the woods and longing anxiously
to hear the voices of their comrades. We call to each other to prove to
ourselves that we have not died.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is all souls’ day. Numberless persons are making pilgrimages to the
graves of their dead to lay a flower there. I stay at home and close my
eyes. I am not crying for the dead who have died but live for me. I am
weeping for the dead who still live but who are dead to me....




MIRROR SLAVES.


There are persons who spend their entire lives under the tyranny of the
mirror. From early morning to late at night they are thinking, “How do
I look to-day?” The mirror follows them into their dreams and shows
them their ego horribly distorted and grotesquely transformed, or it
annihilates the imperfections which make them so unhappy. Everybody
has a tremendous interest in his personal appearance, an interest
which may assume such proportions as to amount to self-love, to being
in love with one’s bodily ego, or to hatred of one’s self, disgust
with one’s own appearance. Ultimately every one of us is egocentric.
For each one of us our ego is the hub of the world. Every slightest
happening is looked at and judged from the standpoint of our own ego.
In the mirror slaves this trait is exaggerated to the n-th degree, to
the extent of being uncanny and neurotic. They spend their lives in
front of the corporeal and spiritual mirror. For they fix their gaze
not only on their physical appearance, but even on their thoughts,
feelings, sensations, and work; they are constantly checking themselves
up, criticising themselves, and are most discontented with themselves,
or they are ridiculously conceited, and never cease to admire their
actions and transformations.

Mirror slaves waste a part of their lives in front of the mirror. They
keep a little mirror by them constantly so as to look at themselves
from time to time. They can’t pass a mirror without stopping in front
of it long enough to survey themselves from head to foot. There is a
story of a king who promised to give his daughter in marriage to the
man who would pass a certain mirror without looking into it. Vanity
foiled all but a poet, and the princess was awarded to him. (And, in
all probability, the poet did not look into the mirror because he was
absorbed in admiring his ego in the mirror of his soul!) This story
teaches us the intensity of human vanity. In the case of mirror slaves
this human failing becomes a disease; it fills their lives and, under
certain circumstances, unfits them for life.

A mirror slave devotes a great deal of attention to the matter of his
external appearance. He is dominated by an imperative which makes life
a torture. This imperative is: “What will people think of me?” He
feels all eyes are upon him, everybody is looking at him, everybody is
thinking of his appearance. He has a horrible fear of being laughed at.
For God’s sake! only not to be laughed at, not to become the subject
of other people’s mirth! He would love to be lost in the crowd and not
be noticed. If he could only possess a magic cap that would enable him
to go about invisible! On the other hand he thirsts for triumphs. He
would like to find favour, to be larger, bigger, more elegant and more
beautiful than others, would like to shine in society, and be able to
outshine others in wit, intellect, vivacity, education and culture.
Above all he is desirous of making an impression on the opposite
sex, to make conquests, to be a Lothario, free from all restraints,
uninterfered with in his inclinations, and unconcerned about the
judgment of his environment.

The mirror slave begins his day with the question, “What shall I wear
to-day?” As soon as a careful inspection has convinced him that this is
going to be a good or a bad day for him, that he is looking younger or
older, sick or well, the painful task of selection begins. What dress
will be most adapted to the taste of this day, to the weather, or to
the mood? After some deliberation a choice is made. But then, all of a
sudden, the mirror discloses a blemish! Woe! The toilet must be gone
all over again. Everything is weighed carefully in the balance, and
finally the arduous task is completed.

And now the mirror slave’s martyrdom begins. He studies the people he
meets to see whether they greet him or ignore him, are friendly or
unfriendly, pleased or indifferent, etc., whether they take note of
him, whisper behind his back, criticise him, make remarks about him, or
make merry over him. If one laughs without his participation he is on
the rack; unquestionably it was he who was being laughed at: there must
be something wrong with his clothes. Why is everybody looking at him so
curiously? In his distress he may even be induced to address strangers.
“Why did they stare at me so fixedly?” In a sudden outburst of passion
he may even call an acquaintance to account for not having greeted him
or for having done so carelessly.

He experiences extraordinary sensations when he puts on new articles
of clothing. What a difficult task it is to go out in new shoes!
All eyes must be magically directed on his shoes. He makes himself
ridiculous with his new shoes. People surely think him silly or a slave
of fashion. He lives through all this with every new garment, and
ultimately he develops a fear of changing his clothes and goes about
in old, worn, and even shabby clothing, thinking that thus he attracts
less attention.

All daily tasks become a great undertaking. To go into a store to
make a purchase, to enter a theatre when other spectators are already
seated, or to look around for a seat in a restaurant, etc., are
difficult and often impossible tasks. He loves to be the first person
in the theatre or at the concert--to come in while the hall is still
empty. The selection of a seat is a source of worry. A mirror slave
would love to sit alone in a box or in the front row if he were not
so afraid of being looked at--which is exactly what he longs for. He
therefore conceals himself in a modest inconspicuous seat, but does not
enjoy himself because he is always impelled to observe and study the
people.

He is a slave of public opinion. At no price would he do anything not
quite proper, that would cause the slightest head-shake, or would make
him the subject of public comment. He would purchase the good-will of
all, court everybody’s favour, and wants to be loved and admired by the
whole world. He spares no pains to get the approval of his environment.
He is one of the eternally amiable, modest, and helpful persons that
we encounter now and then. He gives very liberal tips in order that he
may be highly thought of. In fact, he loves to give presents and fears
nothing so much as being thought niggardly.

In time he becomes socially useless. A trivial public function, a
speech, a betrothal, any appearance in public liberates a whole host
of apprehensive ideas. If he happens to be an artist he fears to make
a public appearance, and contents himself with being a teacher. If he
overcomes his fear of appearing in public, he becomes the slave of the
critics. An unfavourable criticism brings him to the verge of despair;
a favourable criticism temporarily lifts him above all difficulties.

If we inquire into the cause of this neurosis we find it to be a
defective educational method in childhood, which has led the child to
overvalue its environment and has implanted in it a pathologic degree
of vanity. How many parents have the habit of calling the child’s
attention to the fact that people are looking at it, observing it,
or laughing at it! How often when a child is wearing a new garment
is it told that everybody is looking at it and admiring it! And how
often is a child admired and worshipped to such an extent that it
really imagines itself the hub of its little world! All the boundless
overvaluation of the world, of one’s surroundings, the striving for
public recognition, for reputation, for honour emanate from our
childhood years. We ought to make it our object to bring about just the
opposite. The child should be brought up to be modest, to learn that
happiness lies in the feeling of having done one’s duty, in the quiet
joys of life, in work, in a capacity for enjoyment. It is our duty to
limit the child’s vanity, to restrain his ambition, and to train him
to be self-reliant. One who has learned to consider contentment with
oneself--not self-satisfaction based on vanity and arrogance--as worth
more than what people say about one has found the way to health and
happiness.

Who would deny that a mirror has its uses? Who does not know that it
is necessary occasionally to observe ourselves in the mirror of the
body and the soul so that we may recognize our shortcomings, remove our
blemishes, and make ourselves better and more beautiful? All excess
becomes a vice. A mirror is a dangerous thing for the vain person who
cannot live without it. Everything is a mirror to him. The world as a
whole is a mirrored salon which reflects his image from every point.
But he fails to see that behind these mirrors there is another world to
which he has lost access. For the next step beyond this mirror-neurosis
is insanity, a disease which we now know is a losing of oneself in
oneself.


_Printed in Great Britain by The Cheltenham Press, Cheltenham, Glos._




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE


Archaic, unusual and inconsistent spellings have been kept in the text.
Obvious misspellings have been fixed.

Details of the changes:

  PAGE  original text[**corrected text]
   12 the glory of supreme worldy[**worldly] wisdom and branding
   42 being a phsyician[**physician]. That’s a great, a noble,
   64 could wear the shirt of a happy man. Mesengers[**Messengers]
   79 experiences can strip of[**off] the pollen linked with
  105 The servants, the family phsyician[**physician], the music
  106 its origin in our life’s needs. We woman[**women] all
  113 on the homœpathic[**homœopathic] principle. They fight the
  114 to work. For behind their zeal to accummulate[**accumulate]
  119 suprising[**surprising] forms among the victims of hysteria.
  129 if she lost him! But a careful psychanalysis[**psychoanalysis]
  129 brought forth ample and convincing comfirmation[**confirmation]
  138 country of the bethrothal[**betrothal] period, and thus
  146 example from our daily life. A women[**woman] is
  146 pyschic[**psychic] origin. When we investigated carefully
  157 to a splinter in the brain. An excellent mataphor[**metaphor]!)
  158 instincts and impulses with dont’s[**don’ts]. The sum
  159 and the Checko[**Czech] rustic are always at each other’s
  160 wage a war for exsistence[**existence]. A few survive longer
  172 of their excitement is imcomprehensible[**incomprehensible]
  179 in all likelihood takes it[**its] origin from the sexual
  179 “Walkyre[**Valkyrie],” that forced the dagger into Tullio
  183 the feeling that the counsellor’s malicious wittiism[**witticism]
  211 or they are ridicously[**ridiculously] conceited, and never cease
  214 its environment and has inplanted[**implanted] in it a





End of Project Gutenberg's The Depths of the Soul, by William Stekel



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEPTHS OF THE SOUL: PSYCHO-ANALYTICAL STUDIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bi-sexual love; the homosexual neurosis
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Bi-sexual love; the homosexual neurosis

Author: Wilhelm Stekel

Translator: James S. Van Teslaar

Release date: November 8, 2021 [eBook #66693]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Turgut Dincer, Les Galloway and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BI-SEXUAL LOVE; THE HOMOSEXUAL NEUROSIS ***

                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.

The footnotes have been placed at the end of the book.




Excerpts from the Professional Press on the work of DR. WM. STEKEL


We have lacked thus far a systematic clinical application of Freudian
analysis. Stekel’s work fills this need.

  _Jung_, in MEDIZ. KLINIK.

       *       *       *       *       *

... A standard work; a milestone in the psychiatric and
psycho-therapeutic literature.

  Geh. Sanitätsrat _Dr. Gerster_, in DIE NEUE GENERATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

It would be regrettable if the work did not attract fully the
attention of the scientific world; its deep sobriety and the fulness
of its details render it a treasury of information, primarily for
the physician, but, in large measure, of interest also to the
educationist, the minister, the teacher and, not least, to the student
of criminology....

  _Horch_, in ARCHIV F. KRIMINALOGIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

These case histories will be read with great interest by everyone,
including those who are inclined to maintain a sceptical attitude
towards psychoanalysis.

  _Eulenburg_, in MEDIZINISCHE KLINIK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stekel’s work teaches practitioners a great many things they did not
know before, particularly about the significance of psychology and
sexual science in the practice of medicine.

  _Hitschmann_, in INTERNAT. ZEITSCHRIFT F. PSYCHOANALYSE.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is Stekel’s extraordinary merit that he compels us to take into
account a pressing mass of data which he brings to light with a
scientific zeal which is unfortunately still rare,—facts and
observations so penetrating, so true to life that these often render
unnecessary any formal statement of the obvious deductions which flow
from them.

  DIE NEUE GENERATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most modern problems are considered, new viewpoints are brought
out, while the excesses in the technique and interpretation of the
earlier stages of psychoanalysis are avoided.

  _Kermauner_, in WIENER KLINISCHE WOCHENSCHRIFT.

       *       *       *       *       *

All in all, Stekel’s is a work for which I bespeak the widest interest
not only among physicians, but also among jurists, educationists,
sociologists and ministers. Only an understanding of the mental life of
the individual will yield a proper view of our social life.

  _Liepmann_, in ZEITSCHRIFT F. SEXUALWISSENSCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

The work is a treasury for all who have occasion to probe the depths
of human life and should be a source of considerable information and
stimulus to every jurist who takes in earnest his professional duties.

  Geh. Justizrat _Dr. Horch_, in ARCHIV F. KRIMINALOGIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

It does not matter from what angle the work of Stekel is approached.
Any consideration of it reveals rich material. Stekel is a writer
who handles his subjects in a lavish manner; lavish, but with that
restraint which bends all to the urgency of his themes. He evidently
approaches his clinical work with the same exuberant interest. There
he reaps through psychoanalysis a rich harvest of results. He has
collected these results and presented them for the dissemination of
such knowledge of the sexual disturbances as he thus obtained. Facts
are there in great number. They cannot be gainsaid. Stekel’s own
evaluation of such facts and his earnest plea for their consideration,
both by the medical profession and by the society of men and women
where these facts exist, can speak only for themselves to the truly
conscientious reader. There is not much in these books that the
psychotherapeutist can afford to pass over.

  NEW YORK MEDICAL JOURNAL.




  BI-SEXUAL LOVE

  THE HOMOSEXUAL NEUROSIS

  BY

  DR. WILLIAM STEKEL

  (VIENNA)

  _Authorized translation by_

  JAMES S. VAN TESLAAR, M.D.

  (For sale only to Members of the
  Medical Profession.)

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON
  RICHARD G. BADGER
  THE GORHAM PRESS




  COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY RICHARD G. BADGER

  All Rights Reserved


  Made in the United States of America

  The Gorham Press, Boston, U. S. A.




_Preface_


The present work is the English version of a part of one of the volumes
in the author’s massive series of clinical studies bearing the generic
title, _Disorders of the Instincts and Emotions_ and covering the
whole range of the so-called _Parapathic Maladies_. The translation
represents approximately one-half of the _Homosexualität_ of the volume
entitled _Onanie und Homosexualität_, and bearing the sub-title, _Die
Homosexuelle Neurose_. The balance of the _Homosexual Neurosis_ and the
author’s clinical study of _Autoerotism_ are also translated and will
appear shortly.

It is the author’s intention, and mine as his translator, to issue
an English version of all the volumes in this comprehensive series.
In addition to the subjects covered in the present volume and in the
two volumes to follow shortly, the _Disorders of the Instincts and
the Emotions_ include the _Anxiety States_, _Female Frigidity_, _Male
Impotence_, _Infantilism_ (including _Exhibitionism_ and _Fetichism_),
the _Compulsion Neuroses_ and _Morbid Doubts_. The range of the
subjects and the plan of the volumes already published show that the
series as conceived by the author forms a complete clinical account of
the psychogenetic disorders, and represents the most recent development
of scientific research. Since the genetic study of these parapathic
maladies involves a thorough understanding of the facts of sexual life
Dr. Stekel’s works on the _Disorders of the Instincts and the Emotions_
constitute incidentally the latest practical reference Handbook of
Sexual Science in the light of our newer knowledge and should prove
also on that score of inestimable value to the medical and the allied
learned professions.

The absence of formal systematic instruction in the Principles and
Practice of Psychoanalysis in spite of the wide interest that the
subject has deservedly aroused in our midst is highly regrettable,
the more so since the lack of systematic instruction in our country
deprives the older practitioners as well as the oncoming generations of
physicians of an opportunity to familiarize themselves with this most
important branch of therapy. Even though the curriculum of instruction
in our schools, and particularly in our medical colleges, is admittedly
burdened with a bewildering plethora of other branches of instruction,
it is inconceivable that our colleges, our hospitals and psychiatric
institutes, and our other institutions of higher learning will long
continue to neglect a subject of such vital importance as psychotherapy
and re-education, now that the subject has been placed, at last, upon
a solid basis through the application of the psychobiotic and genetic
methods of approach. But it will probably take considerable time before
competent instruction to fill the need will be available.

It appears therefore highly desirable that an English version of Dr.
Stekel’s works should make their appearance at this time. For in the
absence of formal instruction his clinical studies form an excellent
substitute, perhaps the most suitable means available for post-graduate
instruction in the clinical aspects of Psychoanalysis. And should
systematic courses be made available in the near future, in response to
the urgent need, our instructors and students alike will undoubtedly
find the Stekel series most valuable aids for study and guidance.

In a letter received from Dr. Stekel while this work was going through
the press he states that a new edition of _Onanie und Homosexualität_
is being issued in the original, bearing a dedication to the present
translator.

  v. T.

Brookline, Mass.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER      PAGE

  I Krafft-Ebing considers onanism the cause of homosexuality—Confusion
  of cause and effect—The
  views of Krafft-Ebing—The views of Moll—of
  Havelock Ellis—of Bloch—of Magnus Hirschfeld—How
  is the diagnosis established?—The fundamental
  bisexuality of all persons—Relation of
  neurosis and homosexuality—The family of the
  homosexual—The views of Bloch on the problem—The
  influence of the psyche on the organism—Wish
  as active factor of the psyche—My theory—
  The theories of Kiernan, Chevalier and Lombroso—The
  neurotic as a retrograded type—Early
  awakening of sexuality      11

  II The development of sexuality—-the bisexual ideal
  of all persons—The fundamental law of sexuality—The
  rôle of homosexuality in neurosis—Womanly
  men and mannish women—Gerontophilia—Love
  of prostitutes—The significance of sexual
  symbols—Various masks of homosexuality—Transvestites—A
  case of Transvestism—The significance
  of the hose as a symbol—Love at first sight—The
  critical age—The pleasure seeker—The
  case of a man passive through the critical age—Neurotic
  types of homosexuality—The Don
  Juan type—Psychoanalysis of a Don Juan—Passionate
  falling in love during advanced age,
  significant—Analysis of a Don Juan      53

  III Diagnosis of Satyriasis—Priapism—A case of Satyriasis—A
  second case of Satyriasis—A case of
  nymphomania—Proof that the cravings represented
  by this condition are traceable to the ungratified
  homosexual instinct      129

  IV Description of Don Juan types who are satisfied
  with conquest and forego physical possession—An
  unlucky hero, whose love adventures are interfered
  with by gastric derangements—A would-be
  Messalina who hesitates on account of vomiting
  spells—Influence of religion on neurosis      175

  V Resistance of homosexuals against cure and their
  pride in their condition—Acquired vs. inherited—Insanity
  and alcoholism betray the inner man—Three
  cases by Colla illustrating behavior during
  alcoholic intoxication—Observations of Numa
  Prætonis—The case of Hugo Deutsch—Views of
  Juliusburger—Two personal observations—A case
  of Moll—Views of Fleischmann and Naecke—A
  personal observation—Bloch on woman haters      241

  VI May disgust produce the homosexual attitude?
  Cases by Krafft-Ebing, Fleischmann, Ziemcke—Observation
  (personal) and case by Bloch—Late
  trauma as cause of homosexuality—Personal
  observation of a case of late homosexuality—Two
  cases by Bloch—Further discussion of the
  problem—A case of Pfister’s with the analysis
  of several dreams      279

  VII Erotism and sexuality—The motive power of unfulfilled
  wishes—The male protest—The relations
  of the homosexual to his mother—Hirschfeld’s
  schematic outline—Infantile impressions—Influence
  of the stronger parent—Letter of an
  expert      331

  Index      353




I

 Krafft-Ebing considers Onanism the Cause of Homosexuality—Confusion
 of Cause and Effect—The Views of Krafft-Ebing—The Views of Moll—of
 Havelock Ellis—of Bloch—of Magnus Hirschfeld—How is the Diagnosis
 established?—The fundamental Bisexuality of all Persons—Relation
 of Neurosis and Homosexuality—The Family of the Homosexual—The
 Views of Bloch on the Problem—The Influence of the Psyche on the
 Organism—Wish as active Factor of the Psyche—My theory—The Theories
 of Kiernan, Chevalier and Lombroso—The Neurotic as a retrograded
 type—Early awakening of sexuality.

 _Leben—ist das nicht gerade ein Andersseinwollen, als die Natur
 ist?—Nietzsche._




BI-SEXUAL LOVE




I

 _Living,—is it not the will to be otherwise than nature
 is?—Nietzsche._


That there are preeminent physicians who earnestly look upon
masturbation as the cause of homosexuality seems hardly believable. It
would be as proper to consider masturbation the cause of sexuality.
We have shown elsewhere that onanism may be the result of ungratified
homosexual trends. At times it may stand as a substitute for some
homosexual act. It then replaces for a time the adequate temporary form
of sexual gratification. I state “temporary form,” because the sexual
object itself does not remain permanently the same and the sexual
directive goals,—to use the excellent expression of _Hans Blüher_[1]
are often abandoned. The false notion that onanism is responsible for
homosexuality has been preconized by _Krafft-Ebing_, whose great
authority in matters of sexual psychopathology persists to this day.
His services are significant, indeed, and we must observe that he
has at last accepted the view of _Hirschfeld_ that homosexuality is
inborn,—that there is an acquired and a hereditary homosexuality.[2]
But in the last (14th) edition of _Krafft-Ebing’s_ work, which has
appeared in 1912, his editor, _Alfred Fuchs_, preserves the statement
about onanism at the head of the chapter and he even underscores the
contentions of his great teacher on this particular subject.[3]

My work proves that we must abandon the merely descriptive method of
sexual research. The subject’s first account is only a statement of
the manifest content of his consciousness concerning his paraphilia.
We must look into the latent content, into the unconscious and
quasi-conscious forces involved. The descriptive form of sexual
research must be replaced by the psychological, in keeping with the
spirit of our times. In no other field does analysis so convincingly
and completely prove its claims.

What was the status of the subject before the advent of analysis?
_Krafft-Ebing_ originally looked upon homosexuality as the result
of a hereditary transmission, a hypothesis not corroborated by the
observations of subsequent investigators. Certain circumstances favor
an outcropping in manifest form of the latent homosexuality common
to all persons,—a fact which complicates this problem. Environment
also comes into play. An environment such as is furnished by some
nervous or psychopathic parents naturally plays a role. This subject we
shall take up later. The alleged hereditary transmission is supposed
to show itself in the homosexual through the early awakening of the
sexual instinct and by the appearance of masturbation during early
childhood. But we know that the homosexuals share this peculiarity
with all others, especially with neurotic persons. A strong flaring
up of instinct is not the consequence but the cause of the neurosis.
But according to _Krafft-Ebing_ masturbation during childhood is
the cause of homo-or pseudo-homosexuality breaking forth at a later
period. “Nothing is more likely,” he states, “than masturbation, so to
disturb and occasionally thwart all noble emotions at the source as
they arise spontaneously out of the sexual feeling.[4] The habit robs
the nascent feeling of charm and beauty leaving behind only the husk
of grossly animal craving for sexual gratification. An individual, so
thwarted, attains the age of maturity lacking the esthetic, ideal, pure
and undefiled longing which leads to the other sex. At the same time
the heat of sensuous passion cools off while the inclination towards
the other sex is significantly weakened. This deficiency embraces the
morals, the ethics, the character, the phantasy and the disposition
of the youthful masturbator as well as his emotional and instinctive
life and holds true of both sexes, occasionally reducing to zero the
yearning after the opposite sex, so that in the end masturbation is
preferred to every other form of gratification.”

Imagine the injurious effect of such statements upon the masturbating
youth; particularly when he reads that the best way to combat
homosexuality is to fight against masturbation (p. 336, _loc. cit._).

The great investigator has confused here cause and effect. The
masturbators avoid the path leading to woman not because they
masturbate. They indulge in the habit because the path towards
womanhood is closed to them. For many persons masturbation is the only
available method of sexual gratification. Persons with a strongly
accentuated homosexual tendency often find no other path open at all,
particularly when the intercourse with woman becomes impossible for
them on account of some definite traumatic incidents, such as we shall
discuss fully later.

Masturbation is never _the cause_ of homosexuality. Homosexuals do not
contract the habit early, as _Krafft-Ebing_ claims,—it is an early,
a very early habit of all persons—and that without any exception.
The homosexuals do not forget their childhood onanism because there
are other, more painful memories for them to repress and drive out
of memory. Again we shall speak fully of that later. More important
for the present is the question: how does homosexuality arise? Is the
condition hereditary or acquired? Is it something fatally predetermined
or is it only the result of certain definite constellations of the
family circle? May it be ascribed to a hereditary taint? _Krafft-Ebing_
was at first of the latter opinion and propounded the thesis that
“we may doubt whether a person of the same sex ever has a sensuous
attraction for a normally predisposed individual,” but later he changed
this opinion fundamentally and expressed the conviction that there is
an inborn homosexuality though the condition is found only among the
hereditarily predisposed.

He propounded the following theses:

“1. The sexual life of such persons manifests itself as a rule very
precociously and consequently, is of abnormal strength. Not rarely the
peculiar attraction for members of the same sex which in itself marks
the abnormal direction of the sexual instinct is associated with other
perverse manifestations.

“2. The spiritual love of these persons is frequently an exalted
dreaming just as their sexual instinct as a whole penetrates their
consciousness with a peculiar and even compulsive strength.

“3. In addition to the functional signs of degeneration manifested
in the contrary sexual instinct often there are found also other
functional and frequently also anatomic stigmata of degeneration.

“4. Neuroses are present (hysteria, neurasthenia, epileptoid states,
etc.). Neurasthenia, transitional or chronic, is nearly always
manifest. This is usually a constitutional state induced by inborn
conditions. It is awakened and sustained through masturbation or
compulsory abstinence.”[5]

These statements are relatively milder and here the ideal traits
of homosexuality are also given some recognition, although—as we
know well—all without exception are addicted to masturbation.
_Krafft-Ebing_ does not know that all artists are neurotics and that
neurosis stands in intimate connection with creative ability. He also
makes a distinction between true and false homosexuality,—bisexuality
(psychic hermaphroditism) and other forms, as described by
_Hirschfeld_.[6]

_Krafft-Ebing_ points out a certain relationship between homosexuality
and neurosis. But since he still preserves the concept of degeneration,
he is forced in the end to admit that homosexuality may also appear in
the normal and is not necessarily a morbidity.

_Moll_, to whom we owe the first great comprehensive work on
homosexuality, is of an entirely different opinion. He states:
“Considering the sexual instinct not as a means for the attainment of
pleasure but as standing in the service of procreation we must look
upon exclusive homosexuality as belonging to the realm of pathology.”
(_Die kontraere Sexualempfindung_, Berlin, 1899, 3rd edn.) This is an
untenable argument. _For there is no procreative instinct as such,
only a sexual instinct._ Science is not concerned with the study of
purposiveness, it is interested in the ascertainment of facts. Science
must not and cannot be placed in the service of teleology. At any
rate _Moll_ is inclined to look upon homosexuality as a neurosis:
he claims to have found in recent years a growing tendency among
investigators to establish a border province between mental health and
disease, “and into that realm have been relegated many cases of psychic
degeneration—I may mention, for instance, certain compulsory neuroses.
I believe it is proper that we should place in the same category the
contrary sexual feeling.” (_Loc. cit._ p. 435.) He refers here to
_Westphal_ who compares homosexuality to moral insanity.[7]

Notwithstanding _Moll’s_ opinion we must state that most modern
investigators declare that they have examined many homosexuals whom
they have found normal or have at least designated as normal.
_Havelock Ellis_ and _Albert Moll_[8] very appropriately state in their
last joint work:

“_Naecke_ has repeatedly maintained that the homosexuals are perfectly
healthy and aside from their specific deviation may be normal in
every respect. We have always maintained this view although, contrary
to _Naecke_, we assume that _homosexuality is very frequently found
in intimate association with minor nervous states_. We agree with
_Hirschfeld_ that heredity plays a rôle in no more than 25 per cent
of the cases of homosexuality and that, although a neuropathic
background may be present in homosexuality, the degenerative factor
plays but a small role.” These authors find the hypothesis that every
person’s constitution combines the male and female elements a keen
concept though rather hypothetical. “But still it is undoubtedly
justified, if we look upon homosexuality as an inborn anomaly or, to
speak more correctly, as an anomaly resting on constitutional traits,
which if morbid, are so only in _Virchow’s_ sense, according to whom
pathology is not the science of diseases but of deviations, so that the
homosexual may be as healthy as the color blind. Inborn homosexuality
ranks on the level of a biologic variation: it is a variation,
representing perhaps an incomplete phase of sexual differentiation,
but bearing no discernible relationship to any morbid condition of the
individual.”

I am inclined to doubt this view. What proof have we that the
homosexual is perfectly healthy when any criterion of health we may
accept must be artificial? On this point we have only the statements of
the involved persons to rely upon. All describe themselves as healthy.
Do not advanced psychopaths do the same? They lack any feeling of
illness. This seems to be characteristic of homosexuals in particular.
They want their condition to be looked upon as normal. They claim to
be in good health, seldom wish to change their condition, and usually
do not call for medical advice unless they come into conflict with the
law and find themselves in danger. The authors themselves very properly
remark: “As to the men, the homosexuals prefer to hold themselves as
normal and endeavor to justify that contention. Those who struggle
against their instinctive craving, who look upon their conduct as
peculiar or so much as entertain any doubts about it, are in the
minority,—less than 20 per cent.”

Naturally the large number of homosexual physicians have always tried
to convince their observers that they are normal and that they do
not differ from other persons in any other way. But all unprejudiced
observers have to admit the presence of numerous neurotic traits in
connection with homosexuality. This I have undertaken to prove _sine
ira et studio_ having met numberless homosexuals and having become
very closely acquainted with many of them. _I have never yet found a
homosexual who was not a neurotic._ He is necessarily that, as I shall
later prove. He must be neurotic, the same as the heterosexual, who
struggles to overcome and repress a vast portion of homosexual longing
with him. _Havelock Ellis_ and _Moll_ as well as _Krafft-Ebing_ also
lay stress upon the tendency to neurasthenia. But who nowadays is not
neurasthenic? is a question frequently heard. Such an unprejudiced
investigator as _Iwan Bloch_ becomes convinced and recognizes an
inborn homosexuality which must not be conceived as a morbidity. For a
long time _Bloch_ preconized a different view but changed his opinion
convinced by _Hirschfeld’s_ work and through his own professional
contact with homosexuals. He is now a believer in the theory of
inborn homosexuality having been led to this view particularly by the
statements of the homosexuals. Later we shall prove how unreliable such
statements must be. At any rate so keen an observer as _Bloch_ could
not fail to note the striking percentage of neurotic homosexuals. But
he thought they were nervous because “homosexuality acts upon them as
a psychic trauma.” Further he states: “According to my investigations
and observations the _relationship between health and disease among
homosexuals is originally the same as among heterosexuals_ and in time,
on account of the social and individual isolation of the homosexuals,
acting like a psychic trauma, morbidity becomes accentuated; usually we
encounter nervous complaints and difficulties of an acquired character,
and we note the development of a typical ‘homosexual neurasthenia,’
which may readily enough lead some superficial observers to confuse
_post hoc_ with _propter hoc_.” Undoubtedly the dangers of homosexual
activity favor the development of anxiety states. But such nervous
states are found also in cases showing no predisposition towards
anxiety, and anxiety states are encountered without any relation to
homosexuality.

_Magnus Hirschfeld_ places himself with all the weight of his
personality and experience squarely in favor of the contention that
homosexuality is a normal state. His investigations touching upon
this field are numerous. We also owe to his labors that great work on
the subject: _Die Homosexualitaet des Mannes und des Weibes_. (The
Homosexuality of Man and of Woman, Verlag L. Marcus, Berlin, SW, 61.)
No investigator interested in this subject can neglect this fundamental
and exhaustive treatment of it. Subsuming the views of _Hirschfeld_
we may state: There is a genuine inborn homosexuality which must not
be looked upon as a morbidity. This homosexuality should be confused
neither with bisexuality nor with pseudo-homosexuality. _Hirschfeld_,
too, has changed his views in the course of time. He had conceived
homosexuality as a sexual intermediary stage between man and woman and
proposed the famous term: _the third sex_. As is well known all persons
are bisexual. _Hirschfeld_ looked for the well known physical stigmata
of bisexuality among the homosexuals. He found among men enlargement of
the breasts, female hips, delicate skin, etc., and among women growth
of facial hair, male, energetic traits, etc. In his work entitled, _Der
Urnische Mensch_, he maintained: “A homosexual not differing bodily,
physically and mentally from the full grown man I have not found among
1500 subjects and I am therefore disposed to doubt the occurrence
until I shall meet such an individual.” But in his more recent work
he declares: “The androgynic type of man and the gynandric type of
woman are not necessarily homosexual. There are types of persons which
may be described as eunuchoid,—they give the impression of castrated
persons without having undergone the operation,—they possess female
bodies, high voice and beardless face. Generally there is azoospermia,
frequently anorchia. There are corresponding types in the female
sex,—persons with bodies showing many masculine traits. These marked
womanly men and mannish women are often considered homosexual, but
it is not uncommon to find them completely heterosexual inasmuch as
they find complementary individuals among the types belonging to the
opposite sex. The types which attract them are also androgynous.”[9]

_Hirschfeld_ does not admit the influence of latent homosexuality in
the choice of this androgenic type. A homosexual whose condition is
not manifest he does not recognize. His ground for diagnosis is no
longer similarity of bodily traits when compared with the opposite
sex. The determining factor for _Hirschfeld_ is only the subject’s
feeling. _If he is homosexually inclined (particularly if so disposed
from childhood), the subject is homosexual._ _Hirschfeld’s_ own
statement is as follows: “The determining factor in the diagnosis
of homosexuality remains as before the contrary feeling proper; the
diagnosis is strongly supported by a negative attitude towards the
other sex, as well as by altero-sexual episodes, although these two
features in themselves are not capable of establishing the diagnosis.”
Since _Bloch_ also admits that there are many virile homosexuals with
bodily structures wholly male, it follows that the organic diagnosis
of homosexuality is altogether unreliable. _Hans Blüher_, a reliable
expert on homosexuality, also recognizes the pure homosexual, which he
calls the “male hero” type, whose character and habitus is completely
male, thus differing from the second type, the “woman-like invert”
(_invertierter Weibling_). The latent homosexual he considers a
third type. (Vid. _Die drei Grundformen der Homosexualitaet: Eine
sexuologische Studie._ Jahrbuch f. sexuelle Zwischenstuffen, vol. XIII).

Let us repeat and underscore the far-fetched feature of this
method of diagnosis. According to it _there is no objective means
for ascertaining homosexuality. The only diagnostic guide is the
homosexual’s declaration that he has always felt homosexually inclined
and that he is indifferent towards the other sex._

The analyst is well qualified to recognise the utter weakness of such
a diagnostic guide. We meet continually persons who claim to know
themselves thoroughly; they claim that they have investigated their own
state very conscientiously but after a few weeks, often only after a
few days (illustrations will be fully given in this book) the subject
must admit that he did not know himself, that, in fact, he had avoided
knowing himself. _All persons lie about sexual matters and deceive
themselves in the first place._ All play _Vogel-strauss-politik_, the
ostrich.

_All neurotics falsify their life history or at least retouch it._ They
simply forget the facts which do not suit their system of thinking. We
must also bear in mind _Havelock Ellis’_ statement that the homosexuals
prefer to consider themselves as normal. Similarly the childhood
history is distorted consciously or unconsciously and a life history is
reconstructed (in retrospect) from which all heterosexual episodes have
been eliminated.

Psychoanalysis has proven that all homosexuals, without exception,
show heterosexual tendencies in early life. There is no exception to
this rule. _There are no monosexual persons!_ The heterosexual period
stretches far into puberty. _All persons are bisexual._ But persons
repress either the homosexual or the heterosexual components on
account of certain motives or because they are compelled by particular
circumstances and consequently act as if they were monosexual. Even
the “male hero” (_Maennerheld_) type and _Hirschfeld’s_ “genuine”
homosexual is only apparently monosexual. A glance through the
confessions disclosed by all writers is enough to convince one of
this fact. _Hirschfeld_ himself points out that it is to the credit
of psychoanalysis that it has revealed the transitory heterosexual
cravings of the homosexual.

_The instinct of the homosexual originally is not exclusively directed
towards the same sex. Originally the homosexual is also bisexual._
But he represses his heterosexuality just as the heterosexual must
repress his homosexuality. _Blüher_ who is unwilling to recognise a
pathogenesis of homosexuality for the ‘male hero’ type, contends that
one could claim with equal relevance that there is a pathogenesis of
heterosexuality.

That is a fact. Every monosexuality is other than normal or natural.
_Nature has created us bisexual beings and requires us to act as
bisexual beings._ The purely heterosexual is always a neurotic in a
certain sense, that is, the repression of the homosexual components
already creates a predisposition to neurosis, or is in itself a
neurotic trait shared by every normal person. The psychology of
paranoia, for whose investigation we are indebted to the genius of
_Freud_, shows us the extreme result of this process of repression on
one side, just as homosexuality shows us the other side of the same
process.

There is no homosexual who is not more or less neurotic, that condition
being due to the repression of the heterosexuality. The repression
is a purely psychic process and has nothing to do with degeneration.
Homosexuality is not a product of degeneration in the ordinary sense.
It is a neurosis and displays the etiology of a neurosis, as we shall
prove later.

I revert to _Hirschfeld_. Regarding the relationship of neurosis and
homosexuality he states:

“1. Pronounced physical and mental stigmata of degeneration are
relatively rare among homosexual men and women; at any rate such signs
are not more frequent in proportion to the total number of homosexuals
than among the heterosexuals of both sexes.

“2. On the other hand we find frequently and not merely as a result
of homosexuality, _a greater instability of the nervous system_
(frequently shown in the periodic character of endogenous temperamental
instability) (_endogene Stimmungsschwankungen_).

“3. The family of the homosexual often contains a larger number of
nervous persons and such as deviate from the normal sexual type.
(_Hirschfeld_, _l.c._, _p._ 338).

_Hirschfeld_ also emphasizes the labile character of the nervous system
among homosexuals pointing to the large number of abnormal sexual
types in the family of the homosexual. That undoubtedly is a correct
observation. It may be explained in two ways: (1) as the result of
heredity; (2) as a consequence of a common environment. The extent to
which these two factors are at work in particular instances may be
ascertained only on the basis of specific inquiries.

I can state from my own professional experience that the parents of
homosexuals always show abnormal character traits. With remarkable
frequency male homosexuals have mothers who are melancholic, or
subject to depressions or who are advanced hystericals. All gradations
are found, from the emotional, domineering type of woman to the
solitary, quiet, submissive woman who becomes a prey to melancholia
and eventually must be interned in some institution. Urlinds show just
as frequently a pathologic father, a home tyrant, a drinker, morphine
fiend, dissolute fellow, ‘lady killer,’ epileptic or hysterical. We
will determine later to what extent such parents influence psychically
their offspring and the attitude of the children towards them. Careful
investigation of life histories will make the subject plain.

How do the various writers explain the rise of homosexuality? We have
mentioned already that _Hirschfeld_ and all investigators deriving
their inspiration from him hold to the theory that homosexuality is
inborn. According to them, therefore, it is part of inexorable fate,
like the law of the planets....

But _Bloch_ finds the condition baffling in spite of all the
explanations furnished by _Hirschfeld_ and reverting to the latter’s
chemical theory (_andrin_ and _gynecin_) he concludes:

“(1) The so-called ‘undifferentiated’ stage of the sexual instinct
(_Max Dessoir_) is often eliminated when the sexual instinct becomes
directed towards a definite particular sex among heterosexuals or
homosexuals before the advent of puberty. Homosexuality shows a
definite, clear direction of the sexual instinct towards the same sex
long before puberty.

“2. A comprehensive theory of homosexuality must also explain the
extreme cases, particularly male homosexuality coupled with complete
virility.

“3. Sexual parts and genital glands cannot determine homosexuality
in those possessing typical normal male genitalia and testicles;
neither can the brain itself be the determining factor in genuine
homosexuality, because homosexuality cannot be rooted out by the
strongest conscious and unconscious heterosexual influences brought to
bear upon thought and phantasy,—the condition developing in spite of
such influences.

“4. Since as a predisposition (not as sexual instinct) homosexuality
appears long before puberty and before the actual functioning of
the respective genital glands, it suggests that in homosexuals some
physiologic action pertaining to ‘sexuality’ but not necessarily
related to the functioning of the genital glands undergoes some subtle
change as the result of which the sexual instinct is turned from its
goal.

“5. The condition suggests chemical changes, alterations in the chemism
of sexual tension, the latter being fairly independent of the activity
of the sexual glands proper, as is shown by the fact that it may be
preserved among eunuchs and others who undergo castration.” (_Bloch_,
_loc. cit._ p. 589).

Further he states: “In my opinion the anatomic contradiction, the
biologic monstrosity of a womanly, or unmanly psyche in a typical male
body or a womanly-unmanly sexual psyche in the presence of normally
appearing and functioning male genitalia can be solved only if we take
into consideration this intercurrent third factor. The latter may be
traceable to some embryonal disturbance in the sexual chemism. That
would also explain why homosexuality often appears in the midst of
healthy families as a singular manifestation, having no relation to
any possible hereditary transmission or degenerative taint. On the
other hand, the contention of _v. Roemer_ that homosexuality is a
regenerative process has hardly any points to support it. The root of
the riddle of homosexuality lies here. At least I conceive it to be a
riddle. With my theory I endeavor to cover merely the facts and the
probable physiologic relationship of homosexuality with particular
reference to the biologic aspect of the problem and to do it more
closely than the previous theories have done it. But my theory does
not attempt to explain the ultimate origin of the relatively frequent
condition known as homosexuality.

“I do not claim to be able to penetrate into the last ultimate causes.
This remains a riddle to be solved. But from the standpoint of
culture and procreation homosexuality appears to be a meaningless and
purposeless dysteleological manifestation, like many another natural
appearance, such as, for instance, the vermiform appendix in man. In a
former chapter I have already pointed out that the progress of culture
has been in the direction of a sharper differentiation of sexes, that
the antithesis male and female, becomes progressively sharper. Sexual
indifference, genital transition-forms are of primitive character and
_Eduard v. Mayer_ is correct when he holds that homosexuality was
much more widespread during the prehistoric age than it is today and
considers it as common, genetically, as heterosexual love. Through
heredity, adjustment and differentiation, culture has progressively
repressed the homosexual leanings.” (_Bloch_, _loc. cit._ p. 590.)

Concerning these novel theories of homosexuality I must remark: _It
is not correct that the homosexuals before puberty show an exclusive
definite inclination towards their own sex and only towards their
own._ The truth is that like all other persons, the homosexuals
show a bisexual period (the undifferentiated stage of _Max Dessoir_)
before puberty. Only they forget their heterosexual experiences. The
truth is that a comprehensive theory of homosexuality ought to explain
also the extreme cases, specifically male homosexuality coupled with
complete preservation of vitality and female homosexuality with the
preservation of all feminine characters. Such cases are covered neither
by _Hirschfeld’s_ theory nor by that of _Bloch_. The third point is
equally pertinent. It cannot be a question of brain and genital gland.
Chemical influences are likely, but difficult to prove.

The baffling feature of the problem is due to the fact that the attempt
has been made to explain all cases of homosexuality on the basis of a
single plan.

As a matter of fact homosexuality may develop in a number of ways and
each one must be taken into consideration. That the genital glands
play a role in homosexuality seems to me very likely. But while these
influences may be suspected they cannot be proven. What I am able to
prove on the basis of my data are the psychic factors.

Nor must we forget that not only does the body influence the mind,
but that the reverse is also true: the psyche builds up the body
in accordance with its predispositions. We find that the artist’s
physiognomy differs from that of the artisan, and the physician’s
differs from that of the attorney. The mind also models the body.
A man who feels himself woman-like and who longs to be a woman will
unconsciously adopt woman’s ways and imitate woman. In the course of
time even his appearance will be womanly. Possibly—that agrees with my
view—the transformation is conditioned by glandular changes. We may
presuppose that, but the notion appertains to the realm of hypothesis,
which I prefer to avoid.

All writers seem to neglect the powerful role of the psychic factors.
These factors may seem unreal to the upholder of mechanistic
theories. Unfortunately most physicians underestimate the power of
the unconscious wish as a plastic and synthesising energy within the
human organism. The wish to be a man may raise boys to manliness;
the wish to remain a child hinders development towards adulthood;
the wish to be a woman makes for femininity. Any one familiar with
_Pawlow’s_ investigations of the ‘conditioned reflex’ will readily see
that certain particular wishes may exert a definite influence upon
the activity of the genital glands. The wishes are certainly capable
of influencing the appearance, action, activity and features of the
individual.

When a boy acts like a girl, it does not necessarily mean that he has
that kind of a predisposition. It may only signify his identification
with his mother or with a sister.

Very clearly on this point is the testimony of a case of which I find
an account in _Hirschfeld’s_ book.

A homosexual woman writes: “I was born in the country, where my father
owned a large estate, and there I was brought up till my 14th year.
I was the youngest. My oldest brother had girlish ways about him and
was mother’s pet rather than father’s, whose favorite child, in turn,
was my eldest sister. On my part I am the thorough image of my father
in all character traits and in my sensuous predisposition as well. In
later years father had often said: ‘With you and Ludwig (the elder
brother) nature made a mistake; you should have been a boy and Ludwig
a girl.’ Nevertheless I am certain that father knew nothing about
homosexuality, also that my brother was not homosexual. My peculiar
predisposition showed itself already while I was a child, for it was
always my greatest desire to be a boy. As a child two or three years
of age, I put on some of father’s clothes, played with his cap and
promenaded around the yard with his walking stick.” (_Hirschfeld_,
_loc. cit._, p. 43).

We see clearly that this young woman identified herself with her
father. She wanted to be a man like her father.

The remarks of _Ulrichs_ (_vid. Inclusa_, p. 27 ffl.) may be understood
in the same sense: “As a child the urning shows an unmistakable
predisposition towards girlish occupations, intercourse with girls,
girlish games, and playing with dolls. Such a child is very sorry
that it is not ‘boy-like’ to play with dolls, that Santa Claus does
not bring him also dolls and that he is not allowed to play with his
sister’s dolls. Such a child shows interest in sewing, knitting and
cutting, in the soft and delicate texture of girls’ clothes, such as
he, too, would like to wear, and in the colored silks and ribbons
of which he delights to abstract some specimens as keepsakes. He
avoids contact with boys, he avoids their plays and games. The play
horse leaves him indifferent. Soldier games, so much in favor with
boys do not attract him. He avoids all boyish rough plays, such as
snow-balling. He likes ordinary ball games but only with girls. He
throws the ball with the girl’s light and stilted arm movement not
with a boy’s free and powerful arm swing. Any one who has occasion
to observe a boy urning and does it carefully may verify these or
similar peculiarities. Is that all only imagination? I had observed
in myself long ago the peculiarities mentioned above and, moreover,
they always impressed me, although I did not at first recognize their
female character. In 1854 I related the facts to a relative of mine,
intimating that they must have some bearing on my sexuality. He scorned
the idea and I yielded to his opinion at the time. But in 1862 I took
up that matter again with him: meanwhile I had had opportunity to
observe other urnings and I noted that the female _habitus_ recurred
in every one, although not precisely with the same particular features.
But the female _habitus_ differs also among women with regard to
certain details. In my case, as a boy of 10 or 12 years of age, how
often my dear mother sighed as she exclaimed: ‘Karl, you are not like
other boys.’ How often she warned me: ‘You will grow up a queer fellow,
if nothing worse!’” (_Hirschfeld_, _l. c._ p. 117).

What do these fine observations prove? Any one who understands the
playful character of children, their early directed psyche, must
recognise that such conduct results through the influence of a wish.

No—these observations do not prove at all that the contrary sexual
feeling is innate. _Hirschfeld_ contends: “these accounts (referring
to previous statements) show a remarkable absence of tenderness among
the urning girls. An expert thoroughly familiar with their psyche, not
without reason states that we must watch the girl who passes carelessly
by a looking glass without stopping in front of it when dressing and
we must watch the boy who clings with pleasure to the looking glass
returning to it again and again, for thereby both betray early their
homosexual nature.” (_Hirschfeld_, _loc. cit._ p. 119). I see nothing
in these statements but an attempt on his part to differ from the
other colleagues.

Finally I turn to my own conception of homosexuality, formulated, on
the basis of psychoanalytic data and as an outgrowth of the teachings
of _Freud_.

_All persons originally are bisexual in their predisposition. There
is no exception to this rule. Normal persons show a distinct bisexual
period up to the age of puberty. The heterosexual then represses his
homosexuality. He also sublimates a portion of his homosexual cravings
in friendship, nationalism, social endeavors, gatherings, etc. If this
sublimation fails him he becomes neurotic. Since no person overcomes
completely his homosexual tendencies, every one carries within himself
the predisposition to neurosis. The stronger the repression, the
stronger is also the neurotic reaction which may be powerful enough in
its extreme form to lead to paranoia_ (Freud’s theory of paranoia). _If
the heterosexuality is repressed, homosexuality comes to the forefront.
In the case of the homosexual the repressed and incompletely conquered
heterosexuality furnishes the disposition towards neurosis. The more
thoroughly his heterosexuality is sublimated the more completely the
homosexual presents the picture of a normal healthy person. He then
resembles the normal heterosexual. But like the normal hetero__sexual
individual, even the “male hero” type displays a permanent latent
disposition to neurosis._

_The process of sublimation is more difficult in the case of the
normal homosexual than in the case of the normal heterosexual. That
is why this type is extremely rare and why a thorough analysis always
discloses typical neurotic reactions. The neurotic reactions of
repression_ (Abwehr, Freud) _are anxiety, shame, disgust and hatred (or
scorn). The heterosexual is inspired with disgust at any homosexual
acts. That proves his affectively determined negative attitude. For
disgust is but the obverse of attraction. The homosexual manifests the
same feeling of disgust for woman, showing him to be a neurotic. (Or
else he hates woman.) For the normal homosexual—if there be such a
type—would be indifferent towards woman. These generalisations already
show that the healthy person must act as a bisexual being._

We know only one race of people who recognised formally the bisexual
nature of man: the Greeks. But we must recognise also that the Greeks
had attained the highest level of physical and cultural development.
We shall have to inquire into the reasons why homosexuality fell into
such disrepute and why the example of the Greeks found no imitation
among the moderns, despite the recognition accorded the tremendous
cultural achievements of the ancient Greeks. That will be done
later. We conclude: _There is no inborn homosexuality and no inborn
heterosexuality. There is only bisexuality.[10] Monosexuality already
involves a predisposition to neurosis, in many cases stands for the
neurosis proper._

The theory is not a novel one. New is only its association with
neurosis. The merit to have been the first to express it belongs to
_Kiernan_ (_Medical Standard_, 1888). _Kiernan_ started with the fact
that all lower animals are bisexual and conceived homosexuality as a
retrogression to the primitive hermaphroditic form of animal existence.
We must note this theory as we shall have occasion to revert to it when
discussing the predisposition to neurosis. _Chevalier_ (_Inversion
Sexuelle_, 1893) also begins his inquiry with a consideration of the
aboriginal bisexuality of the fœtus. Two other investigators may be
mentioned in this connection: _Lombroso_, to whom belongs the credit
of having called attention to the manifestations of retrogression
(_atavism_) and _Binet_, who maintains that homosexuality arises
when the aboriginal undifferentiated sexual instinct (consequently
the bisexual instinct) is aroused through some early experience in
association with a person of the same sex. Here we have an adumbration
of the theory of infantile trauma which plays such a tremendous role
in _Freud’s_ work. In the following chapters a number of cases will
be recorded clearly illustrating the latent influence of infantile
experiences.

But we must guard against assuming as true all the traumas which are
reported to us. Some of the incidents are interpolated into the life
history and only subsequently assume significance. But nothing is so
dangerous in psychology as one-sidedness. The etiology of homosexuality
is a particularly fruitful field in which to prove, here and there,
the role of infantile traumatic experiences. _Krafft-Ebing_ holds that
_Binet’s_ theory will not stand close critical analysis but expresses
himself very unfavorably regarding the importance of psychologic
relations as a whole. He states: “Psychic forces are not sufficient
to explain so serious a degenerative process.” This depreciation of
psychic influences was not very surprising at a time when the prevalent
tendency was to explain nearly everything through heredity or taint.

Before attempting to give an exposition of the psychologic theory
of homosexuality I must discuss the relations between homosexuality
and neurosis. All investigators, we have already seen, agree that a
relationship exists between them. The question is: does the homosexual
become neurotic because he fears coming into conflict with the penal
laws, because he feels his unfortunate predisposition is something
contrary to nature (to adopt his own expression),—briefly because he
is homosexual, or is he homosexual because he is neurotic?

Here we naturally encounter the need of defining the meaning of
neurosis. What is neurosis and who is neurotic? I call neurotic the
person who has not successfully overcome the asocial cravings which
he perceives to be unethical. I call asocial cravings all instincts
which society rejects as conflicting with its cultural demands. That
in itself shows that the essence of neurosis must differ in different
countries. In one instance we find repression of normal sexuality,
because sexual activity itself is considered unmoral. (Example: the
properly brought up girl in good society who must remain coy.) In
another, we find a struggle with instincts which society decrees as
morbid. (Example: the actress who maintains many friendships and must
suppress her homosexual longings.) In the same way criminal tendencies
may play a role in the development of a neurosis. The neurosis is the
result of the struggle between instinct and inhibition. There are,
therefore, two paths for the development of the neurosis: a strong
instinctive craving which naturally endeavors to break through the
inhibitions and powerful inhibitions which reduce to a minimum the
voicing of sexual needs even under the impulsion of strong instincts.

The predisposition to neurosis, therefore, is intimately linked with
our instincts. The progression of the human race requires the frequent
suppression of certain instincts and every step in ethical and cultural
progress involves giving up some portion of instinctive cravings. The
laws are a protection of society against the instinctive cravings of
its members. Society tolerates but a portion of the instincts to a
certain extent and all others it outlaws as asocial. The evolution of
the race may eventually reach a stage wherein the instincts will have
been placed altogether at the service of society: the domestication
of the instinctive cravings. This is the meaning of the struggle of
centuries between brain and spinal cord. The results of this struggle
may be determined only if we contrast a truly aboriginal man with a
typical representative of culture. What remarkable progress has been
attained in the conquest of instinct! Society goes a step further. It
takes care that individuals possessing asocial instincts should be
unable to propagate their kind. Criminals are rendered innocuous, the
asocial person finds the environment unfavorable and disappears.

But—as I have already stated in my book, _Die Träume der
Dichter_[11]—the creative urge of nature does not mollify man’s
asocial requirements. The struggle between nature and culture keeps up
unabated and the result is neurosis. All paraphilias are a compromise
between instinct and repression.

I must revert here to my theory of neurosis which I have expressed
first in my work entitled, _Die Träume der Dichter_.[12] The neurotic
is a retrograded type. He represents a conquered stage of human
evolution. He must personally undergo the struggle through which the
human race as a whole has already passed. The ontogenesis of culture!
Whenever nature attempts the creation of something great, powerful
or sublime it turns to the great reservoir of its past. Recessive
types manifest more powerful instincts. The neurotic, criminals and
the specially gifted persons have that in common. Three paths are
open to the man with heightened instincts: he sublimates his selfish
tendencies, his criminal cravings, his asocial attitude derived from
previous epochs and becomes a creator (poet, painter, sculptor,
musician, prophet, inventor, etc.); he works out his instincts
untrammelled and becomes a criminal; or the sublimation is but partly
successful and he becomes a neurotic.

My theory of homosexuality thus links itself to the view of _Lombroso_.
The homosexual, in the first place, is a recessive character. He
shows a precocious development of an instinct which does not fit
the requirements of culture; but biologically he stands nearer the
aboriginal bisexual predisposition of mankind than the normal person
who is typical of the current age. This conflict manifests itself in
various over-compensations, so that the neurotic advances beyond his
age and becomes a creator of the future. I must ask my readers to
consult my works quoted above for further details on this subject. I
have here merely stated in brief what may have a bearing on our present
theme.

The specially gifted, the artist, the criminal and the neurotic
manifest the same characteristic: over-stressing of instinctive
cravings. The criminal carries out his promptings, the artist
sublimates them in his works (_Shakespeare_ conceived so many murders
and that saved him from becoming a murderer ... states _Hebbel_) while
the neurotic meets in them his unsolvable conflicts. He is the criminal
without the criminal’s courage to commit asocial deeds. He is the Don
Juan of phantasy, the Marquis de Sade of his own day dreams, the Jack
the Ripper, without knowing it.

These considerations justify the assumption that poets, artists and
neurotics must show a precocious development of the instinctive
cravings, particularly of the sexual. That is in fact the case. With
regard to artists this is well known,[13] the fact has been repeatedly
mentioned as typical of criminals and with regard to neurotics the
analysts have been able to prove it again and again.

We may now appreciate why all investigators found that the sexual
instinct awakens early in all homosexuals. I want to make myself
clear. We owe to psychoanalysis the recognition of the fact that the
sexual instinct awakens early in all persons,—a fact I have pointed
out already during my pre-Freudian period in my essay on “_Coitus
during Childhood_.” But most persons repress their infantile memories
and later recall nothing about these occurrences dating from their
childhood. The homosexual remembers everything and that fact is pointed
out as proof of his sexual precocity. Already as a child he knew
that certain things pertain to the forbidden realm of the sexual. He
repressed from memory numberless particular incidents among the vast
number his memory could hold. The fact of his precocity, he does not
forget. But at the same time all memories which do not happen to fit
into his system of ideas are either bedimmed in consciousness or lost
from memory altogether. Sexual precocity is a fact brought out in all
life histories and confessions of homosexuals. And that very sexual
precocity shows us that the conditions which lead to the repression
of heterosexuality, are traceable far back into the past and stretch
well beyond ordinary memory recall. Therefore, _Krafft-Ebing_ finds:
“The sexual life of persons of this type is usually manifest very early
and is abnormally strong. Not infrequently it is associated with other
perverse manifestations, in addition to the perverted direction of the
sexual instinct peculiar to this type of sexual feeling.”

Further in the same work: “There are neuroses present (hysteria,
neurasthenia, epileptoid states, etc.). Nearly always there is also
present either temporary or permanent neurasthenia.” (P. 259.)

We see now that the two statements correspond. The individual
becomes neurotic because he is unable to overcome the abnormally
strong instincts. Epilepsy as well as grand hysteria serve as means
for releasing the abnormally stressed instincts during slumber
states.[14] It would appear therefore that a certain relationship
must exist between homosexuality and epilepsy; in fact we shall take
the opportunity later to report in full a case illustrating that
relationship.

These instincts involve not only homosexual and heterosexual cravings.
They include also sadistic tendencies and mysophilia, koprophilia,
necrophilia and particularly the linking of sexual and criminal
tendencies. Neurosis represents them under grotesque changes,
attenuations, transformations, substitutions and exaggerations, all
having counterpart in the homosexual neurosis. The relations between
homosexuality and sadism are particularly interesting and will be
considered fully in the following pages.

We may formulate our notion of the development of homosexuality as
follows: _A person with abnormally strong instinctive cravings is
induced early in life to surround these cravings with inhibitions. The
early awakening of his sexual instinct and its precocious functioning
bring him into conflict. The processes of repression and of sublimation
set in to deal with these cravings much earlier than in other persons.
For one reason or another the heterosexual components are repressed and
the homosexual are evolved. The heterosexual cravings are hemmed in and
rendered useless by disgust, hatred or fear._

Homosexuality arises out of bisexuality as a result of certain
particular attitudes which become determined very early in life. But
not always. Such traits may appear also relatively late in life. Why
and under what conditions does that happen? In the chapters next
following we propose to take up this problem.




                                  II

 The development of Sexuality—The Bisexual Ideal of all persons—The
 fundamental Law of Sexuality—The role of homosexuality in
 Neurosis—Womanly men and mannish women—Gerontophilia—Love of
 Prostitutes—The significance of Sexual symbols—Various masks
 of Homosexuality—Transvestites—A case of Transvestitism—The
 significance of the hose as a Symbol—Love at first sight—The
 critical age—The pleasure Seeker—The case of a man passing through
 the critical age—Neurotic types of homosexuality—The Don Juan
 type—Psychoanalysis of a Don Juan—Passionate falling in love during
 advanced age, significant—Analysis of a Don Juan.

 _Das Christentum gab dem Eros Gift zu trinken:—er starb zwar nicht
 daran, aber er entartete zum Laster.—Nietzsche._




                                  II

 _Christianity has given Eros a poison cup; Eros was not killed thereby
 but has been turned into a taint.—Nietzsche._


Freud who supports the theory of bisexuality with all the weight of his
authority, points out that hitherto we have entertained wrong notions
concerning the nature of the relations between sexual instinct and
sexual goal. The sexual instinct is at first independent of its object
and owes not its origin to the excitations roused by the sexual object.
The earliest stage of man he has designated as autoerotic and he has
described for us the infantile form of onanism.

The development of sexuality may be conceived, broadly, as follows: the
first stage is autoerotic, although all-erotic stimuli are also present
(suckling at the mother’s breast, caressing of the infant, etc.). The
child is more sensitive to all forms of excitation and all vegetative
functions are surcharged with pleasurable feelings more strongly in him
than in the adult. Sexual life is autoerotic, but it is bisexually
autoerotic. The child makes no distinction between the persons to whom
it is attached. Young or old, male or female,—it is all alike to him.
But autoerotism is characteristic of this sexual life. Gradually this
feature is overshadowed by the appearance of the all-erotic tendency.
At first the child seeks to find the goal for its sexuality among the
possible objects of his limited surroundings. Just as the first period
of autoerotism is overcome so the normal fixation upon one’s family
must be eventually outgrown. (Thou shalt leave thy father and thy
mother and follow thine husband!) But even during the earliest period
all libidinous excitations are distinctly bisexual. This bisexuality
persists until the period of puberty, that is, throughout that stage of
sexual indifference, of which _Desoir_ also speaks. But the tendency
to bisexuality is unable to withstand the powerful stress of puberty.
The girlish boy becomes a man, the tomboy girl becomes a young
woman. The development of the secondary sexual characters displace
man’s heterosexual characteristics with the stamp of monosexuality.
Usually at this time there develops also a decisive struggle against
homosexuality leading, sooner or later, to the complete suppression of
that tendency. (Naturally there are exceptions, as some persons retain
their bisexual character traits without trouble throughout life.) _I
have not examined a person thus far in whom I failed to recognise
clearly the signs of juvenile homosexuality._

It is proper to hold that the neurotics show themselves functionally
bisexual. Among the neurotics the males often have little or no beard
growth, plump and roundish bodily figure, high voice and soft facial
features, especially nose and lips; they have small hands, small feet,
their penis is remarkably small, scant hairy growth upon their mons
veneris, cryptorchism (undescended testicle), hernias. On the other
hand neurotic women show hairy growth on face, flat chest, strong,
male figure—more angular than is characteristic of women,—large,
full hands, large feet, disorders of menstruation including amenorrhea
(complete suppression), infantile uterus, male larynx and deep voice. I
do not maintain that this is invariably the case. Now and then I have
met with exceptions; but I believe that a thorough investigation would
support this contention.

The tendency to neurosis is due to the strong instinctive cravings
which manifest themselves bisexually.

There is a process at work which I am inclined to designate as the
fundamental law of sex. According to this law every individual tends to
sum up all his instinctive sexual cravings in one image. Every person
seeks the sexual ideal capable of satisfying all his sexual longings.

The sexual ideal of the ancients was, clearly, a bisexual being.
Divinity is the ideal erotic goal magnified. The first divinities
were always bisexual. They were either women with a penis or men with
a female breast. The longing for the bisexual ideal may be traced
throughout humanity. In his Banquet, _Plato_ has excellently expressed
this longing in the well-known words of _Aristophanes_.

We feel that we are utilizing but a portion of our sexual energy and
that the remainder is allowed to remain fallow. The various sexual
trends are sometimes so split up in life that no part of them is
sufficient alone to furnish the whole driving power for the proper
sexual activity. This is the case with those who apparently manifest
a diminished sexual craving, as _Freud_ and _Havelock Ellis_ have
observed with reference to certain homosexuals. This condition is
only apparent, however, and analysis discloses that it is not real.
Persons of this type, apparently asexual, really vacillate back and
forth between various possible sexual goals never reaching the stage
of aggression, because they are incapable of attaining a sufficient
summation of sexual libido. Their libido splits up into a number of
autoerotic acts, through which the fore-pleasure instead of centering
on a focus is expended in small instalments, as I have pointed out when
I described the various forms of cryptic onanism.

I repeat: the ideal of every person is to be able to concentrate all
libido upon a single goal. That explains why the homosexual does not
seek the typical male, except in the rarest instances. _Freud_ has
drawn our attention to this apparent contrast. Many homosexuals,
particularly those who, themselves, possess strong virility, do not
seek out the complete male for their ideal, but the womanly male. They
prefer the female type of man, men in female clothes, or of female
habitus,—a fact which has shaped a great deal the course of male
prostitution. The male prostitute endeavors always to imitate the
female through the use of trinkets, corset, the adoption of articles of
female apparel, close shaving, peculiar gait and speech.

What the homosexual seeks consciously the latent homosexual, as we
designate the neurotic and, in smaller measure, every individual who
acts exclusively as a heterosexual, endeavors to attain through vague
yearnings which he fails to understand but which are strong enough to
break through.

Let us now turn our attention to these hidden forms of sexuality,
before attempting to explain the rise of the manifest and of the overt
forms of homosexuality. Among the latent homosexuals who struggle with
all the problems of bisexuality which to them appear unsolvable and
inscrutable, and who have recourse to various compromises which bring
them some temporary relief, we may find the various transitional
stages leading all the way up to the overt forms of homosexuality.

Latent homosexuality is a fact, not uncovered by analysis, but analysis
has tremendously enlarged our understanding of the mental processes
involved. The deeper we penetrate into the psychic mechanism of the
neuroses and psychoses, the more vital appears to us the role of
homosexuality. The difference between my method of analysis and the
customary anamnesis is shown nowhere so clearly, as in connection with
the disclosures of the neurotics regarding their hidden homosexuality.
No other component of the sexual instinct undergoes repression to such
an extent or shifts so far from the sphere of ordinary consciousness. I
know persons who have frankly adopted a great many forms of paraphilia
but have completely repressed the homosexual component of their
condition. I have analysed, for instance, a young woman who had quite
an eventful life history. She became neurotic because she could neither
master nor suppress her homosexuality. Like all other neurotics she
skilfully covered her homosexuality and this trait of hers remained
unknown to her consciousness.

It will be helpful to the beginner, therefore, to know the various
disguises which serve as masks for homosexuality. As is well known,
all neurotic symptoms are the results of compromise and they cover, on
the one hand, as much as they disclose, on the other. The tendency
to adopt compromises, which is typical of the split personality, is a
subject worthy of special consideration. The most antagonistic impulses
are stressed and summed up under the same symptom. This tendency to
adopt compromises governs the mental life of the neurotic. It is
seen in dreams as well as in political life, in artistic products
no less than in neurotic symptoms. If the need to adjust opposing
tendencies under some compromise is not met successfully a condition of
uncertainty arises,—of vacillation and doubt. Doubt is the result and
the sign of unsuccessful compromises.

This superficial building up of compromises is seen most clearly in
the case of homosexuality. The neurotic endeavors to focus the most
divergent tendencies of his psyche upon the same goal. His ideal is a
being at once male, female, and infantile (and perhaps also beast and
angel at the same time).

The neurotics always describe their ideal in a way which corresponds to
this polymorphous picture. The males rave about women of a strikingly
manly bearing; heavy, angular figure, flat chest, energetic, bony
facial features, short hair, deep voice, traces of facial hair or of a
mustache. The hidden bisexual ideal is thus partially fulfilled (Woman
with penis or man with vagina!). The repressed cravings, thus partly
freed, serve during sexual aggression and further the attainment of
gratification.

When nature fails to meet these needs, external features, such as dress
and ornaments are brought into play to enhance the illusion. The symbol
is made to replace reality. Men fall in love with women who wear tights
(or who sport mannish hats, officers’ coats, walking canes, etc.) and
consequently they are attracted by actresses, fencers, cycle-riders,
mountain-climbers, horseback-riders, or by girls whom they chance to
see in under-pants. Others require of their sexual objects the adoption
of various male symbols before their libido is roused. The woman,
appeals to them, for instance, at best, wearing a military blouse, a
mannish hat, or in some male attitude or other, capable of yielding a
suggestion of something genuine.

Women display parallel tendencies. They fall in love with men who are
beardless, gynecomastic, men who have a large panniculus adiposus,
broad hips, delicate throat, female voice, or who wear long coats and
long hair. I will quote here only a few examples: the priest, the
physician in his hospital coat, particularly surgeons with graceful
arms, female impersonators, beardless men, or men with high voices who
perfume themselves and wear bracelets, and artists with long, flowing
locks of hair are likely to prove very attractive. (Perhaps the great
erotic attraction exercised by all artists is due to their pronounced
bisexual character.)

Physical factors are also of great significance. Women who smoke,
ride, go mountain climbing and who are generally aggressive, make a
very strong impression upon the neurotic. This is true also about
the influence of men with strong womanly features upon women. Many
neurotic men dream of being overpowered. (The “pleasure without
guilt” principle!). Energetic women fascinate them, just as delicate,
sensitive men fascinate the hysterical woman.

Less known are other masks of homosexuality which I now mention. The
love of old women (gerontophilia) and passion for children often
covers a homosexual tendency. Persons deviating from the complete
male or female type often prove irresistible for the same reason.
Age eventually wipes out the typical secondary sexual characters.
Man becomes like an old woman and old women acquire remarkable male
features (including mustache) and male habits. Children also may figure
as a strong bisexual attraction since they lack the secondary sexual
characters.

A peculiar cryptic form under which male homosexuality manifests
itself, is the love of prostitutes. The unconscious factor which here
appeals to the homosexual component of the sexual libido is the fact
that the body of the prostitute has been previously enjoyed by other
men.[15]

This process,—mediation through the other sex,—plays a great role
in homosexuality in various other ways. The prostitute may be enjoyed
only in the presence of one or more male witnesses. The carrying out of
coitus jointly in one room, looking on, or allowing onlookers, also
betray this motive besides others.

In many cases the form of sexual intercourse preferred betrays a latent
homosexuality. Men choose to lie underneath, or carry out coitus a
posteriori, or per anum. Women show corresponding preferences. They
attain supreme enjoyment only if they are on top during intercourse.
Many paraphilias (fellatio, cunnilingus) betray a homosexual trend
besides showing sexual infantilism.

Various external signs may betray a strong homosexual trend or mark a
sudden outbreak of it. Men suddenly decide to cut or shave off their
beard. They unexpectedly turn their interests to sports which give them
the opportunity of watching men undressed. They become passionate fans
around prize rings, are seen at sun bathing establishments and sporting
places, or rave about the culture of nakedness as a hygienic fad, etc.
Women suddenly find that they cannot possibly wear their long hair and
decide to cut it short. Sometimes they do it without telling their
husband so as to ‘pleasantly’ surprise him. They change fashions, take
readily to English jackets, tight coats and Girardi hats and begin to
show tremendous interest in the emancipation of women.

Joint suicide as a mask is a subject to which I can only refer briefly.
Persons who do not have the courage to live together are the ones
likely to commit suicide jointly. The suicide of two friends, male
or female, is often due to unsatisfied homosexuality, however ideal,
apparently, the motives may be. A life which does not yield to the
full gratification craved by the unconsciously operating instincts,
loses its zest. _Frenssen_ states: “Sun, moon and stars no longer carry
any message to one who has lost interest in them; a thing degenerates
unless cultivated assiduously; it is so with everything. Indifference
deadens; love breathes life into everything.”

I have already pointed out in my treatise on Onanism that those
who have not given up the habit may give expression to tendencies
distinctly homosexual through their autoerotic acts. The feeling
of guilt is due in part, although only in part, to this cause. The
greater hold the habit has upon the individual the stronger also
seems the homosexual trait back of it. Many onanists are asocial in
their inclinations and avoid group life. But I know a number who are
enthusiastic ‘joiners,’ belonging to numerous organisations and always
eager to assume honorary membership in all sorts of clubs. That female
lawyers are particularly apt to show homosexual tendencies is well
known and the fact is often exploited in the comic papers under slight
disguise.

Lastly, I must mention another important form of masked homosexuality:
the artistic. Poets whose preference is the delineation of female
characters are partly homosexual. They perceive accurately the female
emotions, they are able to portray with fidelity the life of that sex,
because they carry within their breast, as it were, a goodly portion of
womanhood. _Chamisso_ described so wonderfully womanly love, because
he himself was largely woman, as his portrait is enough to indicate.
Painters may also show the reverse tendency. They paint preferably male
scenes or, as sculptors, create statues of men. Their appraisal of
esthetic values betrays their hidden homosexuality. Some artists find
the male figure much more beautiful than the female, others find the
male body repulsive. An overstressed aversion betrays the homosexual
trend as clearly as an emotionally overstressed preference.

The choice of a pseudonym may also prove a characteristic sign. Just
as the transvestites (wearers of clothes of opposite sex) clearly
show their homosexual peculiarities thereby so do men choosing a
female pseudonym for their contributions or writings, often betray
their homosexuality by the act. Of course, in the case of women, the
choice of a male nom de plume is determined partly by the well known
common notion that works obtain a wider circulation if attributed to
male authorship. At any rate, it betrays a desire to be taken for a
man, by the readers, at least. A woman writer whom I know and who is
active under a male nom de plume has told me, as an objection to this
view, that she is decidedly interested in men. She confessed herself a
Messalina. But back of such an unsatisfied craving, there stands, as I
have already mentioned, homosexuality, the blind instinct, ungratified.
This woman preferred relations with well known “women killers,” typical
Cassanovas. Obviously, the thought of the numerous female conquests
must have furnished here the chief attraction. Such men carry about
them the aroma of many women. They must be proven masters of the art
of love and a woman is disposed to expect of them special thrills
and, possibly, new refinements of the art; but the heroes, as a rule,
when tried fail to come up to the expectations lodged in them; they
in turn become easily tired of their new conquest. The unsatisfied
homosexual male is incapable of gratifying completely the love hungry
homosexual woman. (That is the tragedy back of many unhappy marriages.)
It is also significant that this woman, who otherwise had allowed
herself an unusual degree of freedom about sexual matters, looked upon
homosexuality as Tabu.

I have mentioned only a small number of the possible masks of
homosexuality. Some of the screens are so transparent they cannot
but be noticed even by those who are still novices in psychoanalytic
matters. One marries a girl, for instance, after falling in love with
that girl’s brother; or a girl marries the brother of her homosexual
choice, as I have clearly shown in connection with the highly
instructive case history No. 93, in my study of Anxiety States.

For this reason a friend’s wife may be a very dangerous person and this
mediation of homosexuality through a third person has often been the
cause of terrific household dramas. I know men who are regularly prone
to fall in love with their friends’ sweethearts, naturally, without
suspecting that back of this proclivity there stands the hidden passion
for their friend.

In conclusion I may point out another very significant mask of
homosexuality. I refer to psychic impotence, which shows itself
particularly during attempted intercourse with respectable women. Men
potent with prostitutes but unable to carry out coitus with a ‘decent’
woman, are latent homosexuals whose libido is sufficiently roused
in the presence of the prostitute by the realisation that the woman
has been used before by another man. Of course, a relative impotence
of this character has many other determinants. But the factor here
mentioned is never absent.

The study of this cryptic form of homosexuality alone will enable us to
appreciate the inestimable role of bisexuality in the mental life of
modern man.

Other forms of masked homosexuality, manifested in phobias and
compulsion, I must mention only superficially. There are men who become
extremely uneasy if some other man walks directly behind them, men
who are unable to remain with another man alone in a room, men who
always dream of scenes in which some man points a revolver or knife at
them, or who have the uncomfortable feeling that some hard substance,
perhaps nothing more than an indurated cylindrical mass of fæces, is
pressing within their rectum. With these peculiarities such men betray
their homosexuality, just as the paranoiacs do with their delusions of
persecution.

Women show similar phobias and more especially morbid anxieties
often centering around servant girls. Women who change servant girls
continually, who worry themselves over the servant problem or quarrel
with the girls, or feel impelled to touch them (acts which really
take the place of sexual deeds) are frequently homosexual. Similarly,
various forms of fetichism may be a cover for homosexuality.

It is plainly obvious that the study of sexual masks promises to
further immensely our knowledge about matters of sex. At the same time
it is clear that the opposition of many circles to the new studies
must remain a tremendous one. Possibly a great deal of the opposition
to the new psychology has its roots in this very peculiarity of human
nature. Their basic bisexual predisposition is precisely what men are
least disposed to recognise.

These general statements I now propose to prove on the basis of various
observations from my practice illustrating the great role played by
the homosexual components in the love life of average men and women.
This will show clearly why I never use such terms as “contrary,” or
“inverted” sexual feeling, and why I never speak of “inversion,” or of
“perversion,” when I discuss homosexuality. The very purpose of this
work is to bring out the homosexual components in the life of every
person and to bring out the normal feature of that state. For normal is
everything that is natural; _and from the standpoint of nature we are
never monosexual and always bisexual_.

I regret that I must contradict so worthy an investigator as
_Hirschfeld_. But I fail to understand the need of setting up,
besides the hetero- and homosexuals, a third group, the so-called
transvestites.[16] Among the transvestites (personifiers) we find
the most pronounced examples of masked homosexuality and stressed
bisexuality. This is a designation proposed by _Hirschfeld_ for men
who—obeying an overwhelming inner impulse—wear women’s apparel and
for women who similarly attire themselves in things belonging to a
man’s wardrobe. In the course of an extensive review (_Zentrbl. f.
Psychoanalyse_, vol. I, p. 55.) I pointed out that it is unnecessary
to consider the transvestites as a distinct sexual species, but that
they are merely bisexual persons with strong homosexual leanings.
_Hirschfeld_ lays great emphasis upon the fact that the transvestites
experience normal sexual feelings, being subject only to the
impulsion to change their clothing for that of the opposite sex.
Unfortunately here he takes into consideration only the conscious
sexual manifestations. He considers merely the facts as they appear
upon the surface neglecting the important mechanisms of repression
and masking,—the tendency to play before, and with, one’s self.
The data obtained upon superficial examination must be subjected to
careful analysis; then the results are most surprising. Analysis
invariably reveals that there is no such thing as monosexuality and
that the transvestites, like the homosexuals, have their repressions.
The homosexual represses his heterosexuality, the transvestite his
homosexuality. In his phantasy the man is a woman (the woman fancies
herself the reverse) and thus he combines the two components of his
libido. It were nothing less than doing violence to facts to attempt
to distinguish the transvestites from the homosexuals.

As one reads carefully the cases published by _Hirschfeld_, with an
eye for signs of homosexuality, one cannot fail to note characteristic
traits of homosexuality in every one of the cases. For instance, one
of them carries out succubus _in coitu_, which is clearly a symptom
of latent homosexuality; if he appears as a woman, the men who follow
him cause him nausea. Another was able to carry out the heterosexual
act only under the influence of alcohol, and when going out in women’s
clothes was fond of eating in the company of men and coquetting with
them. A third is repelled by the thought of homosexual relations, but
dreams of pregnancy, plays succubus _in coitu_, and fancies that his
wife is a man. The fourth hugs his wife tightly, sinks his nails into
her ears, etc., so as to gain the illusion of being overpowered through
sheer force by some man.

Then, most interesting of all, case 12: A man who during four years of
married life has carried out coitus only once. This subject actually
betrays an open inclination towards homosexuality, which _Hirschfeld_
declares is only apparent.... How is one to determine between an
apparent and a real homosexual trend? In order to succeed in that one
must purposely overlook the phenomenon of human bisexuality and be
anxious to hold on at all costs to the notion that homosexuality is
inborn and irreducible.

The transvestite last mentioned relates concerning his homosexuality:
“About homosexuality I learned for the first time through reading
the book: _Die Enterbten des Liebesgluecks_. Some passages gripped
me powerfully, even more so than the works on masochism, of which I
also had read a large number. As I had to renounce my womanly ideal
(for reasons mentioned previously), it occurred to me to seek a man as
the complement to my yearnings. For even the strongest woman wants to
be beneath man during love. But I felt I needed a partner who should
overpower and conquer me with some display of force. So I said to
myself that such a role can be filled properly only by a man. A great
deal of what I read in books about homosexuality confirmed me in this
view.”

If this is not a tell-tale rationalization of homosexuality—what may
we designate as homosexuality?

Comments are hardly needed in this connection. On all sides and
from all directions homosexuality is proven in the history of the
case. But _Hirschfeld_ finds that the tendency to homosexuality is
only apparent and that the whole foundation of the subject’s libido
consists of transvestism. The homosexuality he looks upon as an
incidental manifestation. But there are no ‘incidental’ manifestations
in our vita sexualis. A dream, which has also been reported, shows
conclusively that M., the subject, was all along actuated by the
thought: I wish I were a woman. But there are passages in this case
history showing how highly the subject esteems the male and proving
that this wish is an infantile attitude and due to a feeling of
inferiority. What else should we conclude from the statement: “For the
genuine man, who belongs to the proudest specimens of his sex, sexual
gratification is merely a hygienic requirement, a form of physical
release; beyond that his wonderful creative spirit dwells in higher
realms ... etc.”

In the chapter devoted to masochism I explain the meaning of a case
like the above more fully. The man wants to be a woman and to be
overpowered. He is able to have relations with women, if they assume
the aggressive role. His mind insists upon the fictive notion: I
am a woman and I am forced to carry out this part. Naturally he
shifts towards homosexual acts. The male trait in him tolerates no
submissiveness. The female trait lends itself readily to coercion. The
neurosis consists in this suppression of the male components of the
sexual instinct.

A careful reading of the following case history will show clearly the
homosexual roots of the tendency to personify the opposite sex:

Mrs. H. S. consults me on account of complete sexual frigidity during
her marital relations. She is twenty-four years of age and had married
at the age of 19. Her marriage was a love affair. She has always been
of a loving and sensuous disposition so that from the age of 14 her
mind was preoccupied mostly with sexual fancies and thoughts. At the
age of 15 she fell in love with an uncle. His kisses roused her passion
and she would have readily yielded to him. The father observed what was
going on and forbade her uncle the house. She lived in the Country and
met no men under circumstances which could have endangered her. She was
19 years of age when she first met her present husband and she fell
rapidly in love with him. She withstood her parents’ opposition and
married the young man in a few months. Already during her engagement
she said to her husband: “I don’t believe one man will be enough
for me. You must watch out for me....” During the first few weeks
of married life her husband was impotent, and this drove her nearly
to distraction. After her husband underwent some medical treatment
he succeeded in rupturing her hymen and in a few months she became
pregnant. For a short time during that first pregnancy she experienced
complete orgasm. After that her feeling for her husband disappeared
entirely and she felt very dissatisfied. Her whole character changed
completely. Previously she had been happy, joyous, always in good
humor. Now she became quiet, lived a retired existence, avoiding men in
particular because she was afraid of them.

Deeper investigation of the case shows that, after the death of her
father, to whom she felt attached by bonds of deepest affection, she
became sexually anesthetic. The father was a very earnest, strong man
who adored his pretty wife and he was a model of loyal and dutiful
husband. The mother was an artist who, after the death of her husband,
lost all interest in life. She could not stay alone and abandoned the
country place to live with her daughter in the City. I suspected that
the sudden onset of anesthesia probably coincided with the mother’s
arrival in the house. Might she not hide some special attachment for
her mother?

She emphasized that she felt the greatest compassion for her mother,
who had lost her support in life. For her mother’s sake she would have
gladly taken her father’s place, if such a thing were possible. And
further she declared:

“You would probably find it almost unbelievable, if I told you that I
strongly wished I were a man, at the time. I kept thinking of mother
all the time! You see—she is so pretty and young yet, so full of
life! I also know that she is a very passionate woman. How could she
get along without a man? Now, I must confess something, though it is
very hard for me to express it. You know already a number of my pet
fancies. But there is another which I have persistently kept from you
till now. I wanted to put on father’s clothes, as I have a few of them
in my possession, and to go to mother’s bed at night. I acquired a
sort of an apparatus ... for the purpose. But I did not quite have the
courage. I put on the clothes but stayed in my room. I kept standing
before the looking glass for hours, looking on.”

“Did the clothes fit you?”

“To tell you the truth, I had used some of father’s old suits for a
long time before that. I got hold of them under all sorts of pretexts.
I wrote him, for instance, that I wanted to give his unused clothes to
a worthy poor man. Then I had them altered for a figure of my size and
was glad to wear them while my husband was away. Already as a small
girl I remember I was fond of wearing my brother’s clothes.”

“Do you recollect your thoughts while you were wearing your brother’s
clothes?”

“Oh, I do. I played I was papa. For a time I felt really dissatisfied
because I was a girl. I envied all boys.”

“Later, too, after you were married already?”

“Certainly! Do you know, I have never mustered enough courage to do
something downright disloyal. But I was thinking, if I were a man, I
could never remain true. I have always envied men. In fact, with my
soul I felt myself more like a man.”

“What were your feelings during the time you were in love with your
husband?”

“I had plunged headlong into love and forgot all about my liking of
men’s clothes. During that time I felt altogether womanly. Especially
when I became a mother. Then all my dreams about manliness disappeared.”

“That was also the only time when you enjoyed your relations with your
husband?”

“I have never thought of the two things together. But you are right.
For a short time during that period I was entirely womanly, until
father died....”

“And your mother came to live with you!”

“Yes ... that is so.... Do you mean, that then I wanted again to be a
man? Now, I can confess to you that I always envied father on account
of mama. I used to think that if I were a man, I should certainly be in
love with mama.”

The further analysis reveals interesting details. Repeatedly she dreams
that she is a man and that she has a phallus. She dreams also that she
urinates standing after the manner of men. She admits that, already
as a child, she loved her mother passionately. She had also overheard
a number of times her parents getting together in bed and once she
watched them in the act of coitus, peeping through a key hole. She was
deeply excited by what she saw and thought that her mother must have
suffered great pain and that only the father found pleasure in the act.
This infantile conception of male gratification has remained with her
to this day. Her favorite expression: “If I should come again into the
world I would want to be a man.” The homosexual attitude towards the
mother deprived her of libido during her marital relations.

I suggested that she should separate from her mother but she resented
scornfully this suggestion. She would rather give up her husband.
Some time later she actually did so. She now lives with her mother. I
was greatly surprised one day, when she called on me clothed in male
attire. She requested from me a certificate to the effect that she
was an abnormal person and should be permitted to wear man’s clothes.
She had heard that in Berlin a number of women had been granted such
a permit by the police on the strength of such a statement from a
physician.

Upon being questioned regarding her sexual life she states that she now
maintains relations with a man who, before the sexual embrace, puts
on women’s clothes. This rouses great orgasm in her. Regarding her
relations to her mother her answers are elusive. But I must not think,
she adds, that she is a “Urlinde.” The thought of such persons only
fills her with disgust. Her mother is now merely her dearest friend.

It is plain that this woman has repressed her homosexual love for her
mother and is satisfied with the symbol of masculinity, the wearing of
trousers. The man whom she meets in embrace, becomes for her a woman,
through the wearing of feminine articles. Thus the two partners carry
on a comedy in which the heterosexual act replaces the longed-for
homosexual embrace.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am familiar with a number of instances in which a man dressing like
a woman, or the reverse, was the means of rousing sexual passion, or,
at least, of increasing it enormously. Whenever this happens it is
plainly a manifestation of latent homosexuality,—a condition of which
_Blueher_ appears to have a very poor opinion. Although he seems to
agree with my views otherwise (“today it is no longer possible,” he
says, “to hold that homosexuality or heterosexuality is inborn; instead
we must recognize that bisexuality is inborn in every individual, with
a special predilection in one direction or the other,”), he makes a
distinction between “healthful inversion” and an outbreak of latent
homosexuality; one condition he considers aboriginal and in keeping
with cultural development, while the other “arises out of the depths of
the unconscious, through the removal of the inhibitions....” This view
is also contrary to facts. _Blueher_, like _Hirschfeld_, is inclined
to consider latent homosexuality as ‘pseudo,’ as something unnatural,
and accordingly passes judgment upon it. The practical observations
gathered in the course of my practice do not coincide with these
theoretical assumptions. I know only one kind of homosexuality, and
that is always inborn. Also, I find it always linked intimately with
heterosexuality. Awareness of one’s own homosexual tendency or lack of
it is not a reliable guide. If the number of consciously homosexual
persons be estimated at 2 per cent., we may confidently assert that
there are 98 per cent. of persons who know nothing of their homosexual
traits, or rather that they do not want to know anything about them.

As we become familiar with the various masks of homosexuality, we learn
to appreciate surprising homosexual and heterosexual trends. I shall
draw attention merely to the manifold significance of “trousers” in
human love affairs. How often men fall in love with women only when and
because they are seen in tights! I remember a number of classmates in
high school, who had fallen in love with a singer, when they saw her
in a role which she played wearing tights. _Grillparzer_ apparently
fell in love once in his life and very passionately. It was with
the singer to whom he absent-mindedly sent his famous poem. She had
appeared upon the stage as a Cherub in tights. The woman wearing the
trousers is a by-word,—a typical compromise. Through the medium of
such compromises it becomes possible for the homosexual suddenly to
act like a heterosexual person. _Hirschfeld_, who was the first to
point out this fact, relates that a lieutenant of cavalry well known in
the circle of Berlin urnings one day surprised his acquaintances with
the announcement of his engagement and even more with the statement
he had become fully heterosexual. Previous to that time he had loved
only boys in girls’ clothes but apparently he had found a woman of
very youthful type, one who was able to satisfy both components of his
libido. Symbols at times disclose tremendous power. The trousers figure
as a symbol of masculinity. I remember the storm of popular indignation
which arose once when some change in women’s fashions threatened man’s
exclusive prerogative. The skirt and long hair are symbols of feminity.
The symbol often furnishes the bridge across which traits, otherwise
antagonistic, become fused.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following case is an illustration:

Mr. E. W. has practiced onanism since he was five years of age and
during the act was in the habit of thinking he was touching girls.
Later he masturbated jointly with other school boys. They attempted
pederastic acts, in the course of which he felt neither aversion nor
pleasure. At 14 years of age he was seduced by a servant girl, and he
went to her bed every night for a year. A poor scholar up till that
time, he became subsequently one of the best in the class. After a
time he became tired of her and he sought other opportunities which
were easy to find. He maintains that up to his 20th year he has had
intercourse with every one of the girls who served in his parents’
house, and he estimates them to have been about twenty in number. It
struck him that he could not always achieve orgasm. But he was always
potent, so much so, sometimes the girls wondered. But he would become
indifferent before reaching ejaculation. This happened to him with
fat women who excited him tremendously and at the same time failed to
satisfy him.

He began early to be interested in painting and made special efforts
to experience the feeling of love; for the petty adventures with the
servant girls did not involve the heart in the least. As he grew all
women only appeared to him to be merely objects for the gratification
of lust. He had all sort of love affairs but could be true to none
for any length of time and did not always reach orgasm with them. He
happened to try once the situs inversus and after that he found it
always possible to bring about the orgasm. Coitus a posteriori was
also a method which enabled him to attain this aim more easily than
the normal position. He was already thirty years of age when he saw at
a social affair a girl who appeared as a boy in a “living picture.”
He felt at once the greatest attraction for her. During the whole
evening he kept her in his company, and he felt animated and inspired
with the thought that he had found, at last, his soul affinity. A few
weeks later he became engaged to her. The picture of her as a boy
always floated before his mind. He married soon, experienced tremendous
orgasm during coitus and felt himself very happily married. After a
few years his potentia began to fail him and this worried him a great
deal because he loved his wife tremendously and was ashamed to confess
to her the true state of things. He became more frigid and finally his
potentia failed him completely.

He came into his wife’s room (they had separate rooms) while she was
undressing. She was in her tights, the kind in which he had seen her
in the role of a boy. At once this roused his passion and he threw
himself upon his wife, covering her with kisses, against her protests,
for she was very bashful. This happened in day time. His wife had never
consented to coitus in day time before. But this time she was taken by
surprise and as he pressed her for it, she called out, over and over:
“What is the matter with you today!” He did not tell her the reason for
his excitement; he was ashamed to request her to dress herself next
time in tights.

He called to have this remarkable occurrence explained and to be
cured of the peculiarity. Later he achieved potentia again but always
he had to think of his wife as dressed in trousers. The man was an
out-of-town resident and had come to Vienna only for the day. I was
unable to find out much about the psychic roots of this condition.
He recalled no infantile memories, but thought that the sight of
his little sister in bloomers had already roused him. He was much
interested in women’s underwear and could have easily turned into a
fetichist, one gathering a large assortment of women’s underclothes. I
advised him to confide in his wife and ask her for his sake to dress
herself in the kind of apparel which appealed to him. That was, after
all, a harmless desire which he shared with many other men.

A few years later I saw him again. He had followed my advice, and
his wife, who loved him devotedly, had finally consented, because he
could not attain erection otherwise, and she required the fulfilment
of marital relations. Since she “gave in” to her husband’s peculiar
request, she is able to rouse him to coitus as often as she desires
it. She only needs to put on tights.... He experiences the greatest
satisfaction while his wife wears tights and they assume the situs
inversus. Through such a small compromise, by meeting some specific
phantasy, it is often possible to turn an incompatible marriage into a
happy one.

This is not the only case of its kind of which I know. I know men who,
when going to houses of prostitution request the women to retain their
drawers when undressing. Others actually demand that the girls should
put on male trousers. These latent homosexuals are well known to the
prostitutes. They remain passive and expect the woman to be aggressive.
This shows they maintain the fiction that they are females and they
require relatively but little in the form of overt acts to maintain
this fiction in their mind. Many an instance of love at first sight is
induced in the same way.

       *       *       *       *       *

Case. Z. I. A man, 48 years of age, had several light love affairs,
was twice unhappily married. After the second separation—some six
years previously—he left women severely alone because he had a poor
opinion of them. He used to say: all women are worthless decoys and
it is a pity to turn a single hair grey on their account. In the
circle of women haters he was known for that reason as the decoy-man.
His physical sexual needs he satisfied with prostitutes or street
acquaintances. Beyond that he avoided women and sought only the company
of men. It was obvious that he was drifting away from heterosexuality
and leaning towards psychic homosexuality. Then it happened that he
agreed once to sit as a model for a woman artist. The sculptress was
in ordinary clothes and had made no particular impression on him.
She asked him to wait a few moments and then she stepped out to put
on her working clothes. When she reappeared, a few moments later, he
was astonished. She wore a long white coat, which covered her whole
dress, a pleasing little cap, under which she had tucked her hair to
protect it against the dust, and a pair of glasses which she wore
only when working. She appeared so attractive that he fell in love
with her that moment. He did not hide his feelings but immediately
hastened to make up on the spot what he had lost in six years of
opportunities to worship at the shrine of womanhood. She accepted his
compliments good-naturedly. He fell in love with her as he had never
been in love before. A few weeks later he proposed marriage, but she
politely refused. She had made up her mind never to marry. But he did
not give her up; on the contrary he pursued her with his attentions
and tendernesses. His club and all his cronies he abandoned. He was
head over heels in love, like a frisky boy, and held that now he knew
the meaning of love. One of his friends proposed to cure him of his
infatuation and told him in confidence that he had heard the sculptress
was a homosexual who maintained relations with a chorus girl wearing
tights. The whole town knew about it. It was an open secret. This
information had the contrary effect upon him. His passion reached such
a point that life seemed to him worthless without her. He struggled
with thoughts of suicide and told the beloved about it. This made a
strong impression upon her and she stated frankly: she would agree to
be his sweetheart, but his wife, never. For a time he fought against
accepting this compromise, desiring nothing short of a union for life.
Finally he acquiesced. She was a virgin no longer and told him that
she had already been her instructor’s sweetheart. That is why she did
not want to consider marriage. With her instructor, however, she had
never achieved orgasm. His embrace left her cold. She could achieve
satisfaction and orgasm only with the aid of _manipulatio cum digito_.

Z. I. remained faithful to her for a few years and during that time
tried several times to induce her to consider marriage. He was always
most excited when he saw her wearing the apparel which had first roused
his love for her. They always met in her studio while she was wearing
her working clothes. Finally his love cooled and he returned to the
society of his woman-hating companions. An attempt to have intercourse
with a girl in his employ failed him and he called for advice.

He believed himself impotent. But it was merely the homosexual trait
which comes to the fore at this age in various manifestations which
physicians call the climacterium of man.

Analysis disclosed that the woman sculptor was the cousin of one
of his favorite old school mates, whom she resembled closely. This
young man also wore, while at work in his laboratory, a white coat,
like the sculptress. It was this similarity that roused his libido so
tremendously. The young man had become engaged a few weeks previously.
He disapproved the young man’s step on various grounds. (A young man
should not jeopardise his scientific career on account of a woman.) He
was in love with the young man without realising it. The transference
of the feeling into a heterosexual one was mediated through the fact
that the woman looked like her cousin and the costume also helped
to transfer some of the homosexual tendencies into the heterosexual
channel.

In connection with this case I may make a few remarks about the
so-called climacterium of man and about woman’s critical period. The
psychic process is well known, in so far as it involves a parting from
one’s youth, and it has been repeatedly outlined and described. The
whole love instinct of man rebels against growing old and fosters the
utilization to the utmost of the opportunities during the few remaining
years. The milder the sexual life in the past, the greater and more
stormy becomes the need of making up for lost opportunities “while
there is time.”

But the significance of homosexuality during this critical period is a
matter which most investigators have overlooked. It may be that the
involution of the sexual glands brings the opposite sex into stronger
relief at this period. One who conceives bisexuality as a chemical
process—and there are some data apparently supporting such a view—may
speak of the conquest of man’s heterosexuality over homosexuality.
_Hirschfeld_ would say of a man: as he now produces less andrin the
gynecin achieves upper hands. Perhaps many cases of so-called late
homosexuality (_Krafft-Ebing_) may be explained in this manner. I have
known a man who, up to the 50th year of his life, has had no sexual
experiences and who was also unaware of his homosexuality. At that
age he happened to drift into the company of homosexuals and now he
is a confirmed member of the third (intermediate) sex. Possibly the
outbreak of homosexuality leading all the way to paranoia—a subject
which I shall take up more fully in another chapter—depends on changes
in the sexual glands, these changes leading to characteristic psychic
expression.

In the last case disappointment after marriage (both women proved
unfaithful to the man) induced the breaking forth of the homosexual
tendencies.

The behavior of those persons who do not care to acknowledge their
homosexuality is characteristic. So passionately do they fall in love,
their impulsion to loving is so tremendous that every new passion
surpasses all previous experiences.

This peculiarity gives us an insight into the mentality of the Don Juan
type, the desolute adventurer, and the Messalina type....

The flight away from homosexuality leads the individual to overstress
his heterosexuality (with the formulation of compromises and the
adoption of homosexual masks) but that seldom yields the satisfaction
craved by the individual. The sexual adventurer is always a person who
has failed to find proper gratification. He who has found complete
gratification becomes thereby master of his libido and knows the
meaning of satiety. When the gratification is only apparent the
craving leads soon again to new adventures. Just as the compulsory
acts of neurotics cannot be permanently removed, because such acts
are only symptomatic and stand for hidden cravings, the unsatisfied
homosexual longing which stands masked under an apparently excessive
heterosexuality cannot be completely gratified on that path. The sexual
instinct,—as _Freud_ has pointed out—is of complex character and is
seldom brought into play in its full form. Man’s unattainable ideal is
the whole instinct, undivided and unhampered in any of its component
parts; falling in love manifests the expectation of a gratification
previously unattained.

During man’s critical period—as well as woman’s—a number of
troublesome compulsion neuroses are likely to break forth and these
have been erroneously attributed to excitement, overwork, and other
secondary factors. Every compulsion neurosis appearing at this period
is a complicated riddle through which the subject aims to hide
before his own consciousness no less than before the world at large
the true significance of the psychic impulses which reassert their
supremacy at the time. Frequently back of the various symptomatic
acts it is possible to discern the clear mechanism of defence against
homosexuality.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next case shows an interesting array of symbolisms and of symbolic
acts, which are easily understood if one has the key to the psychology
of such mental processes.

Mr. B. experiences the outbreak of an acute neurosis at 60 years of
age. Suddenly he becomes obsessed with the fear of tuberculosis. He is
firmly convinced that he is a victim of the disease and the reassurance
of famous specialists quiets him only for a few days. He reads all
popular works on tuberculosis as well as the scientific works of
Cornet, Koch, and other investigators. He has worked out for himself a
systematic method for the cure of tuberculosis. He holds, in the first
place, that cold air is the best, and takes long walks out of doors,
sleeps with all windows wide open, goes to Davos and generally prefers
winter sporting places. He is a confirmed believer in the theory
of infection through particles of sputum and therefore avoids the
proximity of ... men.

“Why be afraid specially of men? May not women also carry the
infection?”

“No; women do not expectorate so vigorously. Men spit all over, women
only close by!”

“How do you know these things?”

“You see, I have given the matter a great deal of thought and I have
studied the subject. I thought to myself, coughing and urinating are
very much alike. In both operations products of the organism are
removed from the body. A woman urinates with a small stream which does
not reach far. But many men urinate with force and are able to throw
out their stream,—a distance of several feet.”

Already this statement showed that back of the fear of consumption
there stood some hidden sexual motive. B. carried the analogy still
further:

“Men are also able to ejaculate, while women only omit a little
moisture which trickles down upon their parts.... At any rate, I am
particularly afraid of infection through some tubercular man.”

I inquired into the circumstances under which this fear first showed
itself and how long he had it and in reply received the following
interesting confession:

“For a long time I lived with a nephew who occupied a separate room in
my home. My married daughter came once to pay us a visit because her
child had whooping cough and she was advised that a change of air would
be beneficial.”

(It is characteristic that he was not afraid of catching whooping
cough, although he knew of a serious case,—an elderly man who had
caught the infection and as a result was seriously ill for months. The
fear of tuberculosis thus shows itself to be a misdirected notion.)

“It became necessary for me to share with my nephew the same sleeping
room,” continued the man. “He had but recently returned from Meran and
was considered cured.... But you know, how these alleged cures turn out
upon closer examination. During the night I became uneasy and several
times I heard my nephew coughing. I noticed that he did not sleep, and
I also could not fall asleep because the thought tormented me that I
would surely catch the infection. The first thing I did next morning
was to call my physician; he laughed at me but upon my persistent
questioning he told me: ‘If you are as afraid as all that, you better
sleep in a separate room!’ I did not wait to be told twice and for a
number of weeks after that I slept at a hotel. But here too, I began to
think, perhaps some tubercular man has occupied the room before me, and
could not sleep! I had night sweats and after that I no longer believed
the physicians’ reassurances and was convinced that this was a sign of
the first stage of consumption....”

We note that the elderly gentleman had become homosexually roused
by the presence of his nephew and this craving appeared to his
consciousness masked under the form of a fear of tubercular infection.

“I could tear my hairs out by the roots, to think that I had done such
a foolish thing!”

“What foolish thing?”

“I mean, sleeping in the same room with my nephew. If I had at least
put up a Japanese screen. But, unfortunately, one does foolish things
without reflecting upon the consequences....”

B. also displays various compulsory mannerisms, the meaning of which
becomes obvious once we appreciate that, in his case, ‘tuberculosis’
really means ‘homosexuality.’ As he walks upon the City streets he
meets a man coming his way. While still at a distance he steps aside or
crosses on the other side; he no longer shakes hands with any man, not
even with his friends; one may become infected with tubercle bacilli in
that way. All places where men are seen naked or in partial undress,
such as gymnasia or bathing resorts, are breeding spots for tubercular
infection.

Moreover, B. shows some female traits in his nature. He has shaved his
beard because hairs may be nests for tubercle bacilli; he has become
emotional, whining and he is unable to arrive at decisions promptly. He
finds the fashion of wearing short coats not “dressy” and wears a long
coat that has almost the appearance of a jacket. (Similar mannerisms
are found in _Jean-Jacques Rousseau_; _vid._ his _Confessions_.)

This case is one of almost complete outbreak of femininity, closely
allied to the paranoiac forms, which will be considered more fully
in another chapter. He is also jealous of his wife and thinks he is
slighted,—that he is not given the proper degree of attention. He is
excitable, sleepless, dissatisfied with life. After a few hours the
analysis is given up.

Such persons are tremendously afraid of the truth; they wander from
physician to physician and really want but one thing: to preserve
their secret and to devote themselves more and more to their hidden
homosexuality. If the condition were once disclosed before their eyes
they could not continue their indulgence so easily. They always break
up the treatment after a few hours under some pretext or other and this
justifies the suspicion that, sooner or later, they come to regard the
physician also as a man and, transferring their homosexual attachment
to the physician they flee from the danger of being together with the
object of their love.

This case illustrates, I believe, what remarkable masks the outbreak
of the homosexual trait is capable of assuming. Similar masks are the
fear of syphilis, the fear of “blood poisoning,” and the dread of
physical contact with other persons or objects. The fear of syphilis
covers also other dreads. Formerly I thought that syphilidophobia was
only a mask for incest craving. I am now convinced that it stands
for “forbidden love” generally. Syphilis stands as a symbol either
for incest or for homosexuality. ‘Becoming infected’ means: ‘being
oppressed’ by homosexual or incestuous tendencies. These figures of
speech are suggested by the every day use of language. One hears, for
instance, that the whole city of Berlin is infected with homosexuality;
the opponents of homosexuality fight against the plague which threatens
the whole German nation; young men are warned against being infected
with homosexuality. It is not surprising, therefore, that the morbid
expressions of neuroses assume similar figurative forms.

The rise of such morbid fear during advanced age is always suspicious
of an outbreak of homosexuality, against which various protective
devices are thus raised. If I should attempt to describe all these
forms of outbreak and all the protective devices I would have to write
a special treatise on anxiety states. We well know already that all
neuroses have a bisexual basis. But, what is more, I maintain that
homosexuality plays a far greater role in the development of neurotic
traits than any other suppressed instincts.

I am now turning my attention to a character in whom homosexuality
would hardly be suspected as a motive power. I refer to the Don Juan
type of personality. The Messalina type I shall describe in connection
with my study of sexual anesthesia in woman. But the Don Juan character
deserves special attention in this connection.

One would think that a man who devotes his whole life to women, who
dreams day and night only of new conquests, who considers every woman
worth while when opportunity favors him, a man for whom no woman is
too old, or too ugly, if he desires her,—that such a man would be far
removed from any homosexual trend. Yet the contrary is the fact and
the greater my opportunity to study the ‘woman chaser’ the stronger my
conviction becomes that, back of the ceaseless hunt, stands the longing
after the male. Though many explanations have been offered for the Don
Juan type,—that prototype of Faust’s—none has solved satisfactorily
the riddle of his psyche. Only the recognition of latent homosexuality
promises to clear for us the meaning of this character.

What are the typical character traits attributed to the Don Juan
type? His easily stirred passion; secondly, his indiscriminate taste;
thirdly, his sudden cooling off. Of course, there are any number of
transitional forms and mixed stages.

I choose for examination the fundamental type, as he is known to me
through a number of concrete examples. This triad: “quickly roused,
not particular as to choice, just as quickly cooled,” admits of
numerous variations. Particularly the choice of the sexual object is
something that in many woman chasers becomes determined on the basis
of particular fetichistic preferences, such as red hair, virginity, a
particular figure, a special occupation, etc. The Don Juan collectors
of women are differentiated into various distinct classes. I knew one
who for his record of adventures specialized in widows. The shorter the
period of widowhood the greater was his ambition to make the conquest.
Only women in mourning attracted him. But beyond this point he was not
particular. It made no difference to him whether the woman was young or
old, beautiful or homely, so long as she was a widow in mourning. His
greatest pride he took in his conquest of widows on the burial day.

_Oskar A. H. Smitz_, (in his _Cassanova und Andere erotische
Charaktere_, Stuttgart, 1906, quoted after _Bloch_), has attempted
to trace a fine distinction between the Don Juan and the Cassanova
type: “Don Juan is a deceiving, cunning seducer to whom the sense
of possessing the woman, the feeling of danger, and the pleasure of
overcoming resistance and of exercising his manly strength are the
chief things, but he is not erotic, whereas Cassanova is the erotic
type par excellence; he, too, is tricky and remorseless, but he craves
the satisfaction of his sensuous needs rather than of his sense of
power. Don Juan sees only women, for Cassanova every woman is “the
woman.” Don Juan is demonic, devilish, he deliberately plans the
destruction of the women who yield to him and drives them to perdition,
while Cassanova is humane, he is always interested in the happiness of
his sweethearts and preserves of them tender memories. Don Juan hates
woman, he is a typical misogynist, the satanic type of woman hater,
whereas Cassanova is a typical feminist, he has a deep and sympathetic
understanding of woman’s soul, he is not deceived by his love affairs
but needs continual intercourse with women as the condition of his
happiness. Don Juan seduces through his demonic character, with the
brutal, and wild, attraction exercised by his uncanny power, Cassanova
achieves his conquests through the more refined gentle atmosphere
generated by his charming presence.”

_Bloch_ introduces a third type, the pseudo-Don Juan, or more
correctly, the pseudo-Cassanova,—the adventurer perennially
disappointed in his conquests, of whom Retif de la Bretonne is the
nearest widely known type. He is continually looking for the true
love and never finds it. While I admit that the seducer as a type
belongs to one of these categories, I must designate all three classes
mentioned above, that is, the Don Juan, the Cassanova, and the
would-be type of either, as bearers, alike, of a latent homosexuality.
None of them finds his ideal. Retif de la Bretonne is the perennially
disappointed type, and true love is something he can never find; in
his love he displays considerable dependence on woman. He portrays
the hopeless flight to woman and away from man. Cassanova feels all
the time impelled to prove to himself how seductive a fellow and man
he is and every new conquest gives him a new opportunity to do so.
Woman is to him but a means to enhance his sense of virility. He must
not depreciate his conquest for the glory of his achievement would be
lessened in his own eyes if he were to do so.

The Don Juan type is close to the level which leads directly to the
well known Marquis de Sade type of character. He scorns woman because
she is incapable of yielding to him all the gratification for which he
yearns. He is perennially searching for release and in that respect
bears some resemblance to the Flying Dutchman who is similarly in quest
of love and whom the quest leads eventually to death. But I cannot
concur with the idea that these types are so sharply differentiated
as _Schmitz_ and _Bloch_ are inclined to maintain. We meet the finest
gradations and the most varied combinations. Moreover individuals
change, their character shifting from one type to another by
imperceptible degrees in the course of time.

I propose to consider Don Juan as the representative of the type
of seducer, irrespective of further variations. In fact it is
characteristic of all the types mentioned above that they are alike
unable to remain loyal in their love. And, in my view, this is the most
important characteristic.

Ready excitability, scorn of womankind, latent cruelty, and perennial
readiness for love adventures are traits which show that, in the last
analysis, Don Juan represents a type of unsatisfied libido. For him the
most important moment is the conquest of the woman. In the joy of this
conquest there is betrayed something of the scorn of woman which plays
such an important role in the lives of all homosexuals—whether latent
or manifest. For the genuine Don Juan the conquest of a woman is a task
which appeals to his play lust. Will he succeed with this one, and with
that one, and with the third woman? Each new conquest reassures him
that he is irresistible, magical in his charm, so that he can say to
himself: _thou art a real man_! He must reassure himself over and over
that he is fully a man because he fears his femininity too strongly;
with the aid of his feminine trait he is the better able to achieve his
conquests among women because that trait enables him the better to feel
and know what every woman wants. He is really but a woman in man’s
clothes. His narcissistic character (the morbid self-love) requires
continually new proofs of his irresistible powers. This type of man,
one who practices all sorts of perversions on women and in this very
changing of the manner of his loving betrays his insatiable quest for
new and untried gratifications, never permits himself any homosexual
act, although he is far from particular otherwise and has run the gamut
of tasting all ugly and forbidden fruit. Homosexuality strikes this
type of man as disgusting and unbearable, he must spit out when meeting
a fellow of that kind, he would have all men and women of that kind
in jail, he would have them rooted out as one would a plague. Towards
homosexuality his attitude is emotionally overstressed, showing that
this negative form of disgust and neurotic repulsion really covers
the positive trend of longing. But at the same time he looks for
women who are mannish in appearance and who lack the secondary sexual
characteristics, thin, ephebic women, matrons and girls who are so
young as to look like children and thus represent really intermediary
stages towards manhood.

Certain aversions, which _Hirschfeld_ has described as antifetichistic,
sometimes disclose the homosexual character of their libido and the
protective means adopted against the recognition of homosexuality.
One man dislikes woman with large feet, another is repelled by women
with hair on their bodies. Such a woman causes him to have distinct
nausea. A third one is repelled by the presence of hair upon the
woman’s upper lip, or by a deep voice. There are, besides, all sorts of
transitional types. One seeks only the completely developed and typical
female figure, another is attracted particularly by the type of woman
resembling the male figure but without disdaining the former type.

His search is endless because he is truly, though secretly, attracted
by the male. His sexual goal is man. Through each new woman he expects
to experience, at last, the completely satisfactory gratification which
he craves. But he turns away from each one equally disappointed because
his libido cannot be fully gratified by any of them. In the manner of
his conquering and abandoning each woman he shows his scorn of the
sex. The true woman lover is really no Don Juan because he distributes
his sexual libido among a few women at the most and the emotional
overvaluation of these women furnishes the key to his attitude towards
the whole sex. Don Juan makes love in a manner apparently as if he
respected womankind. But the cold manner in which he dismisses his
victims betrays his complete contempt for the sex. He admires only the
women who withstand him and whom he cannot subdue. Such resistance
may lead eventually to the marriage of a Don Juan, a marriage which
necessarily proves unhappy and he continues his former life. For the
step has not furnished him what he is really seeking, man has eluded
him again.

Closer examination reveals the characteristic fact that frequently the
choice of lovers is determined by homosexual traits of one kind or
another. The Don Juan who runs after married women may be goaded on
by the fact that he likes the physical appearance of their husbands.
Naturally the thought heightens his feeling of self-esteem because it
must be a harder task to induce the wife of a handsome man to deceive
her husband than it would be to bring to one’s feet the wife of an ugly
man. A Don Juan told me once: “I have possessed all sorts of women, but
never cared for the wife of a simpleton. I have always considered it
beneath me and not worth while to deceive a fool.” Here we have a type
of man desirous to measure his wit against that of a sharp rival. (If
you are so very sharp, why don’t you look out better for your wife!)
The emphasis here is really upon the fact that he likes the husband,
admires him, and considers him a bright man. Before he makes up his
mind to get a woman he must like her husband, and he can be attracted
only by intelligent men. That condition is imperative before he engages
in any love adventure. _Maupassant_ describes this type of man in one
of his stories. The hero is interested only in married women whose
husbands attract him and are among his friends. I give the history of
an extreme case of this type in my chapter on jealousy in the present
work.

       *       *       *       *       *

H. O., 49 years of age, is undergoing a severe mental crisis. He
relates that he was happily married, until an actress crossed his
path. He fell so deeply in love he could not leave her, he neglected
his home, was unable to follow his calling and was on the point of
committing suicide. It was not his custom to cling for long to any one
woman. Usually he changed sweethearts every few weeks.

“Did you say that your married life was happy?”

“Yes; that has never troubled me. I cannot be true to any woman. I must
change all the time. I am a polygamous being. This woman is the first
to whom I feel loyal and true right along, I did not feel so towards
my wife and only a few weeks after marriage I preferred the embrace
of other women, but this sweetheart of mine,—she has taken me off my
balance entirely, to her I am loyal. Think of it! I stand for her going
with other men, who support her. Who could have told me that I would
come to this! Every little while I decide to break with her and never
see her again. I have sworn it to my wife, who is heartbroken over
the affair. But I am too weak.... Save me! Free me from this terrible
plight! Restore me to my family.”

... This man’s life history is typical of the neurotic. He understood
sexual matters and masturbated at a very early age. He began to
masturbate as early as the sixth year at school and thinks that he
can even trace the beginning of the habit to an earlier date. He had
many play mates with whom he carried on the “usual childish games.”
These “usual childish games” turned out to be fellatio, pederasty,
manual onanism, and zoophily. The children pressed into service a
dog who by licking the parts produced the highest orgasm in them.
The last homosexual love he carried on at 14 years of age. He and a
colleague performed mutual masturbation. Once the two were warned
against the dangers of masturbation and they went together to a house
of prostitution. This they kept up for a long time because it increased
their satisfaction. Often they exchanged their sexual partners. (This
is not an uncommon practice through which latent homosexuals achieve
a heightening of their orgasm and cryptically reach after their male
companion. In houses of prostitution this practice is common among
friends.)

In a short time he developed into a genuine Don Juan. At 16 years of
age he had already become a full-fledged woman hunter and succeeded
in attracting his high school professor’s wife as his sweetheart. He
went after every woman, young or old, pretty or plain. He claims that
old women have yielded the highest pleasures and shows me a letter in
which _Franklin_ advises young men to cling to old women. But this
pronounced gerontophiliac tendency does not prevent him from having
relations with girls below age, almost children. His whole thought,
night and day, was concentrated upon women. His first thought upon
rising in the morning usually was: “What adventures await me today?”
If he finds himself in a room with a woman alone invariably he thinks:
“How can I get her?” Every woman he gets hold of he looks upon merely
as a means for gratification and soon tires of her. With the exception
of one elderly woman whom he occasionally visits he has not kept
up with any woman longer than a few weeks. Often after the first
intercourse he feels disgust for his new sexual partner and thinks to
himself: “You are not any different than the others!” Since his 16th
year he has had intercourse almost daily and often several times a day.
He was 32 years of age when he first met his present wife. Her father
was his superior at the office, a man for whom he had the very highest
respect. (“There are not many such men as he.”) He married the man’s
daughter, whom he held high in esteem high above all others of her sex,
and it was a very happy marriage. His only fear was that his wife would
find out about his amorous escapades. For no woman was safe near him
and even during the early part of their married life he kept up sexual
relations with their cook. Finally he managed to control himself at
least to the extent of avoiding any escapades under his own roof so
as to be more sure of keeping his wife in ignorance of his amorous
proclivities. But he always kept on the string a lot of women and girls
who were at his disposal whenever he wanted any of them.

He became acquainted with a young man whom he liked a great deal.
But there was one thing about that young man which repelled him:
he was homosexual and proud of it. This was something he could not
understand and he endeavored very zealously to rouse in his friend a
love for women. He failed completely; on the other hand his new friend
introduced him to the local homosexual circle, in which he became
interested merely as a “cultural problem.” He frequented a café where
homosexuals were in the habit of congregating and noticed that many
among them were of pronounced intellectual caliber. He was particularly
impressed by the fact that their common peculiarity levelled so
completely persons of different social standing. A Count met a waiter
or post office clerk as cordially as he would a most intimate friend. A
few weeks later he met the sister of his new friend and fell deeply in
love with her at first sight. That was his tremendous attachment.

It was plain that contact with the homosexuals had released some of
the inhibitions which had kept back his own latent homosexuality
and the latter trait now threatened to overpower him. There was but
one safeguard against that, namely: flight into love. The attachment
to his friend became now a passionate love for his friend’s sister,
who resembled her brother very closely. During coitus with his new
sweetheart it occurred to him early to give up succubus, and to try the
anal form of gratification, and this produced in him tremendous orgasm
such as he had never before experienced.

His wife was informed through anonymous letters of the state of
affairs. Moreover he had become very weak in his sexual relations with
her and was able to carry on his marital duties only with greatest
difficulty.

Psychoanalysis brought wonderful results in this case. He learned
quickly to recognise his emotional fixations and only wondered that he
was too blind not to have seen for himself that he really loved the
brother through that woman. He broke with the actress in a dignified
manner. He proposed that if she should give up her intimate relations
with all other men he would keep his word and marry her. He still loved
her but he was no longer in the dark. She laughed in his face. Did he
really think that he could meet the cost of her wardrobe and other
needs? That put an end to the attachment. He was ashamed afterwards
to think that he should have preferred such a woman to his wife. The
analysis of a remarkable dream brought about the complete severing of
his infantile fixations.

The dream: _I am with Otto_—that was his friend’s name—_in a room. He
walks up to me and says: “Don’t you see that I love you and want you!”
I try to avoid his love pats and draw a revolver out of my pocket. I
hold it high and am ready to shoot my friend. But instead of my friend
I see standing before me my son, and my boy’s sincere blue eyes look up
at me imploringly: ‘Protect me!’ I throw down the revolver and run out
of the room._

His young friend resembled somewhat his boy to whom he was specially
devoted just before the unfortunate love affair....

This case shows that sometimes a great and passionate love arises to
save the lover from himself. There are times when it becomes necessary
to love and then the object of one’s love, though falling short of
the actual yearnings of one’s soul, becomes emotionally overvalued so
that the intoxication of love leads to forgetfulness (like every other
intoxication). Any love affair which breaks out during later life
rouses the suspicion that it is an attempt to save one’s self with all
one’s might from homosexuality. The characteristic signs of such a
love are its exaggerated and compulsory character. The lovesick man is
unable to keep away from his sweetheart; he wants to have her by his
side all the time; she must accompany him everywhere; even in sleep
he puts his hand out to his sweetheart as if to protect him from every
temptation. And I have seen cases in which the curious infatuation
was able to withstand all opposition when it must be looked upon as a
successful healing process.

In the course of analysis it not infrequently happens that those who
call for advice transfer their attachment to their consultant, feel
tremendously attached to him and in this state of emotional readiness
the first woman who happens along becomes the object of their most
intense love emotion as the shortest way out of a sexual danger. The
sexual danger in question is homosexuality.

Don Juan, Cassanova, Retif de la Bretonne,—all flee from man and seek
salvation in woman. Retif is a foot fetichist. The choice of this
fetich, typically bisexual, already indicates latent homosexuality.
Insatiable woman hunters often end their flight away from homosexuality
by falling into the deepest neuroses.

The next case history illustrated this fact:

G. K., a prominent inventor, 32 years of age, consults me for a number
of _remarkable_ compulsory acts which he must always carry out before
retiring for the night. He must prove about twenty times to make
sure that the doors are all locked. Then he goes through the house
and submits every foot of the place to the most painfully detailed
and careful search to make sure that no burglar is hidden anywhere.
He looks not only under the beds but into every box and drawer and
closet, opening and closing each one in turn, and very carefully. One
can never tell where a burglar may hide himself! By the time he has
concluded this search it is nearly midnight. The terribly arduous
procedure fatigues him for he has to look everywhere, emptying even
the book cases in the course of his search for fear that the burglar
may be hidden back of the books, and it is midnight when he crawls
into bed, although he begins his preparations around ten o’clock. Then
he is usually tormented with doubt whether he has done everything. It
occurs to him that he did not go into the nursery at all, where his
three children are asleep. The boy’s room, too, has not been searched.
Jumping out of bed he lights a candle and in his night toilette makes
his way to the children’s rooms, unable to rest any longer. The girls
are already accustomed to seeing him that way, nevertheless they jump
out of their sleep scared. In his white nightgown, like a shadow, he
moves from place to place with lighted candle in hand, looks under the
children’s bed, under the servant girl’s bed and incidentally makes
sure that no man lies by her side in bed. During these rounds every
door and every window is tried whether it is safely locked. It is now
long past midnight. Exhausted he returns to his bed. Again various
doubts begin to torture him: did or did he not try this, or that, or
the other particular door, is the gasometer safely turned off, and
again in his thoughts he rehearses every detail. His logical faculty
tells him: you have done everything, you need not have any further
concern, it is high time you went to sleep! But logic is powerless when
his doubts overpower him. Again he rises and takes a few additional
precautions which I need not detail here. Thus it may be three or four
o’clock in the morning and even later before he is finally through.
Then he lies down in his wife’s bed and wakes her up. Only after
coitus, which he carries out regularly every night, he falls asleep.
But by that time the night is over and the dawn is just breaking. He
remains in bed exhausted, often sleeping till past the noon hour, much
to his wife’s disgust. The whole house is in uproar. The children wake
up but are taken to another wing of the house because “papa is asleep
and must not be waked up!” As he is very wealthy, he has his way.
The servants are paid extra well so that they are willing to put up
with “that queer household.” Afternoons he is at work in his chemical
laboratory. His researches have made him famous. He is a very capable
chemist, possessing wonderful ideas and his patents have brought him a
great fortune.

In addition to all that he is obsessed by another compulsory thought,
which seems very extraordinary. Continually he wants to know how
everybody likes his wife and whether she is still considered a
pretty woman. Regard for her appearance is his greatest concern.
Many afternoons he spends with her in the fitting rooms of modistes
and tailors. He reproaches her for not knowing how to dress tastily,
and scolds her because she does not take proper care of herself. On
the other hand he is entirely indifferent regarding the manner of
her appearance in the house. He is greatly concerned only with the
impression his wife makes upon other men. It also disturbs him if other
women do not find his wife beautiful but he worries more if men fail to
notice her. As he dreads evenings he spends the time in the company of
friends. (Thus the ceremonial on retiring is delayed and he sleeps to a
late hour into the day.)

His chief thought is his wife’s appearance. If a man says to him: “Your
wife is charming today!” or if some stranger says to him: “Who is that
beautiful woman?” as has actually happened at balls and entertainments
he feels supremely happy. Or, if he introduces his wife to some man who
gallantly remarks later: “I did not know that you had such a charming
wife!” his happiness knows no bounds and his wife has a good time in
consequence. The very next day he buys her a costly gem, he is tender
with her and bestows upon her pleasant flatteries.

But, on the other hand, if he sees that his wife passes unobserved in
a crowd, or if there is some other pretty woman in the room, he feels
unhappy. Then he meets his wife with severest reproaches because she
does not know how to dress attractively, he growls, and raves, and is
angry for several days until another event takes place and his wife is
again noticed by men and women when he quiets down. He cannot endure to
hear that some other man also has a pretty wife. He does not rest until
he meets that woman and is happy if some one says to him: “Your wife is
really prettier.” But if he hears that another woman is praised and his
wife is not mentioned at same time he feels again very depressed and
his wife pays unpleasantly for it. His uncles—he has no brothers—all
have pretty women. His chief concern is to find out whether his wife
is really the prettiest. He asks this question frequently of his
acquaintances, in an offhand manner of course, for he would not have
them suspect his feelings for anything in the world and the opinion
of a man towards whom he is otherwise completely indifferent often
determines his disposition for the whole day. He is happy if he notices
that some one is making love to his wife. On the other hand it troubles
him if he sees there are young men around and they fail to gather
around his wife. He is not jealous because he knows his wife well, can
trust her and, besides, she is never alone. She is either with him
or in her mother’s company. That is why he is very happy to see men
gather around her. He goes with her wherever any beauty contests are
on and spends a great deal of money to make sure that his wife will win
the prize. If another woman is the winner it makes him unhappy and he
genuinely envies the man who possesses or will possess such a woman.

In spite of all that, the man is a Don Juan and was never true to his
marital vows. He maintains a second house where he receives girls and
also such of his friends’ wives as find favor in his eyes and are
willing to accept his attentions. As he is a well preserved, stately
man of most attractive appearance he is very lucky with women.

Besides that he receives a number of girls in his laboratory where he
has fitted out a room for this purpose. Not a day passes in which he
does not possess some woman—any woman—in addition to his wife. He
looks well, though occasionally a little pale, feels physically very
fresh and energetic. He works really but two or three hours a day. In
this brief time he accomplishes more than other men in a day’s grind.

The character of his sexual gratification is noteworthy. While carrying
out normal coitus with his wife, with the girls and other women he
indulges in the kind of practices which furnish him the greatest
orgasm. He gives them his phallus which they take hold of, and kisses
them, _dum puella membrum erectum tenet et premit_. He carries out
coitus if the partner requests it. But the act is interrupted and
again exchanged for hand manipulation. As he is a very potent man, he
is able to satisfy the woman and still has time to withdraw his penis
before ejaculation and put it in the woman’s hand to be manipulated
by her. There have been also various other indulgences. He has tried
everything. The form of gratification just mentioned he prefers to all
others. A certain feeling of shame has prevented him from asking his
wife to do it for him.

His anamnesis is very fragmentary. He remembers no particular incidents
of childhood or early youth. He began to masturbate very early and up
to the time of his marriage masturbated regularly every night before
falling asleep. Already before marriage he had had such compulsory
habits, but usually he was through his bed time searching in about
one half hour. At any rate he masturbated daily even when he had
intercourse with women. He never took women to his house. They always
came to his laboratory. He is greatly attached to his mother who is
yet a very attractive woman and shows great veneration for his father
who brought him up with strict but just discipline and who showed some
light neurotic peculiarities.

He recalls no homosexual episodes. He masturbated excessively and began
intercourse with women at 18 years of age; after that he rapidly became
a confirmed woman hunter but he developed a very particular taste. All
his women had to be very fair, have a pretty, round, strongly feminine
figure, a delicate tint and be, above all, very beautiful. Yet a very
white and smooth skin would make up for the lack of other points of
beauty in his eyes. With the perfectly white face he required dark,
fiery eyes. This type of beauty seems to coincide with his mother’s
who was a remarkably attractive woman and who to this day carries with
great dignity the obvious signs of her former great beauty.

He had also certain antifetichistic peculiarities. If he notices hair
on a woman’s body, for instance, at once she loses all attractiveness
in his eyes. Such a woman he finds as disgusting as a woman with a
mustache. Equally disgusting to him are all women with sharp figures
and no breasts such as remind one of a man. “A woman should be a
woman,” is his favorite remark. He despises all “blue stockings”
and emancipated women and has requested his wife to drop the
acquaintanceship of a friend of hers who had taken an interest in
various women’s movements.

In the course of the analysis he refers continually first of all to his
wife. According to him he has married an angel of patience. It takes
great love to endure this man’s moods and whims. But the wife loves
him devotedly and has learned to stand everything from him because she
knew that he loved her and she said to herself: every man has his
peculiarities. She was contented and the house vibrated with her happy
laughter. If he troubled her with his foolish reproaches she did not
pout for long. On the contrary she soon smiled forgiveness so that
their married life was really a model.

He insists that his wife is an ideal person. When early in the
course of analysis one confesses such a deep affection, the opposite
feeling, scorn, is sure to become disclosed before long. First the
advantages,—then the disadvantages. But this woman seemed to have no
unpleasant component in her nature. He could tell only favorable things
about her and about his concern regarding her beauty.

But before long—in the course of a few weeks—the tone of his talk
changed. There was another trauma about which he felt he must tell me,
something of tremendous significance which had shattered his whole
married life. At the time of his marriage he had resolved nothing
less than to give up his Don Juan adventures and to be true to his
wife. Just before marriage he had been carrying on with six different
girls at the same time and it kept him on the jump to keep each woman
from finding out about the others. He wanted to live quietly after
marriage and be true to his wife. He had also resolved solemnly to
give up masturbation after marriage. As a married man this would be
easy,—instead of masturbating before going to sleep he would have
intercourse with his wife.

Before the marriage ceremony he became obsessed with the thought
that his bride might have hair growing on her breasts. That would be
unbearable. He was on the point of demanding that his bride should be
examined by a physician but, as a man of high standing, he was ashamed
to make such a suggestion. During the bridal night he discovered a few
light hairs on her breast and a light soft down on her abdomen. He was
so shocked that he would have wanted to send her back to her parents.
For months after that he was very unhappy and every night he wept over
his misfortune. His great hope, to find a woman who would take the
place of all other women in his life, was gone.

This notion about his wife’s hairs made him most unhappy and prevented
his moral resurrection. He had planned to turn a new leaf. But he
continued to feel himself irresistibly attracted to beautiful white
women with marble-like smooth skin and no hair to remind one of a man’s
body.

The most remarkable feature, characteristic of the whole case is the
fact last mentioned.

The man is avowedly bisexual with a strong leaning towards
homosexuality. This homosexual trend was gratified up till that time
through masturbation—as he has pointed out. He sought contact with
fully developed women, to forget man. He wanted a very beautiful wife
because he imagined her beauty would serve to drive away from him
all thought of man and to focus his libido exclusively upon her. He
wanted to have the prettiest woman in the world: Helen. If his wife’s
appearance pleased other men, this so roused the homosexual component
of his libido that he enjoyed sexual intercourse with her more keenly.
Above all he wanted to avoid the thought of man. The anxiety on account
of man came over him particularly before retiring at night and it was a
morbid anxiety over masturbation at the same time. In his head, within
his brain, man was a living thought, something that threatened him and
demanded release. But this was also something his consciousness refused
to recognize and therefore the thought of man tortured him and he could
not fall asleep. He projected this intruder into his room and it led
him to search his empty closets for a non-existent man, as if saying to
himself: I have no trace of any homosexual leaning whatever! That is
what he actually told me when I referred to the homosexual significance
of his compulsory acts: such a Don Juan as I! I have devoted myself
completely to woman. The thought of man is repulsive to me.

I explained to him that disgust is but a hidden form of longing. If he
were indifferent to the thought of man it would be more convincing.

“Well then, I am indifferent to the thought.”

Thus he tried to convince me that he was not homosexual. But we
conceive that the hairs he discovered upon his wife’s body reminded
him of the fatal homosexuality. He felt so unhappy over it he was
considering a separation on that account. Whatever reminded him of man
was painfully unpleasant to him. He threw himself into love adventures
to forget man. He gave up his clubs and male companions because he
wanted to be all the time in the company of his wife.

I pass over for the present the further significance of his neurosis
as disclosed by the analysis of his dreams. I shall only give an
example illustrating how untrustworthy are the statements of those who
attempt to give an account of their lives and insist that they remember
everything accurately. This or that particular kind of incident, they
are sure, has never occurred in their life. Regarding sexual matters
all men lie consciously, unconsciously and half-consciously.

After further, continuously progressive analysis the subject himself
came to the conclusion that he must have been struggling against
homosexuality. Now he understood his sudden decision to get married,
after having maintained right along that he would remain a bachelor.
He was interested at the time in a laboratory assistant, a young man
with pretty rosy cheeks. He showered gifts upon that young man and
planned to give him an education so as to have a friend always close to
him. The first compulsory acts appeared at the time. He married, felt
unhappy for a time but for a few years he lived at least a relatively
quiet life. Then another man came into his life destroying his peace of
mind, a man who had lived for some time in foreign countries and now
returned to his fatherland. This was an uncle.

Now he recalls something of which he had not thought for many
years—for he was going to keep this from me,—namely, that he had
maintained certain intimacy with this uncle for about a year. They
lived in a boarding house where they occupied a room together. The
uncle always came to lie in his bed and they played with each other
before falling asleep.

His uncle carried out the kind of manipulations which he now required
of his women lovers: manual gratification. During his relations with
his wife, however, he wanted to avoid all thought of homosexuality; she
should not practice this form of gratification for him nor should her
body remind him of homosexuality. She must save him of the burden of
homosexuality which still plagued him under the form of onanism.

After resurrecting this memory a mass of other homosexual data came
trooping forth out of his past.

This man was strongly bisexual from childhood with particular
predisposition towards the male sex. As a child he did crocheting and
showed various female characteristics. After the onset of puberty his
homosexuality was strongly repressed, persisting chiefly under the
guise of onanism. For the act of masturbation takes place just before
falling asleep in a half dreamy state during which he thinks, though
indistinctly, of his uncle and of other men. The latent homosexuality
was the most important factor in his neurosis.

The result of the analysis was most gratifying in this case. The
subject soon abandoned his compulsory acts and was able to sleep
quietly. His life became regular; he ceased being a Don Juan. He
allowed his wife to carry out those manipulations which seemed
essential for his orgasm and for his peace of mind. Occasionally I see
him.

These observations show that in the dynamics of the “polygamic
neurosis,” homosexuality plays a tremendous role. The observation that
every love is really self-love receives new confirmation. Don Juan
seeks himself in woman and finds in her that femininity which has
turned him into a Don Juan.

       *       *       *       *       *

In his book (_Don Juan, Cassanova and other Erotic Characters_) already
mentioned (Stuttgart, 1906), _Oskar A. H. Schmitz_ states:

“Cassanova would not begrudge woman the possession of all those traits
which are called ‘male,’ through ignorance, just as he himself has
been described as possessing many female traits. The division of
mankind in men and women is a great convenience. But he who undertakes
to investigate erotic problems to their bottom must bear in mind that
there are no absolute male and female persons any more than there are
persons who are purely quick tempered, good-natured, envious, Germans
or Semites. All these designations, like Theophrast’s characters,
represent so many psychic elements which must have a name. But they
are met only in various combinations which may be compared and
contrasted with chemical combinations. I believe it is noticeable that
men of overstressed virility do not necessarily appeal to women, who
find them, instead, partly repulsive, partly amusing. On the other
hand it is certainly true that all female tempters were remarkable
for their intellect and wit—some of them were veritable amazons
intellectually—and we note in our own day with great reason the
disappearance of the “_crampon_” together with the leaning instinct of
Epheus. Even the disappearance of Don Juan may be due partly to his
overstressed virile characteristics. The erotic temperament includes
a number of female traits; such peculiarities as tenderness, vanity,
talkativeness need not interfere with his amorous adventures.”




                                  III

 Diagnosis of Satyriasis—Priapism—A case of Satyriasis—A second
 case of Satyriasis—A case of Nymphomania—Proof that the cravings
 represented by this condition are traceable to the ungratified
 homosexual instinct.

  _Wenn man die letzten Funken einer Leidenschaft
  im Herzen trägt, wird man sich eher einer neuen
  hingeben, als wenn man gänzlich geheilt ist._

  _La Rochefoucauld._




                                  III

  _So long as the last ember of a passion still glows
  in the heart it is easier to rouse a new passion than
  if the cure is complete._

  _La Rochefoucauld._


The last case has shown us that cryptic sexual goals which remain
hidden make for unrest and in spite of frequent sexual experiences
bring about a state of sexual insatiety, endless hunger, longing and
unrest. Man’s unsatisfied instinct drives him like a motor to all sorts
of symbolic acts; it induces him to taste all gratifications which are
not under the sway of inhibition, robbing him of sleep and rest.

All the symptomatic acts we have mentioned, trying the doors,—looking
under the bed, etc.—were due to the subject’s fear of homosexuality.
The doors of his soul must be hermetically sealed so that the terrible
enemy should find no entry.

The subject also displayed a number of other symptomatic acts which
richly symbolized his inversion. He turned around certain objects from
the left to the right. He felt more satisfied after doing so. Why did
he do it? Because in consciousness the right side always stands for
what is permitted, while the left symbolizes the forbidden. Some things
he turned around and upside down to see whether they would keep their
balance. If they tumbled it filled him with uneasiness, if they stood
up, he felt satisfied. Occasionally he found a vessel that kept its
balance when turned upside down. But he was satisfied if it did not
break.

His phantasy played with the possibility of turning sexuality upside
down. If the change involved no mishap it carried to him the meaning:
even if you are homosexual, you need not lose your balance, you
can keep up and stand on your feet. After such a symbolic act he
experienced promptly erection and ran to his wife who only disappointed
him because she did not gratify him enough. These men have a strong
yearning for great heterosexual passion which shall make them forget
their homosexuality. Usually imagination comes to their aid and they
find women who give them so much spiritually, that they overlook the
absence of physical attractiveness. They sublimate their homosexuality,
heighten the meaning of sexuality by endowing it with spiritual
erotism, and by means of spiritual ecstacy they make up for the lack of
physical lure.

If this transposition does not take place, if the flame blazes only
upon the physical sphere, a permanent love hunger becomes established
known as satyriasis. This condition must be differentiated from
priapism which is caused solely by organic conditions and consists of a
more or less continuous state of erection.

Priapism is often brought about by diseases of the _corpora cavernosa_,
by diabetes and diseases of the spinal cord, and is a condition very
unpleasant to the sufferer. Here the instinct is not brought into play,
the excited organ requires nothing,—it is merely unwell. The psychic
impulse is entirely lacking. The subjects feel their condition as
something painfully unpleasant, they cohabit merely to get rid of the
troublesome erection. On the other hand, the victim of satyriasis is
continually impelled to seek gratification and it often happens that
he is unable to carry on intercourse because erection fails him. The
impulse is psychic rather than physical. Satyriasis is an attempt to
exhaust a psychic impulse through the physical channel. A transference
of priapism into the psychical sphere, that is, the establishment of a
disposition along this path on the basis of a priapistic excitation, is
something I have not encountered.

Satyriasis may be produced in a number of ways. We have seen already
that persons with sadistic fancies, necrophiliac tendencies and with
all sorts of infantile misophilias may be addicted to masturbation.
In all these cases, if onanism is given up, a condition develops
resembling satyriasis. What these persons seek is a transference of
their libido upon the normal path. At the same time my observations
enable me to declare that the various conditions mentioned are
overshadowed by the significance of latent homosexuality. The most
important as well as the most powerful driving force is homosexuality.
But I also know of a homosexual in whom the latent heterosexuality has
broken forth as a satyriasis directed along homosexual channels.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall now turn our attention to a case which illustrates many of
these points:

Mr. Alfred V., clerk, 26 years of age, complains of a long array of
nervous symptoms. In the first place there is his inability to attend
to his work. He is without employment, because he is unable to hold on
to any place. He cannot concentrate his thoughts as his mind turns all
the time to women.

In the morning, as soon as he wakes up, his first thought is: I could
enjoy a woman now! He thinks this over and finds that, after all, it is
too early in the day. He goes to the restaurant and there looks over
the morning papers. It is almost too much for him to do even that.
Usually he only glances over the news of the day and then turns to the
want ads, particularly those marriage offers and “personals” with more
or less pointed allusions. Several hours pass that way and meanwhile
he looks at the women passing by the window. Then he takes a walk
and tries to talk to the girls he meets and to strike up acquaintance
with them. If he finds that they are after money he breaks up his
talk with them. He would rather take a real prostitute than pay a
half-prostitute. Occasionally he finds a girl who meets his wishes.
Then he goes with her to a hotel, although it is still forenoon. For a
short time after that he is more quiet and he even feels that he could
work an hour or two. But soon his restlessness seizes him again which
is always at first a purely psychic urge. It is not erections that
trouble him, but craving and unrest. He attains erection only when he
is with the _puella_. His _potentia_ varies. Sometimes he is through
very rapidly, sometimes he requires a half hour before he accomplishes
erection and orgasm. Again he may indulge in coitus several times in
succession, although he feels quieted down after the first.

This condition he naturally describes as painful and unpleasant. He
tries to interest himself in art and science, as other men do; he would
also like to carry on intellectual conversations. But he can only think
of “obscenities” to talk about. The more foolish and cynical the better
he likes them. He feels impelled to use the grossest expressions,
especially before prostitutes and doing so brings him great pleasure.

He also has fits of anger during which he is almost beside himself. If
something is not to his liking it makes him raving mad. At such times
he is likely to break out with violence, for instance, destroy a chair,
or hurl things through the window regardless of the danger of striking
some passer-by, and he may say the most awful things to his landlady.
He has had many quarrels and violent scenes have been caused on account
of his uncontrollable temper.

For some months he kept a fairly good job but had to quit because he
talked back to his office chief, using bad language. It always made him
mad to have work piled up on him. Work is a red rag to him. He found
on his desk twenty letters which had to be done. Instead of settling
down to work he began swearing. What did the folks think anyway? How
did they expect one man to do it all? The very impertinence! etc. After
several hours of fuming that way he fell to his work. Then everything
was all right and he got through fast enough for he always finished his
work before all others in the office.

He wondered that he was not dismissed from that office long before. His
chief had the patience of an angel. Finally even that man’s patience
was exhausted and he was discharged. After that he could find no
permanent employment. He kept a job a few days at a time; then the chip
on his shoulder would cause him to be discharged.

He related his sexual life in great detail; of particular importance
is his statement that he never had anything to do with homosexuals;
though he well knew there are homosexuals. Such folks were “beasts” who
inspired him only with disgust....

We allow here Alfred to speak for himself. In the account of his life
there are a number of observations which are characteristic of the
whole man:

“I remember nothing of my early childhood. What happened during that
time I cannot recollect; my earliest memories date from the time when
I was already in school. I only know that both parents were nervous. I
lost one brother early, I know nothing of the circumstances. There were
a number of insanities in our family, especially on father’s side.

“My sexual feelings asserted themselves at a very early age. I remember
that when I was seven years old I played with myself before father,
without any feeling of shame, because I did not know that it was wrong.
Father scolded me and forbade me doing this. But his threats only
had the effect of forcing me to continue under cover what I tried to
do openly before him. I believe that my power of concentration and
my ability to work were impaired already at that time. From playing
I merged quickly into systematic masturbation, a habit in which I
indulged excessively. At ten years of age we had at school a regular
ring of masturbators and we carried on all sorts of things jointly. Nor
did we limit ourselves to manual handling....

“At about that time I had terrible nightmares. I saw wild animals,
was overcome or bitten by them, thieves wanted to kidnap me, and in
my dreams I often saw my father coming after me with a great long
stick. These nightly dreams tortured me considerably, every night I was
feverish and bathed in sweat.

“In the morning I had an ‘all gone’ feeling. I gazed blankly before
me at school always holding my hand on the penis,—in fact, I often
masturbated during class. I became less and less able to concentrate
on the work or to carry on my school tasks. In various ways I
attempted first to keep up with the work and then I tried all sorts of
makeshifts to avoid my school duties. As early as at that age it was
characteristic of me that what interested me I had no difficulty in
doing. I learned easily but only subjects which I was not taught in
school. Thus, for instance, as a boy I became interested in mineralogy,
astronomy and botany, and I acquired quite a fund of information on
these topics. I should have never learned a hundredth part of what I
knew about the subjects if they had been drilled into me at school....
Everything that was a duty seemed unbearable to me. Work was a hard
duty and always unpleasant. Therefore I got along rather poorly in
school. I reached the status of a one-yearling (the privilege to do
but one year military duty) only with the aid of home coaching and by
the use of influence. And I attained that privilege only at the last
moment, during my twentieth year, when I faced the danger of having
to serve three years. In a few weeks I prepared and crammed, so as to
pass my examinations because I knew that, unless I did, I would be in
trouble. I always went to extremes that way, the midway never appealed
to me. I would pour over my astronomical books for five hours at a
stretch or devote myself uninterruptedly to my plants and my collection
of stones, but if I spent a half hour upon my school lessons it made me
mad and in my fury I tore the note book.

“My memory for past events is poor. But some incidents, here and
there, I recall very vividly. For instance, I remember nothing of a
journey through Thuringen which I made with my uncle when I was ten
years of age. I was like in a trance during that journey. I made that
same journey a second time and then I recalled of one spot that I had
already been there. There was a stone there where I had tripped and
fallen during the first journey.

“As a boy I was often punished for my laziness and I was even strapped
for my obstinacy. I thought I was treated unjustly for I considered
my lack of concentration as something I could not help. I was always
restless, perennially moody, sometimes very joyous and again very
depressed.

“Masturbation I carried on excessively. I masturbated daily—seldom a
day passed,—sometimes several times daily, up to the 21st year, when
I first had intercourse. Then I decided to give up onanism. At first
I had only normal intercourse and felt great satisfaction. But I had
to do it very often or my nerves would be all to pieces. During my
military service I felt excellently well. I endured easily all sorts of
physical exertion and I was very proud of my uniform. As I am very tall
and well built I attracted attention in my uniform and the girls looked
at me and this made me very proud. But I continued masturbating at the
time and avoided intercourse. During the service I was often nervous
when I had to carry out an order or if I was kept at one station for
any length of time. I pressed myself forward wherever I could, and
finally a horse kicked me and I used that accident as a chance to
be freed of the service and received for some time the accident pay
granted under the circumstances.

“If I am able to get the best of some one, especially of some one in
authority, it pleases me beyond measure.

“After the military service I took a position. As I had intercourse
daily with women I was in good condition to keep up my work. But I
could not endure to have two tasks piled up on me at the same time. I
could do only one thing at a time. I was not easy to get along with and
had to change positions because I quarreled with my chiefs and because
I always avoided hard work. Then I came to Vienna and got a place which
I kept for some time. The business interested me, because it dealt with
an article which appealed to me. Here I began to grow restless and my
uneasiness increased when we removed to Berlin. Normal intercourse no
longer satisfied me. I became acquainted with a French woman who became
my sweetheart and with whom I practiced all sorts of perversities. I
became more and more unstable in my work, often neglecting it for hours
at a stretch. I do not know whether that was on account of the Berlin
air, which did not agree with me, or because of an accident I met with
on the railway. I gave up my position, that is, my chief advised me
to do so, although it was a responsible position of great trust, of
which I was very proud, especially as my father had bonded me heavily.
But I grew more and more restless, it drove me continually to women.
I had nothing else on my mind and I wracked my brain to think of new,
unheard of perversities to try out. I even tried _podicem lambere_ and
for a time this brought me great satisfaction, but it quieted me only
for a few hours. Then I turned again to Friedrichstrasse looking for
the other girls I kept on string besides my regular sweetheart. These
adventures required a great deal of money, only a part of which I was
able to earn at the time. It was to me always a pleasant thought that
father had to pay for my indulgences.

“My unrest reached its highest point when my father came to Berlin to
see me and I lived in Charlottenburg. I had a formidable anxiety about
meeting him and so it happened that he was mostly alone and saw me
but seldom. He did prevail upon me to see a specialist who promptly
put me in a sanitarium. While there I was much more quiet, but only
outwardly. Within me the old struggle kept on as usual. The physician
ordered me to give up women for a time because I was super-excitable
and indulgence would harm me. I was abstinent for a few weeks but
thoughts troubled me every night and I was plainly afraid of losing
my mind. Then I turned to my old remedy, onanism. I did this in spite
of the fact that the physician and the specialist both declared that
my condition was due to excessive masturbation. I was torn between
conflicting thoughts at the time but noticed that I became more quiet
after masturbating. At any rate after three months of sanitarium
treatment I was still in no condition to work. I am depressed and life
loses its zest the moment I turn to work. After the first few minutes
my mind turns to women and I must interrupt whatever I am doing and
run into the street. Leaving the sanitarium I returned to Vienna where
the old vicious cycle began once more. I made the round of physicians
and was given any quantity of bromides. Neither the medicines nor the
various hydrotherapic courses helped me in any way. Only if I have
intercourse about three times during the night do I feel a little
quieted down in the morning. Then I am a little more alert and can work
for a short while. But already on the following day, usually the first
thing in the morning, the old trouble reasserts itself. I am irritable
and depressed. After a coitus which does not gratify me I feel worse
than ever. Then I am tremendously excited and want right away another
woman who might satisfy me better. Sometimes I long for true love and
for the companionship of a lovely being. I then feel the terror of
loneliness fastening upon me. I literally pant for air and again rush
to the street where temptations meet me. I feel as if something within
me has taken possession of my soul driving me on from one adventure
to another. Personally I am inwardly inclined towards everything that
is noble; but something within me compels me to act as a bad and evil
person.

“I believe I am like a man who is the victim of an insatiable hunger.
I have often thought of poor Prometheus, condemned always to linger in
hunger and thirst. In the same way I feel within me an unquenchable
thirst for love and its pleasures and I have no other thought than to
satisfy this thirst in some way. I feel like a mechanism destined only
to serve the penis in its demand for gratification.

“I have often resolved to change. But I am unable to carry out any
resolution, I cannot undertake a thing. I can only hunt after women.
_Ich kann nur coitieren_, (I can only ——,) every other activity about
me is in a state of suspension. I am uncertain and vaccilating about
everything. Today I feel a little religious twinge, tomorrow I poke
fun at church and priest. Today I decide to learn something new or to
find a job, tomorrow I think something else entirely. I want to buy a
new hat. I decide today to go to a certain store. I go to the place but
linger before the windows, unable to make up my mind to step in. “No,”
I say to myself, “I don’t want to buy a hat just yet.” And meanwhile I
also think about women for that is a subject which never leaves my mind
for a moment. I stroll up and down the street watching the hundreds of
women before I make up my mind to speak to one.

“I draw no distinction between old and young, pretty or plain ones. I
weigh the matter over considerably but in the end I pick up the first
one that comes along. If it only quieted me! But it lasts only an hour,
sometimes, at best, a whole day, then I must rush out again to the
street and hunt. Sometimes I cohabit with three women in a day.

“My worst time was when I had gonorrhea (not yet completely healed). I
was forbidden to have intercourse for a time. But I could not listen
to the doctor, because I was afraid that I would go literally to
pieces. I kept up intercourse right along and was inwardly glad to
think that so many others will also have to suffer what I suffered.
Then I felt remorse over my meanness, I felt myself a reprobate, a
criminal, and resolved that I must change my ways. I fell into a deep
depression and for a few hours I was free of my usual erotic thoughts.
Then they started again and the same thoughts now plague me night and
day as before.” ...

       *       *       *       *       *

We have listened to the poor man’s terrible confession. His hunt after
gratification has that tragical quality which the poet has so fittingly
expressed: “_Und im Genuss verschmacht’ ich nach Begierde._”—“And
I starved with yearning even while I tasted.” The deep depressions
indicate that this trouble is approaching a crisis. For the depressions
occur at closer intervals and satisfying experiences are more rare.
That is also the reason why he seeks professional advice. He feels that
this cannot go on. He cannot and does not want to endure life under
such conditions. He wants to work like other men and to be capable of
turning his mind to other matters than sexual.

Two things stand out in the patient’s account. First, his complete
amnesia regarding his first journey through Thuringen, as pointed out
by himself—except for the slight accident of tripping—and next, the
fact that his condition became so much more serious during his stay in
Berlin, when he was already on the way to get well. He had given up
masturbation of his own initiative, substituting for it intercourse
with women, he was working, he held a responsible position, and kept
up his work, according to the statement of his superiors in office, in
spite of disturbances ... then suddenly his condition made a turn for
the worse. Some strong impression or unusual experience in Berlin must
have brought on this sudden change.

It is noteworthy that the subject denies having ever carried on any
homosexual act. He claims such men only fill him with extreme disgust.
The childhood experiences, of course, do not count. All children did
the same things; one would conclude that all boys were homosexual. As
a matter of fact they are married and happy, most of them heads of
happy families. “I have a frightful passion,” he says, “exclusively for
women. Men do not exist for me.”

At night he dreams:

_I see a turbulent ocean before me. The waves are in continuous
agitation. I think to myself: it were a pity if the waves ceased their
agitation. A ship passes by, and the boat carries everything that I
love. I believe my mother is also upon that ship. There is an orchestra
playing on board: “Oh, how could I possibly leave you!” I awake feeling
sad and depressed._

Such a dream is a resistance dream and indicates that the subject does
not want to get well. His soul is an ocean, continuously in a state of
agitation. “I think it a pity that the waves should cease,” means: _I
do not want to become quiet at all!_ The boat symbolizes the illness,
the neurosis. His neurosis covers everything he loves, including his
mother; and should he give up all that? Impossible! He cannot renounce
his infantile sexuality. He wants to remain a child and be ill.

The analysis is carried out under very great resistance but
satisfactory progress is made. I want to outline the results limiting
myself to the most important points.

His sexual life comes more and more to light. It appears that in his
free account he covered under silence a important form of pleasurable
gratification because he was ashamed of it. He indulges in a very
curious form of infantile sexuality. The habit must be widespread but
in this form I have met it only twice.

Every two weeks he does as follows: he lies down in bed dressed in his
underclothes and defecates. Then he lies in his stools for several
hours. After that he takes great pains to remove every trace. He washes
the drawers and the shirt or he burns them up. At the baths, where he
is always very excited sexually he does the same thing. He does that
there more readily because the means are at hand for cleaning himself
afterwards. He usually takes along a package of clean linen. At the
public baths every cabin has a couch. He lies down and allows his
bowels to move. There he lies feeling very satisfied and masturbates
or has a spontaneous ejaculation. Then he bathes to clean himself and
the package of soiled linen he throws into a river or anywhere where it
disappears quickly.

In these scenes he reproduces the infant in swaddling clothes. He even
presses the covers tightly around him so that he cannot move, to give
himself the illusion of being tied down. He repeats the infantile
scenes of cleaning by the mother, during which in his fancy he plays
the double role of mother and child.

He struggles with greatest anxiety against this remarkable paraphila
but always submits to it in the end. The longest interval up to
the time of the psychoanalysis was four weeks. After that “orgy of
filth,”—as he calls it—he feels depressed and is ashamed of himself.
He has not mentioned this to a living soul and even the physician at
the sanitarium knew nothing about it. He went through this act several
times not at the sanitarium, but in his room because the baths were not
private. When discussing sexual infantilism we shall learn of several
similar cases. His attitude towards his mother is very changeable but
not so emotionally tense as his relations with his father. He carries
on a quiet and occasionally affectionate exchange of letters with his
mother, but with his father, never. He is to a certain extent fond of
his mother. As he tried masturbation in front of his father as a child
so now he keeps nothing of his sexual life secret before me. He relates
frankly everything. As a child he loved his mother very much and often
wished to be with her. His mother is now an old woman, partially
paralysed. Nevertheless he noticed during his last visit home that
she is still a pretty woman and repeatedly felt impelled to approach
her.... At such times he treats her very roughly and scornfully, and is
inclined to make fun of her and her age. He has had repeatedly affairs
with old women. At his last lodging place there was an elderly woman,
whose face was badly wrinkled, with whom he became intimate but after a
short time he sought a quarrel with her and moved out. That is the way
he behaves with everybody. He quarrels over some trifle, becomes very
excited and makes a terrible scene. Then he is through with that person
for good.

We shall see that this is his way of protecting himself against
temptation. He quarrels only with persons with whom he has pleasant
relations and who play some role in his sexual fancies. That is also
how he parts from his mother, for he usually leaves her after a bitter
quarrel. This is also why his parents let him dwell among strangers,
although they think a great deal of him. His letters are sufficiently
irritating but easier to endure than the scenes he creates when at home.

His attitude towards his father is worse. He is easily moved to anger
when speaking of him. He makes copious use of vile terms when referring
to him. Such expressions as “the old rascal,” the “miserable thief,”
are customary with him when speaking of his father. He knows no reason
why he should feel so bitter towards his father. That is, he gives
a thousand reasons but all trivial and hardly relevant. The father
brought him up badly; the father is responsible for his condition; the
father is wealthy, nevertheless complains always that he has nothing;
the father lives only for his mother and cares nothing for _him_. He
wants to make himself independent and wants to get money from his
father for that purpose. The very thought that his father may deny him
the money makes him angry: “I shall go to him and kill him and shoot
myself.” Such murder fancies are not infrequent about his father.

How close the neurotic is to the criminal! Against his father he raises
all sorts of complaints, equally unreasonable. One day he called on me
to say that, having passed a sleepless night he has figured out at last
the reason for his illness: the father has murdered his brother! The
brother was incurably ill and a burden to his father. He knew it well
and had decided to go home and confront his father with the truth,
then demand his share of the inheritance. Even as a boy it was clear to
him that the father had deliberately put his brother out of the way.
The father always felt uncomfortable when the talk turned to the boy
and always tried to avoid the subject.

He judges his father according to his own inner self. He carries within
himself the soul of a murderer, as the pathologic strength of his
instinctive cravings already indicates. The suspicion directed against
his father is determined psychically by the fact that during his own
youth he wished his brother’s death because he did not want to have any
competitor for household favors and he knew well that the fortune would
have to be divided between them. But he was not the kind of man who
would consent to dividing anything. He wanted everything for himself
exclusively. He wanted his brother out of the way and had actually
indulged in various fanciful dreams how to go about it. Now he shifted
his fancies over to his father, while for himself he conjured up an
attitude of sympathy and regret whenever his brother was mentioned. He
is most unhappy because he has no brother, his father has robbed him of
what was most precious in his life. Had his brother lived he would not
be ill, only the realization of his father’s deed is what brought him
to such a state. The father passes for a prominent person and enjoys
a high position in his community, he has been mayor of the town, but
should he start proceedings against him, the father would land in jail.
He is filled with jealousy because his father has done so well; his own
incapacity he explains away chiefly on the score of his illness.

It takes a long time for the original love of the father to come to
the surface, back of this thick cover of hatred and jealousy. But the
masking layer melts, surely though slowly, and meanwhile explanations
for which the subject is as yet unprepared would do more harm than
good. The art of analysis consists in showing up only so much as
reveals itself from time to time. Our subject is not yet prepared to
see that he is in love with his father. Nevertheless he begins to talk
about his father’s preeminence and other favorable sides, the man’s
knowledge, his great library, etc.

Gradually the father’s picture looms up in terms more and more
favorable. The subject relates pleasant episodes from youth, when he
botanized along with his father who introduced him to the science; he
withdraws his murder notion, admitting at last that it was only part of
his over-heated fancy. At this stage when he takes me for the _locum
tenens_ of his father, he assumes an aggressive attitude towards me
and uses an expression which amounts to an insult. I had already made
clear to him that he sees his father in me. Now he undertakes to treat
me as he would his father. At once I break up the analysis. Three
days later he returns remorsefully and begs forgiveness. It will not
happen again, I must not leave him in the lurch, he cannot stand this
condition any longer, and I must save him. That was the only conflict
I ever had with him; after that he behaved well and to this day he
shows himself appreciative and filled with gratitude. He was ready
to recognize how strongly his homosexuality determined his attitude
towards his superiors, towards his father, as well as towards me. He
now sees it clearly. He admits he practically fell in love with his
last chief and that is why he had to quit the place. He relates a dream
which he had kept to himself till then, and which shows his homosexual
attitude towards me, and admits that during childhood he had idealized
his father and loved him deeply.

We learn more than that. We find out what brought on his turn for the
worse at Berlin. At his lodging house there was a young boy 14 years
of age, very attractive, whom he coached evenings. He began to play
with that boy. He masturbated him and was masturbated by the boy in
turn. The relationship kept up for about three months. These were the
first three months of his stay in Berlin. Then he felt remorse, sought
a quarrel with the landlady and moved out. From that moment began his
insatiable craving for women. It was his last homosexual period. He had
led astray other boys before that one and always gladly introduced
them to the habit. A court case in which the defendant was sentenced
for a similar offence decided him to give up the homosexual practices.
He never repeated them after that Berlin episode.

His satyriasis developed on account of the repression of his homosexual
tendencies. Back of his morbid passion for woman stood his ungratified
longing for man.

The subject now sees clearly that he carried on with the boy the act
which he expected of his father. His hatred of the father is reversed
love. In the chapter devoted to sadism we will describe more fully this
relationship between father and son.

Our subject expected his father to do with him what he did with the
boy. It shows how little credence we should lend a patient’s first
statements. Presently numerous similar episodes come to the forefront
and soon we learn that his greatest desire at one time was to procure
a pretty boy for himself and that boys roused him more than girls.
He seeks the company of women to forget all about his inclination
towards boys and hopes to overcome his homosexual tendencies through
excessive heterosexual experiences. His craving for women, his
obsessive thinking about them, serves only as a means to prevent his
mind from reverting to the other sex. Compulsory thoughts often serve
the purpose of preventing other thoughts from intruding. This is the
law of resistance which plays such a tremendous role in the mental life
of neurotics. In the course of treatment he transfers upon me all his
passion—as was to be expected. He has some dreams,—which he relates
with great difficulty,—during which he sees me naked and handles my
penis or even carries out _fellatio_. He now recalls passionately
watching his father, also how happy he was to go bathing with him,
and how he liked to hide in order to see his father’s phallus. The
dissolution of this transference and reference back to his father he
does not like at first, but it becomes more and more pronounced as we
proceed. He is now abstinent for a week at a stretch and no longer
chases after women although I gave him no particular advice on this
point. The consciously acknowledged homosexual leaning has no need for
this cover. As leaning comes to surface openly it is openly overcome.
He again experiences anxieties. His landlady tells that he is heard
tossing and groaning and even crying out in his sleep. He is now
sentimental and soft, becoming greatly changed in character, to his
advantage. Again he goes to the theatre and reads books,—things he had
not done for years. His letters to his father are more quiet in tone
and sympathetic. He becomes economical and spends less than his father
sends him.

Then something happens which promises to mark a new epoch in his life.
It is a typical experience of these men during treatment. As the
infantile ties are loosened in the course of the analysis they fall in
love.[17]

Our subject is in a state of highest preparedness towards love. His
homosexuality, which had been completely repressed—he no longer took
any interest in boys—was again manifest. He now played his trump card.
He fell in love with a girl who was to replace for him all other women
as well as all thought of man. This happened in so remarkable and
typical a manner that it is worth while to report fully the occurrence.

He was still in the habit of accosting girls on the street, even if
for no other object than sheer amusement. One evening he came across
a demure little girl who looked rather like a young boy, boldly spoke
to her and fell deeply in love with her on the spot. In three days he
declared himself her beau and six days later they became engaged. He
thought of nothing else but his sweetheart. As if bent on revenging
himself on me and on his father he spoke of nothing else but his love
and his new found happiness. The satyriasis was replaced by a psychic
intoxication even more powerful. He picked up a girl belonging to an
ordinary family to punish his parents. He chose that girl although she
was no longer _virgo intacta_ (because this did not interest him). He
told that to his parents and it was, he felt, the strongest revenge and
punishment he could bring upon them. They thought a great deal of their
social position; and now, their son was marrying the daughter of a
motorman, a girl without any education and who served as clerk in some
store. And he threatened his parents that he would take his life unless
he could marry the girl. He would marry her without their consent. His
love was so great,—such a love never had its equal in the world! The
very thought that his father might try to prevent the marriage made him
raving mad and he talked of violence and murder.

I advised the father to disarm the son by placing no opposition in his
path. He should make but one condition: the son must support himself
and his wife. Only a man capable of maintaining a wife has the right
to marry. I took the same attitude explaining to the young man that he
must make himself independent of his father through his own labor. He
perceived plainly that the idea of maintaining himself through his own
labor did not appeal to him. His greatest pleasure was the thought that
his father had to pay every time he went out with a woman and that he
was squandering his father’s money.

At this time he confesses to me that he was about to get married once
before. It was in Berlin, shortly after the homosexual relations
with the young boy. He became acquainted with a girl who kept up
intercourse with him. This girl he wanted to marry and his father
went through the same trial with him. He could not think of a greater
revenge. Such subjects show this trait again and again. It is not the
only case of the kind that I have met. The occurrence is common and
every experienced nerve specialist is called in consultation over
similar problems several times in the course of a year. That girl
was the Frenchwoman who introduced him to all forms of paraphiliac
practices. The father, naturally indignant, threatened to disinherit
the son. That was precisely what our patient was looking for. He was
afraid only of a soft-hearted father and he managed always to rouse his
anger as a sort of protective screen between himself and his father.
The patient also felt that his father scorned him. During the Berlin
episode he clung to his Frenchwoman, did not rest until his father met
her, wanted always to keep in her company and was afraid of being alone
with his father.

At this point the subject’s journey to Thuringen with his father came
up through numerous associations. He accompanied on that journey not
his uncle, but his father, and he now recalls that during the trip he
frequently occupied one bed with his father, and that it made him happy
to think that his father took him along instead of his mother.

It will be recalled that previously he remembered only the incident of
slipping on a stone. That is really a “Deckerinnerung.” The fall covers
other incidents: It stands for a fall into sin. I must point out that
the subject also links the return of the trouble and its aggravation
to an alleged fall. The accident happened in a merry go round. He fell
unconscious but after a short time came fully to himself and returned
to the sport. The accident could hardly have been a serious one. At any
rate the riddle of a fall belonged to the fancies with which he had
beclouded his journey to Thuringen. The fiction established itself in
his mind through his occupying one bed with his father in the course of
that journey and his substituting the father for the mother. His dreamy
mind conceived the companion as a woman, as the mother, and added the
fiction of a fall into sin, symbolically represented by the trivial
incident of an actual fall.

He now finds himself in a new homosexual danger. I see him daily and he
tries by various tricks to induce me to give him a physical examination
and to show me his penis. He thinks he has again gonorrhea, perhaps he
has phthiriasis, I ought to examine him, it would be foolish for him to
go to another physician for that. I explain these symptoms and the man
confesses that he has indulged also openly in fancies in which I played
a role. And now he takes revenge by telling me about his bride and
dwelling on her tenderness for hours. He has no other theme for talk.
He must always have her near him to feel quiet. She must not leave
him for a moment. Day and night he wants to hold her hand ... thus he
insures himself against homosexuality.

Finally I tell him I shall give up the psychoanalysis if there is
nothing else to come up. Then, lo! his talk turns to other matters.
He knows now that his engagement is a defence measure against his
homosexuality and his filthy onanistic acts. But he also sees that in
his bride he has found a surrogate for his mother. He surrounds her
with tenderness like a man who truly loves, and presently his psychic
intoxication turns into a deep and true affection. He still has serious
quarrels with his bride. He still storms against his father and against
all authority. He is an anarchist at war with all authority and assumes
an obstinate attitude towards everybody. But his father, apprised by me
of the true situation, keeps his temper and thus disarms his son. Thus
the engagement no longer serves the object of worrying the parents.
His parents apparently let him have his own way, insisting only that
he should go to work. I doubt his ability to get to work and express
to him my sympathy. He wants to show me that he can work. At every
opportunity I sympathize with his bride, a quiet, brave little woman.
He will surely abandon her. He cannot keep true. Not so! he declares.
He is going to show me that he can be true.

In a few weeks he finds a position and does his work so carefully and
diligently that his condition is greatly improved. Then he marries and
in every sense of the word becomes a new man.

But there was a great deal more to do. His paranoiac notions of
grandeur, his feeling that he could do anything which others may not,
his obstinacy and his rebellion against all authority were gradually
replaced by social tendencies. He became modest and agreeable....

His complete recovery, he learned early, depended on his keeping away
from his parents. A short stay in the old home roused all the old
antagonisms and he resolved to stay away so as to keep on friendly
terms with his parents.

At first all his affection was centered on his bride and he did
not wait for the marriage ceremony.... He attained unbelievable
accomplishments.... But this did not continue for long and soon he
quieted down and had intercourse with his wife at regular intervals....
Pregnancy and childbirth made it necessary for him to keep away from
her for a time and he did so easily enough, without being untrue to her.

I do not know how long this improvement will last. He has kept his
place for the past three years with dignity and honor, and is today
a quiet, brave man who shudders when he thinks of his past. His
parents have reconciled themselves to his marriage and the birth of two
grandchildren has ratified in their eyes the inevitable fact.

The character of satyriasis is richly illustrated by this case. We see
also why the Berlin air did not agree with the subject. There he was
in danger of becoming overtly homosexual. In one Berlin office where
he worked there was a homosexual who wanted to introduce him to his
circle. He took a sudden liking for his chief of whom he grew daily
more fond. The other men in the office made him jealous and he resorted
to quarreling, using vile talk. Finally he broke with his chief as a
defence against the pent-up feelings within himself.

It is interesting to note that during his relations with the young
boy he identified himself with his father. He carried out the act of
seduction which he vainly expected to be acted out by his father. His
identification with the father went so far that he felt himself aged,
tired, played out and he thought he might not live long. During his
coprophiliac acts he played the role of a suckling.

It is interesting to observe what role he assumes now while in love
with his wife. A few remarks on that point may not be out of place here:

During the first stage of his infatuation the subject identified
himself with his mother, while the young woman stood for a boy, mostly
himself. He acted out the love scenes between mother and son and he
was surprised to find himself capable of such motherly feelings. He
emphasized his strong femininity. He had, he thought, womanly hips,
scant beard growth, gynecomasty (full breasts). Organically he was of
that bisexual type which careful examination of the neurotic never
fails to disclose. He was also attentive, gallant, dainty and mannerly.
Sometimes the bride was the mother and he played the role of the child.
He snuggled up in her arms saying: “I should like to crawl in and lie
like a child in its mother’s bosom! That would be bliss.” During coitus
he preferred succubus and once there occurred a strange incident. A
fancy seemed to dawn on him that he was having intercourse with his
mother. This was not a phantasy that I had in any way suggested. I
let the subject relate everything that comes to his mind without
influencing him in one direction or another.

As he improved the identification with his mother disappeared. He made
up with his parents, exchanged friendly letters with his father, and
felt he was making satisfactory progress. For the first time in his
life he was himself.

He became aware of his own personality. Now he loved his wife as a
husband, and felt that he was a father who had a mother of his own.

That may seem self-evident and an irrelevant remark. But the whole
task which I aimed to achieve was to break up his identification with
his parents, destroy his projection upon the old home. Previously
the leading motive in all his conduct was the thought: _what will my
parents say?_ The knowledge that his father would be troubled made him
happy. He wanted to punish the man whom he held responsible for his
sufferings on account of his lack of proper responsiveness and to keep
the father always in trouble. Now he abandoned his infantilism. He was
a child no longer, he was a man. Overcoming all disguises and masks he
came to himself.

His homosexuality persisted as formerly. But he saw this clearly before
his eyes and recognized it openly in his relations with his superiors,
his friends and his psychoanalytic adviser. He could meet the issue and
overcome it. Perhaps he shifted a part of it over to his son. One thing
is certain: he is through with the homosexual longing and so completely
that it no longer troubles him. He is alert and active. Such result
would not be attained without the art of analysis and without the
physician’s educational skill. This man, in the absence of analysis,
would have probably ended his misery in suicide.

I must also point out that his genuine affection for his wife developed
out of an impulsive infatuation. He met the woman, spoke to her, and
fell in love with her at once. Yet the marriage is happier as time
passes. Trifling storms do occur—where do they not—but they blow
lightly over and his home life is one of quiet happiness. The dream
about his great historic mission is gone. He who had once the ambition
to become a Napoleon or a Herostratos, a Satan or a Don Juan, a
bomb-thrower, is now a reliable, efficient and satisfied bookkeeper;
he now sits at his desk in the office dutifully adding long columns of
figures, brings home little presents for his wife and children, and
if his old folks send him a sum of money he is pleasantly surprised
and puts it in the bank for his little daughter. This case illustrates
also the relations of homosexuality to the family and to the problem of
incest. More about that later....

       *       *       *       *       *

Nymphomania shows the same homosexual basis as satyriasis. In the
study of Sexual Frigidity in Women[18] we shall have occasion to point
out types of women who are undoubtedly nymphomaniac in character,
Messalinas. These women are usually anesthetic, a condition in itself
of considerable significance and one which is often seen also in
ordinary prostitutes. They have a hunger for man similar to Don Juan’s
longing for woman. It is characteristic of them, too, that they never
find satisfaction. These persons in perpetual quest, Ahasuerus, the
Flying Dutchman, Faust and Don Juan, who are condemned to wander and
search and who never find rest, portray the libido which does not find
its proper sexual goal.[19]

There are also among women endless seekers continually dreaming of
man,—some man who shall completely and lastingly gratify them. The
conditions are even more complex in women than in men. For the present
I want to report briefly one case, pointing out merely what may serve
as an illustration of our present theme. We shall take up the whole
subject more fully in connection with our discussion of dyspareunia.

       *       *       *       *       *

A woman, strikingly beautiful,—we shall call her Adele—comes to me
with a most unusual complaint. She is married to an excellent man
with whom she had fallen in love and she still loves him. She has no
inclination whatever to remain true to him. She lacks completely any
resistance to temptation. She is easily the victim of any man who
comes near her. She is a woman who does not know how to say “no.” Her
husband who has no inkling of her doings worships her. Sometimes she
is conscience stricken, as now, and wishes to find something that
would quiet her so that she would not have to think from morning till
night only of sexual matters. But, what I shall find unbelievable, she
adds, is that she remains cold during a man’s embrace and must always
follow it up with onanism. Only cunnilingus produces an adequate orgasm
in her. She thinks that if a man satisfied her regularly in that way
perhaps she could remain true to him.

From her life history I quote the following data. Already as a child
Adele had gathered certain experiences on the subject of sex. She was
about eight years of age when her brother began to carry out coitus
with her. She was very sensual even at that time and claims that she
experienced great pleasure in the act. The brother was two years
older. All the children in the apartment building where they lived
were introduced early to sexual acts. Often there took place regular
orgies. She was loaned by her brother to other boys when he received
their sisters in exchange. She remembers having been used once by four
boys in succession. These doings went on for over a year. Then another
girl’s mother discovered what was going on and matters came very near
being aired in court. There were scenes and investigations but all the
children lied themselves out of it.

From that time on she masturbated and to this day she cannot give
up the habit. Even as a “flapper” she had no other thought than to
attract men. She was very coquettish and easy going, improved for a
time, becoming very devout as well as retired in her disposition and
even thought of joining a nunnery and taking the vows of chastity.

But this pious attitude did not last long. Soon she flirted again and
turned to all kinds of erotic books, the reading of which so excited
her that she masturbated several times during the night. At 17 years of
age, a pupil of her father’s who was teacher of piano at the musical
high school, took advantage of her. She was alone with the young
man for a few minutes. He kissed her and she accepted this without
resistance. Then he dragged her on top of himself—there was no couch
in that study room—and she lost her virginity. She did not know how it
happened. It was over in a few minutes. She kept away from the young
man after that, although he pursued her, and for a few weeks lived in
terror, afraid that she might be pregnant. But fortunately that was
not the case. She soon noticed that all men were interested in her.
Young and old pursued her. The mother to whom, with tears in her eyes,
she related the incident with the young man and who kept it from the
father (fearing that he would murder the boy) kept careful watch over
her, never left her alone, always saying to her: “Child, you must marry
soon! Your blood is too hot.”

At 19 years of age she found her man, with whom she fell in love so
desperately that she became the laughing stock of the town. During the
very first days of courtship she fell into his arms and offered no
resistance when he tried to possess her completely. He was so excited
that he failed to observe that she was not a virgin. She enjoyed the
experience but little, although she was tremendously excited at the
time.

From the very beginning she was untrue to him. She carried on with a
friend of his, going even to that man’s house. She was unhappy and
wanted to do away with herself. But she soon got over that and again
began flirting.

After the marriage ceremony—three days later—she recalled having
heard that Dr. X., an attractive young single man, was a great Don
Juan. She decided to look him up at once and seduce him. She complained
to him of a red spot upon her privates, claiming it troubled her. Was
that not a sign of some illness? In short, she attained her purpose,
was his sweetheart for a time, and learned then of cunnilingus for the
first time. That she regarded as the highest achievement in the art
of love. Another man required of her the anal form of copulation. All
such things amused her, although she never experienced the orgasm as
satisfactorily as during masturbation.

Before long she felt painful remorse. She had the best of men for a
husband. She tortured herself with the most severe reproaches, daily
saying to herself: “This must be the last time; I must not do it
again.” But the very next day she felt impelled again to go into the
street or to telephone to one of the many men who were at her disposal.
It is interesting to note that on her list of lovers there were
physicians, lawyers, army officers, clerks, nobles and commoners. She
never took payment and never accepted presents. That would put her in a
class with the prostitutes. She also tried coachmen and chauffeurs, but
her disgust afterwards was so great that she gave this up, although she
always felt the temptation.

She acquired a gonorrheal infection and this compelled her to claim
“female trouble” as an excuse to keep her husband away from her for
a time. She was so provoked with the man who had infected her that
she wanted to revenge herself on all men and in her anger thought of
transferring the infection to every man in her circle. She did not
carry out this plan because the gynecologist who treated her forbade
all sexual congress. Nevertheless twice she could not control herself
and she infected two men....

She wanted me to hypnotize her. There was no other thought in her
mind than men and again men! Her mind revolved continually around
sexual scenes; she has even thought of going for a time to a house of
prostitution, and, like Agrippina, allow any number of men to use her
until she shall have had enough. Perhaps then she would quiet down! If
she meets a stranger that night she dreams of intercourse with him!

I ask her about the dreams; whether they lay stress on some special
form of intercourse or portray merely the normal act.

Hesitatingly she answers: “Always the normal. Only I am regularly on
top.... Why is that? I have often thought of it.”

“Did you have such a dream last night?”

“Let me see. Certainly; a foolish dream, though....”

“Please, let me hear it.”

“I am in bed with my brother-in-law. A man of whom I would not even
dream.”

“But you did dream of him.”

“I cannot understand it. I have never given him one minute’s thought.”

“And never anything happened between you?”

“No ... with him, never. Although he is attentive to me and I know he
likes me. I love my sister too dearly to treat her that way, although
my sister is not faithful either, and things like that don’t matter
with her. It seems to be in the family. Still, I would rather have
nothing to do with my brother-in-law. The dream is nonsense, I have
forgotten the most of it. It was much longer.”

Observing that she tries to avoid the dream I insist that she should
try and recall it as nearly as possible. “Well, then,” she continues
her narrative, “the dream was as follows:

”_I am in bed with my brother-in-law. It seems I am the man and he the
woman. He has no mustache and lies under me. Suddenly he changes and it
is my sister and I kiss her passionately. ‘You see,’ she says to me,
‘you should have done this long ago and you would be well.’_”

I inquire about her relations to the sister and learn that she has not
been in touch with her for the past few months and that during this
time she has grown more nervous and her craving for men also grew worse
than ever. “When I am with my sister I seem to forget men more easily.
She is a very spiritual person and extremely charming. If you should
ever meet her you would fall in love with her.”

When one hears such talk, and one hears it rather often, the diagnosis
is easy: the narrator is in love with that person and therefore thinks
it natural that everybody should fall in love with the person in
question.[20]

Further inquiries disclose that she was preoccupied with but one
thought: her sister. She always looks upon her sister as the best
dressed, most spirited and most charming person she had ever known.

Why was the woman no longer on friendly terms with her sister?

Because, she claims, her sister is egotistical and cares nothing for
her. She was lying ill for a few weeks and her sister let her lie there
and took no more notice of her than if she were a dog; she wanted her
sister’s company when she went out, she could not do her shopping alone
but she could not get her sister to go along. So she had to go around
with a woman friend who was a disgusting and vulgar person. She ought
to be ashamed to show herself in such company; if she were in her
husband’s place, she would not tolerate it.... After all, it would not
be so very sinful if she did become intimate with her brother-in-law;
her sister was not true to him and kept up relations with an army
lieutenant but the poor fool does not see it and thinks the army
officer is his best friend....

She keeps up an incessant flow of talk. She wakes up thinking of her
sister, she thinks of her all day and she dreams of her every night. I
have studied her dreams over a period of weeks. There is not a dream
in which her sister fails to figure and none but portrays her erotic
attitude towards the sister.

In the course of the analysis her childhood experiences come to light
and she recalls that for a long time she slept in one bed with her
sister and they performed cunnilingus on one another. That was so long
ago, she had forgotten all about it. That experience discloses her
true nature. She is continually looking for woman; specifically she
is looking for one woman, her sister. She wants to forget her, the
traumatic experience with her she wants to drive out of memory, by
covering it with new experiences.

We see that her latent homosexuality drives her into the arms of
every man she meets. We also note the role of family relations in
homosexuality, a subject which we shall take up specifically later and
illustrate with proper data.




                                  IV

 Description of Don Juan Types who are satisfied with conquest and
 forego physical possession—An unlucky Hero, whose love adventures
 are interfered with by Gastric Derangements—A would-be Messalina who
 hesitates on account of vomiting spells—Influence of Religion on
 Neurosis.


_Ich wüsste kaum noch etwas Anderes geltend zu machen, das dermassen
zerstörrisch der Gesundheit und Rassenkräftigkeit, namentlich der
Europäer zugesetzt hat als das asketische Ideal; man darf es ohne
Übertreibung das eigentliche Verhängniss in der Gesundheitsgeschichte
des europäischen Menschen nennen._

  _Nietzsche._




                                  IV

_I know hardly what other factor could be held so harmful to the health
and racial vigor of European peoples, as the ascetic ideal; without
exaggeration this must be looked upon as the striking fatality in the
health history of the European._

  _Nietzsche._


We have spoken thus far of the active Don Juan and of Messalina types
and we have attempted to prove that homosexuality is responsible. Along
the extreme types we find endless varieties of transitional types.
Nature nowhere confounds us through the richness of her varieties and
combinations so much as in the manifestations of human sexuality.

The would-be Don Juan and would-be Messalina are most interesting
types. They behave precisely like the true type. They manifest the same
uncontrollable and restless craving. But somewhere in their development
the capacity to carry out heterosexual adventures fails them. I am not
now speaking of the man who plays Don Juan in his mind’s fancy or of
the Messalina who does not truly possess the courage to try to live up
to her instinctive cravings. There are numberless such cases and a bit
of the type lurks in the breast of every person, a fact we recognize as
the polygamic tendency.

The type which I wish to describe approaches the ascetic. It is plain
that the ascetic ideal would not arise if a strong homosexual tendency
did not depreciate heterosexuality. For every action is the product of
instinct and repression. An overpowerful instinct may overcome even
the strongest inhibitions. But if a portion of the individual’s sexual
energy is anchored homosexually the aggressive sexual acts are endowed
only with a portion of the energy they require. If the energy is
shunted off its proper track entirely we have the ascetic person; and
if the energy is but partially side-tracked and is insufficient for the
accomplishment of the sexual aim, we have the would-be Don Juan type.

There are any number of men who daily dream only of their possible
conquests, begin adventures, and carry them along for a time only to
drop the affairs suddenly ... because they “get cold feet.” They envy
men who are able to pursue their adventures to the end, men fortunate
enough actually to make conquests and they bewail the fate which brings
them so close to the most tempting fruit only to prove elusive just
when the fruit seems ready to fall into their lap,—and to be gone
forever. Better than all generalizations may serve the account of an
actual case, like the following:

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Xaver Z., would like to be a “lively fellow,” like most of his
companions. He claims that his shyness spoils his success. He is 29
years old and has never yet had a “real” affair. When he wakes up
in the morning he thinks: “Will you have luck today to talk up to
a girl and get her?” The whole day he thinks of this so that he is
continually distracted and unable to work. He is also dissatisfied with
his business accomplishments. Others work so easily and accomplish
everything without friction, he is slow and not energetic enough.
He thinks that somehow he lacks initiative. He is always tired and
depressed, and he has already been in sanitaria several times vainly
trying to get well. He can hardly wait for evening to arrive so he
may go into the street in search of adventure. He speaks to a number
of girls but nothing comes of it. He has also tried a “personal” in
the newspaper and corresponds with several women. But they are only
platonic relations. He either lacks the courage to become more intimate
with the women or finds himself repulsed when making a suggestion of
the kind. He thinks he is unlike other men and it discourages him. He
always feels lonely and Sundays are a torture to him. He tries to meet
poor people and pays them occasionally to partake of an evening meal
with them so as not to feel quite so lonely.

He is a travelling salesman. He fears that he is not an efficient
salesman. He lacks the power of influencing his prospective customers,
he seems unable to talk as convincingly to them as other men in his
calling. He acts indifferent and if he sees that the customer does not
intend to buy he goes right off. He is employed by an older brother. He
is lucky. Another employer would have dismissed him long ago. While his
brother does not reproach him in words he can read it in the brother’s
eyes.

Regarding his sexual life he is able to state that sexual matters
began early to interest him. He does not remember the beginning of
it. He does remember that he masturbated at 10 years of age and he
continued the practice till he was 20 years old. Then he heard about
the evil consequences and gradually gave it up. But even after that he
masturbated every two months or so and always felt very worried after
doing it.

He began going to women at twenty years of age. Since that time he
has intercourse about once every two weeks with prostitutes, or
occasionally with some girl whom he picks up on the street and who
usually expects pay; he is strongly potent. He has no particular
pleasure with prostitutes. He goes to them out of a sense of duty
because all his colleagues have intercourse with women and he wants to
be like them. It is a hygienic measure rather than an inner compulsion
with him. But he always fancies that, under the right conditions,
when the girl gives herself out of love, it must be different. He
felt so dissatisfied because he was never lucky enough to have a real
sweetheart. For the girls he picked up on the street were really
nothing more than ordinary prostitutes since they, too, expect some
present if not regular pay.

He was distinctly unlucky. Other young men were always lucky but he,
quite the contrary. There must be something about him that makes
persons keep away when they get to know him more intimately.

If these complaints are looked upon as true facts one would really
think that the young man was unlucky. But as a matter of fact he
himself lays the foundation for his lack of luck, he alone spreads the
bed in which he is to lie. He is a Don Juan who carries on flawlessly
the first part of his adventures; it is only when he tries to bring
the adventures to a head that his luck fails him and then the expected
conquest turns into a deception.[21]

It appears that he has actually brought many of his adventures to a
crisis only to withdraw at the supreme moment on the score of some
triviality or other. These occurrences are all alike except that the
alleged motives for breaking up the adventure differ in every case.
Perhaps it will be best to mention his last adventure as an example,
for it is particularly typical:

It was Sunday. Xaver felt again very lonely and neglected and went out
looking for a girl. An old friend whom he was to meet at a certain
place he neglected to look up. Today he must succeed. He is tired
of loneliness and neglect. Today he will get a girl. He makes a few
attempts but in each case he finds the girl expects pay and that does
not suit him. Finally he sees passing by a fine, sinewy, supple figure.
He hurries after it—she is an elegant, attractive woman. He speaks up,
telling her in one breath that she must not be angry, his intentions
are “entirely honorable.” He merely feels lonely and would like to
spend the evening in pleasant company. The woman is not prudish, she
permits him to accompany her and confesses that she, too, is lonely
and feels terribly depressed. He now worries because he promised her
“an honorable acquaintance” and during the walk tries to make up his
mind whether he ought not to change his tactics. It begins to rain.
They enter a Café where they listen to some music; then they go to a
restaurant for dinner. He shows himself very gallant, pays all expenses
and conducts her home. The woman tells him she has a telephone, as she
conducts a little business and suggests that he may call her up. They
agree to meet the following Sunday and spend their time together.
During the week he plans a line of attack and decides to put an end to
his shyness and come with her to the real object.... He calls her up,
they decide to go to the Opera together and then to a late supper. On
Sunday forenoon he purchases the tickets and intends to put them at her
disposal. Suddenly the thought strikes him, he ought to give up the
relationship. He sends the spare ticket to a friend and telephones the
woman that some of his relatives having arrived unexpectedly he cannot
go to the Opera. Afterwards he is unhappy over it, etc.

The friend was otherwise engaged, he remained alone, the ticket was
wasted. He worried considerably over the matter and returned home
feeling sad. When I pointed out to him next day that he really fled
from the girl, he shook his head and said his sister was really
responsible because “I told her everything and asked her what I should
do. Sister said: ‘she is pulling your leg, it will cost you money and
nothing will come of it.’”

“Do you tell your sister these things?”

“Certainly. We speak very frankly about all sexual matters. Sister has
started the custom and I find it natural. Why should I not advise with
sister?”

I explain to him that he expected her to turn him against the
adventure, that he was really afraid of the relationship and its
possible consequences. I show that the friend was more to him than the
woman and that the sending of the ticket to him meant: _my friend is
more important to me than a woman!_

I have occasion to prove again and again that he paves the way for his
failures very adroitly and sometimes tactlessly because while acting
the role of a “lively” man he wants at the same time to preserve
his inner attitude. The initial stage of conquest satisfies him and
thereafter he voluntarily renounces to its consummation.

That he vehemently denies,—he knows absolutely nothing about any
homosexual leaning! He declares he would be right if he could only
have the right kind of a love affair. He is continually looking for
it. It was really unbelievable to hear how many adventures he was
able to start in the course of a week. He was a handsome interesting
man and found no trouble conquering women’s hearts. But he always
managed affairs so as to break them up before they went too far. At the
last moment he always thought of something or other which prevented
consummation of the adventure.

This was shown typically one New Year’s day. A woman from a distance,
with whom he was in correspondence—they had also exchanged their
photographs—invited herself for that evening. He was to meet her
at the train and they were to celebrate the New Year’s together. He
went to the station but missed her because he “waited at the wrong
place.” Next day he succeeded in tracing her. Naturally she was angry
by that time; then, thinking to make up with her he proposed on the
spot to take the woman to a hotel with him. Naturally she resented the
insult and made him scurry out of her presence. He had provoked this
precipitate dismissal by his sudden proposal. He managed things so that
every promising victory turned into a defeat in the end.

He was late at his appointments or showed himself overanxious and even
coarse at the last moment, when the situation was most delicate, or
made some uncalled-for remark. Thus, to one girl who was already on the
way to a hotel with him he said: “Ah, all women are alike, they all run
after men and when they catch one they are happy!” She looked at him
with lifted brows: “Is that what you think of a girl who goes with you?
Then I want to have nothing to do with you ...” and turning around she
walked off.

That does not prevent him from running again after girls; he even
accosts married women on the street but he always complains about his
poor luck. At the same time his sexual desire is not excessive. His
physical requirements never cause him any uneasiness. It is a psychic
urge that drives him to seek women. At the same time he longs for
friends but then, such friends as he seeks are also not to be found.
Only the last friend was such a one because “he understood him.” They
went to brothels together. That was the first time he experienced a
really strong orgasm. We know this custom on the part of men to be a
convenient mask for homosexuality.

The motives of his conduct are revealed in a dream which throws
considerable light on the significance of homosexuality.

We have recognized for some time that this is a case of latent
homosexuality, repressed on the negative principle of aversion.

Xaver speaks incessantly of women, thinks of them all day long, so as
to avoid thinking of men. He tries to lean on women, but never becomes
intimate with them because the negative force that drives him is not
powerful enough. The better woman is for him a “noli me tangere,” he
suffers from an inhibition which keeps him from every woman who is
not paid. The prostitute is not considered a woman and, besides, her
charm is increased by the fact that she has intercourse with other men.
Through her it is therefore possible to give an outlet to a portion of
the homosexual tendency.

We shall now turn our attention to his dream. _Naecke_[22] justly
remarks that the dream is the best reagent for homosexuality.
Unfortunately he was not familiar at the time with the revelations of
dream analysis and he paid attention only to the manifest content. How
much richer in meaning the dream shows itself when we learn to read it
and to interpret its hidden symbolism.

The Dream:

_I am pursued by men and fear they are about to do something to me. One
man in particular, brandishing a big sword, is very hotly on my trail
and already he touches me from behind with the tip edge of his sword,
a curved thing like the Yatagan used by Turks. I run to the cemetery
to mother’s grave. I find there my cousin (female) who is also afraid
of the robbers. First we try to hide, then we look around carefully
and see that the coast is clear. We leave the cemetery together in a
carriage and we drive upon an endless dark road. I snuggle up to her,
as if for protection against the robbers and I am ashamed of my unmanly
attitude._

Of course it is not proper to conclude that a dreamer is homosexual
merely because the dream carries a homosexual meaning. For, as I have
shown in my _Language of Dreams_, every dream is bisexual, consequently
homosexual traits may be found in every dream. The dream only portrays
once more man’s bisexual nature and even the dreams of homosexuals are,
without exception, bisexual. We see through them merely the degree of
the repressed homosexuality and the dreams enable us to recognize more
easily the motives which impell the subjects to adopt a monosexual
path....[23]

This dream begins with a typical portrayal of a homosexual pursuit.
The subject is really pursued by his homosexual thoughts. The great
curved sword is a well-known phallic symbol. That the sword touches him
from behind is something easily interpreted. Equally obvious is the
reason why the sword appears curved when we learn that his brother has
a hypospadia and a phallus of that shape so that medical advice was
even sought on the matter. The pursuer had a big heavy beard exactly
like his brother and the same figure. Thus we see that the brother, who
stands out of the mass of pursuing males, in a certain measure typifies
the homosexual pursuit.

He flies to his mother’s grave in the cemetery. His mother shall save
him from homosexuality. She, the representative of femininity, is the
one to whom he flies, when pursued by men. The cousin is the wife of
another brother. She represents the typical incest compromise. Many
neurotics who are emotionally fixed upon their family, finally marry a
cousin. The cousin, whom he finds at the grave, is his savior and he
starts with her upon the dark path of life, a half man....

He tells that he was to marry the woman but she became instead his
brother’s wife because he kept hesitating and would not make up his
mind. But he had the fancy that he could be her sweetheart. He is
specially fond of his brothers’ wives and his sisters.... He has
numberless phantasies revolving around incestuous deeds. His two
sisters also figure in these day dreams.... He grew accustomed to talk
over sexual matter with his sister not without reason. He tells her all
his adventures with preconceived watchfulness. Thus he told her also of
the late acquaintance, as mentioned above, and was advised, as she had
previously advised him in a number of similar instances, to keep away.
Unconsciously he was awaiting from her the reply: _Why go out of your
way? Why seek in other women what you can find in me?_ ...

We understand now the inhibition which stands between him and women of
“the better class.” The latter stand for the sister and the mother.
The incest taboo is what stands in his way. He looks for a true
adventure but cannot find it. He looks for his sister and he looks
for the man. His brothers’ wives are the objects of his jealousy and
his yearning at the same time. With his questions and problems he
goes to his sisters-in-law, never to his brothers. His conscience is
uneasy with regard to his brothers. In their presence he is always
timid and ill at ease. He is in love with his older brother though he
does not acknowledge the fact to himself. His brother’s strength and
energy rouse his admiration. Occasionally his brother sang. The voice
lingers in his ears so sweetly that he declares his brother to be the
best singer in the world. He feels that his brother neglects him. The
brother does not seem to notice how ill he is or how much he suffers.
Once he was quite a jolly fellow but now (since giving up masturbation)
he is mostly depressed. But the brother takes no notice of it and never
asks him how he feels or how it goes with his health. If he only could
quit his brother’s business! He belittles himself in order to cling
to the brother more lovingly. He could not endure being away from his
brother. He does poorly during his business trips because it is against
his wish to travel at all and because he is jealous of his brother’s
large business.

His attitude towards the second brother, who was his playmate in
childhood, is even more tense. He never visits that brother and when he
cannot avoid meeting him has but little to say. He shows that peculiar
uneasiness towards the brother which persons manifest when they try to
cover a certain erotic attitude.

The following characteristic dream may be instructive at this point:

_I am in my brother’s store ... He puts before me an assortment of
underwear to mark up. I refuse to do it and step out of the store
saying: “Brother can kiss me....”_

His brother advised him to get married. This is the incentive to
the dream language “underwear to be marked.” But he loves only his
brother. The remark, “_er kann mich gern haben_,” (equivalent to the
colloquialism, “he can kiss me,” and its more vulgar variants) plainly
embodies a reference to a sexual act.

Incidentally anal irritation is one of his strongest paraphilias. He
suffers more or less continually of “anal itching,” which is at times
so unbearable that he cannot sleep. He consulted for this complaint
a physician who found no local trouble and who declared that it was
merely a “nervous” itching.

The fact is this subject is now on the point of becoming a homosexual.
Some precipitating occasion and his homosexuality is bound to become
manifest. His last friend is dearer to him than all the girls.... This
is shown clearly by the fact that he sent him the ticket which he had
bought for his lady friend. A portion of the hidden impulse had broken
forth on that occasion. Usually he covers his homosexual leanings
very cleverly. His friends and colleagues at the office think he is
a lucky Don Juan and have no idea that he never enjoys the ultimate
advantage of the role he plays. They see him always in the company of
girls, always going around with pretty women; he runs after them on the
street, he goes to public places with them; at the office he speaks of
nothing else but his conquests and new adventures.

But not to his brothers. He never mentions any sexual matters
especially in the presence of his younger brother, the one who was his
playmate in childhood.

The analysis did not last long. But during the very first few weeks
there came to light experiences with this brother which explained the
subject’s reticence.

Considering the remarkable fact that Xaver was animated by the desire
to be a regular Don Juan we have something with which to contrast the
extent of his moral qualms. For a long time he was very pious and then
all of a sudden he turned into a free thinker. Analysis discloses that
his religious piety still persists undiminished. Don Juan stands to his
mind only for the unreachable ideal of a free man, a man undisturbed
in his actions by any inhibitory feelings. But he invariably hears an
inner voice calling to him, at the last, supreme moment of action:
_Don’t! It is sinful._

It is the voice of his mother, who never failed to dwell on moral
themes, who warned him against the dangers of the big City, his mother
whom he so loved and honored. How often his dreams lead him to the
cemetery where his mother lies buried, as if to conjure up before his
eyes the dear image and to remind him to avoid all evil and to follow
in the Lord’s righteous path!

This case illustrates the significant role of family environment in the
genesis of that homosexuality which _Hirschfeld_ calls genuine. We find
a fixation upon the sisters, also a fixation upon the mother, and the
passionate love for the brothers, particularly for the older one, with
whose wife he sees himself driving off in a dream. That cousin really
stands for his brother. Through her union with his brother she had
acquired a new attraction for him. Before her marriage he was rather
indifferent towards her. The homosexual experiences with his younger
brother date back to his 16th year.

His craving for love affairs, the impulsion to women, was but a flight
away from the pursuit of man.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next patient shows an entirely different constellation. Whereas
Xaver was clever enough to free himself from the terrible women through
his peculiar tactlessness, the following subject reassured himself by
conjuring up an ailment which became very troublesome, it is true, but
which proved an effective means of defence.

Mr. Christoph—we shall designate the subject by that name—is a victim
of chronic stomach trouble which, according to the opinion of various
physicians, is of a nervous origin. He has attacks of sharp gastric
pains, and loss of appetite so that he has grown very thin and looks
like an advanced victim of consumption. (Lungs and all other organs
are in excellent condition.) He cannot digest any meat, any attempt to
do so produces intense pain, and if he swallows so much as a mouthful
he is likely to vomit. He denies that he ever masturbated, and claims
that his sexual life is entirely normal. Formerly he was in the habit
of going around with girls, but it gave him no pleasure, probably
because prostitutes are disgusting to him, and with other girls he did
not care to become too intimate for ethical reasons. He would like
to be hypnotized so that he should be cured of his aversion to food.
I decline hypnosis and advise, instead, a complete analysis. Only in
that way may he learn the way to a complete cure. He insists he has not
withheld anything in his talk with me. He has told me everything and
wants hypnosis by all means but this I refuse.

He says he will think it over. My questions took him by surprise. He
was unprepared. He is one of those men who have to think matters over
and don’t make up their mind in a hurry. One of his rules through
which he learned to protect himself against life’s sudden perplexities
is: “Don’t lose your head. Think it over.”

He calls a few times continually talking about his pains. One day he
states that he has about made up his mind to quit. But next day he
returns and brings me a lengthy written document: “You have asked me
repeatedly about my dreams. I have written down my last night’s dreams.
I always dream a lot and my dreams are always lively and about like
those of last night. I have also brought along my true confessions to
let you know what I really am. You will see from the confession of my
life history what brought about my illness. I see I cannot get along
any more trying to keep it all to myself. Let the truth come out.”

I am now giving this life history as it was presented to me in writing,
following it up with the dream report.


              _The Story of My Illness and My Biography_

I lived in the parental home up to my 4th year and then I was taken in
charge by my mother’s people. My father’s business compelled him to be
away from home for months, sometimes for a whole year at a stretch.
My grandparents brought me up with much tenderness, and as they were
very religious, my education was also based on piety. They lived in
a very prettily situated village, an old, lovely resort place. The
river flowing nearby was naturally the meeting place for us children.
On account of the danger of drowning I was an object of great concern
to my grandparents, so that they tried to keep me close to them as
much as possible. I went with them to church daily, visited with them,
usually at the homes of elderly people where the conversation was
almost exclusively about religious matters, and on every occasion it
was drilled into me under the most terrible threats and admonitions to
pray and be good.

I heard numerous stories of deeds and miracles attributed to the Holy
Mother and I was shown the places where some of these took place in the
neighborhood.

Then I returned to mother. Soon afterwards I went to school. Sister
taught me the primer and soon I was able to go through my favorite
book, an old large copy of the Bible, whereas formerly I depended on
questioning others.

Frequently I gave up all games preferring to sit in a corner poring
over my Bible. It is customary in the country to undergo a public
examination in the church every half year. My sister two and one half
years older than I prepared herself for that event for some time
because she did not learn easily. I followed her study carefully and
was able to recite everything as well as she.

The examination came up at the church and no one could answer a certain
question. But I knew the answer, because it was part of sister’s
lesson, made signs, the vicar asked me and I surprised everybody by
giving the correct answer. It was the prayer, “Our Father.” My folks
admired me for it, gave me presents and said: “Boy, you will grow up to
be a fine man.” This praise touched me very deeply.

I was about seven and a half when a girl of twelve induced me to join
her in forbidden games, we played with each other’s genitals, etc. This
occurred very often. I liked it very much and the experience became
deeply imprinted on my mind. Then I felt a strong desire to repeat the
same games with other girls. My mother’s sister visited us about a year
later and while she caressed me she roused in me a new feeling and I
could hardly refrain myself from asking her to play with me the games
that the first girl had taught me.

Beginning with the third year of school we had a new teacher. He took
notice of me early because I was a good scholar and soon I became one
of his favorite pupils. This teacher had the horrible habit of calling
me to his desk where he held me by the member until it became stiff,
while talking to me. I wondered a great deal what it meant; but I did
not dare mention it to any one.

At the end of that school year we removed to Vienna permanently. I was
tremendously homesick for the old place; the coolness and indifference
of the new surroundings at Vienna affected me and secretly I resolved
that I would rather starve than stay there. I was threatened that I
would not be allowed to visit the old home if I did not make progress
and I would be sent to a sanitarium; the last threat in particular
scared me especially as I was shown some (false) papers to indicate
that the first steps had already been taken to have me interned. That
and the perpetual anxiety at school where we had a queer teacher who
mistreated horribly the pupils (and I did not know a word of German
at the time), had a serious effect upon me; my physical condition was
impaired, I grew thin and lived in a sort of dream state. During my
solitude I often sought relief in tears.

I lived through the period. In two years, here too, I reached one of
the first places as a scholar. I had a colleague at school, whose
sixteen-year-old brother was compelled to stay at home for a year on
account of illness and we played with him. The two initiated me into
all sorts of nasty practices. The brothers slept together in one bed,
underneath their parents, and had frequent opportunity to see their
parents lying together. They always told me about it and showed me
their mother’s stained shirt. This impressed me very much and I also
began to watch my parents. Till my twelfth year I slept in one bed with
my sister. Then I slept near mother in bed, as father was mostly away.

My fancies grew to such unhealthy dimensions, that I began to think my
uncle, mother’s brother, who was living with us at the time, was guilty
of criminal intimacy with her. Slowly my suspicions were allayed, as I
could observe nothing out of the ordinary, despite watchfulness.

Around thirteen a school boy taught me to masturbate. I did not do
it often because I feared it was sinful and it kept me in continuous
anxiety. Then a book fell into my hands describing the terrible
consequences of the habit. That scared me off completely, and as a
positive protection, when I was about fourteen and a half I swore over
grandfather’s grave that I would have nothing to do with sexual matters
till my twentieth year. I suffered a great deal in consequence on
account of my pent-up desires. But I was fairly faithful to my oath.

At fourteen I joined a higher institution. My preparation was far
below that of my colleagues and one of the teachers warned me that I
might not be able to keep up with the course at that institution. That
worried me a great deal. It affected me considerably to think that in
this way I might be hampered in the free choice of a vocation.

At the first examination it turned out that only I and one other
student passed successfully and I looked upon that as a divine favor,
the more so because my very affectionate grandmother prayed for me
continually.

I was permitted to take the course on condition that I should earn for
myself remission of the school fees, which amounted to a considerable
sum. Only the best scholars received free tuition. I plunged zealously
into the subjects on which my preliminary preparation was weak.

My thrifty zeal was not flawless. I was always confident that God was
with me and I thought that I owed to his intervention, rather than to
my constant application the position of a scholar of the first rank
which I had attained in two years’ time.

During that period I came again into contact with that girl who was
the first to initiate me into sexual matters. Her presence continually
disturbed me.

When I was about seventeen and a half I had some innocent love affairs
with some other girls, but although opportunities for coitus were
frequent, I never took advantage of them. Reason: my fear of immoral
deeds.

I slept with my sister and a girl cousin in one room. I concentrated
my attention upon the girl cousin. The frequent allurements kept me in
a continuous state of agitation the more so because I could see that
the cousin, too, had to struggle hard to suppress her inclinations and
desires. I withstood all temptation and remained innocent.

Towards the end of the school years I came into closer contact with
a girl who had already previously attracted my attention. We became
deeply interested in one another, but we could meet only occasionally
and that under very strict conditions. We had to part in the end; as
I really loved the girl it made me suffer a great deal. During the
occasions when we did steal away to our secret trysting place I felt a
peculiar excitation which settled on my stomach; if I ate it caused me
nausea.

After completing my course of study I entered the employ of a local
business house. I became acquainted with another girl, and strange
enough, we two also had to overcome considerable difficulties when we
tried to meet. After about a year we could meet freely and shortly
after there were no more difficulties in our way. But I lost interest
in her by that time, and decided that I would have nothing to do with
any such foolish love affairs.

Whereas formerly I was kept back from any thought of coitus with a
decent girl because I considered it an unworthy and dishonorable act,
now whenever I was about to meet a girl I was seized with a gastric
discomfort and even vomiting. Once in the girl’s company that would
disappear.

I gave up all affairs of heart, but my condition became gradually
worse. I vomited several times daily, I could not even tolerate a
mouthful of bread on my stomach, even clear soup was hard for me to
take. Every time I swallowed I felt like vomiting and I could not
even drink. Besides that I suffered of sleeplessness and of strong
neurasthenic pains.

Finally I had to give up work for a year and I spent four months of
that time in the country but my condition did not improve very much.

It caused me a great deal of tension to suppress my strong sexual
impulses. Contact with a public woman seemed shameful to me, and with
a good girl I could not enter into any intimate relations partly for
moral reasons and partly on account of lack of favorable opportunity.

I felt inhibited from the moment my illness began. I decided to resort
to public women upon the express advice of a physician.

       *       *       *       *       *

This remarkable case is as clear as a school problem and richly
illustrates the various factors which determine a person’s attitude
regarding sexual matters. The subject is a simple man who has not
yet mastered completely the German language and he has repressed but
little. His youth and his sexual struggles apparently stretch before
his memory like an open book. He has had many dreams and remembers
them well. We note the genuine religious background. He is no longer
pious and does not care to go to church service. Nevertheless it ought
not to be difficult to perceive that back of his fear of immoral acts
stands the fear of divine punishment,—a consequence of his early
moral training. This man has been brought up with fear in his heart.
This breeding of the germ of fear in his soul was responsible for his
anxiety neurosis. Witches appeared to admonish him, in the school he
was spurred on by dire threats to do his best. Then there was his
powerful sexual craving which he, nevertheless, found possible to
withstand. Whence did he acquire the strength to keep away from his
girl cousin, although she so warmly attracted him and even encouraged
him? Was it the proximity of his sister who occupied the same room?
Some occurrences between him and that sister he had overlooked in his
voluntary account of his life, otherwise fairly accurate. He avoided
incest, but besides the moral and religious inhibitions, there must
have been something more to keep him so effectively away from women.
His trouble which asserts itself before keeping a secret appointment
is nausea. Dislike and fear are protective defences against sinning.
We recognize readily this disgust for woman, so strongly emphasized by
most genuine homosexuals. We know that this aversion covers a repressed
craving, a craving which is unbearable to consciousness for one reason
or another and therefore breaks out in the negative form as disgust.
The latter serves as defence and protection against the very tendencies
which generate the powerful cravings.

The disturbance is a cover for the incest motive. He cannot approach
a woman because he sees in her the grandmother, the mother, or the
sister, a fact of which he was often fully aware. _Quo me vertam?_
There is open before him the homosexual path, since the road to woman
is closed. The episode with the teacher, the “vile doings” with his
school companions were a sort of initiation.... Here repression sets
in. He knows nothing about his homosexuality. But the dream betrays
and tells more than the subject is prepared to see as yet. We shall
therefore begin the analysis with an analysis of the dream.


                         _That Night’s Dream._

I stand before the door of a dwelling in my home town and gaze upon the
surrounding landscape.

While I am immersed in thought, my uncle comes along; he had helped
through the day working in the field and on his way home stopped near
me in front of the big door; he throws out some jocular allusions;
among other remarks saying: “it would be healthier for you if you
plowed up a few acres instead of idling away.”

I point to the team of horses hitched to the harrow, jocularly saying:
“oh, yes, certainly, but not with so poor a team. These two animals
should have been dumped on the scrap heap long ago, specially this left
one bearing himself so proudly when he is only an old nag.”

I hardly finished my words, when the horse started and broke his traces
madly to jump at me.

I started to run, fled up the first stairway and ran into the kitchen
shutting the door after me. Then I ran into the next room and
barricaded the door with every furniture article I found handy. The
horse was already at the door kicking until he broke through and made
his way into the room.

Meanwhile I ran to another room, again shutting the door but even as I
did so I knew that it wouldn’t be an effective barrier. I looked around
the room for some other means of escape and to my surprise saw my
sister standing behind me.

The horse had broken down the door enough to be able to stretch his
head through into the room and his dilated nostrils snorted angrily.

Sister handed me a small round stove calling out to defend myself with
the stove lids, they will prove an effective weapon.

The horse was ready to jump inside the room so I hurled at him first
the covers then the whole stove as powerfully as I could. At the last
critical moment I caught sight of another door, hurried out ran to the
stairway and woke up.

I went over the whole dream in my mind to make sure that I will
remember to tell it to my psychoanalyst. Shortly after that I fell
again into a light slumber and dreamed that I had gone to the analyst
who treats me:

He occupied a commodious residence with broad stairways. I found myself
face to face with him; he was doing something in a closet. I stood by
and told him the foregoing dream.

He went away for a while to attend to some important matters, as he had
to drive off in about one half hour. Then he called me down to him and
asked me to continue my story while he was lacing his shoes.

When I finished I moved off and through a side door and there I met my
mother. I exchanged a few words with her, opened the door, which led to
a glass-covered veranda and saw a locomotive and open fire.

The engineer moved various levers in vain, he could not start the
engine. Meanwhile the physician arrived, looked at his watch, and
remarked impatiently that it is already late. Suddenly a servant girl
comes running down the steps bringing three carefully tied up paper
packages (or bundles).

In order to raise the required steam pressure it was necessary to feed
the fire lively. The physician decided to help and threw one of the
bundles into the fire. It burned up quickly but produced no effect.

Then mother spoke up from the other side saying, there it must be
all right, took another package and threw it in at that spot without
accomplishing anything, any more than the physician did.

Saying: “That is not the way, look here,” I took hold of the third
package, jumped on a protruding piece of machinery in the midst of the
flame which surrounded it and threw the bundle into the center of the
burning mass. The flames broke forth, the safety valve began to whizz,
a whistling was heard and the engine began ponderously to move.

The physician jumped on, reached out his hand to me as he was moving
off and I barely had time to ask him where he was going. He said he was
going to Brünn. I wondered at that and—woke up again.

After I fell asleep once more I had another dream like the first. I
found myself in an elegantly furnished residence.

The door opened and a young pretty woman came in. She looked at me for
a while, then smiled wickedly but I did not lose my poise and said
something to her. She became more irritable, raised her hand, in which
she held a weapon and threatened me.

I looked on quietly, confident that she could not do a thing to me.
Then she jumped at me. I ran to another room, she pursued me, and thus
the chase continued through several rooms.

I was about to open another door when I felt she was directly behind
me holding in her hands some instrument that looked like a perolin
sprayer. It squirted a white soapy fluid. She gave a few squirts
without touching me, although a few drops fell on my clothes. I thought
it was some caustic fluid and wanted to escape.

While she was preparing for a new attack I quickly shut the door and
the nozzle of the sprayer caught between the door and the frame.

I grasped the nozzle, twisted the sprayer out of her hand, threw it
aside, caught the woman by the throat, and was going to throw her
down. But she caught me also by the throat, kissed me passionately and
staggered towards a sofa, dragging me along. I held her with my left
arm around her body while I pushed my right hand between her legs. I
felt a pleasant sensation; as we looked in each other’s eyes we slid
down together....

She was saying she meant no harm, laughed heartily, pressed me to her
bosom, her face began suddenly to change,—I now saw my sister smiling
at me.

Overcome with affection for her I wanted to press her closely to
me—suddenly the door opened and an elderly woman came storming in. It
scared me and I awoke—pollution.

       *       *       *       *       *

His first dream carries him to his home town and birthplace. Our
previous analyses have shown us the meaning of this and no Freudian
student will fail to recognize that the birthplace is a symbol for
the mother. We learn that the father’s brother resembles the father
and conclude that the uncle stands for the father in that dream. The
conversation between himself and the uncle is a repetition of old
reproaches. For a long time he was unable to work and at the present
time he is unable to help in his father’s business. He finds a ready
excuse in his illness. The incestuous relation to his mother is fairly
obvious. The inhibitions which developed so that he is unable to make
himself useful in his father’s business, are due partly to his hatred
of the father as a rival. The day before the dream he had a small
controversy with his father, because the latter had made an error in
one of his calculations and was unwilling to acknowledge it. In the
dream he revenges himself for the reproach implied in his unwillingness
to plow (plowing here stands for coitus) by a slurring reference to his
father’s age. He was no longer fit for marital duties. The parental
couple are too old, they have already lived too long (“the pair belong
on the scrap heap”) and the one at the left (the father) is but an old
jade. (In German, _Mähre_, jade, old horse, here is also a play upon
the old home, _Mähren_). This is followed by the revenge of the scorned
father in the form of pursuit by the horse.

The dreamer relates that he was fully aware of his incestuous thoughts
with reference to his mother and sister, only he thought that he had
outgrown them. But he finds that occasionally he still dreams of
contact with his mother and more often with his sister. On the other
hand he did not think the dreams signified anything, believing that
they were but the echoes of a past stage. He does not remember having
ever dreamed of his father in an overt sexual connection.

But we recognize the bipolar attitude towards his father. His trouble
must be intimately linked with an unconquered homosexuality. The
account of his illness now brings up a childhood occurrence which had
made a strong impression on him. There was a teacher in that home
town who had a most peculiar and extraordinary way of recompensing
his worthy pupils. If one did something praiseworthy and the teacher
was pleased, he said: “very well, my boy! You shall be honored for
this,”—and gave the boy his erect penis to hold until ejaculation
followed. This was done openly before the whole class. The teacher
carried on this sort of thing until five years ago without any trouble
and then left the place suddenly, to avoid court trouble as the result
of a complaint. Christoph, who was a special pet of that teacher, was
probably chosen for that honor more often than any other boy. He was
also the prettiest boy in the class.

Beginning with that experience various episodes of homosexual character
are disclosed extending up to the time when he was seventeen years of
age, when they suddenly ceased. But he does not know that these were
homosexual acts and still insists that he always felt only the most
terrible aversion towards “all these homosexual things.” The subject
maintains unconsciously the wish to do with his father what he had done
with his teacher.

He is pursued by homosexual thoughts (the _left_ horse). We are now
turning our attention to the functional significance of the dream. It
represents a pursuit. The attitude displayed towards the physician is
clear. The physician pursues him through all his memories (the flight
through the rooms). This flight through rooms has been interpreted by
_Freud_ as a flight from women (brothel). I have repeatedly pointed out
that rooms represent the compartments of the soul, that the pursuit
is really through all the parts of the brain (the upper story stands
for brain; compare the colloquialism, there is something the matter
with some one’s “upper story”). We see that a certain thought pursues
him past all obstacles and hindrances, and he is unable to elude
that searching thought. His sister is the one who comes to his aid.
She hands him a miniature stove with which to defend himself against
the horse. The stove and the lids represent the sister’s sex.... The
dream means: _only your sister, only a woman can save you from your
homosexual inclination towards your father_. The dream also indicates a
prospective tendency: he throws the sister upon the father and saves
himself through another door. He means to overcome his complexes. The
attitude towards the physician is also clear: he expects to put me off
his trail by confessing to me his incest fancies about his sister,
when I had not asked him about it. The dream indicates his intention
of telling me about his fancies and episodes in which his sister
figures. But he expects to escape thereby any further inquiry into his
wish phantasies and to avoid telling me about his attitude towards his
parents.

Then the patient falls asleep again and repeats the dream so as to
be able to tell it. We may presume that the dream was distorted and
changed somewhat in the course of its first rendition. We really get
but an extract, the chief parts omitted.... In the next dream he
tells me the first dream. Such dreams are seldom remembered. When a
woman dreams that she has told her physician the dream, it means that
she is through with the unpleasant task and the dream vanishes from
memory as in the cases when the patients declare: Today I dreamed
something important; I said to myself in my half slumber: “This is
something I must tell the doctor! I don’t remember what it was. But
it was something really significant.” Thus is the physician thwarted;
the resistance is vicariously overcome in the dream, the wish to tell
the dream is fulfilled but the wish to keep it from the physician
is stronger; during his dream experience both tendencies are given
expression by the subject.

The next dream: Again, an exposition of analysis. I am upstairs busy
with a closet, which represents the brain or his shut-up soul. But
the analysis will not last long. The wild hunting after his secrets
and treasures will cease soon. The physician has to leave (die?).
Here the physician substitutes the father. The dream shows plainly
the transference from the father to the physician. The first dream
dramatizes the pursuit of the father, in the second and third the
father no longer figures. His name is not mentioned at all in the
dream, he is the secret, the unspeakable theme.... The physician laces
his shoes; that is commonly known as a death symbol and shows the clear
wish to be through with the analysis.

An engine has to be started. He is a machinist and has daily to do with
machines. Engine is symbol for his soul which functions so poorly, a
symbol for himself, for all the impulses and energies within him. He
accomplishes through his own powers what his physician and his mother
are unable to bring about. First I try to put the engine in motion. I
take the mysterious paper package and throw it on; the mother attends
to the other side of the fire. But he gets up and takes care of the
fire from above.[24] He is above, he triumphs over me and surpasses
me in the ability to cure him. He recalls a pupil of his who had to
commute to Brünn. It brings to his mind an occasion when he was the
teacher. Thus I am his pupil, I am learning from him how to start
an engine. Though I may know something about sick souls, I don’t
understand a thing about his specialty (he is a machinist), there
he is the master and I am ignorant. This consoling thought serves
to strengthen his feeling of self-regard and prevents a feeling of
inferiority from developing in his relations to me. There are a number
of scornful references to the impotent father and to the equally
unskilful physician. He is with me one half hour daily. He had noticed
that I looked at the watch, to see whether his time was up. The half
hour and the looking at the watch appear in the dream. The day before
he showed his father how a technical problem was solved. In this dream
he also shows me that something must be done a particular way.

We observe that this attitude towards the physician, as representative
of the father, pervades the whole dream. But this does not exhaust the
meaning of the dream. It is a pollution dream (gratification without
responsibility). It is interesting to see how the onanistic act,
represented as pollution, is dramatized in the dreams. In the first
dream he flees from homosexuality and there the relationship between
homosexuality and the hidden mother complex is clearly shown. In the
second dream the mechanism of sexuality is represented in action.
Neither the father (the engineer working around the engine), the mother
nor the physician can do it. He alone is able to accomplish it. This
shows the secret pride of the masturbator, the self-sufficiency of the
autoerotic personality. (The engine’s flame covered running board, a
phallic symbol; later note.) Onanism is shown as a protection against
all sexual perils. The safety valve hisses and relieves itself—an
intimation of the subsequent pollution.

But the fear of onanism, the strong effects, the dread of homosexuality
and incest wake him from his sleep. Consciousness (the engine
conductor) attempts to control the thoughts and to banish the nocturnal
ghosts. The thoughts about a man and about his sister are interrupted
and he falls asleep once more. Three times he dreams of various
situations before the anxiety in him is transformed into wish. First
he fled from the horse and from his sister, then he fled from his
mother and the physician and finally there came his release. He was
strong enough to withstand his homosexuality, strong to overcome the
heterosexual longings. Now the instinct throws forward its highest
and strongest card to overcome the last inhibitions: bisexuality. The
girl with the phallus, his sister, appears ... and pursues him. He is
frankly preoccupied with the thought: give in and masturbate. The
thought itself he avoids, he tries to push out of his mind. He sees
himself in the dream. He sees the womanly side of himself, the woman
with the phallus, and this thought troubles him during the nightly
hours when he should be resting. He jumps at the female person to
strangle her: that is how he fights with his instinct, how he tries
to thwart his autoerotism. The instinct recognizes the weakness of
his defence and suggests that it seeks only his welfare. With the
right hand he seizes his genitals while with the left he carries out
an embrace. He has an orgasm (the sister smiles at him) but it does
not last long; for an old woman appears upon the scene. The door
opens, that is, the door of conscience (the threshold symbolism of
_Silberer_), and remorse seizes his soul. He rouses from his sleep and
the pollution worries him. The old woman may also be a symbol for his
mother (further significance of the old woman as symbol will be shown
later). But I have no proof of that inasmuch as the subject describes
her otherwise.

What is the sense of the dream with reference to its central theme?
Is it a wish-fulfillment, a warning, or a prophecy? Undoubtedly
many wishes are fulfilled in this dream. The subject resists many
temptations, he embraces his sister, he triumphs over his father and
over his physician as well. But the most important feature that the
dream portrays is the pollution as a defence against all sexual
dangers and as successful cover for all inner inhibitions.

Another meaning of the dream should be pointed out. His neurosis must
be represented by some person or object in the dream. Asked what the
engine suggests to his mind the subject answers: my illness. The
glass-covered porch: the transparency of his trouble; the engine: his
neurosis. The subject habitually compares his body to a steam engine,
especially his stomach. He shows various effects of starvation: unable
to eat, he loses weight, and looks like a skeleton because he wants
to starve out his sexual longing and punish himself for his sinful
passions. This man had built for himself a marvelous safety valve in
his neurosis. When he thinks of going to meet a girl, he gets such a
severe attack of gastric pain that he must give up the appointment.
The gastric discomfort is induced beforehand through excitement
and inability to eat. The clever staging of his gastric trouble is
noteworthy. Nausea and vomiting are first induced to prevent the taking
of food. Then hunger supervenes and that gnawing sense of hunger,
spoken of as gastric cramps, becoming so strong as to overshadow the
heart affair. The craving for food becomes more obsessive than the
desire for woman. These episodes are followed by a ravenous appetite.

He recalls that after the first dream he woke up with a terrible
hunger. This hunger was even stronger after the second dream but
disappeared after the pollution.

I have already maintained in my work on _Morbid Anxiety_ that hunger
may stand as a substitute for sexual libido and here this is clearly
shown and illustrated.

Now we understand the firing of the engine with the paper packages.
The caloric value of paper is as small as that of nutrition, when
the latter is substituted for sexual desire. Thus he makes use of
his stomach as a remarkable safety valve. He starves himself out
because the gratification of food serves as a substitute for sexual
gratification. He relates a number of incidents showing how cleverly
his neurosis serves him. Every woman he meets excites him but even when
he goes so far as to arrange an appointment with one and she agrees
to call at his residence or to go to a hotel he stops short of actual
intimacy.

From the standpoint of the analysis the prognosis is unfavorable. He
does not want to give up the neurosis, his safety valve, he wants to
keep up his own way of “firing the engine” and wishes the physician
were out of the way. Indeed, he continues to have recourse to
masturbation, he endures the consequent regrets and self reproaches,
rather than give up his defence.

We observe inwardly a strong “will to power” and formally a decidedly
feminine attitude; the orgasm occurs while he plays the role of woman;
but the highest gratification always depends on the most powerful
inner forces. He does not avoid women because he fears defeat, for
he has repeatedly proven his _potentia_ through intercourse with
prostitutes and feels supremely confident that he could master any
situation involving no moral scruples. What hinders him seems to be the
association of his sister with all decent girls, and of his mother with
all married women. His homosexuality is inhibited by his fixation on
the father. And back of all inhibitions there stands his overstressed
religiosity, which he had cultivated for years although he had
apparently outgrown it. He intended to embrace a religious career but
gave up the idea when he was 14 years of age. It is very likely that
most of his troubles will disappear after marriage, if he should break
away from the parental circle.

I believe that even one who is inexperienced in dream analysis will
readily recognize a phallic symbol in the perolin sprayer which gives
forth a soapy fluid. It was natural that at 16 years of age he should
fall in love with a colleague who resembled a sister. The obvious
incest thoughts kept him from the girl. All girls of good family were
sisters; he treated them like sisters. The prostitutes were not in
the same class with his sister and he could be potent with them. The
homosexual path was closed to him also on account of his sister. In all
young men he saw his sister with a phallus.

It is significant that further analysis discloses a fixation upon
the father to an extent I had not quite suspected before. Back of
the apparent scorn of his father, underneath his tendency to speak
lightly of him there was an unquenchable love which nothing could quite
gratify. The ugly example given by his teacher suggested intimacies
possible only in the realm of phantasy. (His subsequent dreams placed
him with me in a similar situation.) Thus he vacillated between
homosexuality and Don Juanism.

Why do these men hesitate in the end and why do they not become
genuine Don Juans? In large measure this is due to the inner religious
scruples. These rudimentary types are weighted down by an excess of
morality. They like to play at immorality but very carefully see to it
that morality wins in the end.

I wish to add a few remarks about the religious significance of the
dream. It is remarkable that all dream interpreters have overlooked
the obvious import of dreams, from the religious standpoint, in spite
of the fact that they are aware of the great role which religion plays
in man’s mental life and must appreciate that such a force necessarily
finds expression through the dream.

The subject has been for years a very pious young man. Witches and
devils filled his fancies as real tempters. The dream also shows the
fear of the devil who misleads the weak to drink, whoredom, shortly,
into sin. The homosexual tendency is often felt as the work of the
devil.

Our subject who was so very pious for a long time, declaring himself
now an atheist and free thinker. He promised his mother, under oath,
that he would attend church services regularly on Sundays but he gave
this up when he reached the 20th year. At first his mother objected,
and was very angry over it, and desisted only after her son convinced
her that he had no faith. But she said repeatedly: “I feel certain that
the Lord will enlighten you and that some day you will come back to the
faith.” He only smiled at that for on his part he felt certain that he
would never again be a believer. His greatmother, whom he visited every
summer, was even more pious. Two weeks after the dream we analyzed he
had the following dream:

_I am with my grandmother. She goes early in the morning to church and
asks me to go along. I hesitate. Next morning she repeats the request.
I have a strong attack of gastric pains and tell her. I will take a
sunbath, it is the same thing...._

We see that, under the grandmother’s request, the dream portrays the
subject’s childhood disposition. We note a connection between the
hesitation to go to church and the gastric pains and we hear of
sunbaths as a substitute for religion,—a fact which I have repeatedly
observed in other cases as well.

Further inquiry reveals that every evening the patient struggles with
the impulse to recite “Our Father”; he resents the inclination,—“it
is nonsense. I don’t believe any such folly as that.” Nevertheless
sometimes he murmurs portions of the prayer, while in a half dreamy
state, when he has the illusion of being again a child. He carries
around in his pocket, a couple of small “holy mother medallions” which
he bought at a fair: “it is really a superstition; I always carry them
in my coin purse, because I have an idea it is good luck.” He has
presented his prayer book to his younger sister and so the book is
always accessible. He goes to churches because he is “interested in the
church music.” ...

How does the dream show this? The devil appears to him in the shape of
a horse (horse’s hoof is a characteristic sign of the devil) and tries
to seduce him. The horse breaks down doors and all obstacles. At one
time he believed in a personal devil. He attended once a church where
the minister preached considerably about the devil and who said that
there were living witnesses to testify that they had seen the devil.
His grandfather was angry because the minister told believers such
far-fetched stories, and forbade him going to that church. But the
fear of a personal devil had been deeply implanted in him at home. If
he misbehaved, he was threatened with the evil one. If he refused to
pray some one knocked in the next room and he was told that it was the
devil that was after him. He was brought up the same way to believe in
witches. An ugly old woman once came to his room dressed as a witch to
scare him and the other children into better behavior and it affected
him so horribly that he remembered the scare for years. In his dream
the devil pursues him and he eludes the pursuit. In the second part
of the dream he himself is the devil and can do charms. To do magic
was his highest ambition in his youth and he would have gladly given
himself up to the devil for the privilege of learning magic. He starts
the engine by means of a charm. In his childhood his great wish was to
build a magic locomotive with which he could travel wherever he wanted.

The servant girl who brings down three bales of paper (play on
trinity?), (his love letters?), is a symbol of the Holy Virgin, as
it is in all dreams, a fact which I could easily prove. He was a
confirmed admirer of the Holy Mother. He must give this up if he is to
learn magic. But the dream is a compromise between the two tendencies
and expresses a bipolar attitude; he fires the engine with divine
fuel, with faith, which upholds his life along the right path and
protects it. He wishes me to the devil that he may continue secretly
to cling to his religion. But the infantile wish to be a magician
comes foremost to the surface. (The dream does not portray one wish,
but a number of wishes which criss-cross the soul.) The supplementary
portion of the lengthy dream also illustrates the power of magic. The
religious meaning of spraying (with holy water ... Perolin cleanses and
disinfects the air) is readily obvious and so is also the admixture
of religious and sexual motives which play such a tremendous role in
the neuroses and the psychoses.[25] He yields to the temptation, a
she-devil seduces him. The old woman, after all, is the witch of his
childhood, coming to punish him for his sins. (He admits also a strong
gerontophilia and once he fell in love with a 60-year-old woman).

The old and the new testament, his prayer books, his confession slips,
are in the paper packages which he must burn up to free himself of all
religious inhibitions.

The dream thus portrays a prospective tendency,—the overcoming
religious inhibitions, subduing the dread of hell and devil as well as
the fear of witches so as to give himself up to his cravings. He takes
his life in his own hands, fires his own engine,—he will take unto
himself any woman who looks like his sister.

The dream expresses clearly also that his homosexual fixation is due
to the mother and sister Imago which he finds in all women. Finding
himself upon a sexual path which leads away from women and in the
direction of man, he wants to leave that path and become a normal man
by overcoming all inhibitions. He no longer requires the protection
of his neurosis, he is master of himself, scorns the religious
imperatives, becoming magician and God in his own right.

Through the history of this subject we obtain a glimpse into the
mechanism which eventually leads to homosexuality. This subject might
have become a homosexual and would have then presented the usual
homosexual life history: Very tender for a time, girl-like, played with
dolls at his grandmother’s house, liked to be busy in the kitchen and
preferred the company of girls. Such experiences are commonly shared
also by the heterosexual persons but the latter forget them. Later, if
the course of development favors the outbreak of homosexuality, these
recollections, emphasized and fixed through repetition are pointed out
as proof that the condition is inborn.

One episode in our subject’s life might have led him to overt
homosexuality: his experience with the teacher,—the more so as it
took place openly. But what amounts to an inciting factor in one case
may act as a deterrent in another. Every influence may assert itself
either on the negative or positive side. Childhood dreams as carried
out by adults, may generate either a gerontophilia, or a similar
inclination towards children, depending on whether the subject assumes
the role of the adult or of the younger person. Fixation on the mother
may drive a man entirely to homosexuality as I have clearly learned
through the history of a certain case. The homosexuals frequently have
a morbid mother, a woman who suffers of depression and is unwise in her
actions. Unfortunately my observations indicate that the fancies are
generated by parents as often as they are incited by guilty servants
and that such occurrences are far from rare.

In the case under consideration the experience with the teacher and
the latter’s revolting openness about it acted as an inhibition to
homosexuality. The thought, “You may get to be like that teacher,”
acted as a deterrent against the outbreak of a so-called genuine
homosexuality, though all conditions were otherwise favorable. Even the
characteristic dislike of women was there as well as the incestuous
fixation upon the female members of the family.

And although much of his sexual life was perfectly clear to this
subject’s mind, including things which to others appear only in the
dim light of day dreaming or upon the lowered state of threshold
consciousness, there was one thing about which he was entirely
ignorant: his true attitude towards, and relationship to, his father.
He was continually more irritated with his father and avoided to be
alone with him because he knew how easily they break into a quarrel
and how misunderstanding would arise between them on the slightest
provocation. This hypersensitiveness in his relations with his father,
shows that there were feelings at work over which he was not master.
What he demanded and expected of his father I have already indicated.
He wanted to be treated by him as he had been treated by his teacher.
In the course of the analysis he also had a dream during which I was
the one assuming that role. He is homosexually fixed on his father and
heterosexually fixed upon the female members of his family.

It is interesting to see that the homosexual inclination, despite all
childhood experiences, is repressed and masked under the feeling of
disgust. We understand in this light the meaning of the gastric pains.
He thinks only of women and is a typical instance of a would-be Don
Juan. He begins numerous adventures but always meets difficulties.
That is, he starts relations which from the beginning present these
difficulties and in that way there is no danger for him. If the
difficulties (symbol of the unattainable, that is of the incestuous
goal) are overcome, the attraction disappears or else his protective
defence comes to his aid: the gastric attacks. He goes so far as to
take a girl to a room but at the last moment he can do nothing on
account of his gastric pain. The nausea is a sign of disgust. It is
brought about by the homosexual tendency pressing forward as much as
by the subject’s inhibition against heterosexual relationship. At
the most critical time before meeting the girl he is restless, and a
voice within seems to say to him: “you do not really want this woman,
you want a man, like that teacher, or that friend of yours!” As a
protection against these homosexual notions his nausea comes up and
this also acts as a defence against women. For woman, as such, he feels
no dislike, he is able to have intercourse with prostitutes, without
aversion. But homosexual acts are repulsive to him. Thus he remains
hanging midway between homosexuality and heterosexuality. On account of
his religious scruples both pathways are closed to him and the result
is—his ascetic behavior at the end.

His asceticism is back of the rudimentary Don Juan role which he plays
but cannot carry out in accordance with his instinctive promptings on
account of his inhibitions. One step nearer and we have the Don Juan
of day-dreams and ascetic in fact,—if the adventures with women are
not even begun. A step further advanced is represented by the complete
repression of all sexual inclinations. We may define the ascete as a
person who remains in the narcissistic stage of fixation because both
paths of allerotism (that is, homo-, and heterosexuality) are equally
closed to him. An exclusive monosexual goal is incapable of rousing the
instinctive excitation necessary for carrying out a sexual act, because
the religious scruples are oppressive. His perennially unattainable
ideal is a bisexual being, he longs for a passion so strong that it
should be capable of overcoming all obstacles. His asceticism is not
voluntary, but a state induced by his sexual constellation.

Our subject has found his sexual ideal in the dream world. That is a
sister who has a phallus. He, the valiant warrior, struggles against
his instinctive promptings and masturbates. This act acquires in his
conscious mind, as pollution, the character of an involuntary act, an
accidental occurrence which cannot be helped, thus being robbed of its
significance.

_Freud_ points out rightly that the psychologist is particularly
interested in cases showing a late development of homosexuality,—a
condition which _Krafft-Ebing_ has described as “_tardive_” or Late
Homosexuality. In such cases homosexuality develops after a period of
hetero-, or bisexuality. We will describe a number of cases of late
homosexuality elsewhere and then we shall also attempt to trace the
reasons for the occurrence.

The next case also represents a transitional stage showing us a woman
in the throes of a struggle between the two tendencies. We have here a
rudimentary, a would-be Messalina, an interesting female counterpart to
the case described above.

Miss Wanda K. complains of an unfortunate split in her mental make-up
which prevents her from enjoying life as she should. She suffers of
strong and uncontrollable vomiting but the trouble arises only when
she is about to keep an appointment. She holds the most liberal views
that “a modern girl can and should have.” She meets gladly men who
interest her and even those who rouse her sexually. She knows she will
never marry. She is 29 years old and although still very pretty and
attractive,—how long will this last? She wants to enjoy life, she
would not care to die without having tasted the supreme gift and prize
of life, love. But she has a “delicate” stomach which interferes at the
most critical moment. Here is an example:

“Last Sunday I was to take an excursion with a gentleman whom I met in
an unconventional way. I am not at all prudish and do not mind being
spoken to on the street. As I walk downtown often I think to myself:
will someone talk to me this time? I try to attract attention, just a
little, and return home disappointed if no one notices me. A few weeks
ago a very elegant elderly gentleman addressed me on such an occasion.
He is a very intellectual man, which is the chief consideration with
me. I like intercourse only with intellectual persons. Persons lacking
culture are a trial to me. We entertained ourselves very pleasantly and
since then we meet daily. When the store where I am employed closes at
the end of the day, I find him already waiting for me at the street
corner. Then we go for a walk and we talk about all sorts of things.
He has never dared yet mention anything erotic in our conversation.
I have no reason, therefore, to fear him. Nevertheless I am watching
and waiting eagerly for the opportunity to show him that I am a modern
girl, unafraid of anything when she finds a man sympathetic and to
her liking, if he should ever begin. I do not expect anything more.
One cannot fall in love all of a sudden! Now, we promise ourselves an
excursion around Vienna for Sunday. Saturday I feel very excited, and
I picture to myself how he is going to bring up sexual matters, how he
will kiss me in the woods, I already plan what I shall say to him, how
I will resist him, just a little, and finally give in. You will excuse
me. It is high time that I quit being an old maid. Is that not a pity,
at twenty-nine? At the office where I am employed all the girls have a
sweetheart and some have several at once. That keeps going through my
mind. I am very excited and I even whistle a tune. But at the evening
meal I am unable to swallow a morsel of foods. My stomach seems shut
tight. Nothing will go down. I hope it will be over in the morning. I
get up early, put on my excursion suit and want to have my breakfast. I
struggle with nausea, try to eat some breakfast, only to vomit promptly
every particle of the food. Then the terrible nausea continues and
keeps up so that I must stay home while the gentleman waits in vain for
me at the appointed spot. Naturally when this happens a second time he
drops me ... unfortunately it ends just that way every time.”

She relates numberless occurrences of this character which always end
in uncontrollable nausea and vomiting. She has a long list of admirers,
young and old, rich and poor, educated and some less so, every one
thinking he can conquer her as she is very free and open in her talk
and does not avoid sexual topics in her conversations with them. She
is a member of various women’s organizations, like _Mutterschutz_,
which is devoted to the protection of the unmarried mother, she is a
champion for women’s sexual freedom and also a Shannaist. But every
one of the men she dangles on her string who tries to pass from theory
to cold fact discovers, much to his astonishment, that there is quite
a difference between this woman’s views and her practical conduct.
She circumvents all occasions which might prove embarrassing to her.
An office colleague invites her to his home. He is an art collector,
she is interested in painting, and he would like to show her his
collection. She finds all sorts of excuses to postpone accepting his
invitation and finally appears at his house ... accompanied by a girl
friend.... She had dwelt so much on all the possible consequences of a
visit of this kind that at the last moment she lost her courage.

It is interesting that her mental state developed first after an
engagement. Until the age of 23 she was fairly normal, very much like
any other girl. At that age she made the acquaintance of a man of good
standing in whom she became much interested. She became engaged to him
and this made her happy for she was in love as much as any girl could
be who thought she had found her ideal.

The man had but one serious fault. He was tremendously jealous. He
tortured her with questions about her whole past life and she had to
relate to him with particularity everything that she had experienced
as a girl. She frankly told him that once she was in love with her
piano teacher and also with her school teacher, a girl, but that there
was nothing else of any significance in her life. Nevertheless he
kept torturing her with further questionings insisting that she must
tell everything before marriage and he will forgive her absolutely
everything, but he did not want to be deceived, he wanted perfect
candor and truth between them.

One night she woke from a dream in which her brother and she had
figured in a rather intimate role. This brought to her mind an
occurrence she had entirely forgotten. She was visiting her married
brother in the country. His wife had gone to some relatives and he
suggested that she should sleep in his wife’s bed. She did so without
having any particular erotic notions, since this was her brother with
whom she had always been frank, not as she was with her other brothers,
for she had four others. During the night she felt her brother’s hand
touching her. He crawled in to her bed and kissed her. She was sleepy
and thought she was dreaming. He kissed her again and sleepy as she
was, she responded. They embraced warmly. She knows that she took hold
of his _membrum_. She thinks her brother must have exercised wonderful
control over himself after that and that he crawled back in his own
bed. The whole experience of that night is rather unclear. That much
she is certain, no coitus took place.

This remembrance awed her for she knew then that she had lied to her
man. It happened only once for next day she left the place and her own
brother advised her to do it. She went to visit a friend of hers in
the neighborhood and returned only after her sister-in-law was back
home. But since her young man had such complete faith in her, she felt
that she must tell him the whole truth. She told him of the occurrence
relating how it took place as in a dream. He began to investigate and
to question until it drove her to distraction and there were times when
she herself wavered in her recollection as to what really occurred.
But she could only repeat the one thing: she knew positively that
they kissed and touched each other that night, but could not say that
between her brother and herself matters had gone beyond that.

Her bridegroom stayed away a few days. Then she received from him a
note stating that he does not feel that he can take her to the altar
after her confession and he considers himself therefore a free man. He
sent her back the engagement ring and demanded the return of all his
gifts and letters.

This was like a physical blow to her. That was the thanks she received
for her complete candor! She had taken at his word the man whom she
dearly loved. How could she help thinking that he merely sought an
excuse in her eyes, and in his own, a pretext to declare himself free?

For a time after that she hated all men. She made no exception,
including in her hatred even that brother who was responsible for her
misfortune, in the first place.

Then she arrived at a second deduction: “it is not worth while to be
honorable! Better be easy going, like all your women friends!”

Shortly after that she apparently ceased hating all men and her great
yearning began causing her to think continually of nothing but men. At
the same time there began also her uncontrollable vomiting.

It seemed that her tremendous inclination to love was struggling with
an equally powerful antagonism. During that difficult period her only
consolation was a woman friend and her sister to whom she felt herself
very closely attached.

But her dreams show that back of her running after men there was
something else: the homosexual instinct which was struggling powerfully
to come to surface and which she tried to hold back by her love
affairs with men. She showed a number of unmistakable signs. She
dressed simply and rather mannishly; she cut her hair short, and
began smoking cigarettes; her appearance and gait assumed more and
more a mannish form; she lost her mildness and soft nature becoming
hardened and strong. Her whole nature expressed one supreme wish: _I
want to be a man, he has a better life!_ And, strange enough! Now
she does attract men and they dangle after her by the dozen. But she
only played and when it came to a serious issue in the course of any
of her adventures,—for some of the men had earnest intentions,—she
deliberately turned the whole thing into a huge joke.

She was no longer lured by men alone. She was on the point of becoming
overtly homosexual passing through the last phase of the struggle. The
nausea stood more and more clearly as a protection and defence against
the homosexual inclination. Her dreams were filled with homosexual
episodes. She herself was astonished when she began to observe her
dreams. The very first dream she related concerned her sister and her
friend:

 _I am with my friend on the_ Gaensehäufel _(a popular promenade on the
 Danube embankment in Vienna) and we are naked; I say: How beautiful
 you are! You are more beautiful than any man. She embraces me and
 kisses me on the breast, on the spot where I am so sensitive. I wake
 up with dread,—palpitation of the heart and nausea._

Other dreams represent endless variants of this theme. Men figure in
them but seldom. Occasionally she is pursued by them and flees to her
sister or her friend. Thus her conflict is also shown in her dreams as
a flight away from men, an escape through homosexuality.

This young woman also imagined herself to be a radical although
inwardly she was pious. Sundays she visited the church, to hear the
music, she was not a believer, but occasionally she prayed, because
it was an old habit, she was fond of reading the Bible and she had to
suppress a small inner voice which impelled her to go to confession.
One day she said to me: “Do you know, yesterday it occurred to me that
if I were again a believer and could go to confession, everything would
be all right....”

Here we see a young woman who was at first on the proper path to become
a normal, heterosexual woman. She experiences a serious trauma and
begins to despise all men. She turns away from them. This aversion
is favored by the fact that all men remind her of the love for her
brother, which was repressed and forgotten but which flared up again
on the occasion of her unfortunate experience. That was the reason
why she was able to entertain herself best with elderly gentlemen and
go on excursions with them, etc., without being overcome with nausea.
The danger was not so great and these men were less typical of her
brother.... She turns away from men and her sexuality flows into
another channel. We have therefore a regression back to a childhood
phase, apparently past and gone, in _Freud’s_ sense. She also becomes
more agreeable at home, where during the past years she had been
accustomed to pay no attention to her mother. She again becomes fixed
upon her family and turns once more to her childhood piety. The period
of her nausea represents the last stage in her struggle against
homosexuality.

       *       *       *       *       *

As we glance over the three cases just analyzed we are impressed in the
first place by the powerful rôle of the inner religiosity, which often
passes unrecognized. Both men stood upon that emotional level which
leads to polygamy as a defence against homosexuality. But they were
unable to overcome their religious scruples. Too weak openly to embrace
asceticism, they wandered through complicated neurotic by-paths in the
attempt to circumvent all the dangers that threatened them. One of them
played very cleverly the rôle of ‘_Pechvogel_,’—a man who would gladly
be a libertine but who was not lucky enough to succeed,—the other was
prevented by his stomach trouble from abandoning the path of virtue.

The counterpart is the “modern girl” who dreams about free love and
mother-rights and at the same time generates a nervous nausea as a
defence against any danger to her virtue. Here again we must admire
the subtlety of the neurotic who finds such clever means to assume a
certain rôle in the eyes of the world no less than before himself,
in order to cover up his true nature. All men who really lack inner
freedom are overanxious to act as if they were free. They apparently
adopt some modern liberal principle while as a matter of fact secretly
they adhere to the religious scruples of their ancestors.

As a great sin and “unnatural” act, it is plain that homosexuality
was out of question in these cases. Religion acts here as protection
and outlet at the same time. But it is also clear that under an other
educational régime these men would have found open to them two
paths neither of which they were able to choose under the existing
inhibitions.

The woman may become overtly homosexual and some late episodes indicate
that her resistance to the homosexual longings may yet be overcome. In
this case the traumatic incident which turned her against all men did
not occur during early childhood. It is a great error to assume that
traumas of late occurrence lose their pathogenic rôle.

There are periods in our life when we are impervious to traumas.
But there are also times during which we are hypersensitive to
any influences which play upon us. Every decennium of our life
has its crises and morbid periods during which we show a peculiar
sensitiveness.




                                   V

 Resistance of Homosexuals against Cure and their Pride in their
 Condition—Acquired vs. Inherited—Insanity and Alcoholism betray the
 Inner Man—Three Cases by Colla illustrating Behavior during Alcoholic
 Intoxication—Observations of Numa Praetorius—The case of Hugo
 Deutsch—Views of Juliusburger—Two Personal Observations—A case by
 Moll—Views of Fleischmann and Naecke—A Personal Observation—Bloch
 on Woman Haters.


 _Die Kranken sind die grösste Gefahr für die Gesunden; nicht von
 den Stärksten kommt das Unheil für die Starken, sondern von den
 Schwächsten._

  _Nietzsche._




                                   V

_The sick are the greatest danger to the healthy; the mischief done to
the strong comes not from the stronger, but from the weakest._

  _Nietzsche._


Experience in the course of psychoanalysis has shown us that the
recollections as told by the subjects are partial and incomplete.

The repressed memories and all those images which the subjects are
unwilling at first to see come to surface only after weeks of analysis.
Then the subjects are astonished to discover that they did not really
know themselves. The solution of our problem appears to depend on the
successful analysis of a large number of homosexuals. Meanwhile there
are a number of striking facts which every psychoanalyst can verify
and which those who uphold the theory that homosexuality is inborn
look upon as proof of their contention that homosexuality is truly
hereditary: most homosexuals are apparently well satisfied with their
condition and do not particularly care to be cured of it. They call on
the analyst only after they come into conflict with the law or if they
fear such a conflict. They do not want to have heterosexual feelings,
they are proud of their condition and they always insist that social
ostracism alone is what makes their status an unhappy one. They belong
to those remarkable persons who refuse to appreciate their plight.
Hence the customary statement: since I began homosexual relations I am
happy. I desire nothing else! Only a small number retain any desire for
“wife and child” and for normal relations, but even those fear it as
much as the “manly hero,” proud of his homosexuality.

We must not forget that exclusive homosexuality is the end result of a
long and tortuous psychic process, a sort of self-healing process in
the midst of a quasi-insoluble conflict. The dangerous heterosexual
path is apparently blocked altogether, because certain inhibitions
stand actively in the way. The removal of the inhibitions renews the
acute character of the conflict,—it means changing a state of truce
for a state of active warfare. The homosexual finds in his condition
a makeshift for peace and quiet. It is a poor peace, to be sure, for
the heterosexual inclinations are still powerful enough to generate
neurotic symptoms. But it is a safety outlet and anxiety prevents
its abandon. Just as the woman seized with fear of open spaces
(agoraphobia) finally refuses to leave the house and thus avoids her
anxiety only to experience the attacks of anxiety again the moment she
endeavors to step out of the circumscribed area of peace,—the moment
she endeavors to go beyond the sphere within which her inner voice
keeps quiet,—so the homosexual feels once more the full strength of
his revulsion whenever he attempts heterosexual activity. His customary
attitude towards woman is one of dislike or disgust, she may leave
him indifferent, but never will he admit that—he is afraid of woman.
He would rather assume the mask of indifference; he may be willing
to approach woman but only upon intellectual grounds, he may even
appreciate her as a friend, but he flees from her as a possible lover.

The homosexual resembles the fetichist in this regard: he has found his
compromise, he has become accustomed to his limitation and willingly
puts up with his limitation as being something organic, final,
inherited. That is why we usually hear that the homosexual felt his
peculiarity already in his childhood, that he was from the first unlike
the other children, that he was always “different.”

_The pride over his condition, the continually repeated and stressed
notion that he is exceptional, the attitude of contrariness towards
what is normal, all these things render difficult a subsequent
correction of the trouble._[26]

How may the homosexual be cured? If he is made heterosexual he
represses his homosexuality and becomes neurotic for that reason; the
endeavor to turn him bisexual meets the course of social development.
The proper therapic course would be to remove the inhibitions which
stand between him and woman, to make him de facto again bisexual and
heterosexual for all practical purposes. That is certainly possible
and it may be attained through analysis provided the subjects have the
patience and perseverance to carry it out. Where the will is lacking no
therapist can accomplish anything. Unfortunately in most instances the
will is absent.

Analysis has taught us how misleading the first accounts are as
obtained from the subjects, how much they recollect their past in a
spirit of partizanship. Every person carries out a one-sided choice of
remembrances recalling merely what suits a particular occasion. This
came to me as a great surprise when I first undertook the analysis
of a homosexual especially as at the time my experience was limited
and my knowledge of the technique and my understanding of resistance
very imperfect. At the time I still believed that the patient wills
to get well; I am convinced today that the will to be ill is the
strongest force which we must fight against. That first homosexual
gave me the usual history,—the development from early childhood of
feelings exclusively homosexual. My surprise was great when the subject
recalled a large number of heterosexual experiences in the course of
the following three weeks, all dating from his childhood. I learned
then in one lesson that homosexuality is _developmental_ and not
something _inborn_; _an acquired, not an inherited character_. I was
much impressed with _Hirschfeld’s_ theory of the intermediary stage
(_Zwischenstufentheorie_) but placed no credence in this theory and
awaited further proofs. At the First Psychoanalytic Congress, _Sadger_
reported similar experiences based on psychoanalysis. To be sure,
_Sadger_ conceived the psychogenesis of homosexuality in rather narrow
terms and for a time, I must confess, I too looked upon the repression
of the mother Imago, which every woman is alleged to reproduce, as the
sole cause of homosexuality.[27]

But my diligent researches extending over a period of years have since
convinced me that this problem is very complicated and that there are
clearly a number of genetic factors, and that several of them must and
do cooperate in every instance to bring about the thwarting of the
heterosexual and the enlargement of the homosexual craving.

It occurred to me at first that in many cases the inhibitions may
disappear also in the homosexual leading him to become again a
heterosexual person. Every one who has had any experience with the
homosexual knows that occasionally a genuine homosexual may change and
fall in love unexpectedly with a woman or he even marries and after
that continues as a normal person. Thus, for instance, _Tarnovsky_,
in his work, “_The Morbid Manifestations of the Sexual Instinct_,”
states:[28] “I know a pederast who maintained relations almost
exclusively with young boys; at a relatively advanced age he fell
passionately in love with a young girl, whom he married and with whom
he had children. He was able to carry out sexual relations with his
wife only because her face resembled that of a young man whom he once
loved.” A rationalisation of that kind, such a transformation, may
be seen here and there. It is quite likely that the young man, whom
_Tarnovsky’s_ patient once loved, in turn resembled the homosexual’s
sister or some other beloved female person and that the subject took
that step to return at last to his first heterosexual ideal. Only a few
days ago there called on me a “confirmed” homosexual who had suddenly
fallen in love with a cabaret singer whom he wanted to marry. She
was the exact image of a sister of his who had died long ago. Before
this he did not want to hear of contact with women. Cases of this
kind—without any treatment, of course,—are discussed very heatedly
in homosexual circles and the news is rapidly spread. The deserter is
spoken of as traitor to the holy cause, he is counted out and banished
from the circle. Anathema sit! Such cases are not infrequent. But they
do not come to the attention of the physician and if they attract the
specialist’s attention, the latter invariably declares them instances
of “_pseudo-homosexuality_.” No “genuine” homosexual would do such a
thing! Homosexual physicians, unfortunately, only add to the confusion
on this subject. They constitute themselves judge and jury at the same
time, but claim to be objective in their judgment,—they have tried the
experiment in their own case, etc.—Oh, those wonderful psychologists
who know all about their own soul! What have I not endured from those
enthusiasts who imagine that they have really penetrated the depths
of their own psyche! But any one who has opportunity to analyze a
psychoanalyst is invariably amazed at the degree of blindness possible
where one’s own attitude is concerned. The practice of psychoanalysis
on others does not prevent ignorance where self is concerned. I have
analyzed dozens of psychoanalysts and found “analytic scotoma” an
appropriate designation for their mental state. Every one is blind
about those complexes which he has not yet conquered, whether he meets
them in himself or in others. The homosexual physician is also blind
about his own condition and should never undertake to furnish testimony
on the question whether homosexuality is inherited or acquired.

There are occasions when the cover which screens from view our inner
attitude, the repressions and transferences, the metamorphoses and
changes, is torn aside by more powerful forces and then we obtain a
view of the forces which act behind the setting of consciousness. These
occasions are the intervals during which our inhibitions are lifted.
_Insanity permits us occasionally to see truths which reason timidly
keeps under cover. But alcohol also tears aside the screen which covers
the inner man._ Many physicians know of persons apparently heterosexual
in every respect and who never think of homosexuality, but who have
been guilty while drunk of carrying out homosexual deeds such as are
entirely repulsive to them in the sober state. I had under my care a
teacher who while intoxicated—the first time in his life—attacked
a boy and was guilty of committing a crime. When he came to himself
he felt so disconsolate, his remorse was so great, that he wanted to
take his life and it was only with the greatest difficulty that he was
prevented from turning himself over to the authorities. Later he was
denounced by some one. But I was able to squash the inquiry for lack
of positive evidence. In his favor stood his exemplary previous life
history and the fact that he had always been an admirer of ladies and
had never taken any interest in men or boys. I have already remarked
before that a large number of those who uphold temperance or abstinence
are really afraid of alcohol because it releases inhibitions and
permits the aggressive outbreak of repressed sensuousness.

I. E. Colla has reported on “_Three instances of homosexual deeds
during drunkenness_,” in the _Vierteljahrschrift für gerichtliche
Medizin und öffentliches Sanitätswesen_,[29] as follows:

The first case was a 29 year old inebriate who had had a wide
experience with women and carousals; after a prolonged period of
abstinence he became intoxicated while in a sanitarium, was seduced
by a homosexual, and immediately after that, while in an intoxicated
state, he attempted to attack a servant. Repetition of similar episodes
when under the influence of drink but when sober exclusive breaking
forth of heterosexual feelings. A clear proof in favor of my view about
the relations of latent homosexuality to satyriasis.

In the second case a controlled homosexual leaning breaks forth
overpowering the subject when drunk. A similar picture in the third
case: A protestant minister, 37 years of age, drinker, loses his
self-control while drunk and by his offensive behavior in a public
place attracts the attention of the authorities.

_Numa Praetorius_, that thorough expert on homosexuality, relates:
“In many cases homosexual deeds are committed under the influence
of alcohol. Thus, for instance, I know a former police officer, a
homosexual, who when drunk attempts homosexual deeds upon heterosexual
comrades, who excite him, although he is acquainted with the homosexual
circle, is intimate with many homosexuals, and in his sober state
he carries out relations only with persons with whom he is safe. On
account of these attacks on heterosexual persons during his drunken
condition he has lost his position as police officer as well as his
later position in a factory.

“Another homosexual, a merchant, thirty years of age, when drunk
finds this inclination uncontrollable and has tackled the wrong
persons while in that state. There is a great deal of truth in the
contention that during the inebriate state man’s true character comes
to surface,—at any rate his true sexual character certainly reveals
itself in that state, since the customary inhibitions are curtailed.
Here ‘_in vino veritas_’ certainly holds true.” (_Jahrbuch f. Sexuelle
Zwischenstufen_, Vol. VIII.)

These cases, with the exception of the first, show only an increase of
an already existing homosexual inclination otherwise under control. But
frequently it happens that heterosexual persons carry out their first
homosexual aggression during the inebriate state.

Thus _Praetorius_ remarks in another passage: “As is disclosed in
various published biographies as well as in certain communications
which have reached me orally, there are young persons, otherwise
apparently normal in feeling and conduct, who when drunk are attracted
to their own sex with a great feeling of pleasure thus disclosing more
than a pseudo-homosexual attitude. But their proper heterosexual nature
does not appear to be changed materially by these occasional homosexual
episodes and emotional sprees.”

_Hugo Deutsch_[30] has reported a very instructive case, which,
although far from unique, as the author believes, may be mentioned in
this connection:

“An intelligent workingman, 39 years of age, appeals for advice and
information to the clinic for alcoholics. As a child he suffered
of rachitis and began walking only at four years of age; excessive
masturbation as a small boy and young man; later, occasional
intercourse with girls; he married two years ago and is the father of
two children. No illness, with the exception of minor complaints. Uses
alcohol moderately, drinks now and then one-half to one litre of beer
on the occasion of some reunion or meeting. But this always excites his
sexual passion; specifically he feels impelled to take advantage of
young male persons[31] so as to touch and feel their sexual parts. He
has been able to withstand this desire but once while on his way home
from a meeting where he had again taken a couple of glasses of beer he
met a young boy whom he invited to have a drink with him and while they
were sitting at a table in the saloon he touched the boy’s genitals.
A customer saw this and denounced him to an officer who arrested him.
He was in despair over the occurrence and only the thought of his wife
and children prevented him from committing suicide. He has not touched
a drop of alcoholic drink since because he recognizes how dangerous
even a small amount of drink may be for him. So long as he is sober his
libido is directed exclusively to women, in fact he feels only _disgust
and aversion for any homosexual deeds_. When the contrary feeling first
arose in connection with drink he cannot recall. There is nothing
relevant in this connection in his family history and there is nothing
“womanly” in his physical appearance.”

_Deutsch_ believes that this is a case of bisexuality brought to
surface because the use of even moderate doses of alcohol suspends the
existing inhibitions.

_Hirschfeld_, too, has also made a few pertinent remarks on this
subject (l. c. p. 209). He mentions the case of a government official
who attacked a baker’s apprentice after a “heavy celebration” of the
Kaiser’s birthday; also the case of an apparently heterosexual high
school teacher who during a prolonged carousal attacked a waiter. He
also mentions a report he was requested to make about an officer who
after a carousal requested his servant boy to help him take an enema
and used that opportunity to seduce him. In his report _Hirschfeld_
found this complaint, if it be true, contrary to the defendant’s whole
personality, and recommended annulling the complaint because at the
time of the alleged misdeed the accused was in a peculiar and morbid
mental state. But we must look upon these occurrences as proofs of
man’s bisexual nature and as outbreaks of latent homosexuality made
possible through the removal of customary inhibitions.

_Otto Juliusburger_, in his _Psychology of Alcoholism_,[32] has given
us an exhaustive and masterly exposition of this problem. That author
reports that he has been able definitely to trace the outbreak of
unconscious homosexuality in cases of dipsomania and discusses most
instructively the relations between alcohol and homosexuality.

_Juliusburger_ describes the case of a dipsomaniac who during the drink
episodes betrayed most clearly his homosexual love for his uncle.
During those episodes the subject felt impelled to accost men—and
only men—ordering for them anything they wished,—“frankly a symbol,
to show his affection.” “One source of the anxiety and unrest which
ushers in the so-called dipsomaniac episode or which may entirely
replace the attack,” states _Juliusburger_, “I see in the struggle and
the resulting intrapsychic tension between the various psychosexual
components of the individual.” I shall have occasion to refer to
_Juliusburger’s_ views concerning the relationship of the jealousy
episodes of the alcoholics and sadism in the chapter on “Jealousy.”

It is even more interesting in connection with our present subject to
find that homosexuals are easily induced to carry on heterosexual
deeds while under the influence of alcohol. Of course this is not the
case in every instance but the fact is undeniable. Neither do all
heterosexuals lend themselves to homosexual acts when drunk. Often the
inhibitions are more powerful than the releasing effect of alcohol.

I have made inquiries of about one hundred homosexuals regarding the
circumstances under which they indulged in intercourse with women. Many
hesitated to answer, but I have found that a high percentage of cases
have had the experience. Some answered saying, practically: “I can do
this only if I am under the influence of drink;” or, “while I was drunk
a girl seduced me.” We must not suppose that homosexuals are impotent
with women. There are among them many more bisexually disposed than are
willing to recognize this fact, because they prefer as a rule to assume
the rôle of innocents before others and for that reason they claim that
intercourse with a woman is positively impossible for them. I have had
circulated in the Viennese homosexual circle a small questionnaire
which contained also a question covering this point. Many confessed
dislike for woman, others admitted a platonic attitude, but there were
also such answers as: “In my 34 years I have had intercourse with a
woman, this I found very pleasurable, but after four months I turned
again exclusively homosexual;” or, “now and then I have intercourse
with a woman”; further, “after pleasant personal relations lasting for
some time I am able to have intercourse with a woman”; another writes:
“Once I had intercourse with a woman and it was a very pleasurable
experience but never repeated it since that time;”—Others write as
follows:

“Have had intercourse previously; do so no longer.”

“No intercourse; presumably would be impotent with woman.”

“Intercourse previously pleasurable; sudden disappearance of feeling
now makes intercourse impossible.”

Another writes laconically: “bisexual.”

At least one-fourth of my overt homosexuals are really bisexual with
subsequent modifications of their bisexuality brought about through
causes which will be discussed in a subsequent chapter of this work.[33]

We now turn our attention to the next case. It shows clearly that
heterosexual tendencies arise in the homosexual under the influence
of alcohol and it also proves that under the pressure of danger the
homosexual craving by drawing on the greater libido turns into the
heterosexual channel:

D. S., a clerk, 35 years of age, has been homosexual for the past
fifteen years. His father died when he was 7 years of age. He hardly
remembers his father. His mother was always very severe, and very
energetic as well as exceedingly nervous,—she had to go frequently to
sanitaria to recuperate. He admits having had feelings predominatingly
homosexual ever since childhood. He interested himself only in boys and
his mother brought him up in girlish ways. He began masturbating at an
early age and already at the age of 12 he carried on mutual pederasty
with his comrades. At 17 years of age he attempted intercourse with
girls. That was not easy, his _potentia_ had to be roused by them
first through manual stimulation, then he felt some pleasure, which
was curbed partly because he could not help thinking of the possible
danger of venereal disease, of which he had seen some illustrations
in a museum of wax figures. He was also thinking about his mother
reflecting, what would she say if she knew what he was doing! From
that time on and until he was about 21 years of age he had intercourse
with women regularly about every month. Then he fell in love with his
office chief, who was an extraordinarily attractive man. (He gives a
romantic description of his first ideal. This account, of course, is
not trustworthy. In fact the photo of his latest ideal, also praised by
him as an Adonis, shows the stolid, expressionless, rather common face
of a very ordinary man, a soldier in the artillery branch of the army).

His chief was a homosexual who easily seduced him and brought him
into the homosexual circle. Then he became aware of his condition and
maintained relations only with adult and well educated men. He had a
delicate taste and not every man could please him (here he shows me
the photo of the soldier, mentioned above). Unfortunately he had the
misfortune to be caught in a park in the act of taking hold of the
_membrum virile_ of a driver. His case is now pending in the court. He
would be happy if he could return to his former mode of gratification.
When asked if he had had no intercourse with women during the whole
period from the 22nd to the 35th year he becomes uneasy and confesses
that this has happened a few times but when he did so he was always
under the influence of drink. While he kept sober it never happened.
And every time after intercourse with a woman he had such a terrible
after-effect that _his own mother to whom he always confessed
everything had advised him to seek intercourse with men, because she
noticed that he was always feeling fresh after doing so, while if
he went with women he was always depressed for days_. Experienced
psychoanalysts need not be reminded that the mother used this means to
keep her son from contact with other women because she was jealous of
them and therefore she drove him to men. She was never jealous of men.
That was something else.

This occurrence is far from rare. The mother of a homosexual once told
me: “I am never jealous when O. finds a new friend, although he falls
romantically in love with them. But the thought of his giving himself
up to a woman is something I cannot bear....”

D. S. listened to his mother’s advice. He says: “I gave up drink after
that and became a fanatic homosexual.”

As the subject, a high governmental employee, could easily lose his
position, I advised him to have intercourse only with women and in view
of his desire to free himself of the trouble through psychoanalysis I
was able to wrestle him out of the clutches of the law. He attempted
contact with women, always after partaking of small quantities of
drink, and he gradually improved so that he finally married, his wife
being, in fact, a woman 20 years older than he. That woman was a _locum
tenens_ for his mother! Further observations on the psychology of
similar cases will be recorded in subsequent pages. Here I propose to
draw attention merely to the influence of alcohol. Drink enabled him to
adopt the heterosexual path.

In the last case the heterosexual act was possible only after
neutralizing the inhibitions. Similar influences are responsible for
the well-known morning erections of those who are psychically impotent.
Homosexuals, too, have heterosexual dreams before awakening in the
morning but they cannot—or will not—remember those dreams. I need
mention here merely that every night the dream operates in the sense of
lifting the inhibitions and that the inhibitions are fully suspended
only towards morning. During the first sleep hours the dreams are full
of inhibitions appearing as “warnings,” but towards morning the dreams
are relatively free of these inhibitions. That is why we often hear
that “genuine” homosexuals are able to have intercourse with women, if
at all, only towards morning. At that time most inhibitions which stand
between them and woman have been overcome in the dream! This obvious
fact is given a different interpretation by _Hirschfeld_ who states:

“The erection of the _membrum_ with which many men wake up during the
early morning hours has nothing to do with the sexual instinct, but is
due solely to the mechanical effect of pressure by the full bladder.
Some time ago I was consulted by a homosexual, married, father of six
children and expecting the arrival of a seventh. I asked him how
that was possible. ‘That is very simple,’ he answered, not without a
certain feeling of self-consciousness, ‘I always took advantage of my
morning erections.’ Thus the children owe their existence not to the
father’s sexual instinct, but to the operation of his full bladder.
The much-praised aphrodisiacs, are probably also nothing more than
diuretics; in other words it may well be that the renown which certain
remedies and articles of diet have acquired as stimulants of the
_potentia coeundi_ may well be due to their stimulating effect upon the
bladder function and its genital reflex.

“Alcoholic drinks, when taken in small quantities have a similar effect
and rouse the sexual function. Excesses _in Baccho_ and venereal
excesses have always been looked upon as belonging together. This is
so because alcohol has the effect of lowering the inhibitions and at
the same time it appears to weaken the mental acuity. We may thus see
why occasionally heterosexuals confess that they have taken up with
some man under the influence of drink, and homosexuals that, _when
intoxicated_, they can have intercourse with women.” (_Hirschfeld_,
l.c., p. 189.)

But the fact that homosexuals are capable of heterosexual activity
under the influence of drink is for me a proof of their bisexuality, a
proof that that they have repressed the heterosexual component of their
sexual instinct.

The hypothesis that the morning erections are due to a full bladder
will be discussed more fully in my work on _Male Impotence_. I do not
believe that erection is due to reflex action from the bladder.[34]
_But it is an incontestable fact that the dream operates until the
existing psychic inhibitions are overcome._ _Hirschfeld’s_ patient is
able to have sexual intercourse with his wife only mornings, because
through the day and evenings he is under the domination of inhibitions
which make him impotent with women.

       *       *       *       *       *

That the impotence in such cases does not always denote weakness is
illustrated by the following case:

C. H., a homosexual physician, tells me that he abstains from touching
all drinks because he fears he might commit criminal acts. He is
homosexual since childhood and had never felt any inclination towards
women. Masturbation began at 9 years of age. It began when his uncle
once lifted him upon the shoulder. That gave him a strong pleasurable
feeling and soon after that he began rubbing his genitals and while
doing so he always fancied that his uncle or some other man was
carrying him. He had never felt any desire to be carried similarly by
a woman. Such a thing would strike him as degrading and vulgar. His
experience in houses of prostitution, from 19 to 24 years of age,
filled him with disgust for all women who can be hired. Perhaps he
might have been able to have intercourse with a girl of better class
but a certain timidity prevented him from ever approaching such a
girl. Emancipated women fill him with horror. He maintained relations
with a certain colleague for some time. _Coitus inter femora._ At 28
years of age, after a carousal, he met a girl whom he took to a hotel.
Powerful erection and prompt coitus. _But with the onset of the orgasm
he felt an overwhelming inclination to strangle the girl._ Suddenly
a tremendous hatred mounted in his soul against the poor creature.
He hurried away from the scene as rapidly as possible. He thought
he wanted to revenge himself because through the act of coitus she
degraded him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here we see a sadistic attitude towards woman under the cover of
timidity. He really feared himself, his criminal tendencies. Problems
rising out of the struggle between the sexes (specifically, out of
man’s instinctive sex hatred of woman) play a certain role in this
case. The significance of this attitude will be explained fully later.
This case shows the outbreak of a heterosexual-sadistic instinct under
the influence of alcoholic drink. Alcohol seems to dissolve here the
defences raised by consciousness against the sadistic tendencies.

Very interesting is the case reported by _Moll_ in his work on _The
Contrary Sexual Feeling_ (3rd edition). I give here the case in brief
extracts from its history, as it contains points of significance in
connection with our present subject:

Miss X. is 26 years of age. Her father she describes as a healthy
but very irritable man. Already at the age of 5 she had carried on
certain sexual plays _with a small boy_. She admits having attempted
intercourse at the time with the boy who was four years of age. The
intercourse consisted of _mutual cunnilingus_. At six years of age she
was sent to school and here she soon began intimate relations with
small girls. With a number of them she carried on mutual _cunnilingus_
as she had done with the boy. From the time when she first began this
with the girls her heterosexual inclination disappeared completely;
after that she never again went through a similar experience with
a boy. We shall see that later she did allow herself to be used
occasionally by men; but we must note in that connection that the
heterosexual acts took place without the cooperation of sexual feelings
on her part. At 12 years of age she began to menstruate. At that time
she had as playmates the children of a neighborly family who had a
governess with whom she soon entered into close intimacy. The governess
prevailed upon her to carry on sexual acts, particularly _cunnilingus_,
and the active part was taken now by each in turn from time to time.
In the course of these relations she experienced for the first time
sexual gratification, so far as she is able to recall. Their intimacy
lasted for some time. Miss X. differs from other women of her type in
that she is not averse to other forms of gratification. Soon she sought
also _anus feminarum amatarum lambere_, in addition to the genitals.
The thought of carrying out such an act with a man was repulsive to
her. Just as we know that occasionally perverse men want _urinam feminæ
dilectæ in os proprium immittere_ so we see that Miss X. likes to
have the same thing done to her by other girls. For a number of years
already Miss X. has been in the habit of allowing _fæces amicæ in os
proprium iniciire_; the act produces in her gratification and orgasm.
She had first indulged in these acts during her intercourse with the
governess above mentioned, which lasted several years. Miss X. is also
tremendously roused when she _sanguinem menstruationis amicæ lambit
et devorat_; but, she explains that she is able to carry out these
disgusting acts only when there is complete mutual confidence and only
if the relationship has endured for some time. She declares further
that she is sexually roused also when she is struck with a whip. When
asked how she came to acquire this habit she answered that she knew
a man who required to be thus treated by a former sweetheart. But,
to secure her any sexual excitement the whiplashes must fall upon
her from the hands of a woman. She has allowed herself very often to
be flagellated by her friend with whom she has also been carrying on
the disgusting acts mentioned above. It may be mentioned also that
when they kiss each other Miss X. wants to be bitten by her friend,
preferably upon the ear lobe. This may be carried so far as to actually
cause pain and swelling of the ear.

It is necessary to delineate more clearly the attitude of Miss X.
towards the male sex. She does not remember having ever felt any
attraction towards the male. But during a celebration where much
drinking was had a man prevailed upon her to spend the night with him.
She had always wondered why she never felt any attraction towards the
male sex and the desire to find out definitely about this as well as
the don’t-care-attitude brought on by drink induced her to spend that
night with the man. Coitus brought her no satisfaction. Some time later
another man became interested in her and fell in love with her but she
did not reciprocate his feeling in the least. Nevertheless she wanted
to try once more whether she could learn to care for a man’s embrace.
She therefore permitted herself to be induced by that man to have
intercourse a few times; again she found that ordinary coitus did not
rouse the least sexual feeling in her. She requested the man to carry
on _cunnilingus_ with her. This roused her sexually and thereupon she
experienced gratification; but, without being asked specifically about
it, she declares at the same time, that it was necessary for her to
imagine that the person performing _cunnilingus_ on her was a woman;
otherwise even _cunnilingus_ would have yielded her no satisfaction.
The thought of carrying on any of the disgusting acts mentioned above
with a man, Miss X. found in the highest degree repulsive. (_Moll_,
l.c, p. 565.)

This case appears to me very noteworthy. It supports my contentions
regarding the influence of alcohol upon the homosexual. Miss X.
beclouds the fact and thinks she was actuated by the desire to find out
definitely whether man had any attraction for her. Absence of orgasm
during her intercourse with the first man shows clearly that even
indulgence in alcohol was unable that time to release the inhibitions.
But she allows herself the experience a second time and this time
_cunnilingus_ by the man yields her gratification. It is interesting
that her first experience of this kind was with a boy. This corresponds
exactly with my observations. In other ways, too, man plays in her
condition a greater role than she is willing to recognize. Flagellation
she adopts because she knew a man who was treated that way by his
previous sweetheart. The relationship of this paraphilia to the strong,
irritable father is fairly obvious. Her misophilic acts with women show
that _she does not want to belittle herself before man, but that she
looks upon subjecting herself to woman as a manner of paying homage to
her sex._ In my study on _Masochism_ I go further into this subject.
The other acts indicate a sexual infantilism, rarely seen in a more
discreet polymorph-perverse form.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Fleischmann_[35] also records a few cases showing homosexual seduction
carried out during a state of intoxication. He relates also the case
of a homosexual who when intoxicated was able to have intercourse with
women. “At 28 years of age,” relates the author about this subject, “he
visited a house of prostitution for the first time and, animated by
drink, he was able to carry out coitus once with a woman; when sober a
twenty-horse team could not drag him into such a place,” according to
the urning. But after drinking he was always able to have coitus.

We see that the incentive to drink is obviously due to an ungratified
craving. Psychoanalytic experience reiterates again and again that
almost every craving to become drunk or otherwise to lose one’s
senses betrays an ungratified sexuality. Among the inebriates, the
morphine and cocaine addicts, we always find pronounced paraphiliacs
and bisexuals who have repressed a portion of their sexual instinct.
In the same way every unprejudiced investigator will find a similar
condition true of homosexuals who, according to my experience, are
bisexuals who have repressed the heterosexual component of their
instinct. I cannot agree with _Naecke_,[36] who contends that urning
as such is a moderate drinker and seldom inebriate. Nor do I believe
that in homosexual circles moderation in drink is the rule. Of course,
I do know a number of temperate homosexuals, but the data under my
observation as a whole and the material supplied through the objective
accounts of physicians, reveal an entirely different situation.

A great deal of what takes place during states of intoxication never
comes to the attention of those not immediately concerned. Possibly
infantile experiences with drunken parents may have a greater role in
the psychogenesis of homosexuality than we are aware of at the present
time.

Now and then it happens that parents, drunken or otherwise debauched,
attack their own children. I have had occasion to observe that some
very curious habits are still prevalent in the nursery, here and there.
One subject related to me that his mother had the habit of playing
with his penis until he was six years of age. His wife also found this
a convenient way to lull their child to sleep. He thought it was as
harmless a practice as it seemed efficacious in quieting the child.

       *       *       *       *       *

H. T., a homosexual chemist by profession, who has a theoretic interest
in psychoanalysis, writes me: “The contribution that I am able to make
may be of some use to you. I have often tried to think whether dreams
have had any influence upon the development of my sexual life. But I
could recall no experience which I could correlate to my condition. I
have felt early an interest in the _membrum virile_ and this interest
abides with me to this day. The sight of the penis in a state of
erection is enough to rouse in me the strongest feelings of pleasure.
While walking on the street I always try to observe the respective
region in passers-by and I try to estimate the size of the organ by
outward appearances,—my fancies are full of such reflections. I have
always masturbated in front of the mirror watching my penis during the
act. But it took a very long time for me to overcome my shyness enough
to find companions for these acts.

A few days ago I had a dream in which I saw my father who has been dead
for ten years. He was the best man in the world, but unfortunately a
periodic drinker. When in the inebriate state he treated mother very
roughly. I dreamed a scene which scared me so that I awoke. I saw my
father give me in hand his _membrum erectum_. And suddenly there
flashed through my mind the recollection that he had done repeatedly
this very thing when he was drunk. But with every fibre of my being I
cling to my mother who is for me the ideal of womanhood such as I shall
never again find the equal of in all this world! Beyond that my love
is directed only to the male and specifically I am attracted to common
men. Can you explain my riddle? I feel myself attracted to ordinary
drivers, men of vulgar tastes such as one finds in the dram shops. Only
once was I able to have intercourse with a girl. I was so “soused” at
the time that I then did something which I could never carry out while
in my ordinary senses....”

I emphasize once more: The outbreak of heterosexual excitations after
indulgence in alcohol proves the presence of that tendency and shows
that under ordinary conditions the heterosexual tendency, though
continually present, is subjected to suppression. The tendency is
preserved in some closed-in compartment of the soul, the door to which
may gape open under certain circumstances. Occasionally alcohol acts as
a master key which opens up every enclosure.

It is interesting also to observe the sublimation which the
heterosexual love undergoes among homosexuals. They endeavor to
de-sexualize the other sex, at the same time have recourse to
heterosexual friendships by preference. I know quite a number of
homosexuals of this class, men who maintain motherly, sisterly, or even
grandmotherly friendships and to whom these friendships are positively
indispensable. We psychoanalysts are in a position to appreciate the
source of these sexual attachments. They are due to repression and are
also the result of an inhibition which extends merely over sexuality
but allows the _sublimated_ eroticism to manifest itself. Among the
homosexuals there are many women haters (misogynists).

They often hate all women with but one exception: their mother.
Occasionally some sister, aunt, or some friend of their mother’s is
also exempted. They never fail to emphasize: this is an exception!
But the law of bipolarity teaches us that alongside this tremendous
hatred there exists an equally powerful love. Occasionally the dislike
is hidden and the homosexuals pose as completely indifferent towards
the other sex. A little close analysis shows that this attitude is an
artefact, that the assumed indifference really covers the fear that
the true attitude will be betrayed otherwise. Beyond the apparent
indifference stands the fear of woman and back of that fear there may
be hidden, in its turn, a sadistic attitude towards woman. It is thus
that the homosexual learns to cover his feelings with one another, to
change them, or else he transforms, substitutes, overstresses here
and assumes indifference there, until his actual state of feelings is
completely hidden from view. Superficial observers merely remark of
some man: he hates women!...

What stands back of such a dislike has been pointed out by _Bloch_
(l.c.) with considerable insight. He mentions the famous misogynist
of Classical Greece, Euripides, and in that connection makes a very
appropriate observation. He states:

“The strongest invectives against the female sex are found in _Ion_,
_Hippolytos_, _Hekate_, and _Kyklops_ of _Euripides_. (_Verses_
602-637, 650-655.) (Here he introduces the actual quotation.)

“These verses contain the whole quintessence of modern misogyny. But
_Euripides_ also discloses the ultimate background for this attitude:
‘The most wanton creature,’ he says in a fragment, ‘is woman.’ _Hinc
illæ lacrimæ!_ Only men who are not accustomed to woman, men who cannot
endure to have her act with them as a free personality, and who are so
little certain of themselves that they fear an inroad into their own
personality, some irreparable damage or possibly complete annihilation,
only such men are genuine women haters.” (_Bloch_, l.c., p. 533.)

Here _Bloch_ has come close to a solution of the problem having plainly
adopted the view developed later by _Adler_, who traces homosexuality
to the fear of the sexual partner. Unfortunately he has failed to draw
the further inferences which this excellent observation is capable of
yielding.

_Hate, fear, disgust and shame are the inhibitions which keep the
homosexual away from the sexual partner._

Let us examine first the feeling of disgust. How does the feeling
arise? In my study of _Anxiety States_ I have explained this matter
more fully. But there is a form of disgust whose action is positive.
Disgust need not always be necessarily repressed desire. If I should
see today a woman covered all over with furuncles it may inspire me
with disgust to hear that she is an old aunt whom I must greet with a
kiss. In a case of this kind only the super-analyst in his folly might
be able to discover suppressed components of the libido.

But we do know that occasionally homosexuality may be aroused through
episodes which enlist the negative reactions (hate, fear, disgust,
shame). These revulsive effects then protect the individual against
their own positive tendencies. Disgust covers craving, hate covers
love, fear covers longing; and shame—boldness.

But indulgence in alcohol is capable of turning revulsive effects into
positive. Disgust is turned into desire, hate into love, fear into
longing and shame turns into daring. If the fearful, repressed sadism
is also added to this transformation of the negative into positive
affects, when it cannot be sublimated into lasting love, the moral man
is turned into a criminal who represents but a stage in the development
of the human race.




                                  VI

 May Disgust Produce the Homosexual Attitude? Cases by Krafft-Ebing,
 Fleischmann, Liemcke—Observation (personal) and Case by Bloch.—Late
 Trauma as Cause of Homosexuality—Personal Observation of a case of
 Late Homosexuality—Two Cases of Bloch—Further Discussion of the
 Problem—A Case of Pfister’s with the Analysis of several Dreams.


_Wären nicht die Details unseres geschlechtlichen Lebens so unendlich
mannigfaltig und läge es nicht bei den meisten Menschen fast in allen
wichtigen Erscheinungen und Fragen unterhalb des Bewusstseins, und
wäre es nicht eine Wesenheit der Liebe, immer wieder die Schleier
des Mysteriums über unsere sexuellen Empfindungen zu werfen, so dass
allen stark empfindenden unverdorbenen Menschen, namentlich in der
wichtigen Periode der Geschlechtsreife, Zynismen und Offenheiten über
das geschlechtliche Leben sogar als unwahr erscheinen (Frauen und
keusche Jünglinge sind schon beleidigt, wenn man über die Liebe auch
nur wissenschaftlich anders als schwärmerisch, allgemein oder poetisch
metaphorisch redet) und hätten wir nicht endlich mit der grossen
Heuchelei und Verlogenheit der Gesellschaft in erotischen Dingen zu
rechnen, so dass sogar die Anomalen und Perversen von ihr angesteckt
werden, die es gar nicht mehr nötig haben, zu lügen und unwissend zu
bleiben; kurz könnten wir unsere Erotik in seelischer und körperlicher
Hinsicht bis zu den letzten Zusammenhängen analysieren, dann würden wir
vielleicht mit Schauder erfahren, einen wie kleinen Bruchteil unseres
Lebens wir unserem eigentlichen Geschlecht angehören._

  _Leo Berg._




                                  VI

_If the details of our sexual life were not so endlessly manifold;
if they did not belong for the most part and in their most important
aspects to the realm beyond ordinary consciousness; if it were not a
peculiarity of love continually to throw the cover of mystery over
our sexual feelings, so that all normal persons of strong feeling,
particularly during the period of their sexual ripeness look upon
frankness in sexual matters as untruth (women and shy young men feel
insulted if one speaks about love even scientifically, in other than
romantic or poetic and false, metaphorically veiled, language); and if
we did not have to consider the tremendous hypocrisy, and falsehood of
society in all matters pertaining to sex, so that even the abnormal
and the perverse, who no longer need to lie and assume ignorance, are
inspired to assume a similar ‘chaste’ attitude; in short, if we could
analyze our eroticism in its physical as well as in its psychic aspects
down to the last details, we should then probably discover with horror
to what a small extent we truly belong to our own sex._

  _Leo Berg._


The form of homosexuality which develops late in life is perhaps
best suited to serve as an introduction to our inquiry into the
psychogenesis of homosexuality and may help us understand the origin of
the more complicated cases.

There are, in fact, a number of cases, in which homosexuality appears
to have developed in consequence of a feeling of dislike for the other
sex. Many authors consider the development of homosexuality among
prostitutes as due to this cause. _Bloch_, for instance, writes:

“The naturally heterosexual prostitutes are driven to homosexuality for
one of two reasons: First through the contact with and the influence
of their truly Lesbian comrades, which strengthens the inner feeling
of solidarity common among all prostitutes; Second, through their
dislike of intercourse with men which grows with their experience and
with the passage of time, the more so because they see man only in his
brutal and raw aspect. The continual compulsion under which they find
themselves of satisfying the animal sensuousness of oversophisticated
men often by means of disgusting procedures, rouses in them eventually
an unconquerable dislike of the male sex, and therefore they devote
to their own sex the nobler feelings of which they may be capable.
The homosexual relationship appears to them as something ‘higher,
something nobler and more innocent,’ something pertaining to a purer
realm than sexual contact with men, a fact which _Eulenburg_ (_Sexuelle
Neuropathie_, p. 143-144) has rightly observed.” (_Bloch_, l.c., p.
603.)

_Krafft-Ebing_ (_Neue Studien_, l.c.) also holds this view and thinks
that, “many prostitutes endowed with great sensuousness, repelled by
contact with perverse or impotent men who misuse them in connection
with detestable sexual deeds, turn to pleasing members of their own
sex.”

In connection with my discussion of the Messalina type I have
already shown that latent homosexuality is what drives many women to
prostitution. They run away from woman and into the arms of man, into
the arms of a great number of men! They expect quantity to replace what
quality fails to supply them. We have additional reasons to assume
that the women who lean most strongly towards the homosexual side are
those who supply the ranks of prostitutes. That of course is true of
the largest number though by no means holding true of every case. For
there are prostitutes who are attached to their lover (cadet), and who
experience orgasm only during intercourse with him, while the embraces
of other men leave them unaffected. Here and there the factors pointed
out by _Bloch_ and _Krafft-Ebing_ may also enter into the situation.
In the presence of an already avowed homosexual inclination disgust
brought about through a number of possible circumstances may act as an
effective barrier against heterosexuality.

This is revealed to us through the life histories of certain
homosexuals. We often come across the statement that certain men,
and women too, became homosexual after an infection, particularly
gonorrhea. The fear of infection also plays an important role in the
psychogenesis of homosexuality.[37]

_Krafft-Ebing_ mentions (_Late Homosexuality_, etc.) the case of a
young man, 27 years of age, who after masturbating since 7 years of
age, at 19 years had intercourse with women and enjoyed it. After
a gonorrheal infection he became so disgusted with women that when
frequenting houses of prostitution he found himself impotent. Old
masochistic-homosexual phantasies reappeared and before long he was
attracted to the respective circle and seduced.[38] I must draw
attention particularly to the fact that this man was able to experience
orgasm during intercourse with women. Nevertheless his experience
was so impressive that it intensified his revulsive attitude towards
heterosexuality by generating a feeling of disgust. (In other cases
under similar circumstances there arises a dislike for prostitutes, and
the subject seeks as sexual partner a healthy woman.) The infection
often becomes the root of a phantastic hatred of women without leading
all the way to the development of a manifest homosexuality.[39] The
next case which has come under my own observation belongs to this
category:

       *       *       *       *       *

I. P., engineer, 30 years of age, appears to me a typical anxiety
neurotic. He is unable to leave his room, a personal servant must
accompany him wherever he goes. For the past ten years has been
sexually abstinent, because he had the misfortune to acquire a very
serious luetic infection from a so-called “respectable” woman. Since
that experience he feels a tremendous hatred for the sex. He reads with
interest _Strindberg_, gloats over _Weininger_ and he has translated
into a foreign language _Moebius’_ “_Der physiologische Schwachsinn
des Weibes._” Homosexual activity does not inspire him with disgust
but he claims that it has no attraction for him. Analysis discloses
that the anxiety attacks appear as a defence against homosexual deeds.
After the syphilitic infection he was for a time in danger of becoming
homosexual. Now he protects himself against that tendency by various
defensive measures. The path to woman is effectively blocked for him
through his disgust and hatred of the sex.

The cure of his anxiety state was not very difficult. A few years
later I found him a married man. He had married a woman who was 10
years older than he and who lacked every womanly characteristic. He is
entirely potent in his marital relations, claims to experience orgasm
satisfactorily, and believes his orgasm would be even greater if he
did not have to use precautionary measures against pregnancy. As a
syphilitic he wants to avoid bringing sickly children into the world.
For coitus he prefers the _a posteriori_ position and _situs inversus_
and justifies this theoretically on the basis of the structure of the
female genitalia....

       *       *       *       *       *

Concerning the relationship between sexual infection and homosexuality
we also have an illuminating observation by _Fleischmann_.[40] This
case is an _urlind_ (homosexual woman):

She is an illegitimate child. Father a heavy drinker. She was badly
brought up, neglected and persecuted. As a child she avoided work and
was unruly. Prison experience. “At 16 years of age I had to earn my own
living. My first position was in a restaurant serving beer. There I met
Mr. X., the man who seduced me and gave me a sexual disease.

“At the hospital I saw and heard things that opened my eyes. From that
time on I worked no longer. Years passed in struggle with suffering
and want; prison life; house of correction; solitary confinement. In
the house of correction most girls handled one another at night and
from that time on no man could interest me any more. I have intercourse
only with girls who are pretty. For the past year I have been a
prostitute,—mostly drunk,—for I wanted to forget what has become of
me and the morbid inclination to which I have fallen a victim.”

The first sexual experience of the poor girl an infection! Then
followed the homosexual seduction and the heterosexual channel
was blocked. We see here the characteristic homosexuality of the
prostitute, already mentioned; then alcoholism, obviously to forget her
longing after true love. It must be clear also that her hatred of the
father played a certain role and that this feeling towards the drunkard
who brought her into the world a bastard she transferred towards all
men.

The two cases reported by _Ziemke_[41] are also fairly clear:

An artist; between the age of 16 and 17 years a relative taught him
to masturbate and he kept up the practice regularly every week. At
18 years of age first intercourse with woman; acquired gonorrhea;
later, once more coitus, this time with a prostitute; never took any
particular interest in the female sex; on the other hand as a boy
9 years of age he already was pleased at the sight of the _membrum
virile_ so much that it brought on erection. First sexual dreams were
definitely of homosexual import, according to his own declaration, and
continued of that character. Later has had repeated sexual experiences
with other men, always feels fresh and well after that, while normal
sexual intercourse fills him with disgust. His sexual partner he
seeks among men of middle age; he is familiar with the literature on
homosexuality.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another case: Former officer, 38 years of age, mother said to have been
a very nervous woman. Very shy and bashful as a child in the presence
of older persons or strangers. At high school had to repeat the same
class twice, was coached and succeeded at last to pass the army
examination for officer. After a few years was dismissed from the army
because he had mishandled his man-servant, went to South-West Africa,
there settled as a farmer, and as a volunteer participated in several
small riots.

His first sexual feelings arose around the 12th year; he contends
that till that time he knew absolutely nothing about sexual matters.
At that age an experience brought his attention to the subject of sex
for the first time; he played circus with a younger sister and with
his 10-year old uncle and sat on the latter’s back. While imitating a
rider’s movements he noticed that his penis became stiff and he had
a pleasurable sensation wetting himself in front. He did not know
the meaning of this occurrence but was too shy to tell anyone about
it. Shortly after that he tried deliberately to reproduce similar
situations; whenever he succeeded he also tried to attain ejaculation.
He insists that he was not attracted particularly to his uncle, whom
alone he had used for this form of gratification, nor to any other
boy or man, his only desire at the time was to achieve ejaculation.
Later during his high school years, when he had opportunity to gratify
himself in the same way, he met a young colleague of his own age,
a strong and beautiful boy, who appealed to him very strongly and
with that boy playing the passive role he indulged more and more
frequently in sexual deeds. In fact as soon as he met that particular
boy the thought occurred to him that he would like to have him for
the gratification of his sexual feelings in the manner peculiar to
himself. During play he used all manner of excuses to climb upon his
friend’s back and to imitate a rider’s galloping movements until
he had ejaculation. Subsequently he found frequent occasion to use
other colleagues in the same way. After drinking it was particularly
difficult for him to restrain himself; that is why he frequently had
to do with soldiers while intoxicated and one day he was caught and
this led to his dismissal from the army. In order to get rid of his
unnatural inclination he took up a girl, had normal intercourse with
her a few times but without any pleasurable feeling on his part,
although in order to accomplish this he had to suppose himself riding
a man in the manner customary with him, and eventually he acquired a
gonorrheal infection. Then he migrated to South-West Africa, but even
there was unable to master his inclination, felt himself impelled to
maintain relations with young Hottentots, was caught at it, sentenced
to jail, and finally banished from the Country.

In this case the gonorrheal infection seems to have put an end to his
heterosexual period.

       *       *       *       *       *

I recall a number of other cases in which homosexuality broke out after
gonorrhea, according to the testimony obtained during my consultation
hours. In fact, there was a time when I was a firm believer in the
theory of inherited homosexuality, in _Hirschfeld’s_ sense, so
that I turned down all these cases and did not care to undertake
a psychoanalysis of them. In the homosexual circles I had quite a
reputation at the time as a man worthy of their confidence. But since
I have found that homosexuals are really bisexual neurotics who have
repressed their heterosexuality, these men come to me more rarely
and consult me chiefly when they get into conflict with the law. The
solidarity of homosexuals and their will to hold on to the notion that
their condition is inborn goes hand in hand. Their secret organisation
is thorough, and even where formal organisations are lacking,
homosexuals know each other and they are always ready to introduce to
one another their friends and colleagues.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. S. K., physician, 32 years of age, relates that he has a pronounced
heterosexual past. At any rate his longing previously was purely
physical and psychically he was completely indifferent. As ship surgeon
he acquired a severe gonorrhea in a port and this trouble lasted some
six months. He suffered all possible complications: epididymitis, a
posterior prostatitis and finally, a gonorrheal rheumatism of the
joints. Since that trouble he has felt a terrific disgust for women. In
Alexandria while entering a cabin he saw one of the ship lieutenants
committing pederasty with a local boy. He knew that at the various
ports young boys visited the ships and offered themselves to the
homosexual officers. The scene evoked in him a terrific nausea and
he wanted to drop that officer from among his acquaintances. But
the latter spoke up frankly confessing that he became homosexual
after being seduced and since then he was completely impotent in the
company of a woman. He begged the physician to keep his secret and
not to betray him. He was the only intellectual man on board that
ship with whom it was pleasant to have relations. In a few weeks the
two men became intimate with each other: “Then, for the first time, I
learned what love was and I had never before been as happy as that. My
heterosexual past now seemed unbelievable. But in _Platen’s_ diary I
came across a passage telling that as a young man he too had been in
love with a girl named Euphrasia and that he learned only later the
true direction of his sexual instinct. It was the same with me. I was
born a homosexual although I had to go through some experiences before
my eyes opened.”

In this case the gonorrheal infection and the trivial incident
during the journey through the Orient furnished the occasion for the
outbreak of homosexuality. But is not the subject in error regarding
the strength of his homosexual predisposition? It is interesting to
note that his homosexual attitude is promptly beatified and idealized
through the addition of psychic factors. Indeed, the homosexuals
display a greater love intoxication than the heterosexuals. Such a
degree of love frenzy as is displayed by the homosexuals is hardly
ever seen among the heterosexuals. Homosexuality represents a harbor
of refuge, an attempt to lose one’s self exclusively in one direction,
which must be conceived as an attempt on the part of the psyche to
neutralize all other tendencies by the overemphasis of that supreme
passion.

We find frequently that the homosexuals contend that their previous
heterosexual leanings were exclusively physical.[42] Psychically their
love relations must be exclusively homosexual. In fact it is common
to find men sublimating into friendship their craving for psychic
love while woman remains with them merely an instrument for sin
(_instrumentum diaboli_).

       *       *       *       *       *

A certain homosexual whose history is of particular interest because he
recalls clearly his heterosexual period told _Bloch_:

“At what age my sexual feelings first arose I am unable to recall. My
sexual desires are directed towards the male. _Before and during my
puberty the actual direction of my desire was not clear, in fact I
believe I did entertain at the time a wish to have once intercourse
with a girl._ But it was not love, what I felt was merely a physical
longing,—the psychic counterpart of the instinct was entirely absent
at the time. Now I feel myself inclined exclusively towards young boys.
I have had no intercourse thus far either with males or females, but I
believe I would be able to carry out the sexual act in a normal way;
I know, however, that it would not be pleasurable to me, it would not
amount to more than masturbation so far as I am concerned. Towards the
female sex I am completely indifferent, I feel neither disgust nor any
dislike. My love dreams are always concerned with persons of my own
sex.” (_Bloch_, l.c., p. 566.)

       *       *       *       *       *

Homosexuality often develops also in women following an infection:

Miss Erna, 42 years of age, writer, shows preeminent male features,
behaves peculiarly like a male, smokes, drinks, is a preeminent
champion of women’s rights. She claims to be innately homosexual, even
as a child she assumed a male role, and was wilder than her brothers.
She always passed for an uncontrollable tomboy. Had no intimation
about her homosexual condition. Masturbated very early and already
at the age of 15 she maintained clandestine relations with an army
officer who had seduced her. But she claims that her experience was
exclusively physical. She has experienced orgasm with men. At 19
years of age another army officer gave her a venereal disease. _Since
that time she feels a tremendous dislike for all men._ At 22 years of
age she conceived a romantic love for a woman friend. They kept up
a relationship during which she maintained the male role. She even
procured for herself an artificial phallus and wore male clothes in the
house. It was like a genuine marriage. “I know only since then what
love really means. Formerly I only felt a liking for men. It was merely
a physical attraction. But for the past 20 years my love has been
exclusively for women.” After the first “homosexual marriage,” which
lasted only three years because her friend deserted her and married,
she had numerous relations with other women.

       *       *       *       *       *

Very convincing are the cases in which the homosexual outbreak occurs
first after some powerful trauma! It is not always gonorrhea. Often
various other experiences furnish the inciting moment as I can easily
prove on the basis of my own observations. But first I must quote a
case reported by _Krafft-Ebing_ which is illuminating on this score:

Miss X., 22 years of age, is considered a beauty, men flock around her
whenever she appears in society; she is decidedly of a sensuous nature,
seems born to be an _Aspasia_, but rejects all advances. One of her
admirers, however, a young scientist, she looks upon with some favor,
becomes intimate with him, allows herself to be kissed by him, _but not
like a loving woman_; and when the young man believes himself close
to the consummation of his supreme desire she begs him with tears in
her eyes to desist because she is utterly unable to yield to him, not
on account of moral grounds so much as for deeper psychic reasons. In
the course of the exchange of written confidences which followed that
unsuccessful meeting between the two the homosexual character of her
inclination was clearly revealed to her.

Miss X. had a father who was addicted to drink and a hysteropathic
mother. She herself is of a neuropathic constitution; has full breasts,
and generally the outward appearance of an unusually attractive woman
but reveals boyish ways about her and various male peculiarities,—she
fences, rides horseback, smokes and has a decidedly mannish way of
standing and walking. Lately her romantic attachment to young women has
become quite noticeable. She has a young woman with her sharing her
apartment.

Miss X. claims that up to the time of puberty she was sexually
indifferent. At 17 years of age she became acquainted at a summer
resort with a young foreigner whose “majestic” figure made a tremendous
impression upon her. The privilege of dancing a whole evening with
him made her happy. _The following evening, at twilight, she witnessed
a horrible scene—from her window she saw that wonderful man in the
bushes futuare more bestiarum mulierem quandam inter menstruationem._

_Adspectu sanguinis currentis et libidinis quasi bestialis viri Miss
X. felt shocked, she seemed powerless and crushed, could hardly
recover her psychic equilibrium and for some time after that could
neither sleep nor eat; from that time on man stood in her mind for the
quintessence of bestiality._

Two years later a young woman approached her in a public garden, smiled
and glanced at her with a very peculiar look which penetrated deeply
into her soul. The following day Miss X. felt impelled to visit again
that public garden. The woman was there, in fact, she seemed to have
been expecting her. They greeted one another like old acquaintances;
they talked and joked pleasantly and thereafter met by appointment
daily, first in the garden, and later, when the weather became
unpleasant, in the woman’s living apartment. “One day,” Miss X. relates
confidentially “the woman led me up to her divan and allowed me to
glide to the floor while she seated herself. She lifted her shy eyes
at me, stroked the hair off my forehead softly with her hand, saying:
‘Oh, if I could once love you the real way, may I?’ I consented, and
as we sat close by gazing into each other’s eyes, before we knew it
we passed to that love from which there is no drawing back.... She
was bewitchingly beautiful. For me the whole experience was something
new and intoxicating.... I do not believe that man is ever able to
feel such delicate, bewitching, exquisite intoxication.... Man is
not sufficiently sensitive, he is not delicate enough for that....
Our foolish abandon lasted until I fell back exhausted, helpless,
intoxicated. In this exhausted state I was lying on her bed when
suddenly an exquisite feeling thrilled through me and awoke me from
my half dreamy state, something unspeakably sweet and unlike anything
I had ever experienced before; I found J. on top of me, _cunnilingus
perficiens_—that was her highest pleasure, _tandem mihi non licebat
altrum quam osculos dare ad mammas_—and with every motion she shook
convulsively.”

Miss X. acknowledged further that during her homosexual relations she
always assumed the male attitude towards her womanly companion and that
once, _faute de mieux_, she allowed one of her male admirers to perform
_cunnilingus_ on her. (_Krafft-Ebing_, l.c., Obs. 165.)

Let us consider closely the case of an exalted nature like that girl.
She goes through her first graceful love fever, she is about to become
a true woman, she thinks “him” a princely man, a “majestic” personality
when unexpectedly she undergoes the experience of witnessing that very
God-like man behave like a common beast.... Jealousy and a revulsion
of feeling unite in her at the terrible sight rousing such a tremendous
affect that forever after she feels an unspeakable horror of all men.

Many women must have become _urlinds_ as a result of just such
experiences. One must also take into account that among many women
homosexual love shows itself merely in kisses and embraces and that
it seems to them something nobler and much more esthetic than the
manifestations of heterosexual love. Fear of the phallus is something
that may be roused by a relatively slight infantile occurrence. In her
homosexual indulgences Miss X. is not particularly esthetic by any
means, nevertheless even she remarks: “man is not delicate enough!”

This highly interesting case illustrates the development of
homosexuality following a trauma which must have had a tremendous
effect upon so sensitive and romantic a nature as this young woman
and which could not but strengthen the existing predisposition to
homosexuality. But in spite of all she is still bisexual and I do not
think it impossible that she should yet overcome her tremendous horror
of man. We must consider that the father was a drinker and that she had
probably witnessed in the parental home scenes like the one she has
described. What a pity that the case has not been analyzed. _Traumatic
incidents during later life are particularly powerful in their effect
if they resemble and therefore re-echo infantile memories of similar
childhood experiences._ It may even be possible that the woman did
not actually witness the scene at the time she states but that she
experienced merely a hallucination, repeating in her mind a scene which
she may have witnessed only during her childhood.

       *       *       *       *       *

A remarkable parallel is furnished by the next case which I record from
among my own observations:

Miss K. S. is 32 years of age and calls to consult me about her various
compulsions. She confesses that she is an _urlind_ and that she had
never felt herself attracted to men. Her father, a heavy drinker, died
three years ago; her mother lives quietly and is not neurotic.

Our subject has had a number of chances to get married but she
withdraws coyly from every man the moment one comes close to her.
She feels a certain inclination towards older married men and she
understands in consequence how a woman might become interested in a
friend’s husband. “When I did find a man whom I liked, I was unlucky,”
she declares, “for I discovered that he was already engaged to a
friend of mine.” Truly she fell in love only with girls and women. Her
first romantic attachment was to a woman school teacher, whom she also
visited at her home. That teacher wanted this wealthy girl to marry
her brother and brought the two into contact as often as possible.
She liked the brother because he looked so very much like her beloved
friend. But if the sister was not in the room their conversation lagged
and she could talk only in monosyllables. She sent flowers and costly
gifts to her teacher. Her supreme desire was to sleep once in the same
bed with that teacher and she often dreamed of it. She even proposed
to take her on a journey. The teacher could not go and hesitated also
because she found her pupil’s attentions too oppressive. The teacher
actually suffered on account of her admirer’s deep jealousy, for the
girl turned ill if she so much as found other girls visiting her. At
any rate, quite a circle of girls in the class admired the teacher.

Later she fell in love with a girl friend whom she embraced and kissed
warmly numberless times because it gave her a wonderful warm feeling to
do so. On the other hand the kisses of an uncle made no impression on
her whatever. No man interested her in the least. For a long time she
did not know that she was homosexual, but she was well aware since her
childhood that she was unlike other children. She was always as wild
as a boy and her mother frequently said to her: “there are ten rough
boys in you!” She climbed trees, ran around wildly and always preferred
to play with boys, did not care for dolls, coaxed to be given a saddle
horse and a gun until her father was driven to despair over her and
exclaimed sometimes: “you are really a spoiled boy!”

During the analysis she recalled a number of homosexual and
heterosexual experiences. Already at 12 years of age she had an
experience with an uncle who came to her in bed and played with her.
She could not recall whether they indulged in coitus that time. With
girl friends she also had various adventures. She confesses in fact
that she has been in the habit of masturbating since her 12th year,
when she was taught by a girl, and that at one time she often indulged
in the phantasy that a man was having coitus with her. In fact, as late
as her 16th year she fell “heels-over-head” in love with a friend of
her father’s. He was much younger than her father but belonged to the
same circle.

While she talks at first only in favorable terms about her father
(his drinking habit was not so very excessive) and dwells mostly on
his lovely qualities, his mild character, his imposing appearance,
etc., at the same time she begins to show underneath a growing hatred.
The father had in fact left her in critical circumstances. Every one
considered them millionaires, because her father had kept up a very
big house. After his death it turned out that he had been spending his
capital and that there had been left practically only her share which
was, however, large enough to permit her and her mother to live in
comfort. Her mother had always endured the life of a martyr. The father
had maintained relations with the cook in the house during the last
ten years. She was a fat, shapeless vulgar person. In fact, mother and
daughter were just tolerated in their home. Once her mother endeavored
to dismiss the cook and the father was mad and grew almost violent
showing her mother the door threatening that she might leave and take
along her daughter if she did not like it in the house. After that
the cook was naturally more arrogant and unbearable than ever so that
the poor mother passed her days weeping until finally she reconciled
herself to that state of things. It was possible to throw that cook out
of the house only after her father was lying ill in bed. That daring
woman started a law suit claiming that the father had promised to
settle on her a home and an income.... She lost that suit because the
father testified upon his death-bed that the woman’s contentions were
false. The subject relates a number of other relevant incidents but
does not recall having ever witnessed any intimacies between her father
and the cook.

However, her dreams seem to point in that sense. Thus, for instance,
among others she had the following dream:

       *       *       *       *       *

_I go carefully into the kitchen and do not find the cook there. Then I
tiptoe slowly up the back stairs to the garret and through the key hole
I see the cook lying in bed with the driver._

She recalls that that particular driver was in their service when the
cook was a younger woman and that her father had dismissed him. He
watched for her father once, as he was coming out of a restaurant to
waylay him. But her father was stronger and threw the servant to the
ground with such force that the fellow fractured a bone. But she thinks
that the neighborhood did not know the true reason for the battle,
every one naturally thinking that the servant planned the attack out of
revenge.

Finally she confessed to me that there was one experience of which she
had not thought before for a long time which she must tell me about.
She wanted to tell me about it for some time but an inexplicable
shyness prevented her. She was 16 years of age when she once heard
her father leaving his study room to steal upstairs to the garret.
It was the maid’s day out and her mother was lying down not feeling
well. She took her shoes off and followed him quietly up the stairs.
The door to the servants’ room stood open. The father was somewhat
under the influence of drink and so was also the cook, who always
managed to secure some liquor for herself on the sly. A candle was
burning in the room and the stairway was dark. She could see plainly
everything that was going on. She now saw _pater membrum suum in os
ancillæ immisit_. The sight of his reddish face now distorted under
the influence of passion was so repulsive to her and struck her so
powerfully that she could never forget it in her life. Even to this
day when she thinks of it she feels nauseated. (While she is telling
the incident she is struggling against the impulse to vomit.) After
that episode she developed a nervous complaint of the stomach, chiefly
a nervous vomiting. Even during the year just passed there were times
when she could not swallow a morsel of meat and she had attacks of
uncontrollable vomiting.

It was after that occurrence that she fell in love with her teacher.
That episode was what had determined the course of her sexual
development and what drove her to homosexuality because it made her
look at all men in the light in which she had seen her father. Her
inclination towards elderly married men (always platonic) is also
traceable to her father _Imago_. She was aiming to find a nobler and
more delicate father.

Whenever a man tried to get closer to her it reminded her of the
painful incident she had witnessed, which summed up in her mind all the
misery in her home, the whole outrageous situation, the humiliation of
her mother, and her father’s morbid passion. For her father who did
have some splendid qualities and who enjoyed an enviable position in
society she once had as great a love and as deep a respect as for her
noble mother. Then she had to go through the disastrous situation in
the house. That experience could but serve her as a warning against
men, a warning and a lesson! It could not but implant deeply in
her soul a lasting dread of man and of man’s terrible passion. She
naturally shrank back from any close contact with man for there was
always a picture before her mind which plainly carried the message: “do
not trust any man lest you should go through what your mother did!”

What might have been the future of this brave girl if the father had
not acted in that way, if the marriage of the parents had been a happy
one, if she had not witnessed that terrible scene which impressed
her the more painfully because she had no inkling whatever of the
brutal side of sexuality? I make bold to assert that she would have
developed into a quiet pleasant housewife and she would have given
vent to her homosexual tendencies along quiet and innocent paths.
But as it was she devoted herself to girls and avoided men more and
more. She did permit herself to be attracted by men. But they had to
be married and unattainable. Thus there could be no danger for her.
When the husband of a friend of hers of whom she also was very fond
declared that for her sake he would be willing to divorce his wife,
she fled and presently found some other unreachable ideal to which she
attached herself. All her ideals were practically desexualized while
her sexuality she exercised exclusively on women. _The love among women
loomed up in her mind as pure and elevating, while the love of men she
considered brutal. Even coitus seemed to her a disgusting brutal act._

The traumatic incident occurred after puberty yet it had a very
tremendous effect. The question rises whether the traumas occurring
during childhood may also influence the particular direction of sexual
development. This question has long since been solved in harmony with
_Binet’s_ view and psychoanalysis has taught us some additional facts
regarding the influence of traumas. The narrower Freudian school
has gone so far as to overvalue the influence of traumas and has
designated as traumas certain relatively trivial experiences which
do not deserve that designation. I want to sound again a warning
against underestimating the role of traumas. Certain minor fetichistic
tendencies are easily and sometimes fairly satisfactorily explained
on that basis, although the more complicated forms of fetichism,
such as we shall study later, are not to be explained solely upon
the theory of traumatic causation. Here the association hypothesis
of _Binet_ completely breaks down. We must bear in mind that the
neurotics conceive many traumas which in reality did not occur and
that their phantasy turns innocent incidents into alleged traumas
whenever it suits the trend of their emotions to do so. The neurotic’s
memory serves him poorly and that is also true of the homosexuals who
construct a purely homosexual life history for themselves.

But are not first impressions of fundamental determinative value for
future development? _Jean Paul_ very appropriately declares: “_All
first impressions persist forever in the child!_”

       *       *       *       *       *

I wish to add here a couple of observations which we owe to _Bloch_ and
which illustrate very well the influence of first sexual impressions:

“I was about five years of age when during a walk accompanied by the
nursemaid I saw at some distance a man in the act of masturbating;
without knowing what it was, the picture persisted in my mind for
years. In my dreams until my fourteenth year a playmate occupied the
chief role. At thirteen years of age I fell in love with a school
comrade who took but little interest in me; what roused my interest
in him in particular was probably the fact that he was the one who
brought to the class information about sexual matters. We removed to
another City and I lost sight of the boy. Although I knew nothing
specific about sex at the time I sought contact with those who roused
my feelings.

“A stranger, a man of about 35 years of age, enticed me and as soon
as he had me he carried on pederasty with me. I felt that there was
something repulsive in what he was doing, but I was too weak to oppose
myself against his influence. In about three months he disappeared. Now
I knew what masturbation was especially as there had occurred a number
of orgies at school.

“At eighteen years of age I left school, and while the others among
my comrades began showing an inclination towards the female sex I
found myself attracted in every way exclusively to man. Often at the
insistence of some of my friends I tried to come into contact with
women of the half world but every time the attempt filled me only with
disgust and aversion. When I see a woman taking an interest in me I am
filled with a horrible feeling. That was one more reason why I felt
attracted to the male sex. When I love a man I do not think (only) of
sexual attraction, but I seek to find in him precisely what I, in turn,
feel myself ready to give; exclusive devotion, loyalty, tenderness;
when I love a man, everything else pales into insignificance for me.”
(_Bloch_, l.c., p. 565.)

It would seem that in this instance the memory of the masturbating man,
an incident which the boy had witnessed during childhood, determined
for him the actual course of his sexual development. In the previous
case the trauma acted as a warning. In this case it seems to have acted
like a perpetual stimulus, since a child does not possess the usual
moral scruples, and the first excitation (the sight of the erect organ)
must have been tremendous. That picture stayed in his memory for years,
it fixed itself and persisted permanently in that young man’s memory.
In the K. S. case, mentioned above, the trauma was associated with
disgust; it served as a revulsion against heterosexuality.[43]

In this particular case the memory of the incident was associated
with desire. It was utilized in positive form as an inciter to
homosexuality. Thus we find that the problem is rather complicated.
I confess that for some time I was unable to see my way clear in
the midst of these facts so long as I was one-sided in my views and
thought that the condition arises exclusively in one way. But I know
now that a number of paths may lead equally to homosexuality and that
this is a subject which requires a much more thorough study. We must
find out whether psychic factors are invariably at work behind every
case of homosexuality or whether there is an exclusively psychic
and a specially organic homosexuality. Such cases could be called
pseudo-homosexuality.

As a contribution to this question I find of interest the following
case, reported by Bloch, as the history reveals the trauma and the
bearing of the trauma upon the development of the condition. It is a
case of male homosexuality:

“From my early childhood I was aware of something peculiarly girlish
in my whole nature outwardly as well as inwardly (the latter in
particular). Sexual excitation I experienced also very early. _I was
about 6 years of age when I remember that a private instructor seated
himself on the edge of the bed where I was lying ill with fever,
petted me and then membrum meum tetigit with his hand; the pleasurable
sensation which thus arose was so intense that I cannot get it out
of my mind to this day._ At school where my conduct and studies were
always excellent I indulged occasionally in mutual ‘touching games’
with other boys. I do not know on what side of the family I may have
inherited the unusual intensity of my sexual desire, but I remember
that around my 12th year the flaring up of the instinct caused me
a great deal of unrest and when a comrade once showed me how to
masturbate it proved a welcome relief. This ‘paradisaic’ state did not
last long and when I learned about the dangers and forbidden features
of my habit I had a terrific and useless struggle with myself.

“I remember that as far back as my memory goes I had the habit of
_gazing at older, vigorous men_ almost involuntarily and with
a feeling full of longing, without knowing what it meant. As to
masturbation I thought that I fell into the habit because I had no
chance to come into contact with women. As a matter of fact I did
occasionally entertain friendly relations with certain girls who
appeared to be strongly attached to me; _but I always saw to it that
these love excitations were ‘nipped in the bud’_ because I was _afraid
I should be unable to carry out my role_ to the end. Finally I decided
to seek relief among prostitutes, who were otherwise repellent to my
esthetic and moral sense, but the attempts proved useless: either I
found myself unable to carry out the normal sexual act at all or if
I did it, I experienced no satisfaction and thereafter I was also
plagued with the fear of infection. I did have rather frequently
the opportunity to enter into amorous relations with married women
but I never did so even though I inwardly scorned my shyness and my
oversensitive conscience. Although these facts are true, I must not
omit to mention the chief thing responsible for the whole situation,
namely, the fact that I am homosexual in my inclination and that the
other sex has hardly any attraction for me.

“I believed myself totally unfit for ordinary sexual relations when
I found one day that the sight of the _membrum virile_ alone made
the blood boil in me with excitement. I then recalled that this had
occasionally happened before, although not to such a remarkable
extent. Secretly I had to face the plain fact that I was ‘not like
others.’ This fact which I had previously suspected and of which I grew
more and more convinced, brought me to the brink of despair.

“Then it happened that a simple little girl fell deeply in love with
me, and I made up my mind to start relations with her. During the time
while this lasted, a period of several months, my inclination towards
the male sex persisted though occasionally I tried to subdue it; but
to overcome it completely was for me, I found, impossible. I was still
keeping up my relations with the girl when I once noticed in a public
lavatory an elderly gentleman who appealed to me very strongly; he
scrutinized me carefully and bent over in order _membrum meum videre_,
came close by, moved forward his hand shaking with excitement and ...
_membrum meum tetigit_. I was so surprised and scared that I ran off
at once and for some time after that I avoided passing by that place.
But my impulsion was the greater on that account to meet that man
again; this was not at all difficult.... In this continuous struggle,
so meaningless and so useless, against an instinct which was at least
partly inborn in me, I have squandered my best energies, although
I have long ago reached the point of realizing that in itself the
instinct is neither morbid nor sinful.” (_Bloch_, l.c., P. 545.)

Does not this case illustrate clearly the influence of first
impressions and the significance of the bisexual foundation in the
homosexual attitude? The man is seduced by an elderly man and after
that he longs continually to be seduced by an elderly man, in a manner
recalling that unforgettable scene. Although capable of heterosexual
acts, this side of his nature persists as a sort of compulsory tendency
and drives him again into the arms of elderly men to seek that form
gratification which was the first he had ever experienced in his life.
His heterosexual leanings are repressed. He himself admits that he
always saw to it that all such love affairs were nipped in the bud. In
other words he is deliberately fighting off all heterosexual stimuli
and encouraging the homosexual excitations. Then he arrives at the
realisation that he is not like others.... In fact he is bisexual and
has the capacity to act as a bisexual being. A careful analysis would
have disclosed many interesting features. We wanted only to show how
this young man was continually seeking to find his teacher (father?),
and what a great deal of neurotic overgrowth stood back of this desire.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next case quoted from _Krafft-Ebing_ is also very remarkable:

A merchant, 34 years of age, mother neuropathic; at 9 years of age was
taught masturbation by a schoolmate; also, homosexual relations with
a brother; fellatio; urolagnia; at 14 years of age first love for a
school colleague.

_At 17 years of age his love ideal changes completely. He is no longer
attracted by young, beautiful boys, but by decrepit old men._

_T. traces this back to the fact that he had once overheard his father
in the next room uttering pleasurable exclamations after he retired
for the night and this excited him tremendously because he thought his
father was ... (weil er sich den Vater coitierend dachte)._

Since that time old men carrying on various homosexual deeds play a
predominant role in his dream pollutions and during masturbation. But
even through the day the sight of an old man is enough to excite him,
especially if the man is very old and decrepit when his excitement may
be so tremendous as to end in ejaculation. Attempts at intercourse with
women in houses of prostitution proved unsuccessful and ordinary men
and boys do not rouse him. From the age of 22 years on he carried on
a platonic love towards an old gentleman whom he met on the latter’s
daily walks. During these walks T. had ejaculation. In order to free
himself of this peculiar dependence after several unsuccessful attempts
at intercourse with prostitutes _he took along with him a decrepit
old man whom he induced to have coitus before his eyes. The scene
so excited him that he in turn proved potent. Later on he was able
to dispense with the old man’s presence and could carry out the act
successfully without that aid. But this improvement did not last long;
soon he became impotent once more._

This case is in every way interesting and of great significance for our
problem. It proves to us the great determinative role of a childish
reminiscence and the persistence of a scene which is continually
repeated in memory. The whole of that young man’s libido is centered
around that particular scene. He stages it also in the brothel when
he hires an old man to have intercourse in his presence. That old man
assumes then the role of the father, the prostitute is the mother,
while he is once more the onlooking child. The act of looking on
so excites his passion that with that aid he proves potent in his
intercourse with the prostitute. But that continues only so long as the
exciting influence of the scene persists. After that he reverts to his
former impotence and he again ... seeks his father. It is perfectly
plain, and only the blind could fail to see that T. seeks his father.
His wish was obviously that his father should also start something
sexual with him. It is possible that he had identified himself with
his mother. But we have no direct proof of that. This is particularly
significant because _Sadger_ and the others who belong to _Freud’s_
narrower circle place great emphasis upon the role of the mother in the
genesis of genuine homosexuality while neglecting ruefully the role of
the father. This case shows us a “Japhet, who seeks his father.” The
promenades with the respectable old gentleman are repetitions of the
walks with his father.

This patient does not recall any heterosexual experiences during
his youth, probably because the memory of them has been repressed
from consciousness. In the other case which I shall now quote from
_Krafft-Ebing_ the heterosexual period is clearly recalled. I refer the
reader to that author’s _Observation 144_. Here I quote the first part
of the history of that case:

“I am at the present time 31 years of age, lean yet well built, devoted
to male love, therefore unmarried. My relatives were in good health,
mentally normal, there were two suicides in our family, on mother’s
side. My sexual feelings arose when I was about seven years of age, the
sight of the naked abdomen being particularly exciting. I gratified
my instinct by allowing my sputum to trickle down the abdomen. When I
was eight years old we had in our house a little nurse maid of about
thirteen years. I found it very pleasurable to rub my genitals against
hers, but there could be no coitus on my part at that time. During the
ninth year I went to live among strangers and went to the gymnasium. A
colleague showed me his genitals and that filled me with disgust. But
in the family where my parents arranged for me to board there was a
very beautiful girl who prevailed upon me—I was but little over nine
years old at the time—to sleep with her. I found the experience most
pleasurable. My penis, though small, was already capable of erection
and I had intercourse with her almost daily. This continued for several
months. Then my parents transferred me to another gymnasium; I missed
the girl very much and during my tenth year I began to masturbate. But
the act inspired me only with disgust. I masturbated but moderately,
always felt deeply remorseful afterwards, although I could discover no
bad consequences.”

Here is a man who actually felt disgust at the sight of a friend’s
genitals and who found intercourse with women pleasurable. He is
excellently on the way to become a heterosexual. At fourteen he falls
in love with a school colleague, an experience which every person goes
through at about that age, the “normal,” no less than the homosexual.
After the final examination (high school) he has intercourse with
girls and great pleasure in the act, but he is already making use of
some homosexual makeshifts. Soldiers must precede him in the act of
using the prostitutes and the thought of having access to a vagina
which had just been in contact with another penis, stimulates him. “At
the same time I can never kiss women without feeling disgust; _even
my relatives I kiss only on the cheek_.” ... _Hinc illæ lacrimæ!_ He
protects himself against the sexual excitations emanating from his
family circle. His homosexuality is somehow linked to his family. The
peculiar action of a boy who allows sputum to trickle down his abdomen,
imagining that it is spermatic fluid could probably be traced by means
of analysis to a definite childhood trauma. Particularly clear in
this case is the heterosexual attitude which under certain influences
and inhibitions merges almost imperceptibly into the bisexual and
homosexual.

       *       *       *       *       *

Whether late homosexuality is determined every time through definite
traumatic incidents, I am unable to state, because I have not had the
opportunity thoroughly to analyze such a case. The next case seems to
me to show that strong emotionally toned episodes may turn a latent
into manifest homosexuality:

An army officer, 46 years of age, consults me for complete impotence
with women. The impotence is of four years’ duration. He has become
acquainted with a lady of whom he is very fond and who enjoys an
excellent financial status. He could now be a happy man, if he only
were a complete man. Asked about his morning erections he blushes. The
trouble is not with erections, they do not fail him on other occasions.
He is impotent only in contact with women. Finally he admits that since
his 38th year he has been carrying on homosexual relations. Since
that time his interest in women gradually vanished and he has become
impotent. His anamnesis reveals some significant facts. He recalls no
homosexual deeds or excitations during childhood and before puberty. He
was sexually precocious, masturbated already during the primary school
period and was attracted by girls. First coitus at seventeen in a house
of prostitution. After that he felt he wanted women very badly but had
no homosexual inclination. Then a tremendous experience came into his
life which agitated him and after that he was depressed for some time.
That was just before his first homosexual act.

“Can you tell me something about the nature of that agitation?”

“I find it painful to speak of it.”

“But you expect help in a rather difficult situation. How should I
appraise the situation in its true light if you won’t furnish me the
necessary information?”

“You are right. But there are things of which it is almost impossible
to speak. It is about my mother. But I suppose I cannot help myself
otherwise. I must tell you all.

“I have always honored and respected my mother. I was 38 years of age
when I received a telegram calling me to her sick bed. She passed
away shortly after my arrival. As the only son it was my duty to put
everything in order after her. I went through her old correspondence
and in a box I came across a mass of love letters. First I was not
going to read them. But curiosity got the best of me. I said to myself:
‘every married person loves once in his or in her life some one else,
why should not that be permitted to my mother when father died while
she was still very young.’ If I only had not done that! I found not
one letter, I found hundreds of letters and ... they were not all
from one man. The letters were so vulgar, so plain, so cynical, so
revolting that I wished myself dead. I lost the holiest thing in my
life. Before then I always dreamed of finding a woman like mother, and
her type of womanhood always stood before me as the ideal. Now I found
that she could be bought and she was to be had for ordinary degrading
purposes. The tone which her lovers assumed in those letters was so
revolting that I imagined the worst. Since then I feel a deep scorn for
all womanhood. Shortly after that I yielded to the temptations of a
homosexual friend....

“Do you believe that my impotence has some relation to that occurrence?
I have often thought of it. Whenever I go to a woman I cannot help
thinking of the box in which I found mother’s letters. After such an
experience how is it possible for one still to consider marriage?”

       *       *       *       *       *

A late homosexuality induced by a very tragic experience. Naturally
the man was always latently homosexual. But it was that experience
which turned him into a manifest homosexual. Unfortunately I am unable
to state whether he married the woman and became heterosexual again or
not, because I never saw him after that.

The reader will observe that in this chapter I have quoted quite a
number of cases culled from the reports of other practitioners. I do
this for a double reason. First, I want to prove, on the basis of
other material than my own, that homosexuality has its psychogenesis;
and, in the second place, I aim by this means to disprove the
contention unfortunately rather widespread in some circles and actually
expressed by some critics, that my case histories correspond to the
“genius loci.” As if the Viennese differed in sexual matters from the
North-German or from the Englishman! My material is derived from the
world at large. _I have been unable to discover thus far any difference
with respect to sexual matters between any two nations, except that one
may keep things under cover more cleverly than the other._

       *       *       *       *       *

This series of cases aiming to illustrate the rôle of psychic trauma
in sexuality may be concluded with the following case, reported by
_Pfister_ (l. c. p. 169):

A 28-year-old woman, member of an educational institution, of high
moral repute, is in despair because she fears she is no longer able
to control her homosexual longings. If she meets a young girl she is
nearly overpowered with the impulse to kiss her then and there. The
unknown girl’s face haunts her for weeks afterwards and she can not
sleep tortured with regret because she did not gratify her impulse to
kiss the girl as she does with her acquaintances. She is particularly
distracted at the thought that with her tendernesses and attentions,
she may mislead into homosexual counter-affection a fourteen-year-old
girl who is close to her, although nothing out of the way has happened
between them. But the little friend already trembles with excitement
when she is embraced and her great affection leads her to tears if she
does not see her beloved often enough.

Our homosexual girl had a physically attractive but otherwise
insignificant, nervous father who left the conduct of his business to
the capable hands of his energetic and intelligent wife. The little
daughter learned early to admire her mother and to look upon her father
as a “light weight.” As a small girl she was normal. She played equally
with boys and girls. With her playmates of both sexes she underwent
various sexual experiences: the girls played the game of doctor and
this gave them an opportunity to touch the sexual parts, and a small,
ailing boy who was one of the girl’s playmates between her seventh and
ninth years, did the same thing. Around the age of eight years she fell
in love with an uncle who had the habit of throwing her playfully
into the air, a game which always gave her a very peculiar feeling.
_At ten or eleven years of age a 40-year old housekeeper abused her
repeatedly._ Definitely homosexuality broke out when the girl was
thirteen. She was at the time a great deal in the company of a teacher
who resembled her mother in many ways but who was better educated.
That passionate woman was distinctly homosexual and for two years
she treated the girl with greatest affection. During that time her
passion for kissing developed while the grossly sexual cravings which
the sensuous housekeeper had roused in her gradually quieted down. A
few love affairs with boys also led to kisses but she experienced no
particular passion in that connection. Those affairs she took up as a
pastime and to be in fashion rather than because she was interested.

At the boarding school her one-sided erotic inclination was further
developed in the course of passionate friendships. At the age of
nineteen she made a couple of heterosexual erotic attempts but they
proved unsuccessful. The first affair was with a hot-blooded artist of
womanly appearance. Her love was deep, the young girl floated in ideal
conversations and gladly exchanged kisses with the young man. After his
departure they maintained a warm correspondence full of tenderness but
without giving one another any formal promise.

Five or six weeks after parting from the beloved friend she became
engaged to a smart young man because she was in despair and she had
given up the plan of a higher education for herself as she was not
getting along at all well with a relative at home. She thought she
loved her young man but soon after the engagement she began fearing
that she had perhaps undertaken more than she intended to carry out.
The soft, shy young man apparently resembled her father. For seven
months she played at being in love, vomitted every morning and wished
she were dead. Finally she gave up her engagement and concentrated
all her feelings upon members of her own sex. She maintained however
her delicate womanly sensitiveness throughout and always gave the
impression of a girlish creature. So long as she found homosexual
gratification, she took little interests in a career, or in nature, art
and religion; but as soon as her inclinations were thwarted, her ideal
interests came strongly to the foreground. She herself compared these
vacillations with the movements of a pair of scales.

When she felt deeply in love she was fairly free of grossly sexual
excitations. But during her loveless engagement _she felt herself
sexually roused a number of times when the young man played with her in
a thoroughly respectable manner_.

_Pfister_ then relates that the young woman interrupted the analysis
just as she was making rapid progress towards recovery. But he adds
a number of interesting details, including her first dream, which
usually contains the nucleus of the neurosis.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first dream is as follows:

_A cat bit me on the left index finger and held on to it for some time.
The finger swelled and burst down to the bone. The tendon was broken
and a great deal of fluid was oozing out. It meant I shall always have
a stiff finger. I said to myself: “What a pity! Now I won’t be able
ever to play the piano again.”_

_I woke up and found my finger so fast asleep that I could not move it._

Just before the dream the girl in her despair had offered a fervent
prayer which made her feel a little easier. Before the analysis the
girl was extremely restless and longed for her beloved, but she said to
herself that she would only bring misfortune upon that poor girl’s head.

The analysis of this dream, which _Pfister_ unfortunately, did not
carry out with complete success, shows that her whole emotional life is
governed by the infantile experience with that housekeeper. The first
recollection brought up by the free associations with this dream relate
to the housekeeper, who in the dream is represented by the cat.

I have discussed elsewhere in a lengthy contribution, the
_Representation of the Neurosis in Dreams_.[44] In this dream the
trouble is symbolized by a stiff finger. “Playing the piano” is
again a symbol for sexual intercourse as well as for masturbation.
Probably the symbol here has acquired its emotional coloring from the
masturbation habit. But the heterosexual meaning is also obvious (piano
playing—coitus). If we interpret the dream we have:

The housekeeper, that false cat who played a dependent rôle towards
my parents, made me ill with her long-continued tendernesses (A cat
bit me on the left index finger and held on for a long time). The
trouble grew worse, something valuable tore in me (the ability to love
a man) and the homosexual form of love established itself permanently
(stiffening). Now I am incapable of loving a man, I cannot be a mother
or raise a family of my own,—a wish that has already cost me so many
tears (the water flowing out of the wound).

       *       *       *       *       *

Perhaps this interpretation will be doubted as something artificial and
rather forced. But the subject recalls further details of the dream
and relates them subsequently. Such additions are of extraordinary
significance because usually they contain the censured, the repressed
material. She recalls that the cat was going to bite her at first on
the foot (significant because of the proximity of the sexual parts).
Further on she relates a continuation of the dream:

_The water flowed down the steps. I ran to a friendly woman physician
for aid to my wound. On the way I met her unexpectedly in the
neighborhood of a merry-go-round. Then my sister speaks up saying: “She
will fix your finger in good shape right away.” The woman physician
retorts: “I am sorry, but I do not operate.” She sends me instead to a
surgeon (male)._

The interpretation is not difficult. There is a great deal of weeping.
Her tears inundate her whole soul (House as symbol of soul). At first
she is looking for a woman healer. A woman shall cure her trouble.
Life is a merry-go-round, everything in life revolves, she may yet be
happy. But the woman physician gave her the correct answer. You need a
surgeon. _Only a man can heal thee._ I do not operate. I am not the one
to awaken your femininity (defloration?).

A further supplementary account shows that the finger became the muzzle
of a repeating revolver. _Pfister’s_ interpretation that this is a
phallic symbol and that it shows the dreamer’s phantasy that she was
a male with a phallus, may be correct. Every homosexual woman has the
wish to transpose the psychic state into an actual physical condition.
But another possible meaning of the repeating fire arm seems to me
more plausible. The subject’s traumatic incident had the effect of
facilitating subsequently other homosexual experiences. _The traumatic
experience required repetition._

I pass over for the present the other meanings of the dream
(over-determination), which _Pfister_ discloses with keen insight. I
am concerned here merely with pointing out the determining influence
of a trauma. Naturally there are other factors at work along with the
traumatic incident, it would be necessary to find out why the incident
influenced her in that particular manner, the precise constellation of
her family circle ought to be taken into consideration, etc. But the
dream points so clearly to the cause of the psychic trauma that the
cross section it furnishes enables us to reconstruct the whole picture
of her trouble.

The case is convincing also from another standpoint. The subject gave
up early her psychoanalysis because she felt in a short time that she
was well. These apparent cures which serve to circumvent the danger of
a thorough psychoanalysis, are well known occurrences. The subject is
unwilling to acknowledge that she is also heterosexually predisposed,
that her whole longing, in fact, is directed towards the fulfilment
of motherhood. The dream says plainly: _“I want to be a woman, like
all other women, I want to bear children! Save me from the danger of
homosexuality!”_

But her consciousness is unprepared to acknowledge this desire. She
meets difficulties upon the heterosexual path. _Pfister_ believes that
she identified herself with her father. In that sense the kissing
episodes (with girls) signify: _I let father_ (who was a very handsome
and well appearing man) _kiss me_! But her mother was also in the habit
of kissing her with great show of affection. It appears thus that the
most varied forces were at work to determine the fixation (stiffening)
of her emotional attitude.

In fact homosexuality does resemble ankylosis. The free operation of
sexuality appears to be restricted, a single point is fixed and every
movement takes place thereafter only within the range of that point of
fixation.

Is it possible for psychoanalysis to loosen up such psychic ankyloses
and to free once more the bound-down energies? In this particular case
can psychoanalysis remove the fear of man and the woman’s doubt whether
she can fill a woman’s rôle? How far reaching are the possibilities of
psychic orthopedics in the case of homosexuals?

I must ask the reader to follow me patiently through the complex
inquiries which follow before attempting to answer these questions.




                                  VII

 Erotism and Sexuality—The Motive Power of Unfulfilled
 Wishes—The Male Protest—The Relations of the Homosexual
 to his Mother—Hirschfeld’s Schematic Outline—Infantile
 Impressions—Influence of the Stronger Parent—Letter of an Expert.


_Die Knabenliebe ist so alt wie die Menschheit und man könnte daher
sagen sie liege in der Natur, ob sie gleich gegen die Natur sei._

  _Goethe._




                                  VII

_Boy love is as old as the race and therefore it may be said to be part
of nature, although against nature._

  _Goethe._


Investigators interested in the problem of homosexuality point out that
the condition occurs in families and see therein a support for the
contention that this condition is inborn. Homosexuals usually have a
homosexual brother or sister, or one or the other of their parents is
similarly afflicted, in spite of marriage. But if we think of neurosis
and of homosexuality (which is a particular form of neurosis) as a
retrogression, if we bear in mind that all neurotics show a marked
overemphasis of sexual traits, the reason for these facts is plain.
What is inherited is not the homosexuality but the powerful bisexual
disposition which leads to morbid tendencies. Furthermore we must bear
in mind that the influence of family life is practically the same for
all children. Yet one child escapes lasting injury while another is
tremendously handicapped.

Before looking more closely into the influence of family life upon the
development of homosexuality we must point out two very significant
considerations.

One of these is the division of all love into spiritual and physical;
the next point is the double attitude of every homosexual as male and
female. For the present I need only emphasize the fact that persons
readily adjust themselves so that one sexual component is expressed on
the spiritual, the other upon the physical plane. Let us call spiritual
love, “erotism,” and physical love, “sexuality.” The average homosexual
applies his erotism to male friendships and his sexuality he places
in the service of heterosexual love; the progress of culture consists
therein that heterosexual love is also gradually sublimated, that
is, turned more and more into erotism. The homosexual, for instance,
turns his erotism towards women, and applies his sexuality in his
relation with men. But at times he may turn his whole erotism into the
homosexual channel and suppress his whole sexuality. Or he may endeavor
to find certain spiritual qualities in his sexual ideal, trying to turn
also part of his erotism into the homosexual path. Thus we meet most
remarkable variations. For an example we may mention the homosexual
who is interested only in coachmen, soldiers, servants and peasants.
His sexual ideal he finds only among the lower orders. Such a man has
turned his whole erotism towards women. He seeks the friendship of
mature women, sometimes also the company of fine men, but sexually he
can be active only in contact with men of low order.

This peculiarity already indicates a judgment-attitude in sexual
matters. Sexuality is perceived as degrading, as compelling a return
to the first aspects of “natural” life. The attitude is further
complicated by the homosexual’s overemphasis of one or the other
sex during his acts. If he is an active homosexual he preserves his
individuality, identifying his selfhood with some male ideal, the
father, the brother, the teacher, etc. On the other hand, if he plays
a passive rôle, he identifies himself with a woman, the mother, or her
polar obverse, the prostitute. Occasionally he carries on both rôles
and the relations between sexuality and erotism become reversed and
transposed. That is what complicates the problem so tremendously. The
urning transfers his erotism to men and his sexuality is roused in
relation with women only, but the latter is soon turned into disgust.
Or the urlind loves spiritually only women and finds all men repulsive,
unbearable and disgusting.

In order to acquire a psychologic insight into every case as it
presents itself, and to judge of its significance, it is necessary to
answer the question: what does the homosexual aim to accomplish with
his actions? What does the homosexual act represent in the subject’s
fancy. In most cases of this character reality does not enter into
consideration.

Some obscure and baffling paraphilias lose their extraordinary
character once we get at the specific act which the subject repeats
vicariously through his overt action. For _Nietzsche’s_ law of the
eternal return of sameness applies to the neurotic.

The acts which the neurotic carries out are either something
experienced or something wished, some unreached yearning. It is part
of human nature that the unattained experience exercises a stronger
driving power than what has been experienced. Experience acts as
a retrospective tendency, craving is prospective. (One might say,
therefore: the most severe traumas are those which have never been
experienced.) The unsatisfied craving is the motive power of most
neuroses. The “world pain” of all those who are weary of life and who
struggle in vain to accomplish the impossible is due to the eternal
craving, the _eternally Lost_, the _perennially Unreachable_. All the
dream fancies of the neurotic are shattered in contact with reality.
For that reason the neurotic overlooks the world’s standards and builds
a world of his own, wherein he is master and attains all his wishes
as dreams. The _unattained experiences_ furnish the material for
_perennial dreams_.

The formation of man’s character traits begins during the first years
of life. He tests his powers upon the surroundings and his environment
furnish him the picture of life. In the eyes of children who are
not self-reliant the father must be a giant because he overawes them
with his genial appearance and his image generates in their soul a
feeling of inferiority which marks them for life. Every child has an
ambition: to excel his father. This wish may express itself first in
the desire to attain father’s size, to be as strong and big as he. But
later the wish shows itself in that quiet but determined competitive
struggle which has always existed between father and son, or mother and
daughter. The strong son takes after the powerful father. But suppose
the father is weak and the mother is the one who dominates the house?
What sort of picture of life becomes imprinted upon the child’s mind
under the circumstances? Can it help believing that women dominate
the world, can he escape taking the attitude either of wishing to be
a woman and rule, or of fleeing from woman when she clashes with his
“will to power” as man?

In the conflict that follows, sexuality becomes mixed up with erotism,
the soul of the child is bewildered, a definite outcome is delayed and
meanwhile the child’s soul is filled with anxiety and doubt.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Alfred Adler_, who has followed this line of inquiry with great
keenness, has conceived it an important factor in the dynamics of the
neuroses and he has described this picture as “_the male protest_.” All
reactions and protective constructions or fictions of the neurotic,
according to him, lead back to the desire to be “_a complete man_.”
Homosexuality displays this protest under a peculiarly cryptic form.
The homosexual cries out: _I want to be a woman!_ He may even go so far
as to dress himself like a woman and become a transvestite. _Adler_
here gives a far fetched explanation, saying: _this is a male protest
under the use of female means_! He holds that the homosexual attempts
to heighten by this means his feeling of personality; the latter turns
away from woman because he fears his inferiority, he avoids decisions.
That is true of some aspects but not of the whole picture. The problem
of homosexuality as a whole shows _Adler’s_ position to be untenable.

The important thing is that there arises in the child’s soul a wish
which gravitates in the direction of the parallelogram of forces
exhibited within the family circle. If the mother plays the upper rôle,
the wish becomes: _I should like to be like mother! I should like to
dominate and rule as she does!_ Love for the mother increases this
tendency to become identified with her and turns it into a directive
ideal. The child begins at a tender age to imitate its mother, acts
womanly, wants to play with dolls and cook, wears gladly girls’
clothes. The child may overcome these tendencies or it may grow up with
them or return to them later and become a pronounced homosexual. (_Late
Homosexuality._)

For the sake of simplicity I am now speaking of boys. The same effect
may be brought about when a brutal father trods down the mother, the
child sees its mother suffer and comes to look upon his father as an
abhorrent example. Under such circumstances the child’s “_will to
power_” may turn into “_ethical will_.” The child’s wish then is: _I
would not rule and be like father; I would rather be like mother!_ If
the child loves his tyrannical father he may become homosexual and
passive: a woman and a strong man.

These are a few examples taken at random from life. I have brought them
out, because one often hears that homosexuals have had an energetic
mother, and a father who played a submissive rôle. Of course, the
contrary may also be the case. Frequently we hear that the mother was
strongly neurotic.... There are no definite rules in the psychogenesis
of homosexuality. Each case requires an individual solution. That is
why _Sadger’s_ statements on the subject cannot be taken as absolute
axioms. Every third case or so disproves his notions.

_Many paths lead to homosexuality._ It would be impossible to describe
all. We can only get at a few typical examples.

We turn our attention now to the important question: what is the
attitude of the neurotic towards his mother? We have seen that
psychoanalysts correlate homosexuality to the repressed love for the
mother. Let us give a glimpse at my few statistical data. The question:
“Are you specially fond of your mother or your father? Or are you
partial to some brother or sister?” was answered by my 20 homosexuals
as follows:

“Only of mother—mother—no particular preference—both
alike—mother—father—no preference—on the whole, more fond of
mother—love the whole family passionately—father—mother—my
father mother—mother—mother—mother—specially fond of a brother
(indifferent to all the others)—father—mother.”

Approximately one-half confess a greater fondness for the mother.
I have mentioned the preferences in these cases because in one of
them, at least, I am able positively to prove that back of love for
the mother is hidden really a powerful aversion against the father;
another subject had failed to mention his fondness for his sister which
played a tremendous rôle in the development of his homosexuality.
Such a statistical inquiry really requires documentation through
psychoanalysis. But even on the face of the statistical figures we
find a certain percentage of cases showing a greater fondness for the
mother. This is also true of some of the cases in which the predominant
love had been declared in favor of the father.

_Hirschfeld_ holds that the attachment of the urning to his mother is a
common occurrence. He states:

“The homosexual is attracted to one woman with particular tenderness;
_this is his mother_; and here we also find the analogy of a
particularly intimate relationship between the urning daughter and
her father. The homosexual’s attachment to his mother is so typical,
that the _Freudian_ school has described this mother-complex as the
cause of homosexuality. _I hold this deduction for a false one._ The
homosexual does not become an urning because he was so passionately
attached to his mother as a child; on the contrary, he leans towards
the mother instinctively rather than knowingly, at first, this being
the direction of his weakness and peculiarity and often his mother,
also instinctively, makes him her favorite child....”

This conclusion of _Hirschfeld’s_ I find myself unable to accept. The
urning is often the mother’s favorite child before his birth. The
child responds with the most tender love for his mother with whom he
identifies himself in the end. Sometimes the mother wishes a girl and
brings up her boy as one. I know one urning who was never dressed in
pantelets by his mother, who was always kept by her side and whose
mother was in the habit of folding his external genital over with
his skin, saying: _you are a girl_! Even as a grown up boy he was
frequently put in girl’s clothes and he preserved for some time a
tendency to transvestism.

Undoubtedly there are many cases, in which direct love for the mother
has absorbed all love for the female sex.

One urning, for instance, as quoted by _Hirschfeld_, states:

“My mother was everything to me, she was my one best friend, the
_alpha_ and _omega_ of my existence. I had built many pretty plans
for her, desiring to make her comfortable in her old age.... Then,
there came the terrible catastrophe, which nearly wiped out my whole
existence, death robbed me of my much-beloved mother. The report of her
illness, which made me fear the worst, found me in the North of Ireland
and the tortures which I endured during the two days and two nights
that it took me to reach home, could not be described in mere words. On
the train folks avoided me suspecting that I was insane.... For three
weary weeks I took care of my mother day and night, then God took her
from me, and I remained a lonely wanderer, broken in mind and body. It
was a blow from which I could never recover. In the endeavor to forget
I returned to my England to take up my former work but it was useless.
Forget I could not, day and night I was a prey to mental and physical
suffering. I could not stand it any longer. So I returned to the old
home where my people had lived for 100 years. Sometimes I was nearly
insane and felt a little more quiet only when visiting the cemetery
and hovering around my parents’ resting place. Unable to find peace I
decided to travel. In the churches and cathedrals of every City and in
the chapels of every village through which I passed I prayed to God for
the soul of my beloved mother. The gnawing anguish in my heart over the
death of my beloved mother had shattered my nerves all to pieces....
I felt myself paralyzed on account of my deep depression, I could no
longer think, I fell into melancholy although I sometimes tried to
rouse myself. I abandoned all correspondence because no one could write
me a consoling word. When the world which existed between mother and
myself shattered, life ceased to have any interest for me.”

The relationship of the urlind to the father and of the urning to the
mother _Hirschfeld_ summarizes in the following table:


 I. _Urning boy_                      _Urlind girl_

 Prefers girls’ games, avoids         Prefers boys’ games, dislikes
 characteristic boys’ games, has      handwork, confections, is
 many  girlish features in his        ‘boy-like’ in behavior, in acts
 character and behavior, Sometimes    and, often, in appearance.
 also in his appearance. Observers    Remark: “She is like a boy!”
 remark: “He is like a girl.”

                 II. _Attitude towards the other sex_

 Prefers the company of girls.        Preferably plays rough games with
                                      boys.
 Emotional fixation on the mother.    Attachment greater to father.

     III. _Attitude towards own sex_ (as erotically colored in the
                             unconscious)

 Instinctively inhibited and            Greater bashfulness in the
 bashful in relation to boys.           presence of girls.

 Dreamy attachment to teacher           Similarly attached in dreams
 or some school mate.                   to some female person—teacher
                                        or school mate.


The powerful influence of the mother in bringing up the child is
illustrated by the following passage from one history:

“A young lieutenant relates: as soon as I was out of the school room I
used to rush to my girl friends. My mother was fond of taking me along
when she went shopping and always asked me how I liked this thing and
that, before making a purchase. For every new hat which mother bought I
served as a model, that is, every hat was tried on my head, and mother
purchased for herself the hat that looked best when tried on me. ‘You
look like a little girl,’ mother often would say to me while the hats
were tried on, ‘too bad, that you are not a real girl!’” (_Hirschfeld_,
l. c., p. 113.)

The expression, “too bad, you are not a real girl,” shows how the
mother influenced the child’s soul at a time when it is so very
plastic. But _Hirschfeld_ maintains that the conditions were reversed;
that the parents had suspected the child’s homosexual inclination and
treated it accordingly:

“Often the disposition towards homosexuality is fostered in children
by their elders who treat them according to that leaning. The fathers
feel specially attracted to the urning daughters—the mothers fondly
give their urning boys girlish tasks about the house. The feminine
and the virile peculiarities are not brought out through training at
first; the mother would not expect girlish tasks of a boy who was not
in the first place inclined that way. When _Krafft-Ebing_ relates in
his description of the case of the _Countess Sarolta Vay_: ‘it was her
father’s whim to bring up S. as a boy; he let her ride, drive, hunt,
admired her virile energy, called her Sandor. On the other hand this
foolish parent allowed his second son to be dressed like a girl and to
be brought up very much like one’—we must credit the father with the
intention of meeting deliberately an outspoken tendency on the part of
his children.” (_Hirschfeld_, l. c., p. 112.)

Naturally when one explains everything so arbitrarily and tries to
interpret in the parent’s favor, suggesting that the father displayed
great psychic insight, anything may be proven.

But when one looks with open eyes at this observation and at another
case of _Hirschfeld’s_,—an important contribution because it
illustrates the whole inner condition of the homosexual,—it is not
difficult to draw one’s own conclusions. One urning relates about his
mother:

“In the midst of his worries he was suddenly embraced and kissed—his
mother held him tightly in her arms; she drew his little face to her
cheek and their tears mingled while she consoled him until his eyes
again mirrored a smile. These were unforgettable experiences in the
life of the homosexual child. He felt that his mother was his truest
friend, and in his grateful heart he planned to recompense her above
all other mothers. His whole life and hope was centered in her; it was
for her sake that he was willing to prepare his school lessons, and
because of her he avoided arousing his father’s wrath; he did not want
her to be scolded on his account. To make her happy was his ambition in
life. Because she was not happy, he felt as if it were his fault and
with redoubled tenderness he clung to her, the quiet sufferer.

“He reached 16 years of age, he became sexually ripe and a perplexing
unrest troubled him. His comrades told him about their gallant
adventures. But he remained unresponsive to everything that seemed
to make them so happy. On the contrary, he was terribly distressed
when his best friend ‘betrayed’ him in favor of a girl. He began to be
aware of his peculiarity and the terrible thought that he must hide
his awful feelings made him tremble. He tried very hard to turn into
the right path. But he could not live at home while harboring his
secret; his mother, whom he loved above all else, he wanted to spare;
he felt he had to leave; so he abandoned his home and went into the
world trying to direct properly his sexual feelings. While away he
received most tender messages from his mother to whom he wrote as to
a beloved. After an absence of two years he returned home. From that
time on his life developed _under the eyes of his mother, in whom he
saw the highest quintessence of all womanhood_. His relations with
women were marked by timidity. He adored them and felt he would like to
serve them. He became early their confessor for his womanly soul made
him their natural comrade. But in the midst of all he was very unhappy,
his feelings for them never turned into physical love—_the sexual
attraction was absent_.” (_Hirschfeld_, l. c., p. 105.)

This urning actually confessed, in his own words, that in his mother
he saw the quintessence of all womanhood. The condition is obvious.
Every woman represents the mother, in part. At first I had occasion
to observe cases of this kind and that is how I came to the hasty
conclusion that every homosexual is emotionally fixed upon his mother
and avoids women because his inhibition towards them is due to the
mother _Imago_ which he carries within him.[45]

       *       *       *       *       *

Another observation of _Hirschfeld’s_ seems to me of very great
interest:

“The great attachment of homosexuals to their mother as pointed out
by _Sadger_ and other followers of _Freud_ is really a fact and holds
true of nearly all homosexuals, the attachment reaching far back into
their own childhood and extending over the mother’s whole life. We have
seen that many who lost their mother at an advanced age, for a long
time were unable to recover from the blow. But it seems more proper
not to look upon this great attachment to the mother as the cause of
homosexuality, but as a consequence thereof. Aside from this more
feminine nature, absence of a home of his own keeps the homosexual
for a longer time than usual close to his mother, especially when she
possesses a more pronounced personality, which is rather not unusual
where the children are homosexual. Urnings who contract marriage are
not wound up emotionally in their mother quite to such an extent and
often their love is transferred to their wife.” (_Hirschfeld_, l. c.,
p. 344.)

With these words and the admission of the transference of the love for
the mother to some other female person _Hirschfeld_ recognizes the
possibility of healing the condition, which is the psychoanalyst’s
task. But I must warn against any tendency to solve the problem of
homosexuality on the basis of any single finding.

In the first place I must point out that the history of these cases
discloses two types of motherhood: the strong mother and the weak
mother. Both types are common and either or both may determine the
growth of the child. _Hirschfeld_ states that the urning becomes
readily attached to the mother who is strong. This corresponds with
my practical observations and shows one type of homosexuality which
I shall presently describe. The strong mother dominates a weak child
throughout his life, he never escapes her and she determines his
relations to other women.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will be of interest to record on this question the opinion of a man
who is looked upon as the spiritual leader of the homosexual circle
in a cosmopolitan city, a man who has organized them and who has had
considerable experience. This gentleman writes me:

  “My Dear Doctor:

“In conformity with your wish I am sending you herewith a number of
life histories.

“First I wish to report to you the result of a questionnaire; I have
reached with the questionnaire 800 persons. It is noteworthy that none
of them knew that the answer to the question was of any particular
interest to me, for the question and the answer came up unobtrusively
in the course of ordinary conversation. This disposes of the criticism
sometimes heard in medical circles that the answers to interrogatories
are of little or no worth because the respondents unconsciously report
things in a manner to favor themselves if they do not deliberately tell
falsehoods with that end in view.

“Among the 800 persons interrogated 65% stated that the mother was
unusually energetic and self-reliant, while the father was mild and
easy going, as well as diffident and easily influenced.

“In my opinion these 65% represent the hereditary cases; there may be
some also among the other 35% due to hereditary transmission but this,
of course, I am unable to ascertain and it would be interesting to
conduct a medical inquiry into the subject.

“In favor of a hereditary predisposition as the most general factor
stands also the fact that in many families the homosexual’s sisters or
brothers show a similar tendency.”


                            _Illustrations_

U. Sch., 26 years of age, a merchant. The mother extraordinarily
self-reliant and the one who determines the course of action in every
family emergency. Father good-natured fellow, easily influenced. U.
Sch. has been several years ago under the care of Prof. Pilz. At the
time he had some intercourse with women, but the act always caused him
disgust and did not diminish his need to get into contact with men. At
first he tried to oppose this leaning towards men, but after two months
of struggle—during which he lost considerable weight—he had to give
in again and today he maintains relations exclusively with men. His
brother, six years younger than he, is an actor and is also homosexual.
An older brother, also a merchant, is completely normal in his sexual
life, but far from self reliant and very moody. His sister is also
heterosexual, but has male traits and physical features, hairy growth
on the face and a bass voice which would be considered very low even in
a man.

       *       *       *       *       *

Count X., 25 years old; a very energetic mother. His gait and movements
are exceedingly feminine, he is careless and has been mixed up already
in a number of unpleasant affairs from which the writer successfully
helped him extricate himself. Two of his three brothers are also
homosexual, and of his family circle in the wider sense, two uncles.


Karl W., 28 years of age, bank clerk. For the past six years has
maintained relations with his older colleagues. He is very strikingly
feminine and anxiety appears to lend zest to life in his case. He is
continually living in dread lest some one in his family should find out
about his peculiar inclination, although he is a stranger here and has
no relative living nearby. But if he has no reason to fear anything on
this score he finds some other reason to keep his mind in torment. For
instance, he fears he will be run over by an automobile, even when he
strolls along the safe side of a side walk, etc. As he is otherwise
mentally normal I conclude that he has a strong masochistic tendency
which he satisfies thus by conjuring up absurd fears. There is no
expression of the masochistic tendency in any overt acts. On the other
hand K. has relations only with persons belonging to the lowest social
stratum (plasterers, drivers, etc.) and it is probable that the greater
danger in that connection serves as a stimulant for him.

His mother is normal, but a very energetic woman, always taking care of
her own affairs and when a couple of thieves once broke in at her home
she grappled with them, threw them to the ground and held them. She
has married a second time, has a slight downy beard growth, and in her
house often puts on male clothing.

We need not be surprised that the expert emphasizes the fact that in
many instances homosexuality occurs in groups in the same family. The
same conditions bring about similar effects. Even the fact that 65%
of homosexuals have a very energetic mother need not be in itself
of any particular significance as typical of the psychogenesis of
homosexuality. The expert really means that these are mannish women so
that they naturally bring into the world womanly boys.




                                 INDEX


  Abstinence, 249

  Abuse, 322

  Act, specific, 334

  Acquired, 245

  Adler, 273, 335

  _Adspectu sanguinis currentis_, 295

  Affect, 274

  Aggression, 59, 73, 85, 150, 176, 250

  _Ahasuerus_ type, 163, 164

  Alcoholism, 248 _passim_, 255, 261, 269, 271, 274, 285, 288

  “All gone” feeling, 136

  Allerotism, 53 _passim_, 277

  Ambition, 344

  Amnesia, 143

  Anal irritation, 189

  Analysis, _vid._ Psychoanalysis

  “Analytic scotoma,” 248

  Androgyny, 24

  Anesthesia, sexual, 76, 163

  Anger, 133

  Antifetichism, 102, 118

  Anxiety, 23, 40, 68, 96, 121, 140, 153, 196, 201, 213, 242, 283

  Aphrodisiac, 261

  Ascetic ideal, 176

  Asceticism, 226

  Attitude (neurotic), 146, 148, 188, 209, 212, 217, 337 _passim_, 342

  Attraction (sexual), 345

  Autoerotism, _vid._ Masturbation

  Aversion, 201, 253, 304

  Azoospermia, 24


  Bashfulness, 342

  Belief in devil, 220

  Bestiality, 295, 304

  _Binet_, 41, 42, 305

  Bipolar attitude, 208, 221

  Bipolarity, 272

  Birthplace symbolism, 207

  Bisexuality, 27, 28, 34, 40, 41, 49, 54, 68, 69, 79, 120, 161, 185,
    213, 255, 261, 268, 289, 312, 317

  _Bloch_, 22, 26, 30, 33, 34, 99, 100, 273, 280, 281, 283, 291, 306,
    309

  _Blüher, H._, 26, 28, 79

  Boy love, 331

  Brain, 31

  Brother, 148, 149, 188

  Brutality, 337

  _Burchard_, 12


  _Cassanova_ type, 66, 98, 111, 124

  _Chamisso_, 65

  Character, 335

  _Chevalier_, 41

  Childhood, 27, 47, 172, 208, 245, 305, 308, 317

  Children, bisexuality of, 61

  Choice of lovers, 104

  Climacterium (male), 87, 90

  Clothing, 80

  Complex, 210, 248

  Compromise, 59, 80, 94, 243

  Compulsion, 19, 68, 90, 91, 111, 117, 298

  Compulsory tendency, 312

  Compulsory thought, 152

  “Conditioned reflex,” 35

  Confession, 236, 258

  Conflict, 242, 335

  Consciousness, 213, 224

  Consolation, 234

  Constellation, psychic, 191

  Constellation, sexual, 227

  Contact, incestuous, 268

  Contempt, 103

  Contrary feeling, 19, 264

  Conquest, 182

  Coprophilia, 160

  _Copulatio analis_, 167, 282

  _Corpora cavernosa_, 131

  Cousin, 187

  Cravings, 39, 43 _passim_, 46, 49, 66, 149, 151, 170, 191, 201, 222,
    257, 268, 291, 327, 334

  Criminality, 43, 64, 263

  Crisis, 143, 238

  “Critical period” _vid._ Climacterium (male)

  Cryptic, _vid._ Masks

  Culture, 33, 44, 45, 332

  Cunnilingus, 165, 167, 172, 264, 266

  Curiosity, 319


  Danger, 159

  Death symbol, 211

  _Deckerrinerung_, 157

  Defence, 160, 214, 226, 237, 260, 270, 300, 334

  Degeneration, 16, 18, 29

  Depression, 141, 188, 224, 341

  Desexualization, 271, 304

  Desire, 274, 291, 308, 328

  _Dessoir, M._, 30, 34, 54

  _Deutsch, H._, 251, 253

  Deviation, 29

  Diagnosis, 25, 26, 170

  Differentiation, sexual, 20

  Dipsomania _vid._ Alcoholism

  Disgust, 102, 121, 144, 201, 225, 243, 274, 281 _passim_, 286, 305,
    315

  Dislike, 280, 293

  Dissolution (of transference), 153

  Distortion, 210

  _Don Juan_ type, 90, 97, 98, 104, 111, 116, 124, 163, 175, 179, 190,
   225

  Doubt, 59

  Dread, _vid._ Fear

  Dream, 61, 77, 110, 144, 160, 169, 185, 189, 193, 202, 214, 219, 231,
    237, 260, 270, 300, 334

  Drink, _vid._ Alcoholism

  Drug addiction, 268

  Dyspareunia, 164


  Ecstasy, 130

  _Eichendorff_, 171

  _Ejaculatio_, 146

  Energy, sexual, 56, 176

  Environment, 13, 29

  Epilepsy, 48

  Erection, 130, 131

  Eroticism, 272, 332, 333

  “Eternal seekers,” 164

  “Ethical” will, 337

  Etiology, 15, 42

  _Eulenburg_, 281

  Eunuchoid, 24

  _Euripides_, 273

  Excess of morality, 218

  Excitement, 167

  Experience, 241, 334, 344

  Exposition of Ps.-A. (in dream), 211


  Factors, psychic, 35, 42

  Falsehood, 27

  Family life, 331

  Fancies, 147, 149, 224, 270

  Father, 148, 303, 335

  _Faust_, 163, 164

  Fear of immoral deed, 198
    marriage, 323
    sexual partner, 273
    syphilis, 95
    tuberculosis, 91
    woman, 272

  Feeling, 25, 315

  Fellatio, 153, 313

  Fetichism, 243, 305

  Fiction, neurotic, 335

  Fire symbolism, 211

  First impressions, 306, 312

  Fixation, 54, 110, 191, 217, 224, 225, 328

  Flagellation, 266, 267

  _Fleischmann_, 12, 268, 284

  _Fliess_, 14

  Flight, 90, 181, 191, 209, 235

  Fore-pleasure, 56

  Form of intercourse, 63

  Foot fetichism, 111

  “Flying Dutchman,” 100, 163, 164

  Freedom, 237

  _Freimark, H._, 222, 243

  _Frenssen_, 64

  _Freud, S._, 28, 39, 42, 53, 56, 57, 90, 209, 227, 236, 314, 346

  Friendship, 272, 332

  Frigidity, 74

  _Fuchs, A._, 12


  Gastric disorder, 192, 215

  Genetic factors, 246

  Genital glands, 31

  “Genuine” Don Juan, 218
    Homosexual, 260

  Gerontophilia, 61, 107, 224

  Grandeur, 159

  Gratification, 90, 107
    “without guilt,” 212

  “Great historic mission,” 163

  Greeks, 40

  _Grillparzer_, 80

  Gonorrhea, 142, 168, 282, 286, 288

  Gynandry, 24


  Hallucination, 298

  Hatred, 152, 233, 263, 273, 285, 300

  _Havelock Ellis_, 20, 22, 27, 56

  Healing, 326

  _Hebbel_, 46

  Heredity, 13, 20, 29, 32, 42,331, 338

  Hermaphroditism, 25, 41

  Heterosexual capacity, 175
    excitation, 271
    longing, 213
    period, 291
    persons, 223
    stimuli, 312

  _Hirschfeld_, 12, 17, 20, 22, 23, 25, 27, 30, 34, 36, 41, 61, 69, 70,
    79, 81, 89, 186, 191, 245, 253, 256, 260, 261, 289, 308, 338,
    339 _passim_, 346

  Homage, 268

  “Homosexual marriage,” 293

  House symbolism, 326

  Hypnotism, 168, 192

  Hypothesis, 35

  Hunger, 215, 216


  Ideal, 55, 56, 129, 231, 332, 333

  Identification, 35, 160, 161, 314, 328, 336

  Imago, 246, 303

  Impotence, psychic, 67, 260, 262, 317

  Impulse, 131

  Inborn, 20, 23, 41, 72, 80, 245

  Incest, 96, 163, 201, 207, 210, 217, 224

  Indifference, 33, 54, 244, 272, 289

  Inebriety, _vid._ Alcoholism

  Infantilism, 63, 145, 154, 162, 222, 269

  Infatuation, 160, 162

  Infection, 282, 284, 292

  Inferiority, feeling of, 212, 336

  Influence, maternal, 342

  Inhibition, 49, 108, 176, 184, 187, 190, 200, 207, 213, 233, 236, 238,
    242, 244, 260, 262, 274

  Initiation, 202

  Insanity, 248

  Instability, 29

  Instinct, 28, 44, 48, 311

  “_Instrumentum Diaboli_,” 291

  “Intermediate Sex,” 89, 245

  Interpretation (dreams), 209, 325

  Intoxication, psychic, 154, 158

  Inversion, 69, 129

  Isolation, 23


  Jealousy, 188, 254, 259, 296, 299

  Joint suicide, 63

  Judgment-attitude, 333

  _Juliusburger, O._, 254


  _Krafft-Ebing_, 11, 12, 13 _passim_, 17, 22, 42, 48, 89, 227, 252,
    256, 281, 282, 293, 296, 312, 315, 343

  _Kiernan_, 41


  Language of Dreams, 185

  Late homosexuality, 89, 110, 227, 317, 319, 336

  Latent, 13, 26, 57 _passim_, 63, 67, 79, 100, 109, 124, 172, 184, 250,
    281

  _Libido_, 56, 57, 72, 78, 88, 90, 103, 164, 252 _passim_

  _Locum tenens_, 259

  Lombroso, 41, 45

  Loneliness, 177

  Longing, 162

  Love dreams, 292
    excitation, 310
    frenzy, 291
    hunger, 130
    Lesbian, 280
    physical, 332
    Platonic, 313
    preparedness, 154
    prostitute, 61
    spiritual, 16, 332

  Lure, 234


  Magic, 221

  Male attitude, 296
    protest, 335
    hero type, 26, 27, 242

  _Manipulatio cum digito_, 87

  Mannerism, 94, 95

  “Mannish” women, 24

  Manual gratification, 123, 135, 257

  Marriage, 89, 105, 120

  Masculinity, 79

  Masochism, 73, 282, 350

  Masks, 61, 65, 66, 68, 80, 95

  Masturbation, 11, 14 _passim_, 64, 81, 106, 117, 135, 140, 144, 151,
    165, 178, 192, 195, 197, 213, 257, 262, 270, 286, 292, 310, 325

  _Maupassant_, 104

  _Mayer, E. V._, 33

  Mediation (through oppos. sex), 62, 67

  _Membrum virile_, 258, 260, 271, 286, 310

  Memory, 47, 137, 241, 245, 308, 314

  _Messalina_ type, 66, 90, 163, 175, 228

  Misogyny, 99, 272, 273

  Misophilia, 267

  _Moebius_, 283

  Moll, 18 _passim_, 20, 22

  Monosexuality _vid._ Bisexuality

  Mother complex, 213, 339
    Imago, 186, 246, 335

  Motherly feeling, 161

  _Mutterschutz_, 230


  _Naecke_, 20, 184, 269

  Narcissism, 102, 227

  “Natural” life, 333

  Nausea, 226, 230, 236, 290, 303

  Necrophilia, 131

  Nervousness, 257, 286

  “Neuropathic” constitution, 294

  Neurosis, 17, 22, 27 _passim_, 41 _passim_, 45, 48, 55, 58, 96, 106,
    122, 145, 215, 223, 237, 305, 324

  _Nietzsche_, 334

  Nutrition, 216

  Nymphomania, 163


  Object, sexual, 11

  Obsession, 113, 120

  Onanism, _vid._ Masturbation

  Ontogenesis, 45

  Orgasm, 74, 82, 184, 263, 267, 281, 293

  Outbreak (of H.), 223

  Over-compensation, 46
    determination, 327


  Paranoia, 39, 95

  Paraphilia, 58, 146, 156, 268

  Parents, 30

  Passion, 89, 97, 144

  _Paul, Jean_, 306

  _Pawlow_, 35

  Pederasty, 81

  Perversion, 69, 102

  _Pfister_, 320, 323, 326

  Phallic symbol, 217

  Phantasy, 70, 130, 300

  Phobias, 68

  Piety, 190, 200, 219, 235

  Pilz, 349

  _Platen’s Diary_, 290

  _Plato_, 56

  Pollution (dream), 212, 227, 313

  Polygamic neurosis, 124
    tendency, 176

  _Potentia_, 133, 217, 257, 261

  Polygamy, 237

  Praetorius, Numa, 250, 251

  Precocity, 45 _passim_, 47, 318

  Predisposition, 31, 34, 36, 39, 41, 290

  Preference for widows, 98

  Priapism, 131

  Prognosis, 216

  Progression, 44

  Prostitute, 61, 163, 178, 184, 217, 280, 285, 316

  Prostitution, 57, 85, 106, 281

  Protection, _vid._ Defence

  Pseudo-Cassanova type, 99
    Homosexuality, 24, 25, 247, 308

  Pseudonym, choice of, 65

  Psychic Homosexuality, 85
    Urge, 183

  Psycho-Analysis, 26, 27, 39, 47, 70, 109, 150, 158, 172, 190, 202,
    225, 241, 244, 248, 268, 284, 300, 312, 328, 338

  Psychosis, 58

  Puberty, 31, 33, 124, 291, 294

  Pursuit, 186, 191


  Quest for sexual object, 164, 172
    father, 312

  Questionnaire, 255 _passim_, 348


  Rationalization, 72, 247

  Reality, 60

  Recessive type, 45

  Regression, 236

  Relations, Platonic, 177

  Religion, 218, 237

  Religio-Sexual motives, 222

  Remorse, 167, 214

  Repetition, 327

  Repression, 28, 39 _passim_, 43, 47, 49, 70, 225, 243, 271, 272, 315, 325

  Reproach, 207

  Research, sexual, 12

  Resistance, 145, 153, 238, 245

  _Retif de la Bretonne_, 99, 100, 111

  Retrogression, 41, 45, 331

  Retrospective tendency, 334

  Revenge, 154, 168, 207

  Reversed love, 152

  Right and Left (symbolism), 130

  _Roemer, V._, 32

  Rôle of family, 172

  _Rousseau_, 95


  _Sade, Marquis de_, 283

  _Sadger_, 245, 314, 337, 346

  Sadism, 49, 131, 263, 272, 274

  Satyriasis, 131 _passim_, 152, 154, 160, 250

  _Schmitz, O. A. H._, 98, 100, 124

  _Schopenhauer_, 283

  Scorn, 218, 319

  Secret pride, 213

  Seduction, 99, 101, 160, 167, 253, 268, 285, 312

  Sensuality, 165

  Sexual object, 98, 103

  _Shakespeare_, 46

  Shyness, 177, 302, 310

  Sister, attitude towards, 169
    Imago, 223

  _Situs Inversus_, 82, 84, 284

  Starvation, 215

  _Stekel_, 48

  _Stier_, 12

  _Strindberg_, 283

  Struggle, 236

  Sublimation, 39, 40, 49, 130, 271

  Substitution, 187, 211

  Succubus, 71, 161

  Suicide, 105

  Suppressed instincts, 96

  Suspicion, 149

  Symbol, 60, 81, 91, 129, 145, 211, 323

  Symptomatic acts, 129

  Syphilidophobia, _vid._ Fear of syphilis


  _Tarnovsky_, 246, 247

  Taste, 97

  Temptation, 147, 164, 196

  Tendency, 55, 89, 176
    prospective, 222

  Tension, sexual, 32

  Therapy, 244

  “Third” sex, 24

  Timidity, 345

  Touch, 252

  Traits, male and female, 73, 94, 124
    neurotic, 96

  Transference, 88, 111, 153, 211

  Transitional types, 103, 175

  Transvestite, 69, 70, 336

  Trauma, 23, 42, 119, 172, 196, 236, 238, 293, 297, 302, 305, 309, 320,
    326, 327


  _Ulrichs_, 36

  Unconscious, 35
    wish, 209

  Undifferentiated, 31

  Ungratified libido, 129

  _Urlind_, 30, 78, 284, 297, 333, 341

  _Urning_, 81, 333, 339, 341, 345

  Urolagnia, 312


  _Van Teslaar_, 44, 46

  Variation, biologic, 20

  _Virchow_, 20

  _Virgo intacta_, 154

  Virility, 100, 125

  _Vita Sexualis_, 73, 145, 178, 270, 287, 300, 321

  Vomiting, symptomatic, 199, 230


  Warning, 260

  _Weininger_, 283, 346

  _Westphal_, 19

  Whip (sadism), 265

  “Will to power,” 337

  Wish, 35, 38, 292, 325, 336
    fulfillment, 214

  Witches, fear of, 221

  Woman, aggressive, 30, 350

  “Womanly” men, 24

  “World pain,” 334

  Worry, 181


  _Ziemcke_, 286

  _Zwischenstuffen_, 25
    _-theorie_, 245




                              FOOTNOTES:

[1] Hans Blüher: Studien ueber den perversen Charakter. Ztrbl. f.
Psychoanalyse, Oct., 1913.

[2] _Neue Studien auf dem Gebiete der Homosexualitaet. Jahrb. f.
Sexuelle Zwischenstuffen_, vol. III, Leipzig.

[3] This view of _Krafft-Ebing_ is by no means “antiquated.” It
is still maintained by _Stier_ (Zur Aetiologie des kontraeren
Sexualgefuehls. Monatschrf. f. Psych, u. Neurol., vol. XXXII, 1914) and
very energetically criticised (ibid.) by _Hirschfeld and Burchard_.
“It is inconceivable,” state the above named authors, “how _Stier_
can ascribe an etiologic significance to onanism in connection with
homosexuality. Its distribution, ubiquitous—in the opinion of most
specialists, would permit one to hold masturbation responsible for
any other sexual development as well.” According to _Stier_, early
and long-continued onanism (especially mutual) is harmful because “it
does away with the feeling of shame in connection with one’s sexual
organs and makes for readier handling even by the uncorrupted adult.”
_Fleischmann_ also finds 33 excessive onanists among 60 inverts and
concludes (Beitr. zur Lehre der kontraeren Sexualempfindung, Zeitschr.
f. d. ges. Neur. u. Psychol., vol. VII, 1911) that “like alcoholism,
masturbation must influence the development of the perversion.” Many
of his patients mentioned the habit in a casual relation. We know well
that the sense of guilt is attached to the habit of masturbation.
But _Fleischmann_ sees in that a proof. “Onanism plays a role in the
development of the sexual perversion,” he argues, “because it rouses an
increased sexual excitability while the will power is weakened by it at
the same time and there follows a progressive wandering of the sexual
instinct away from the normal sexual aim and object.”

[4] This contention is altogether wrong. I have never seen so many and
such pronounced idealists as among masturbators. Young artists, poets
and musicians in particular often show, I have found, a strong tendency
to masturbation, and this agrees with the pronounced bisexuality of
all artists, which has been particularly pointed out by _Fliess_. The
youths of this type are often so delicate and sensitive that they see
in the sexual act only animal brutality and hide their own sexuality
from the whole world. Among masturbators we find the champions of
truth, the over-moralistic preachers, the ethical reformers and
dreamers.

[5] Cf., on the other hand, the views of _Bloch_: “That the contrary
sexual instinct-feeling in itself is not a sign of psychic degeneration
and need not be looked upon at all as morbid, is shown among others,
by the fact that the condition is often associated with spiritual
superiority. As proof we find, among all nations, men of proven
homosexuality, who are the pride of their respective people as writers,
poets, artists, military strategists, or statesmen. Further proof that
the contrary sexual feeling is no disease and does not necessarily
lead to immoral tendencies may be seen in all the noble qualities of
heart which it is capable of generating, precisely as the heterosexual
attraction, such as courage, self-sacrifice, altruism, artistic
feeling, creative energy, etc., just as it may be responsible also for
any of the morbidities and failings of heterosexual love (jealousy,
suicide, murder, unhappy love with its deleterious effects on mind and
body, etc.)”

[6] It was clearly the duty of the new editor of _Krafft-Ebing’s_
popular work to have recorded therein the author’s latest views.
In his “_Neuen Studien auf dem Gebiete der Homosexualitaet_,” he
states: “In contrast with the conception that contrary sexuality is
an inborn anomaly, a disorder in the evolution of the sexual function
of monosexuals and of the glandular development of the sex glands,
_the conception of ‘morbidity’ is untenable_. We may rather speak in
this connection of a malformation and compare the anomaly with bodily
malformations,—for instance, with the anatomic deviations from the
average type. But the concept of a simultaneous psychopathic state
remains a legitimate assumption, because subjects presenting anatomic
as well as functional deviations from type (_stigmata degenerationis_),
_may preserve good physical health for a time, and may even show points
of superiority_.

“At the same time so tremendous a deviation as contrary sexual feeling
must have a far wider influence upon the psyche than many of the
anatomic or functional stigmata of degeneration. That is the reason
why any disturbance in the usual development of a normal sexual life
reflects so commonly in an unfavorable sense upon the harmonious
psychic development of personality. _Victims of contrary sexual feeling
often show neuropathic and psychopathic predispositions_, such as, for
instance, a tendency to constitutional neurasthenias and hysteria,
milder forms of periodic psychosis, inhibitions against the unfoldment
of psychic energies (intelligence, moral sense), including moral
inferiority, especially associated with hyper-sexuality, eventually
leading to most serious disorders of the sexual instinct. At any
rate, it can be shown that, relatively speaking, heterosexuals prove
greater cynics about sexual matters than the homosexuals. Also that
other degenerative signs upon the field of sexuality, such as sadism,
masochism, fetichism, etc., are much more commonly found among the
former....”

[7] _Die kontraere Sexualempfindung, Symptom eines neuropatischen
(psychopathischen) Zustandes. Arch. f. Psych. u. Neurol., vol. II_, p.
106, 1870.

[8] _Handbuch der Sexualwissenschaften (Die Funktionsstærrungen des
Sexuallebens.)_ Leipzig, Verlag F. C. W. Vogel, 1912, p. 652.

[9] I find a very interesting observation by _Bloch_, one which
deserves to be widely circulated: “A final and not unimportant form
of Pseudo-homosexuality is hermaphroditism (_das Zwittertum_). It is
remarkable that science has concerned itself only in recent years with
the close study of hermaphroditic conditions which have not received
heretofore the attention warranted by their sociologic bearings and
their frequency. It is a great merit of _Neugebauer_ and of _Magnus
Hirschfeld_ that they have called general attention to these remarkable
sexual _Zwischenstufen_, intermediary states, and have pointed out
their great practical significance, a matter of which no one has
thought before, as is shown by the significant fact that the new
German civil code has done away with the legal proscriptions of the
old Prussian law concerning the _Zwitter_ (hermaphrodites), upon the
contention that no person is of unknown or unascertainable sex.”

[10] Hirschfeld emphasizes the fact that homosexuality has nothing to
do with organic bisexuality. He states:

“I deem it important to point out this fact: _The most extreme_
deviation of sexual type approaching the opposite sex, such as
hypertrophy of the clitoris and full facial hair growth in the female,
or hypospadia penis-scrotalis and gynecomasty in the male are found
linked with heterosexuality more often than with homosexuality.”

[11] English version by J. S. Van Teslaar, in preparation.

[12] Verlag J. F. Bergmann, Wiesbaden, 1913. Vid. note above.

[13] _Cf._ _Dichtung und Neurose_, J. F. Bergmann. Authorized English
version by James S. Van Teslaar.

[14] _Nervöse Angstzustaende._ _Die psychische Behandlung der
Epilepsie_, 2nd edition, p. 336.

[15] Hirschfeld relates several instances illustrating how heterosexual
potence may be increased by the fires of homosexual passion: A merchant
relates: “I am able to carry out sexual intercourse with women, only
if I keep thinking of the man who possessed the woman before me.” A
young workingman from Berlin relates: “When I was 17 years of age
and I saw young men of my age pick out sweethearts for themselves I
did the same. Later, as man, it seemed natural to me to get a woman,
although my own inclination had little to do with it. The physical
excitation necessary for the carrying out of the sexual act I could
rouse in myself only by thinking of some male person. This sort of
thing exhausted me and after a time I decided to give it up. I felt
myself strongly attracted to a relative at that time. He was younger
and as I had greater influence over women I helped him by putting him
in touch with some and so we often carried out coitus together. Seeing
him [go at it so hotly] excited me tremendously and then I carried out
coitus without any difficulty.” The proprietor of a German hotel also
relates that, before intercourse with his wife, he was in the habit of
rousing his passion by kissing his head waiter. This furnished him the
requisite sexual preparedness and as quickly as possible he hurried to
his wife, whose bed was in the next room. Hirschfeld writes further:
“These sketches from life I want to conclude with the account of a
patient who consulted me for sexual hyperesthesia which in his case was
so keen that seeing the statuettes of naked children ornamenting the
Berlin castle bridge while crossing it was enough to cause erection. He
was a merchant, 42 years of age. In order to obtain potentia coeundi
it was necessary for him not only to think, but also to speak aloud of
some pleasing man, in some such manner: “Did you notice that servant of
the Count’s, who called for a bundle this forenoon, how did you like
him? A neat boy, what? His livery seemed quite new! Didn’t you think
it fitted him a bit too tightly? How old should you say he was?” Only
by carrying on such talk with his wife, and he had to exercise the
greatest ingenuity in order to cover his object while doing so, was he
able to achieve ejaculation, and to beget children,—he was the father
of three.”

[16] _Die Transvestiten. Eine Untersuchung ueber den Erotischen
Verkleidungstrieb._ Alfred Pulvermacher. Berlin, 1910.

[17] (Cf. _Angstzustaende_, p. 417. An English translation of this work
is now in course of preparation and will appear shortly.)

[18] English translation by James S. Van Teslaar.

[19] Faust finds this temporarily in his Graetchen. But it is only
an episode and presently he is again restlessly searching until he
finds Helena, the most beautiful of all women. The Flying Dutchman is
released by a woman who remains true to the last in her love of him.
That is the projection of a subjective feeling upon the woman. He
wishes he could find a woman for whom he would feel a love so dear that
it would relieve him. In Ahasuerus the same problem is glossed over
with religious terms as the problem seen in the Don Juan story as the
requital of the all-highest father. All four must be faithless, they
cannot remain true to one woman.

[20] Once I treated a man who had separated from his wife, wanted to
marry another woman with whom he had fallen in love and to divorce his
wife. In the course of our interviews during that time this man said
repeatedly: “I would not introduce you to my first wife; you would fall
in love with her if I did; no man can help that.” At once I recognized
that the man’s neurotic disorder reached back to a suppressed love for
his wife. In his mind there rumbled continually sounds which he could
not reproduce. He recalled scraps of melodies which he could not place
at all. But once I was able to get at one such melody. It was a song
of which he did not know the words. When the matter was ferreted out
it was found that the words bore distinctly a reference to his first
wife. The vague melodies permitted his mind to dwell on her and at
the same time to cover from his consciousness the fact that he could
not keep her out of his mind. Here is a characteristic passage from
_Eichendorff’s_ poem:

Ich kam von Walde hernieder, Da stand noch das alte Haus; Mein Liebchen
schaute wieder Wie einst zum Fenster hinaus—

Sie hat einen andern genommen— Ich war draussen in Schlacht und Krieg—
Nun ist alles anders gekommen:— Ich wollt es war wieder Krieg....

These verses represent a summary of his great conflict.

[21] Cf. chapter entitled, _Der Pechvogel_, in: _Das Liebe Ich_. Verlag
Otto Salle, Berlin.

[22] _Der Traum als feinstes Reagens fuer die Art des Sexuellen
Empfindens. Monatschr. f. Kriminalpsychologie_, 1905, and other
contributions.

[23] If homosexuals had only homosexual dreams, as _Naecke_ maintains,
the fact would stand as a strong proof against my conception that all
men, including the homosexuals, are bisexual. But as a matter of fact
genuine homosexuals often have heterosexual dreams if one cares to look
into the subject carefully. _Hirschfeld_, through a questionnaire,
found that among 100 homosexuals, 13 per cent. dreamed all sorts of
heterosexual situations. Analytical investigation of their dream
life would lift the 13 per cent. fully to one hundred per cent. The
heterosexual dreams are associated with anxiety feelings in many cases.
They dream that they are married and find themselves impotent, so that
they are confronted with the compulsion of carrying out heterosexual
intercourse. We find here one more confirmation of the fact that the
dream releases all the excitations repressed from consciousness through
the day.

[24] Correction of detail after first report of the dream.

[25] Cf. Hans Freimark, _Das Sexuelle Moment in der religiösen
Exstase_, _Zeitschf. f. Religionsphilosophie_, vol. II, No. 17; also,
_Das Hexenproblem_, _Die Neue Generation_, vol. VIII; and _Sexuelle
Besessenheit_ ibid., vol. IX.

[26] The following statement of _Hans Freimark_ on the _Züchtbarkeit
der Homosexualität_ displays excellent insight into human nature:
“It does not require much psychology to note that some persons are
particularly impressed by and interested in whatever popular belief
ascribes as particularly characteristic of homosexuality. Repression
against homosexual deeds is in itself almost invincible. But that
which is considered the very essence of homosexuality acts apart and
frequently does so in a sense far from proper. It is enough to induce
young men who have no other claim to distinctions to try to imitate
these ‘singular doings’ and they become finally interested in the
acts.... Once the pose is assumed, it becomes part of reality, and then
contact with the homosexual circle contributes not a little towards
strengthening the attitude. Such an influence, naturally, is possible
only among young people. But the young are the ones who generally raise
the problem at all. It has been assumed that in view of the constancy
of the instinct, such a complete shifting from one sex to the opposite
is most unlikely. But since all investigators admit a certain period
of indifference, and since it is admitted further that during that
period the individual may abandon himself to an eroticism contrary to
the form adopted finally, the possibility cannot be excluded that weak
characters may be turned away from their original developmental goal.”

[27] “The flight to homosexuality is the result of repulsing the
incest phantasy.” _Nervöse Angstzustände_, 1st ed., 1908, p. 311. A
translation of the latest edition of this work is in preparation and
will appear shortly.

[28] Berlin, 1886. Verl. Aug. Hirschwald.

[29] 3rd Ser., vol. XXXI, 1906.

[30] _Alkohol und Homosexualität. Wiener klinische Wochenschrift_,
1913, No. 3.

[31] Krafft-Ebing also mentions a young man who carried out his first
homosexual aggression under the influence of alcohol. A man who
previous to that time had successful intercourse with prostitutes while
intoxicated grabbed hold of his friend’s genitals, they masturbated ...
and since that time he is homosexual.

[32] _Zur Psychologie des Alkoholismus_, _Zentralbl. f. Psychoanalyse
u. Psychotherapie_, vol. III, p. 1.

[33] Interesting is also the case of a high school teacher whose
feelings were predominantly homosexual during the stage of depression
and heterosexual during the stage of exaltation induced by the
addiction to morphine (_Hirschfeld_). There are persons who live a
double, alternating existence: homosexual and heterosexual. Their
conduct suggests that they are persons continually in search of a
bisexual ideal. Krafft-Ebing also describes a hysterical (_Jahrbuch
f. Sexuelle Zwischenstufen_, vol. III) who is attracted to men each
time that her neurosis improves after a sojourn at a sanitarium, while
during the height of her trouble she is homosexual. What does this mean
but that the heterosexual cravings are repressed during her neurosis!
For notwithstanding her extensive homosexual gratifications she has
become a victim of severe hysteria while every time she improves she
feels the love for man.

[34] Cf. author’s contribution, _Die psychische Impotenz des Mannes_.
Zeitschr. f. Sexualwissenschaft, 1916.

[35] _Beiträge zur Lehre von der konträren Sexualempfindung_, Zeitschr.
f. Psychol, u. Neurol., vol. VII, 1911.

[36] _Alkohol und Homosexualität._ Allg. Zeitschr. f. Psychol. und
gerichtl. Medizin, vol. LXVIII.

[37] It is not true that homosexuals are exposed to no dangers of
infection. I have examined a homosexual druggist who acquired in
Venice a serious gonorrhea of the anus. He confessed to me that he had
infected other men, because the thought of having fallen himself a
victim made him angry. But on the whole infections are not so frequent
an occurrence as during heterosexual intercourse, which is what would
be expected, considering that _copulatio analis_ is relatively rare.

[38] I must also emphasize that the first homosexual activity often
takes place in the twenties, if we omit from consideration the mutual
gratifications between boys and between girls which—with but very few
exceptions—are found to occur during the childhood of all persons.
Between small children (4-8 years of age) homosexual activity is very
common, then in many cases a period of latency seems to set in. During
the period from the 10th to the 15th year nearly every boy passes
through homosexual love (either purely platonic or grossly sexual).
After the onset of puberty there are numerous variations: persons who
later become homosexual continue heterosexual activity, try all sorts
of experiments and then withdraw into homosexuality in consequence
of some unpleasant heterosexual experience (infection, claim of
parenthood, etc.) or on account of impotence.

[39] As is well known _Bloch_ has endeavored to show that
_Schopenhauer’s_ antifeminism and pessimism are traceable to syphilitic
infection acquired during youth.

[40] _Beiträge zur Lehre der kontraeren Geschlechtsempfindung._
Zeitschrift f. d. ges. Neurol. u. Pathologie, 1911.

[41] _Zur Entstehung sexueller Perversitäten und ihrer Beurteilung vor
Gericht._ Archiv f. Psychiatrie, vol. LI, 1913.

[42] We shall see later that this attitude is due to the fact that
these persons fix their whole heterosexual psychic eroticism upon the
immediate members of their family. Heterosexual men in this situation
often experience merely physical gratification during intercourse with
prostitutes; with the other type of women they are wholly impotent.

[43] The following statement of _Hirschfeld’s_ illustrates this point
(l.c., p. 315): “An urning, writer,—_unus e multis_—writes me: ‘The
homosexual inclination developed in me in spite of the fact that the
first sexual aggression was of a heterosexual character—a nursemaid
seduced me—in spite of the fact that through training from childhood
on I was taught to look at the female sex and my reading of literature
showed me that woman was the object of love.’” I add: this tendency
developed because the first sexual experience was associated with
disgust on his part and because the domineering of woman led him to
hate that sex.

[44] _Die Darstellung der Neurose in Traums._ Zentralblatt f.
Psychoanalyse. vol. III, p. 26.

[45] In a novel which is an autobiography and a confession at the same
time, the hero relates that during his first visit to the brothel
he had to think of his mother. (_Erlebnisse des Zoeglings Taxil._
Wiener Verlag.) This book is interesting also because it describes
accurately the homosexual practices in a school of cadets. The fact
that young boys are impelled to think of their mother when visiting the
brothel for the first time is often the cause of total impotence. Cf.
_Weininger_: _Geschlecht u. Charakter_, chapter: _Mutter u. Dirne._ The
work has been translated into English.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BI-SEXUAL LOVE; THE HOMOSEXUAL NEUROSIS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Homosexual Neurosis
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Homosexual Neurosis

Author: Wilhelm Stekel

Translator: James S. Van Teslaar

Release date: March 4, 2022 [eBook #67557]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Richard G. Badger, 1922

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOMOSEXUAL NEUROSIS ***

          Excerpts from the Professional Press on the work of

                             DR. WM. STEKEL


We have lacked thus far a systematic clinical application of Freudian
analysis. Stekel’s work fills this need.

                                               _Jung_, in MEDIS. KLINIK.

... A standard work; a milestone in the psychiatric and
psychotherapeutic literature.

                 Geh. Sanitätsrat _Dr. Gerstor_, in DIE NEUE GENERATION.

It would be regrettable if the work did not attract fully the attention
of the scientific world; its deep sobriety and the fulness of its
details render it a treasury of information, primarily for the
physician, but, in large measure, of interest also to the educationist,
the minister, the teacher and, not least, to the student of
criminology....

                                     _Horch_, in ARCHIV F. KRIMINALOGIE.

These case histories will be read with great interest by everyone,
including those who are inclined to maintain a sceptical attitude
towards psychoanalysis.

                                    _Eulenburg_, in MEDIZINISCHE KLINIK.

Stekel’s work teaches practitioners a great many things they did not
know before, particularly about the significance of psychology and
sexual science in the practice of medicine.

                _Hitschmann_, in INTERNAT. ZEITSCHRIFT F. PSYCHOANALYSE.

It is Stekel’s extraordinary merit that he compels us to take into
account a pressing mass of data which he brings to light with a
scientific zeal which is unfortunately still rare,—facts and
observations so penetrating, so true to life that these often render
unnecessary any formal statement of the obvious deductions which flow
from them.

                                                    DIE NEUE GENERATION.

The most modern problems are considered, new viewpoints are brought out,
while the excesses in the technique and interpretation of the earlier
stages of psychoanalysis are avoided.

                         _Kermauner_, in WIENER KLINISCHE WOCHENSCHRIFT.

All in all, Stekel’s is a work for which I bespeak the widest interest
not only among physicians, but also among jurists, educationists,
sociologists and ministers. Only an understanding of the mental life of
the individual will yield a proper view of our social life.

                          _Liepmann_, in ZEITSCHRIFT F. SEXUALWISSENSCH.

The work is a treasury for all who have occasion to probe the depths of
human life and should be a source of considerable information and
stimulus to every jurist who takes in earnest his professional duties.

                  Geh. Justizrat _Dr. Horch_, in ARCHIV F. KRIMINALOGIE.

It does not matter from what angle the work of Stekel is approached. Any
consideration of it reveals rich material. Stekel is a writer who
handles his subjects in a lavish manner; lavish, but with that restraint
which bends all to the urgency of his themes. He evidently approaches
his clinical work with the same exuberant interest. There he reaps
through psychoanalysis a rich harvest of results. He has collected these
results and presented them for the dissemination of such knowledge of
the sexual disturbances as he thus obtained. Facts are there in great
number. They cannot be gainsaid. Stekel’s own evaluation of such facts
and his earnest plea for their consideration, both by the medical
profession and by the society of men and women where these facts exist,
can speak only for themselves to the truly conscientious reader. There
is not much in these books that the psychotherapeutist can afford to
pass over.

                                               NEW YORK MEDICAL JOURNAL.




                        THE HOMOSEXUAL NEUROSIS


                                   BY
                           DR. WILLIAM STEKEL
                                (VIENNA)

                      _Authorized translation by_
                       JAMES S. VAN TESLAAR, M.D.

         (For sale only to Members of the Medical Profession.)


                                 BOSTON
                           RICHARD G. BADGER
                            THE GORHAM PRESS




                 COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY RICHARD G. BADGER

                          All Rights Reserved


                  Made in the United States of America

                   The Gorham Press, Boston, U. S. A.




                          TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE


The present volume completes my English version of the _Homosexualität_
portion of the author’s _Onanie und Homosexualität_. The first portion
has been issued a few months ago, under the title _Bisexual Love_, and
it is very gratifying that the publication of the present volume was
made possible so soon after the appearance of the first. The translation
of the part dealing with _Autoerotism_ is also completed, and will
appear shortly. One of the most important works of clinical
psychopathology will thus be available, for the English reading
professional ranks, in unabridged form.

These three volumes, though available separately, in some respects form
an instructive continuity. At any rate those interested in any of the
fundamental problems discussed therein will find most helpful an
acquaintance with all three volumes.

Furthermore the student or physician interested in mental problems will
find the implications of the principles set forth herein of the utmost
practical significance, aside from their specific bearing on the
problems of Homosexuality and Autoerotism. These clinical studies stand
forth, in the first place, as lessons in analysis and therapy; but
incidentally they reveal certain fundamental aspects of human nature
more clearly than such a revelation was possible without the aid of the
psychoanalytic method of research. The knowledge thus gained for
therapeutic purposes is also applicable to many other practical problems
of life. One approaching the study of a work like the present, with the
intention of improving one’s therapeutic efficiency and of thus
increasing one’s professional usefulness, is quite likely to discover
before long that his whole outlook, as a professional man, and, above
all, as a social being, has undergone a wholesome transformation.

Indeed, all fundamental knowledge has this quality of spreading,
fan-like, clearing up with its helpful implications more than appears
obvious at the beginning. It is not surprising, therefore, that
Psychoanalysis, at the present stage primarily a therapeutic method, but
reaching into the inner recesses of the human soul more penetratingly
than any other method of inquiry, should also prove the most helpful
method of interpreting all other problems generated by the functions of
the human instincts and emotions.

                                                            VAN TESLAAR.

 September 30, 1922
 Brookline, Mass.




                                CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                                            PAGE
       I The Relations of the Homosexual to the Other Sex—Fear,
           Disgust, Hate, and Anger—Homosexuality and
           Epilepsy—Sadger’s Researches—Hirschfeld’s Theses—Fear of
           the Sexual Partner—Disgust for Woman—Sadistic
           Attitude—Epilepsy and Homosexuality—Other Reactions
           Indicating Revulsion—My First Early Experiences—Sadger’s
           Investigations                                             11

      II Rôle of the Father and of Other Members of the
           Family—Dislike of Children—Letter of a Homosexual Who
           Fears the “Penetrating Eye” of Women—A Marriage with the
           Father—Jealousy of the Father—A Homosexual Who Hates His
           Mother—A Beloved Boy as the Imago of the
           Sister—Psychology of Love within the Family Circle—Fear
           of the Child—A Girl Who Hates All
           Children—Differentiation from the Mother                   53

     III Homosexuality and Jealousy—Masked Jealousy—A Jealous Wife
           of a Physician—Why Women Abuse Servant
           Girls—Transference of Jealousy to the
           Surroundings—Jealousy of the Father—Jealousy of the
           Residence—Jealousy of the Past—A Young Woman
           Oversensitive to Any Noises                               109

      IV Jealousy and Paranoia—Jealousy as Projection of One’s Own
           Inadequacy—Freud’s Researches on Paranoia—The
           Investigations of Juliusburger—The Jealousy of a
           Paranoiac—Jealousy Delusion of a Merchant—Jealousy and
           Alcoholism—The Evolution of Mankind from Bisexuality to
           Monosexuality—Metamorphosis Sexualis Paranoica—The
           Monotheism of Sexuality—Jealousy and Criminality          155

       V Homosexuality and Sadism—The Analysis of a
           Homosexual—Earliest Memories—First Account of His
           Attitude—Fear of Tuberculosis—His Attitude towards His
           Parents—First Dream—Dreams of Urinals—Anal
           Eroticism—Coprophagia—The Mother as a
           Tyrant—Transvestitism—An Important Dream—Voyeur and
           Exhibitionist—Other Dreams—Poems to the Mother—Maternal
           Body Dreams—Sadistic Phantasies—A Spermatozoan Dream—The
           Dream About Wild Bears—Summarization of the Analytic
           Data in the Case—The Formula of Homosexuality             199

      VI History and Analysis of a Homosexual—Childhood
           Reminiscences—Anal Erotism—Attachment to the
           Mother—Interpretation of Dream Symbolisms—Lore of the
           Father—Regression Theory of Homosexuality                 227

     VII The Neurotic’s Inability to Love—The Narcissism of the
           Homosexual—Progressive Sexual Differentiation with the
           Growth of Culture—The Position of the Homosexual in the
           Struggle between Sexes—The Social Causes of
           Homosexuality—Homosexuality among Greeks—Increase of
           Polar Sexual Tension—Various Therapeutic
           Measures—Hypnosis—Moll’s Association
           therapy—Psychoanalysis—The Path towards Cure and the
           Conditions for Recovery                                   289




                                   I

  THE RELATIONS OF THE HOMOSEXUAL TO THE OTHER SEX—FEAR, DISGUST,
      HATE, AND ANGER—HOMOSEXUALITY AND EPILEPSY—SADGER’S
      RESEARCHES—HIRSCHFELD’S THESES—FEAR OF THE SEXUAL
      PARTNER—DISGUST FOR WOMAN—SADISTIC ATTITUDE—EPILEPSY AND
      HOMOSEXUALITY—OTHER REACTIONS INDICATING REVULSION—MY FIRST
      EARLY EXPERIENCES—SADGER’S INVESTIGATIONS.


_Jedermann trägt ein Bild des Weibes von der Mutter her in sich: davon
wird er bestimmt, die Weiber überhaupt zu verehren oder sie
geringzuschätzen oder gegen sie in allgemeinen gleichgültig zu sein._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._




                                  THE
                          HOMOSEXUAL NEUROSIS




                                   I

_Everyone carries within himself a pattern of womanhood derived from his
mother: that determines whether he should respect or depreciate woman;
or whether his attitude towards woman in general should be one of
indifference._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._


Our investigations thus far have repeatedly shown us that in the case of
homosexuals the heterosexual path is merely blocked, but that it would
be incorrect to hold that the pathway is altogether absent. I have
proven that the individual, as representative of our modern culture,
finds it impossible to maintain his bisexuality; therefore he represses
either his homosexuality or his heterosexuality. We also convinced
ourselves that organic bisexuality has nothing to do with psychic
bisexuality. _Hirschfeld_ expressly emphasizes that he has met with
homosexuality among strongly virile men and among persons typically
female. The organic theory of homosexuality has broken down completely.
One would suppose that the investigators would necessarily turn to the
psychologic concept. No. The psychic forces are still underestimated and
the heterosexual period of homosexuals is still overlooked. Although
_Hirschfeld_ emphasizes that to psychoanalysis belongs the merit of
having pointed out first the heterosexual component, why does he not
draw the natural deductions from this acknowledged fact? He arrives at
the following conclusions:


1. Genuine homosexuality is always an inborn condition.

2. This inborn state is conditioned by a specific homosexual
constitution of the brain.

3. That specific brain structure is brought about through a peculiar
mixed condition of male and female hereditary plasm.

4. That ambisexual state is found frequently associated with pronounced
instability of the nervous system.

5. Between the specific and the nervous constitution there exists an
intimate relationship.

6. All external causes are operative only in the presence of the inner
homosexual constitution.

7. External causes—provocative—are so common that in 99 per cent. of
cases the innate homosexual disposition breaks forth sooner or later and
becomes clearly manifest in consciousness.

8. Homosexuality is neither a morbidity nor a degeneration; it is
neither a taint nor a criminal trait, representing merely an aspect of
natural development, a sexual variant, like many analogous sexual
modifications in the animal and vegetal world. (_Hirschfeld,
Homosexualität_, p. 394.)


Our data do not uphold these contentions. How can _Hirschfeld_ speak of
an innate homosexual constitution when elsewhere in his work he admits
the constant presence of heterosexual instincts? How can he maintain
that homosexuality is a trait reaching back to the very roots of
individuality when every careful investigation proves the contrary?

The following statements show his contradictions on the subject:


“Here too it has been contended that all these deviations from the
sexual type during childhood and puberty do not conclusively lead to the
diagnosis of homosexuality, that the earlier periods of life are
undifferentiated with respect to sex, that boys as well as girls, young
men as well as young women, often become eventually fully heterosexual
in spite of pronounced androgyny and sexual incongruities; even the
transvestites of both sexes show early traits inharmonious with their
respective sex, and certainly many passivists, succubists, or masochists
show themselves already as boys somewhat lacking in ‘mannish’ traits
while female activists, incubists and sadists lack certain womanly
traits already in their girlhood, though all retain the capacity to love
the opposite sex and therefore prove themselves later heterosexual....

“At any rate one thing is certain. If a child is a urning, it grows up a
heterosexual person with the same unconditional certainty with which the
‘normal’ child becomes heterosexual. Thus the special character of the
urning looms forth as something fundamental having its roots in the
depths of personality.” (_Hirschfeld, Homosexualität_, p. 121.)


Naturally, _Hirschfeld_ adopts a safe method of excluding all cases
which do present a history of heterosexuality. He calls such cases
“pseudohomosexuality” thus placing them in a category apart from the
genuine urning. _Bloch_ also calls the heterosexual inclination of
typical homosexuals a sort of “pseudoheterosexuality.”[1] This method of
dealing with the subject admits of no proofs. _Bloch_ suggests the test
that a genuine theory of homosexuality must be capable of embracing all
cases. The _Hirschfeld_ theory of “the third sex” cannot do so. It is
neither founded nor proven either on organic or on psychologic grounds.

But why is it that the homosexual shifts so completely away from the
sexual partner? _A. Adler_ has conceived in these cases the hypothesis
of a “_fear of the sexual partner_.” This observation certainly holds
true in the case of many homosexuals, but is not true of all cases.
Nature does not operate in such simple ways and a single key does not
unlock the riddle of homosexuality.

In accordance with the results of our investigation thus far we may
conclude: the homosexual finds closed for him the path which leads to
the other sex, and the barrier is psychical. Anxiety, disgust and scorn
support the forces of homosexual love. These feelings do not exhaust the
range of inhibitory factors and we shall presently turn our attention to
others. But we must take up the psychogenesis of these inhibitions in a
thorough and systematic manner.

May fear of the sexual partner drive a person into homosexuality? We
must answer this question in the affirmative inasmuch as we are able to
trace that fear in a number of cases.

First, let us take up the case of _Krafft-Ebing_ (Obs. 159) since it is
so simple and obvious:


54. Mrs. X., 26 years of age, married 7 years, confesses herself
attracted for some time to persons of her own sex; she respects and even
feels a certain sympathy for her husband but marital relations with him
she finds repulsive. She has made him abstain from sexual relations with
her since the birth of their youngest child. Already at the boarding
school she felt a keen interest in other young women, which she can only
describe as love attraction. _But occasionally she had also felt herself
attracted to particular men and lately a certain man had put her
resistance to test. She was often afraid she might forget herself with
him and therefore avoided being alone with the man._ But these are
merely passing episodes in contrast with her passionate inclination
towards persons of her own sex. Her true love is expressed in kisses,
caresses and intimate contact with the latter. Failure to gratify that
yearning is painfully uncomfortable and is largely responsible for her
present nervous state. The subject does not assume a particular sexual
rôle in relation to persons of her own sex, and she did no more than
indulge with them in kisses, petting and embracing. The subject
considers herself of a passionate nature. Quite likely that she
masturbates. Her sexual perversion she looks upon as “unnaturally
morbid.” Nothing in the woman’s ordinary conduct or external appearance
betrays such an anomaly. About her childhood she is unable to report
anything of significance. She was quick to learn, had poetic and
æsthetic inclinations, was considered somewhat nervous, loved reading of
novels and sentimental romances, was of a neuropathic constitution, and
extremely sensitive to changes in temperature. It is noteworthy also
that at ten years of age, because she thought that her mother did not
love her, the patient dissolved matches in coffee and _drank the
solution so as to make herself very ill and to draw her mother’s
affection to her_.


Here we see an inclination to heterosexual relations which is not
cultivated on account of fear. This young woman, with a tremendous
homosexual leaning as shown already by her attachment to her mother,
marries a man, in whose embrace she remains frigid, but fears to be
alone with a man who rouses her, because he may prove dangerous to her.
We see that her pronounced bisexuality leads her to fall in love with a
man, to be his sweetheart, in her fancy, but she hesitates to turn her
fancy into a reality, the “fear of sinning” preventing her from carrying
out the step. Then she looks upon the heterosexual inclinations as
passing whims and turns to her homosexual fancies. She is running away
from the male. She fears the man she loves because a strong love implies
submission to the male. She gravitates away from him, not because the
male is unable to yield her gratification but because she fears him. But
we must understand how this flight from the male, which manifests itself
also in her dyspareunia, originated. How little such life histories bear
on this point, without psychoanalysis! In my study of dyspareunia[2] I
describe similar cases and show how aversion towards the male originates
in the first place.

Through _Freud_ we have learned that fear, like disgust, is a repressed
form of _libido_. Though this view is correct, it is not always
adequate. My own researches have shown that every fear represents in the
first place fear of self.

But why should the homosexual entertain any fear of himself during
intercourse with woman? What he fears is his excessive sexuality when it
is commingled with criminal tendencies.

The frequency with which fear of one’s own criminal aggressiveness
stands back of impotence and homosexuality can hardly be overestimated.
_Krafft-Ebing_ describes a typical bisexual who had experienced orgasm
but once in contact with woman. But that happened during the commission
of a delict (_Obs._ 142, p. 273) on his part.

“It is remarkable that he did experience gratification that one time
during the (forced) act. After the act he was overcome with nausea. One
hour after the assault he again had coitus with the same woman and with
her consent but that time he no longer experienced any satisfaction.”
That proves that the orgasm depended on his abuse of force. The fear is
fear of violence, the disgust is disgust of self, both coming into play
so as to protect one against deeds incompatible with one’s ethical
standards.

I know a large number of homosexuals who have actually confessed to me
that they are able to have intercourse with women only while they are in
a strong rage. But then they are in fear of themselves, so dangerous do
they become. One subject confessed to me that he had nearly strangled
his sexual partner. Other homosexuals feel an inexpressible rage just
after coitus. In such cases the heterosexual act is associatively
related to some criminal act. Some unconscious fancies depict and urge
cutting up, strangling or beating the female companion. These men are
extreme woman-haters and hatred is always deadly.

I reproduce here a single relevant observation:


55. Mr. H. K. is a well-known homosexual who prefers particularly males
of low standing. The more powerfully built the men are the greater is
his orgasm. He prefers to choose packers, furniture movers, expressmen
and generally individuals of strong build. His greatest orgasm he
experienced during intimacy with a member of an athletic club, a man who
had a very small penis. He feels such a strong fear of women that he
does not trust himself in a room alone with one. He does not remember
having ever been sensuously stirred by a woman. Several times he tried
intercourse with prostitutes but fled each time as soon as he found
himself alone in the room with the woman. A cold sweat breaks out over
his brow and he runs off precipitately as if pursued by a thousand
demons. A short analysis over a few days revealed that this was a
typical case of a criminal fancy, the subject having indulged for a long
time in the onanistic fancy of strangling a woman. (“All women ought to
be exterminated” ... is a favorite sentiment often expressed by this
man.) In his phantasies he has also committed assaults on men, and the
thought of ripping open the anus of a man has occurred to him already
several times.

His fear of women is the fear he may forget himself and strangle one of
them. But he is also afraid of men, that is, he also fears he may commit
some assault on a man. Therefore he protects himself through choosing
men of powerful physique. They should be stronger than he. Thus he feels
assured that he will not be able to assault them. Lately he has been
seeking a mannish woman who should also be stronger than he. Evidently
he proposes to protect himself also in that case ... against himself.
The homosexuality showed itself to be a flight from his criminal
heterosexual tendencies.


Other homosexuals protect themselves against woman through disgust. How
closely hatred, fear, and disgust stand in this connection may be seen
in the following observation by _Hirschfeld_:


“A certain homosexual related to me that he is able to have intercourse
with a woman but that immediately afterwards he is seized with a
terrible anger against the woman and once after the act he spat at her
in disgust; since that, in order to avoid consequences, he leaves the
room as hastily as possible immediately after the ejaculation.

“How far the aversion may go is shown by the case of the homosexual
_Herzog von Praslin-Choiseul_ who at Paris in 1864 strangled _post
coitum_ his young bride, the daughter of _General Sebastiani_. It may be
mentioned in this connection that by far the greater number of sadistic
women who prevail upon masochistic males of grossest physical and mental
type to carry out acts of violence upon them are in reality homosexual
women with a sexual aversion to men. Professor _Albert Eulenburg_ told
me that all the alleged sadists among females whom he knows have proven
themselves in reality to be homosexuals. I, too, know but three women
among twelve sadists who deny homosexuality.” (_Hirschfeld_, _loc. cit._
p. 96).


First we learn that this homosexual, through fear of himself, runs off
in the nick of time. The act of spitting may be the symbolic substitute
for a more serious act. If additional testimony were needed to support
the relevance of my conception, the case of the _Duke von
Praslin-Choiseul_ stands forth as the clearest proof one could wish.
Plainly _Hirschfeld_, as usual, confuses here cause and effect. The
_Duke did not strangle his bride because he was homosexual,—he had taken
flight in homosexuality, because he felt impelled to commit a “passion
crime” and he tried to protect himself against his own wild instincts_.

Particularly interesting from the criminologic-psychologic standpoint
are the cases of epileptics who during the attack are diverted from
their usual sexual path. The epileptic is a criminal who during the
attack carries out some criminal deed. Ordinarily the deed is carried
out in the phantasy, but here and there the epileptic commits overtly
some deed of uncommon cruelty. During his epileptic attack the patient
gives expression to his criminal trend. The attack is the equivalent of
the crime. Readers interested in this important problem I must refer to
my original study.[3] I have been much surprised that it has received so
little attention on the part of neurologists and criminologists. It is
the fate of psychoanalysts. The current fashion in science has decreed
our ban, our works are overlooked and are neglected even when they are
of fundamental significance, like my contribution on epilepsy.

Epilepsy, with the exception of the Jacksonian type, is a particular
form of hysteria. In the hysterical attack, too, the unconscious forces
break through and the individual carries out various instinctive
promptings while his consciousness is side-tracked. The epileptic attack
represents more the criminal, the hysterical corresponds more to the
sexual urge. Naturally the epileptic attack may also substitute some
sexual crime (_crime passionelle_), and that, frequently, is the theme
of the attack. It is thus obvious that homosexuals who shun crimes of
passion may fall easily a victim to attacks during which the crimes are
carried out vicariously. In our study of sadism we shall analyze in
detail such a case.[4] Here I wish to point out merely the interesting
fact that during the epileptic attack heterosexuals commit homosexual
acts and reversely.


56. Mr. W. H., 39 years of age, a strongly built young man, comes to me
to be treated for epilepsy and every time he is accompanied by an
attendant. Since his 16th year he suffers attacks and several times he
was seized while on the street. For that reason he does not go out alone
and is always accompanied by his attendant, a simple fellow to whom he
seems much attached. He is totally incapacitated from following any
occupation for it turns out that his attacks are more frequent when he
endeavors to work. On account of his attacks he has prevailed upon his
well-to-do father to keep him in the country where he has nothing to do
but to go on walks. He is soft and pliant so long as things go his way.
But if contradicted he flies into great rage. He does not burst out with
anger but tries to control himself and soon afterwards he has an attack
during which he sees red. He reproaches himself a great deal on account
of his failure to achieve something in life and because he is the cause
of so much trouble to his parents. His ethical standard is a very high
one and that is a point of great significance in the differential
diagnosis of genuine epilepsy. He bemoans his misspent life and wants to
be cured. If only there were some way to free him of the trouble!
Regarding his sexual life: he relates that he is decidedly homosexual
and that boys and handsome young men particularly attract him. The
attendant is clearly a protection against his homosexual excitations.
When he meets boys who attract him he clings to his attendant pretending
to fear an oncoming attack. While living in the country at the present
his attacks come on only at night and in bed. He does not recall the
_aura_, except that he sees red, and he remembers no dream starting or
accompanying the attack. He masturbates occasionally; always with the
fancy that he is playing with small boys. I suggest to his parents that
he ought to be psychoanalyzed. In view of the hopeless character of
other current therapy this may be his only chance of recovery. The
father agrees. But as the patient lives some distance from Vienna I
advise the father to remove him to the city for the duration of the
treatment. This he also agrees to do. Next day the mother calls and asks
me to use my influence to prevent the boy from staying in Vienna. That
would bring him back home and she is tremendously afraid of him. Her
husband does not know it, she has kept it from him. During the attacks
the son turns on her and attempts to attack her. Once she succeeded to
repel him only by the exercise of her strength. During the attack he
rolls his eyes fearfully and threatens she must die because she is
responsible for everything. I arrange that the patient should see me
only twice a week after that. But on the third appointment he failed to
appear, because I had stipulated as one of the first conditions of my
treatment that he must go to work. The very next day he reacted with
several attacks. The father found that the treatment proved “too
exciting” for the boy, and I agreed readily to give up the analysis when
the father took entirely the son’s side and disagreed with the
suggestion that the boy must take up some occupation.


This case shows the outbreak of homosexuality during the attacks and an
affective relationship to the mother such as is shown by many
homosexuals, as we shall explain more fully later.

The reverse also happens,—heterosexuals committing homosexual deeds
during the attacks. The repressed components of sexuality always break
through during the attack.

_Tarnowsky_, too, speaks of “_epileptic pederasty_.”[5] The “epileptic
pederasts” are usually of active character. As an example he mentions
the case of a criminal who came under his personal observation. A young
man, wealthy, apparently fully heterosexual, goes to the house of his
beloved after a sumptuous dinner during which he had imbibed a great
amount of wine. The lady of the house not being at home he went to a
room where a 14-year-old boy was asleep, assaulted him and also the
chamber maid who ran to the spot attracted by the boy’s outcries. After
that he fell into a sleep which lasted 12 hours. When he awoke he
recalled nothing of the episode. It was found that he was subject to
epileptic attacks particularly after wine. _Hirschfeld_ observes in this
connection:


“Usually the epileptic neurosis—which, as a matter of fact, I have
noticed but rarely among homosexuals—influences homosexuality in the
sense of removing the inhibitions and increasing the impulsive energy of
the instinctive cravings. I have had under examination a particularly
serious case of this character, a man-servant, subject to epilepsy who
during a fit of rage and anger strangled to death and then hacked to
pieces a boy. In this, as in similar cases, there was a previous history
of a fusion of homosexuality and epilepsy. At any rate it is conceivable
that during the beclouding of consciousness induced by the epileptic
seizure all psychic factors undergo such a complete transformation that
even tendencies ordinarily wholly foreign to consciousness and not even
tolerated in the foreconscious, insofar as the latter may be revealed,
find ready outlet. _Burchard_, too, has observed an epileptic of normal
sexuality who during the seizures committed homosexual assaults on other
patients.” (_Hirschfeld_, _loc. cit._, p. 214.)


What I have said about the influence of alcoholics holds true also of
epileptic attacks. The latter also neutralize the inhibitions and the
bisexual and criminal aspects of human nature come clearly to surface.
It is noteworthy that _Tarnowsky’s_ patient also indulged in alcohol
before the onset of the attack.

The following case shows that the attacks may also be simulated:


57. Mr. Z. T., a bisexual, subject to anxiety attacks, relates that he
suffered a great deal once because his mother devoted herself very
lovingly to a brother during the latter’s illness. He was 22 years of
age at the time and extremely jealous. Once he found himself alone in
the room with his mother. Without knowing what he was doing he threw
himself on her with the intent of assaulting her. The mother shouted and
the sisters and servants came rushing in. He simulated an epileptic fit,
threw himself on the floor and remained for an hour apparently in a
faint. Physicians were called in and they declared the condition
epilepsy. For two days he acted as if he heard nothing of what was said
and knew nothing of what was going on. His deed caused him endless
shame. He was not reproached on account of it and he spent two months in
a comfortable sanatorium.

How closely related are make-believe and illness with every neurotic!
This young man suffered also from fear and disgust of women but that, as
well as his whole anxiety neurosis, disappeared completely under
psychoanalytic treatment. The case stands as one of my most successful
therapeutic accomplishments.

We turn our attention now to a consideration of the disgust with which
homosexuals are inspired by the other sex. I have already repeatedly
stated that the disgust represents a repressed desire, that it stands
for the repulsion of unbearable tendencies. Heterosexuals show a similar
aversion for their own sex,—a feeling which the homosexuals have
repressed. That much the very beginner in psychoanalysis knows; the
observation belongs to the _a b c_ of practical psychology.
Nevertheless, we still find disgust and scorn of woman pointed out as
proofs of homosexuality. Disgust is not a proof of the absence of the
proper _libido_. The true homosexuals would show a complete indifference
towards the opposite sex. Occasionally they do assume such indifference
for their attitude is always affective and negativistic. _Hirschfeld_
contradicts himself repeatedly on this point.

In one place he emphasizes that the genuine homosexual is indifferent
towards woman and shows no disgust:


“On this point also I find myself in agreement with _Numa
Praetorius_,[6] who in one of his essays remarks that most persons ‘show
an inclination towards one sex but only indifference towards the other
sex.’ He is of the opinion that the disgust of heterosexuals’
feeling-attitude of disgust towards homosexual deeds, too, is an
intellectual process induced by the prevailing social attitude and
judgment rather than instinctive and innate. If the dislike were genuine
heterosexuals would hardly get along so easily and so often with
homosexuals nor would the latter carry on so readily masturbatory acts
with the opposite sex, even though the acts be limited to mechanical
excitations.” (_Hirschfeld_, _loc. cit._, p. 218.)


But another passage of the work reveals the opposite view:


“A 26-year-old workingman relates: ‘At 17 years of age an older friend
of mine induced me once to have sexual intercourse with a woman—I was
unaware at the time of my _urning disposition_—and I felt such disgust
that I vomited. Since that time I have a “holy horror” of any contact
with woman, until a few weeks ago when driven to despair I tried to
control myself. It was useless, I could attain neither erection nor
ejaculation and instead, the continuous irritation brought on an
inflammation of the member.’”

“A Bavarian merchant relates: ‘As a result of repeated intercourse with
women I have acquired a serious nervous derangement, a strong sense of
lassitude associated with vomiting and migraine lasting for days. The
odor exhaled by woman causes me greatest distress. I am now unable to
gratify a woman, but on the other hand contact with a soldier makes me
happy, it strengthens and revives me.’” (_Hirschfeld_, _loc. cit._, p.
96.)


In the passage next following he expresses himself even more plainly:


“It is very striking to note that women in executive positions,
directresses, etc., are much more severe with the male employees,
servants, etc., than with the female personnel. There are homosexual
males who avoid any service by women and chiefly for that reason dislike
restaurants employing female waitresses. Also, there are homosexual
women who avoid business relations with men for similar reasons. Without
knowing why, homosexually predisposed girls begin early to feel that
being conducted home by gentlemen is something superfluous as well as
unpleasant. Many _urnings_ and _urlinds_ actually experience a physical
distress when some member of the opposite sex so much as helps them on
with their coat. _I know several homosexual physicians of extreme
sensitiveness whose aversion to the female characters is so strong that
physical examinations of women, particularly of their sexual parts or
breasts, is highly repulsive to them and the aversion may go so far as
to make it impossible for them to undertake such an examination._”
(_Hirschfeld_, _loc. cit._, p. 98.)


Such accounts prove that the attitude of the homosexual towards the
opposite sex is not one of indifference. Where that is claimed it may be
doubted; at any rate it does not correspond with psychoanalytic
experience. Hatred, anger, disgust, physical discomfort serve as
protections against the other sex. That is true of male as well as of
the female homosexuals.

For a short space I shall now limit my observations to male homosexuals.
I shall attempt to make clear how I have arrived at my present
conception. _The homosexual’s scorn of woman, his emotional
revulsion-attitude against the other sex, is precisely what led me to
formulate my new conceptions._ I had the opportunity to analyze a
homosexual. During the very first consultation hours there was revealed
that heterosexual stage through which every homosexual must pass.
Previously it was my custom to refuse to analyze homosexuals because I
had assumed _Hirschfeld’s_ view that _uranism_ is an innate condition.
This particular patient suffered of various anxiety attacks and came to
be treated for his anxiety not for his homosexuality. His anxiety state
showed itself particularly as a fear of woman so that he could not trust
himself to be alone with one. Among his acquaintances there was also a
very sympathetic spinster. They went on walks together for hours but his
fear still dominated him and he could never trust himself with her alone
in a room. They held their conversations either in a public garden or at
a restaurant. Naturally I looked into this anxiety condition and began
to investigate this homosexual who had maintained relations with an
elderly gentleman for years, with reference to his heterosexuality. I
was surprised when he brought forth countless heterosexual reminiscences
from his childhood. During the first few days I heard the usual history
of _urnings_: the liking for girls’ games, womanly behavior, he had
always been more like a girl in everything, etc. But soon the picture
changed and the heterosexual tendency became gradually more evident. His
dependence on the attachment to the mother was striking. One-sided as my
attitude was at the time, I made certain deductions, somewhat hastily,
regarding the roots of homosexuality, and in the first edition of my
_Angstzustände_ (1908), after several similar experiences, I wrote:


“As is shown by my latest investigations these cases are frequently
neuroses. Some time homosexuality improves or may disappear under
psychoanalysis. Homosexuality represents merely the complete revulsion
of infantile incestuous thoughts. Homosexual males never experience any
erotic feeling in contact with a strange woman; they confess that they
can feel towards these women only as towards a sister or the mother.
That discloses to us the roots of homosexuality. The concept ‘woman’ is
unalterably fused with the concepts ‘mother’ and ‘sister.’ The _Abwehr_
of incestuous fancies determines the flight into homosexuality. That
transposition naturally is facilitated through corresponding somatic
changes. The homosexual, too, is a victim of infantile reminiscences.
Thus homosexuality turns out to be but a special form of the neurotic
repression.”


With youthful impetuosity I formulated the results of my investigations
somewhat hastily at the time and expressed the therapeutic results in
too optimistic a tone. In the course of time I learned to know better.
Many patients who considered themselves cured were only improved and
stuck to their _uranism_. We shall have to speak of that with full
particulars.

For the present I must consider more fully the theme “mother and
homosexuality.” The relationship between the two I had originally
conceived according to the Freudian formula. I did not see at the time
the influence of other forces, such as I have already pointed out here.
The earliest dream of my first homosexual, for instance, was about a
murder, the victim being a woman; I did not understand that dream. I did
not know that the fear of woman stood for the fear of criminal
tendencies, that the subject was a sadist who had saved himself through
homosexuality from committing some regrettable deed. These impulses
accompanied the incest phantasies which were unusually strong and of
which he was fully aware long before analysis. The latter were merely
pushed out of consciousness as unbearable. A short time later _Sadger_
published his first analysis of a homosexual and in that contribution he
formulated the thesis that like every other neurosis homosexuality
arises during the fourth year and that the task of analysis, therefore,
must be to reach back to the fourth year.[7]

_Sadger_ emphasized: “From the very first I assumed that the homosexual
tendencies may be acquired only if they are formed during the first four
years, precisely as in the case of hysteria and compulsive neurosis and
that psychoanalysis ought to uncover the fact. What stood beyond
psychoanalysis must be innate and corresponds to the sexual constitution
proper.”

That work, extremely one-sided and full of contradictions, still
attempts to reduce homosexuality to the love of the father. The mother
plays a limited rôle. It is mentioned passingly that the subject of the
analysis had never loved a being so dearly as the mother; but even
before the mother’s death an aunt had attracted to herself the boy’s
love.

But what are the conclusions drawn by _Sadger_ from the case? None
whatever! He is pleased that he has been able to bring to light such
interesting material but knows not what to do with it. Among the various
questions and answers there is a very significant passage suggesting an
important conclusion. Concerning his attachment to the mother the
subject states: “_And my love arose chiefly through compassion, because
father drank a great deal lately and paid attention to other women and
mother often wept and that made me feel badly._”

That is a fact which I have had occasion frequently to corroborate. The
children of drinkers and “woman-chasers” turn easily homosexual, in the
endeavor to be unlike the father. They then hate woman and scorn
everything that the father liked in particular. They become abstinent
and try to behave contrary to the father in every respect.


_Sadger’s_ patient actually points out this tendency. He states: “Father
clearly had no homosexual inclination as he was a great admirer of
women. From the time he began telling me about the school—he was
particularly fond of French women—he also advised me to marry only a
French woman and showed me French pictures and the photos of various
French women. It was thus instilled in me that I ought to marry a French
woman.” And what did the father accomplish thereby? Was it jealousy or
pity and love for the mother? The father accomplished the contrary of
what he set out to do. Instead of obedience he was met with spite. The
subject relates: “Later when I became aware of my homosexual
inclinations, _everything French-like was particularly hateful to me,
especially the French women, I no longer liked the French language or
anything whatever related to French_....”


The subject had a pronounced fear of marriage, having seen a sad example
of it in his own home. He dreams of getting married, a minister is about
to perform the ceremony, and he is so unhappy in the midst of it that
upon awakening his happiness knows no bounds. He fears every great
passion. “I am afraid of a really tremendous love, because such a
passion always makes me unhappy.” The analysis discloses other relations
to the father which are of greatest significance.

The feeling-attitude in question dates in fact from the earliest
childhood. As yet we are ignorant of child nature and we do not fully
appreciate that the fundamental traits of life show themselves very
definitely during early childhood. This boy must have conceived early
the thought: _I must not be like the father!_ and so he turned away from
women because the father was an admirer of that sex. Whether this choice
of attitude was also influenced directly by love for the father I am
unable to assert in that particular case. It seems to play a
contributory rôle and greatly denied love may enhance the child’s
attachment to the mother. _But does not the example of a drinking
“woman-chaser” contrasted to the picture of a quiet suffering mother
seem to be enough to induce the differentiation and to maintain it as
its underlying determining motive?_ Back of the homosexuality of the
first case of the kind analyzed by _Sadger_ stands the subject’s fear of
becoming like his father. The violent fancies disclosed in the course of
the analysis show that there are also other reasons for the subject’s
fear of woman. He is so constituted that he cannot see blood. This
peculiarity denotes the conversion of a craving for violence and
signifies a repressed sadism.

In Russia he once witnessed how a man split his wife’s head open with a
stone.... The occurrence so impressed him that he could never get it out
of his mind, and he also likes to dwell on wars and other bloody scenes.

There can be no doubt the man is a sadist and that with reference to
women in particular. He has full reason to fear woman. His fear is fear
of himself. He must turn to man, towards whom he does not feel the
instinctive sexual hatred which makes heterosexual excitations
impossible for him. When he has intercourse with a woman, he feels
subsequently a tremendous disgust and revulsion, the whole thing seems
to him unnatural. In the end he gives up all such attempts.

Obviously he is all the time seeking a kindly preeminent father for he
falls in love with an elderly philosopher, out of respect for
philosophy, as he paralogizes, because he looks to philosophy to redeem
him from his suffering. The differentiation is an attempt at gaining
freedom, a tendency to overcome the nature of the father. The love of
the philosopher is a substitution for the love of the father.

Thus we see the importance of the early life history of every subject
for the understanding of homosexuality. The constellation of childhood
permits the reading of the horoscope for the future. Perhaps this
uncontrovertible truth contains the root of all astrologic art, “the
planetary laws governing the facts of life.” The father as the sun, the
mother as the milder moon and the children, the stars. Our fate arranges
itself in accordance with the constellation of these planets. Blind
accident and innate forces cooperate to create man as he is.

But let us look further into the investigations of _Sadger_ to whom the
credit must not be denied of having applied himself earnestly to the
attempt of solving the problem of homosexuality.

His next publication appeared also in 1908.[8] Here we find clearly
taken into account the infantile heterosexual attitude which all
homosexuals usually forget but which always precedes genuine
homosexuality.


“The young student, 21 years of age at the time, was sent to me, because
he was tormented by various homosexual inclinations, especially directed
towards young boys 14–20 years of age, associated with all sorts of
masochistic feelings. In contact with woman (a prostitute with whom he
sought intercourse three times till then, the first two times
spontaneously, to see whether he is at all potent, the third time, on
medical advice as well as upon his father’s insistence) he found himself
entirely _impotent_. Questioned whether he ever felt any inclination
towards the opposite sex, he only recalls that when he was two or three
years of age he once opened the garden gate for a girl of about his own
age, with a flourish of extreme gallantry. Concerning any hereditary
factors he can only relate that a brother of his mother’s had some
mental trouble. The mother herself seemed to have something boy-like and
manly about her, on the other hand the father showed very little
sensuousness and rather pronounced inverted traits, while a sister, who
died early, had a _very boy-like facial expression_. She preferred
boyish games and at 4 or 5 years of age she chose a boy’s hobby horse
for her Christmas present. Some female cousins—on mother’s as well as on
father’s side—were clearly amphigenously inverted. The subject himself
had unusually broad hips and the growth of his facial hair was
noticeably scant. As a child he is supposed to have played only with
dolls, never with soldiers, he never took part in boys’ games and he
also learned embroidery.

“Plainly a clear case of inversion with masochistic traits. What was
revealed through the analysis of this particularly intelligent subject?
In the first place, a remarkable peculiarity: _his earliest inclinations
were directed towards women,—not some one in particular, but a number of
them. His first beloved was the mother_ and, of course, after a time he
turned away from her. After that he felt himself tremendously attracted
to an elderly mother of children, proposed marriage to her and that
woman later figured in many of his pubertal coitus dreams. Next he
displayed such an extreme gallantry towards a girl of his own age that
it became very noticeable and his mother spoke to him about it and he
felt very ashamed and uneasy.

“During his childhood a servant maid also had made a deep impression on
his feelings and she reappears in various male types. Among the
homosexual inclinations traceable to the first years I look upon his
attachment to a couple of uncles as the strongest and most significant,
next the love of a 9-year-old boy belonging to the nobility (baron). In
his fourth year the attachment to a boy who taught him masturbation, in
his sixth and seventh years the influence of a private teacher. During
his fourth year, on account of his mother’s condition, following
childbirth, he slept for a time with his father in one bed and this
suggested various homosexual wishes and fancies. When a little sister
came into the world _he promptly fell in love with her_. Even more
striking is the subject’s normal sexual calf-love affairs in his seventh
and eighth years with three or four schoolgirl mates of about his age.
It turned out that each one of these girls contributed some traits to
the types, both male and female, which later were alone capable of
rousing his emotional interest.

“_These facts, of which the subject was entirely unconscious and which
had to be brought to surface after months of diligent analysis, yield an
entirely new picture._ First of all they show us how little even the
most intelligent person knows himself, and, consequently, how careful we
must be in accepting even the most candid statements. Secondly,—that
even pure cases of inversion do not exclude the presence of normal
sexual inclinations, indeed, that the latter may actually be present,
though the subject be unaware of the fact. Thirdly,—and finally,—that
the inversion is traceable as far back as the fourth year although it
may reach consciousness only during puberty.”


Here already I must point out the first contradiction. It is not a fact
that the inversion is traceable back to the fourth year. I have analyzed
a number of cases in which the inversion arose after puberty and much
later. The beginnings of the homosexual disposition reach into childhood
with all persons. This turning away from the other sex may break forth
early in some cases and in others much later. _But it is a fact that
every analysis discloses the heterosexual trait which the homosexuals
forget, or speaking more correctly, repress, because it does not appear
to fit into their system._ Analytically this case of _Sadger’s_ seems to
me to be an instance of fixation upon the sister. The boys are
substitutes for the sister. We will give the histories of several such
cases. He who understands the neurotic’s art of metamorphosing his
ideals, he who has learned through their dreams to appreciate this trick
of substitution, will readily appreciate that a girl may be loved
through falling in love with a boy. It is related of _Platen_ that he
possessed a marvelous phantasy. For a long time a colleague was changed
for him into an owl whom he avoided on the way. In Neapel he kept for
days a cat on his lap pretending it was an enchanted princess. Genuine
fetichism shows to what unbelievable metamorphoses the sexual ideal is
subjected. With the homosexuals to find a boy who stands as symbol for
self or for a sister is a common experience. Like all neurotics they do
not possess the capacity to distinguish between the world of fancy and
that of reality. I have called neurosis _the tyranny of symbolisms_.
This is particularly true of the neurotic who becomes homosexual. All
values are transformed, the object becomes subject and vice versa. In
the midst of this transformation of all facts one thing remains fast and
true: the infantile ideal which is yearned for with the persistence
generated by the eternally ungratified craving.


In his next contribution _Sadger_ reports the results of the analysis of
an invert during a period of six months (_Zur Ætiologie der konträren
Sexualempfindung_, Med. Klinik, 1909, No. 2). The special preference of
his patient for passive pederasty he traces to the frequent use of
enemas during childhood. (In fact it seems to me that the many
unnecessary enemas administered during early childhood may contribute
towards the fixation of the anus as an erogenous zone.) He also traces
out in this case the repressed heterosexuality. “The vacillations of the
_libido_ between male and female are like the facial innervation which,
as is well known, is based on the equilibrium between the muscles
innervated simultaneously by the pair of _facialis_ nerves. Paralysis of
the _facialis_ nerve on one side causes not only weakness of the muscles
on the affected side but induces also contractures of the muscles on the
opposite side.” The patient referred to was attached exclusively to his
father, who, himself somewhat homosexually inclined, won the child’s
heart through his excessive tenderness, in contrast to the rather severe
mother. During his fourth year, on account of the mother’s pregnant
state, he slept with his father, an occurrence to which _Sadger_
attaches great significance. The objects of the boy’s homosexual
attachments bore some resemblance to the beloved sister. He weaned
himself away from his attachment to his mother during his fifteenth
year, when he saw his mother deformed with a tremendous ascites on
account of which she had to be tapped a number of times. Her appearance
at the time filled him with disgust for all women. As over-determination
of this feeling-attitude of aversion he recalls the following: after the
puerperium referred to above his mother had a profuse leucorrheal
discharge which the boy, already sensitive to all scents—he was four
years of age at the time—found very repulsive whenever he approached his
mother. The subject also recalls vividly how his mother repulsed his
aggressive ways with her, between his 3rd and 6th year. (“He always
wanted to grab her by the breasts and tried to go to her room and to the
bathroom as soon as she went in.”)

Much as physicians unacquainted with infantile sexuality may ignore such
aggressions they do take place and some mothers have verified them for
me. On the other hand it is hardly likely that a child four years of age
should be repelled from the mother on account of scent. At that early
age scent is rather a stimulant and is never accompanied by disgust.

I turn now to the last and most comprehensive deductions formulated by
_Sadger_ in his study entitled: _Ein Fall von multipler perversion mit
hysterischen Absenzen_ (‘A case of multiple perversions with hysterical
amnesias’).[9]

This work contains a chapter entitled _“New Contributions to the Theory
of Homosexuality.”_ Here _Sadger_ abandons entirely his former notion
about the significance of the fourth year and states: “_Permanent_
inclination towards one’s own sex usually comes to surface and is
certainly increased during puberty, or during the prepubescent period at
the earliest, in our latitude around the tenth or eleventh year.
Occasionally an earlier onset is recorded and every case of that kind is
due to some special factors.” Permanent homosexuality is established
through some significant incident which leads to the repression of the
mother in her rôle as helper and teacher. Such incidents are death,
sudden financial reverse, and consequent serious neurosis, making
sanatorium treatment necessary, inconsiderate persecution of the boy on
account of masturbation and similar traumata. The love feeling is turned
from the mother to the father, or to older comrades, or to comrades of
about the same age, who stand as substitutes for the mother and initiate
the boy into the facts of love....

The path to homosexuality leads over love of self, through narcissism.
“The state of being in love with one’s own person, which shows itself
also in the admiration of one’s own genitalia (_sic_), is never absent
as a developmental phase.” Every person has two aboriginal sexual
objectives to which he clings throughout life: the mother and self. The
father replaces self only for a short period because as the primary
rival in his relationship to the mother the child early assumes an
antagonistic attitude towards him. The _urning_ hates woman for an
obvious reason: “when the best of women, my own mother, amounts to no
more than that, what can there be to any other woman?”

Here follows a convincing proof that the _urning_ identifies himself
with his mother. The _urning_ always plans to instruct his beloved, for
the mother does it. (Does not the father, rather, do it?) The patient
has instructed a waiter in geology and history of art, subjects which
did not interest the latter. But the mother had done the same....

Most _urnings_ are said to be “only” children. (This statement like many
another of _Sadger’s_, is positively false. Among 500 homosexuals
_Hirschfeld_ found only 67 “only” children and among them only 54 were
sons. My own statistical figures are even smaller. But the percentage
among my neurotics is practically the same.)

_Sadger_ summarizes his findings in five fundamental statements:


“1. The _urning_ is a victim of withdrawal from the mother (the first
caretaker or nurse, respectively) in whom he is himself seriously
disappointed. He represses the mother by identifying himself completely
with her.

2. The path to homosexuality leads through narcissism, that is, love of
self, as one was, or as one may ideally be.

3. The sexual ideal of the invert includes not only traits of former
female and male sexual objectives but also features of one’s own beloved
self.

4. Being brought up in surroundings exclusively feminine—the father does
not count in such circumstances—fosters homosexuality in the male as
well as in the female, for reasons that are not sufficiently clear as
yet. Moreover the _urning_ is usually an only child.

5. Finally inversion may be fostered by a sort of ‘latter-day obedience’
to the mother’s commands. I have observed not rarely that mothers warn
their children against harmless, though warm and friendly contact with
the other sex, as something unpermissible and bad and that the teaching
thus instilled may unfortunately increase the disposition to one’s own
sex through later obedience.”


The first of these conclusions is a false one. The homosexual is not a
victim of withdrawal from the mother, but rather of a fixation on her.
But this subject will be discussed fully later.

One represses no person with whom one identifies one’s self.
_Identification is direct love, differentiation means repression._ Many
homosexuals identify themselves with the mother—of that there can be no
doubt. But that identification already implies the repression of the
father-ideal. _The problem of homosexuality cannot be solved
one-sidedly, and I have the records of a number of cases in which the
mother plays no rôle whatever._

The only psychologic hypothesis we possess—_Sadger’s_—fails to satisfy
on account of its onesidedness. It holds true of certain cases. But it
neglects entirely the great significance of sadism, it overlooks the
fact that the attachment to the father is more important and more deeply
repressed than the love for the mother, it overlooks entirely the
identification with the father and the differentiation from him and it
fails altogether to explain the occurrence of later homosexuality, which
is of particular interest to us (_tardive Homosexualität_). The
awakening of homosexuality is ascribed to a period which varies
according to the different investigators all the way from the fifth to
the twentieth year, and even later. I mention here the ages shown in the
first twenty of my cases taken at random. Homosexuality became manifest
at 12, 10, 12, 15, 16, 22, 13, 11, 14, 8, 14, 12, 17, 17, 17, 13, 21,
15, 17, 24 (Average, 15).

The ages as given are generally high,—only in one subject did the
homosexual attitude become manifest as early as the eighth year. But
that, certainly, is incorrect. For we know that the homosexual leaning
is present already during the earliest period and positively that
children’s feeling-attitude is bisexual during the first few years. The
figures are significant only as showing us that “genuine homosexuality”
is preceded by a lengthy period of latency.




                                   II

  RÔLE OF THE FATHER AND OF OTHER MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY—DISLIKE OF
      CHILDREN—LETTER OF A HOMOSEXUAL WHO FEARS THE “PENETRATING EYE” OF
      WOMEN—A MARRIAGE WITH THE FATHER—JEALOUSY OF THE FATHER—A
      HOMOSEXUAL WHO HATES HIS MOTHER—A BELOVED BOY AS THE IMAGO OF THE
      SISTER—PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE WITHIN THE FAMILY CIRCLE—FEAR OF THE
      CHILD—A GIRL WHO HATES ALL CHILDREN—DIFFERENTIATION FROM THE
      MOTHER.


_Wenn wir nun alles dieses uns vergegenwärtigen und wohl erwägen so
sehen wir die Päderastie zu allen Zeiten und in allen Ländern auf eine
weise auftreten, die gar weit entfernt ist von der, welche wir zuerst,
als wir sie bloss an sich selbst betrachteten, also a priori,
vorausgesetzt hatten. Nämlich die gänzliche Allgemeinheit und
beharrliche Unausrottbarkeit der Sache beweist, dass sie irgendwie aus
der menschlichen Natur selbst herausgeht; da sie nur aus diesem Grunde
jederzeit and überall unausbleiblich auftreten kann als Beleg zu dem
naturam expelles furca, tamen usque recurrent._

                                                        —_Schopenhauer._




                                   II

_Considering all that and taking everything carefully into account we
find that pederasty has been manifest at all times and in all countries
in a manner very unlike what we had at first presumed a priori, that is,
by considering abstractly the subject. Precisely its complete
universality and irradicable character everywhere shows that the thing
somehow flows out of human nature itself; only in that way could it
persist at all times and everywhere as an accompaniment to naturam
expelles furca, tamen usque recurrent._

                                                        —_Schopenhauer._


I begin this chapter with the history of a case, a subject with whom I
have never spoken. I know him only through correspondence. Nevertheless
the case seems to me of great significance as it substantiates many of
my previous conclusions. The need of psychologic insight as shown by our
necessarily brief histories of homosexuals becomes more fully obvious as
we become acquainted with a complete analysis of a homosexual.


62. Mr. G. L. writes me:

“I shall attempt to conform with your request and give you a cursive and
true insight into my sexual and mental life. Born and raised the
youngest of ten children, three of whom died early of children’s
diseases, I lived in the country till my 5th year, when I started going
to school and I remember nothing of that period except that I was
tremendously fond of _playing with fire_ and that I kept up till then,
more or less, the habit of bed-wetting, an act which was associated with
the pleasurable feeling that I was sitting on the chamber. I know also
that I envied my sisters a great deal. My unusually strict and religious
parents naturally subjected me to rigorous training and thus I learned
early to distinguish between mine and thine, good and evil, truth and
falsehood. Continually watched over by parents and instructors—a custom
contrary to the modern spirit—I was kept from many of the children’s
games.

“When I did play, it was mostly with boys and I do not recall having
preferred the company of girls. My free time was taken up a great deal
with agricultural pursuits and I was about 8 years of age when the first
sexual episode took place which left an impression on my mind, _having
witnessed that year how some boys of my own age played with the sexual
parts of a dog and, another time, how the same boys played with their
own sexual parts, taking one another’s member in the mouth,—but without
feeling on my part any desire to imitate them. With girls I came but
little into contact as a child, but I remember once having been present
when several boys, 11–12 years of age, abused a girl_ but I took no part
in the deed. At about that period I put on women’s clothes a few times
though today a man in women’s clothes rather disgusts me. Two incidents
concerning me personally are still vivid in my memory, namely, playing
once with my privates, in the presence of other boys, and another time,
warmly embracing the naked body of another boy while playing a ‘mother
and father’ game. Thirteen years thus passed with nothing eventful
taking place, except a fall from a tree as the result of which I hurt
myself rather seriously. It was at that period that my teacher, who
considered me not only a bright boy but a model student as well,
prevailed upon my struggling parents to permit me to continue my
schooling. I was able to secure, in fact, a free scholarship at an
Institute. Shortly after that a schoolmate grew attached to me and he
_taught me to masturbate_. Although I had already erections, there was
no seminal loss, probably on account of deficient development. He and
another schoolmate prevailed on me to masturbate then—but nothing more.
About that time other comrades were in the habit of speaking of some
girl or other, admiring her beauty. _This talk about a ‘pretty girl’
struck me as strange_, so far as I remember. It was during my second
high school year (_gymnasial-klasse_),—I may have been just over my 14th
year, at the time,—when a teacher appeared in class with the trousers
absent-mindedly unbuttoned and when I noticed it my eyes became glued on
his trouser fly as though in a trance, and thus I awoke, for the first
time, to the sad realization of my sexual bend. From that time on I
noticed that I was extraordinarily attracted to this teacher although he
did not like me in school. It was then that my first struggles, the
first wishes in my awakened boyish soul, began to shape themselves.
There were two boys in particular who, among others, charmed me with
their attractiveness. I masturbated a great deal during that period,
without indulging in any particular phantasies,—occasionally in the
company of other boys. But I had the feeling of being sexually attracted
to boys and in my dreams appeared the wish to be their friend. But the
stimuli were not of a character which I found impossible to curb. Next I
felt myself irresistibly attracted to an elderly man. Neither in the
waking state nor in my dreams did I think at all of women during that
time. Around my 18th year I experienced the first stormy upheaval which
nearly unbalanced me. I came into close touch with a distant relative,
an attractive, interesting and splendid intellectual man who, moreover,
was happily married. I then passed through the anguish of unrequited
love, kept dreaming of what was beyond my reach, and endeavored to still
my unnatural passion through excessive onanism. The keen struggle to
preserve my secret, the intense mental torture, caused me one day to
break down. The strict but kind-hearted talk of my relative in whom, of
necessity, I forced myself to confide, saved me that time from suicide.
The next day the house physician was called, a cordial and kindly young
man, who took a strong professional interest in me. Day after day he
spoke to me and tried to influence my mind and he succeeded in shifting
my sexual feelings entirely into the background and in about five months
he thought I was ready to try regular intercourse. But the attempt
proved a new defeat for me. _The secret aversion, the fear of
infection_, made me prove myself impotent at the critical moment. But I
did not tell the physician _and shortly thereafter he dismissed me as
cured_. There followed again years of struggle. Fearing mental breakdown
I was driven to the idea of seeking final release through suicide. But I
lacked courage for the deed.... Was it cowardice, was it the yearning of
my sickly body that prevented me from ending then a life unblessed by a
single experience of that highest yearning of a healthy body,—the
consummation of love? During that time my relative also died and my
anguish was unbearable. For I was absorbed in that great passion of mine
so deeply that I had forgotten all about the rest of the world. I was
hardly reconciled to that misfortune when further anguish came into my
life; several men crossed my path with whom I would have no doubt
entered into intimacy if I had found any points of contact. In my
despairing mood I confided in _Hofrat W._, who consoled me saying that
my misfortune could not be very deep rooted since I had come to him
about it. He advised me to seek intimacy with girls (I came a great deal
in contact with girls in the course of my daily work and also forced
myself to learn dancing). In accordance with his advice I resorted to
_puellæ publicæ_ and had intercourse a number of times but without
particular pleasure or satisfaction. Yes, I went so far as to propose
marriage to a girl of a good family. It was my fate not to meet with a
favorable response, although secretly I was gratified at that. For I
could not think that my supreme passion intimately and indissolubly
linked to the nature, the appearance and form of boyhood and charming
old age would ever be overcome. Springtide and autumn, boyhood and old
age, evoke in me the wonders of development and suggest the soft quiet
stealing in of blissful eternal peace. Although the sense of touch alone
is enough to rouse in me the most wonderful feeling of bliss, contact
with a woman leaves me indifferent, if it does not actually inspire me
with disgust. Thus I kept up for a time longer, greatly agitated but
unyielding, the fear of being discovered keeping me back. Tortured at
night by the yearnings of the day while dreaming of endless bliss by
conjuring up the most intimate scenes depicting contact, dreaming and
thinking also of oral (lip) contact, but never of any love act _a
posteriori_. In terror of being found out—I blushed at the lightest
pointed joke when in company—I often thought of joining the foreign
legion or to migrate to some country where homosexual love is not looked
upon as a crime or as something shameful.

“Often I heard of places where persons of my bent may be found but I
never had the courage to look them up, fearing that I would be
recognized, that I would be put to shame and that I should lose my means
of subsistence. I am particularly pained at the thought that I must pass
for an inferior dissolute type while millions and millions of
insignificant tramps are placed on a higher level in the eyes of the
law, enjoy life and are even honored and respected while I, in spite of
possessing the qualities of a truer manhood, must waste my life in
joyless existence. Two women came into my life with whom I became
somewhat intimate, _one attracting me temporarily because her physical
appearance was like that of a boy underdeveloped, the other, because I
was at the time under the influence of alcohol_. But I noticed in
connection with those two experiences that I felt no particular
satisfaction during bodily contact with the women or while kissing them,
_in fact, many women cause me nausea if I so much as take food out of
their hand_. Several _puellæ publicæ_ have tried to rouse my sexual
feelings (_lambentes glandem membri_), but in spite of erection I felt
no particular pleasure, and the act was always followed by a feeling of
despair—the same old story. Sometimes in my anguish I sought the church
and there I broke into tears and I yearningly clasped my hands in prayer
without being a believer at heart. Ofttimes I thought my mind must be
affected and thought I had to go to an asylum for the insane but it
would make my trouble known to do so and I feared I should have to
forego contact with men forever after that. Occasionally _I dreamed also
of women_, but without any particular feelings, while if I dreamed of
clasping in a warm embrace or only touching or even merely looking at a
boy, or at an elderly man, I felt great pleasure. I dreamed of contact
with the lips. Something more about the family: On account of father’s
strict discipline _I inclined more to mother who was more indulgent_.
One of four sisters is married, also both brothers, happy and satisfied,
I believe. (I am very bashful with all my relations, old and young.) One
uncle only showed eccentricities and he remained single. All my other
habits of life are not unlike those of any normal young man, I have
friends who are married and who are unaware of my condition. But time
after time I am tremendously agitated on account of my mental struggle.
Finally, to conclude: my dear doctor, you cannot prevail upon me again
to try to look you up at your office because the penetrating look of
your office girl inspires me with the fear that my condition is
recognized and diagnosed at a glance. If you feel inclined to advise me
how best to withstand this craving or to mention some country where I
may go, I should be very grateful to you—if not, I have learned to bear
defeat.”...


One of the usual confessions, overlooking most important features. The
self-incriminating feeling of the masochist who has “learned to bear
defeat,” is indicated by the ridiculous fear of the “penetrating look”
of my office girl. This fear would probably be traced through analysis
to his sadistic attitude towards women. There are a number of other
interesting statements. He belongs to a family of many children, a
severe father, a negligent mother, he is jealously envious of his
sisters. A large number of homosexual episodes are related about his
childhood and his habit of putting on women’s clothes. That shows
clearly the tendency to identify himself with the mother or sister. But
why did he want to be a woman? Why did he want to assume the rôle of
mother? He wanted to supply a woman, to substitute the mother to his
father. Here it was _the strong father_ who so attracted the boy that
the latter wanted to be everything to him; Subsequently he falls in love
repeatedly with elderly men who stand for substitutes of his father. The
elderly man is always the _Imago_ of the father. During the homosexual
episodes with elderly men, either actual or occurring merely in the
boy’s fancy, he finds himself still a child towards whom the father
displays tenderness and who is permitted by the father to carry on
_fellatio_ upon the latter. He is also drawn to young boys. There he
plays the rôle of the father while the boy supplies the picture of his
own youth.

Interesting is his distinct disgust at women which disappears after
alcoholic drinks enough so as to enable him to carry out coitus. He was
also near falling in love with a girl who had a boyish appearance. That
betrays certain relations between boy and girl. The boys are loved when
they show the traits of a beloved sister, the old men when they recall
the father.

His path towards woman is blocked. Disgust and fear of infections cover
more significant motives bearing a religious coloring. Every prostitute
becomes the sister, a younger edition of the mother. Without analysis
the genesis of this paraphilia cannot be understood. He avoids me
because he is unwilling to discover the truth. The over-severe father
seems to have roused in him the yearning for a kindlier one and to have
determined the development of his feeling-attitude. An attachment to the
sister seems also clearly discernible.


63. Mr. T. D., 26 years of age, has struggled vainly for years against
his homosexual disposition. He is attracted to old, gray-bearded men,
who always represent to his mind an erotic ideal, and loves to be in
their company, go on walks with them, play cards or perform music, and
loves also the company of very simple fellows, preferably sailormen,
plasterers, and soldiers, and among the latter prefers artillerists. His
sexual activity consists in holding the friend’s _membrum virile_ in his
hand and giving his own to be held by the other likewise. Orgasm follows
rapidly at that. After the deed, regrets and strong avowals never to
repeat it. The last time he tried it a watchman caught him in the act
and brought him together with his companion, a workingman, to court.

Analysis discloses the following facts: He has repeatedly tried to have
intercourse with women but each time great fear and disgust prevented.
Strong erections, but before _immissio penis_, the _membrum_ turns soft
and useless. Accomplishment of the orgasm through manual friction of the
organ by the woman’s hand is possible, but is followed by a powerful
feeling-attitude of disgust and he must leave immediately. He has had
various opportunities to become intimate with certain women and girls,
they have even incited him to it, but he does not feel tempted.

His family history is as follows: He is the only son of a very kindly
man who died four years previously. The mother died at his birth and
that has established in his mind an intimate association between coitus
and death. He cannot help thinking of that association when with women.
His father was extraordinarily tender with him, and for his sake never
married again. When he was still young his father always played with
him, devoting to him all his spare time. Later their relationship became
even more intimate. There was a sort of marriage situation with his
father.

He began to masturbate at a very early age and claims to have indulged
in phantasies only about common men, imagining they were handling his
_membrum virile_.

His attachment to his father was decidedly morbid. If the father stayed
away from the house a quarter of an hour longer than usual, he began to
cry and could not be consoled. The whole object of his life was to bring
joy to his father and to replace in the latter’s life the lost mother.
When the father fell ill he took it so much to heart that it was feared
his mind would break down. After the death of his father he attempted
suicide and was thwarted in the act by his father’s faithful servant. He
made all sorts of resolutions, among others, not to masturbate during
the year of mourning. He did not live up to that.... At first he is
unable to recall heterosexual episodes from his childhood and his memory
fails him equally regarding homosexual facts. But suddenly the cloud
which seemed to cover his childhood lifts and a vast number of
reminiscences come to surface, showing the developmental course of his
homosexual tendency. His father had always been a strong admirer of the
other sex and even as a child he had observed that the father was
maintaining intimate relations with the nurse, the cook, as well as with
the maid servant. Once he surprised his father in the act of embracing
the cook while the two were alone in the room. The irate father boxed
his ear because he entered without knocking at the door. That was one of
the rare occasions on which his father punished him. He also overheard
at night how his father crawled into the nurse’s bed, who was still very
young and pretty at the time and carried on all sorts of doings with
her. Later he received private instruction from a male tutor who
conformed to the _genius loci_ and was also intimate with the servant
girl. As a child he often wished he were a woman so as to take the
cook’s place in gratifying his father. The father seemed to fear that
the boy might fall into the women’s hands and did not delay warning his
son with appropriate teachings. At 12 years of age his father instructed
him frankly about the dangers of masturbation, with the result that he
struggled hard against the habit without, however, overcoming it. A few
years later his father spoke to him about the terrible dangers of
venereal diseases, warning him against prostitutes. He was told he must
watch out, for he would have frequently occasion to go through the city,
and the prostitutes are always eager to seduce such innocent young boys
so that many a one is ruined for life.

It is significant also that at 5 years of age he played with a girl from
the neighborhood, trying to imitate the father. He must have hurt the
girl for she cried out, the nurse rushed in, a serious scene ensued, and
he was severely chastised by the nurse.

An ugly impression was produced on him when he witnessed a terrible
quarrel between their cook and the nurse who were jealous of each other
on account of the father’s attentions. They grabbed each other by the
hair and the whole household was in an uproar. The cook had to leave the
house at once. He believes that after that incident his father gave up
all intimate relations with the women in the house. At 19 years of age
he fell in love with the cashier of a coffee house and would have very
much liked to possess her. But his father, to whom he told everything,
warned him against all cashier women because they are usually diseased
and infected. As a warning he told him that in his youth he once
suffered very unpleasant consequences as the result of an affair with
that kind of a woman and was even subjected to blackmail.

He filled his heart with a gruesome fear of woman. In addition to that
he placed in his hands a book relating all about the evil consequences
of sexual diseases, so that after that he did not dare come near a woman
without the protection of a condom. After intercourse, which consisted
merely of digital manipulations in his case, he had to bathe at once and
to wash his genitals with soap several times. After homosexual acts he
did not feel the compulsion to carry out these ablutions.

We now come to the analysis of his acts, which show themselves veritable
compulsive manifestations. Suddenly he becomes restless, energetically
tries to control himself, then paces back and forth for hours, until he
falls into the hands of one of the male prostitutes who easily recognize
their prospective victims. But as he never mentioned any name and never
established any lasting intimate relations, he escaped blackmail. Once
he thought that a certain masseur had studied his physiognomy and had
later recognized him. He saw that fellow a few times in front of his
home. Immediately he left Vienna and undertook an extensive journey
which kept him for some months in foreign countries.

In the act he tried to find the love caresses of his father. He split
love into its well recognized two components. The erotic side he
reserved for elderly men, physicians, and the faithful elderly
friends,—while for sexuality proper he turned exclusively towards men of
low rank. Similarly he divided his father’s personality into two parts,
the high-striving, intellectual, lofty-minded father, and the woman
fancier, the lover of ordinary servant girls. He was still playing the
rôle of a male but during the act he regressed back to childhood,
becoming again a child who longs for the father’s tender love squandered
on servant girls. Moreover the ordinary males also had the traits of
servants, they were of the servant class.

We have here an instance of the transposition of the love of servant
girls to males. He had always a weakness for servant girls and since he
feared he might yet get tangled up in marriage with a cook, he tried to
keep away from them. Only once in the home of a friend he embraced
suddenly a cook and passionately kissed her. “I could have without a
doubt cohabited with her,” he told me. But he soon quit visiting that
particular friend....

He identified himself completely with the father. He lived in his own
house, acted like the father, had the same kind of wardrobe, although
his father had aged a great deal. But in one respect he wanted to be
different. He engaged therefore a male servant and always took his meals
outside, so as to have no cook in the house. But that servant he kept
always at a certain distance. He did not care to have any love affairs
with servants in the house, like his father.

The analysis disclosed his repressed sadistic attitude towards woman.
His first attempts at intercourse with women failed him and he was able
to carry out coitus successfully only under the influence of alcohol.
Later he did recall a single successful coitus without that aid. The
girl had roused his anger with the remark that he was merely an insolent
fellow. He jumped at her, ready to strike her, and was tremendously
excited. In that roused state he carried out coitus. _But he would have
rather strangled her._

He showed an idiosyncrasy against certain female occupations. Nurses in
their garb he would have gladly torn to pieces. He also hated all nuns.
It was not well for any woman to rouse his anger. He could be very
dangerous when roused. He confesses entertaining as his favorite
phantasy the thought of tearing to pieces a woman.

The reason for this sadistic attitude: His _infantile jealousy_ of all
women since woman had robbed him of his father’s love. Among them was
also a nurse who had taken care of the father during a prolonged
illness.

That hatred of women made him impotent and drove him into the homosexual
path. For he was afraid of himself when finding himself alone in the
presence of a woman. He rushed away from houses of prostitution
suddenly, as if a thousand demons were after him.

I succeeded in convincing him that this sadistic attitude was a rudiment
of his early feelings, that he was really fighting against ghosts which
he had long since dispelled. Now it was up to him to avow consciously
his criminal tendencies and to render them innocuous through meeting
them in the open. Presently he began having intercourse with _puellæ
publicæ_, before the analysis was ended, and even undertook to carry out
coitus _lege artis_. He forced himself to do it because he no longer
cared to incur the risk of coming into conflict with the law. (The legal
case against him was squashed because there had been committed no overt
act and such manipulations ordinarily are unpunished in Austria, if they
cause no open scandal.) Later he chose a sweetheart who accompanied him
on his travels and whom he suddenly abandoned. He had meanwhile met a
woman who captivated him mentally and spiritually. Two years later I
received their engagement card. In this case the analysis accomplished a
complete recovery.


Here we found a complete fixation on the father, which had to be
overcome first in order to free the path to woman which had become
obstructed by all sorts of infantile imperatives. Neither the mother nor
the persons who trained him during his earlier years play any rôle in
the psychogenesis of his homosexuality; on the other hand there was his
strong sadistic attitude towards women which showed itself in a
personally baffling fear of women.

This case shows how one-sided _Sadger’s_ explanation is of
homosexuality, when he traces its psychogenesis solely to the relations
with the mother and overlooks entirely the rôle of the father.

We must also bear in mind that many children gravitate to the mother
only because they feel themselves neglected by the father, because they
hate the father, and are unable to attain a proper feeling-attitude
towards him. Precisely that overstressed love of the mother and the
obvious antagonism against the father adroitly covers the fixation on
the father.

I will now report three similar cases from my own practice, relating
only the important details:


64. Mr. S. L. has not worked as bank employee for the past three years
or more. Three years ago he began to complain of various nervous
ailments and was granted a leave of absence to recover his health. That
leave proved his undoing. He did not improve; instead, he became totally
unable to work and is now no longer able to return to his duties. His
father always maintained that the whole trouble was imaginary, and
wanted to hear nothing of a prolongation of the leave. But the man’s
suffering became gradually worse. Out of spite for his father’s attitude
he at first simulated the aggravation of his trouble and his condition
in the end actually grew so much worse that it shattered him to pieces
and he lost control over himself. He experienced attacks of dyspnea so
severe that he could not talk. The dyspnea occurred in paroxysms. After
one year he lost his position with the bank and, reduced to want, he
appealed to his well-to-do father for aid. The father denied him any
assistance because he did not consider the son unable to work; he
thought the son was simulating so as to impose on him. S. L. sued his
father for sustenance and won, aided by the testimony of a number of
physicians who certified that his case was one of severe neurasthenia,
so that his father had to give him a monthly allowance. Father and son
broke all personal relations so that the payment was made through an
attorney. Thereafter S. L. was inspired by no other thought than revenge
on his father. He was very clever in thinking out new legal issues and
additional suits against him. Finally he came to the conclusion he was
not the rightful son of his father and threatened a law suit which only
his love for his mother prevented him from actually starting. She was
revolted at the son’s terrible accusation but so strongly under his
influence that she did not have the will power to break with him. She
met him clandestinely, placing money into his hands. He loved his mother
above all else and urged her to leave the father. He put detectives on
his father’s trail, hoping to be able to fasten against him the
accusation of being untrue to the mother. He always spoke of his father
as “the old rascal,” “the old scamp,” “that miserable, quarrelsome
rake.” “Should I see him today writhe in agony it would be the best and
most pleasant day I ever had.” I had never seen before so bitter a
hatred of the father.

He was a confirmed homosexual, hating all women with the exception of
his mother, whom he held in divine veneration. The alleged breach of
faithfulness which he alleged her to have committed with a person of
high position (the well-known family romance of the neurotic) he excused
as natural for it would have been a miracle for that noble soul to have
remained true to so terrible a man. The father compelled her to coitus
with brute force. He was the offspring of such a coercion, etc.... He
loved only younger men, even boys, and he was fairly brutal towards
them. Occasionally he carried on deeds with older men towards whom he
then preserved an attitude of submissiveness and passivity, trying to
please them in every way. He permitted pederasty on his person and did
not shrink from _fellatio_.

The analysis showed a passionate love of the father, a feeling which on
account of its unattainable aspect turned into bitter hatred. He thought
the father was partial to the other sons and fled to the mother to whom
he often complained about the father’s severity and lack of affection.
In his homosexual acts he played actively the rôle of the father,
becoming at such times very severe and almost cruel, passively he
carried out the act as if he were with the father, being then very
submissive, and thus allowing his whole repressed love to outflow as if
bent on showing him: _that is how loving I would be with you always if
you only were agreeable!_ Cruel phantasies revolving around revenge upon
the father as the central theme were confessed under strong resistances.
Several times he came near shooting his father. He often fancied himself
in situations in which his father depended altogether on his compassion
and magnanimity. For instance, he would imagine his father had committed
some great fraud. He himself had become a millionaire through an
ingenious invention of his own. His father comes begging at his feet and
is refused any aid. His favorite reading is books describing cruel
punishments, the inquisition tortures, etc. The well-known work of
_Octave Mirbeau_, “_Le jardin des supplices_,” threw him into ecstasy.

The other roots of this subject’s homosexuality I do not dwell upon
because I am concerned here only with the rôle of the father....

The next case shows a very similar situation:


65. Mr. G. Z. for some years has had intimate relations with an elderly
man, an artist, whose studio is the meeting place of a number of young
men exclusively. He is not a musician like the others, but a jurist, and
had met incidentally Mr. X, his fatherly friend, as he calls the man.
Before that time he had been entirely abstinent. He became Mr. X’s
friend only at the age of 21. The friendship was wholly platonic until
they undertook a journey together. At Salzburg they occupied together
the same room, because the hotel was filled. They carried on intercourse
(_coitus inter femora_), he playing the female rôle on that occasion as
well as subsequently. G. Z.’s relations with his father are very
stressed. They hardly speak to each other. He is employed in his
father’s office, but has only business relations with him. His whole
spare time he devotes to his mother. One day he surprised his mother
with the information that he had had his father watched and found out
that the father maintained clandestine relations with a number of women.
He requested his mother to break with the father. He raised a terrible
row with his father, ordering the father to withdraw from the office and
leave the business entirely to him, and at that the father showed him
the door. A letter from the mother convinces him that he is not the son
of his father; thereupon he locks himself in the room and commits
suicide by shooting himself.

Jealousy of the father had driven him to suicide. During the acts with
the fatherly friend he played the rôle of the son replacing the women in
the life of the father.


66. Mr. T. B., 32 years of age, like Case 64, is also unable to work. He
has tried everything but cannot make anything go. His father is a common
employee reduced to seek occasionally the son’s financial aid. But the
young man now stays at home and complains of attacks which he describes
as of an epileptic nature, occurring only at night, but which prove to
be hysterical anxiety attacks. His brother is diligent and hard-working,
the favorite of the family. When the brother is praised he turns so wild
that he is boiling with rage. He speaks but little with the brother,
exchanging with him only necessary words. Regarding his father he
declares that living together with him he finds most painful. He has
delicate tastes. But his father’s manner of eating and talking rouses
his anger. He will bless the day when he shall once more be working and
in a position to leave the parental home. The mother was on his side,
believed in his illness and in the genuineness of his attacks, and comes
at night during his attacks to his bed, trying to help him and to quiet
him to the best of her powers. The mother alone knows that he is
homosexual and she does not disturb him in the least on that score. But
she turns jealous as soon as she sees him pay any attention to a girl,
and every night, too, she comes to the kitchen to make sure that her
sons are not taking advantage of the servant girls. She accompanies the
ailing son on his errands and is his confidante. She does not get along
at all well with her husband and they have ceased marital relations long
ago. There are thus two parties in the house, he with his mother, and
the father with the other son.

Moreover, the ailing son raises various issues so that there are daily
quarrels and conflicts in the house. The father published a statement in
the newspaper to the effect that he will no longer be responsible for
debts and obligations contracted by the son. Thereupon the mother, who
earns an independent income with her piano lessons, left the house
together with her favorite son. They rented another home for themselves
and the mother hopes that the separation and the quiet care will bring
about her son’s complete recovery. At this stage T. B. is brought to me
for analysis. Two days later I am called to the father. T. B. had gone
there under an excuse and while searching among the books he was seized
with a very severe attack and had to be put to bed. He was now so ill
that he could not leave the bed. It was the love of the father that had
driven him to the place. He could not live without seeing his father and
could not endure the thought of leaving the father alone with the
brother. The mother moved back to the old home. As prerequisites for my
analysis I suggested isolation of the subject and moderate occupation,
and the mother apparently agreed. Next day the patient wrote me that on
account of his attacks he would be unable to live among strangers, and
that therefore he must give up the treatment. An experience similar to
that I had with the epileptic, Case No. 51.

The specific phantasy during his indulgences in which he played always a
passive rôle, represented him as the mother who gives herself up to the
father. The following dream yielded some light on the matter:


“_I lie on the bed in a remarkable attire, a hood on my head and dressed
in a green robe. I gaze in a looking-glass and instead of my person I
see my mother, and father in the act of bending over her to give her a
kiss. Now the image in the looking-glass fuses with the original, the
two coming together and forming a single picture. I feel myself turning
into a woman and everything male about me falls off or disappears. I
have long black hair, a white skin and a high voice. My arms stretch out
to embrace a man and I awake with a feeling of anxiety and a rapid heart
beat._”


An analysis of this dream is superfluous. The subject was unwilling to
see its meaning.

But the fixation upon the mother is often also marked with hatred. It
must not be thought that the homosexual is always disposed pleasantly
towards the mother. It also happens that the love for the mother is
covered under an overt hatred and an unnatural disgust, as is shown by
the following case:


67. H. U., 24-year-old sculptor, homosexual as long as he can remember.
His inclination is always towards waiters and restaurant employees. Has
four sisters and an older brother who had to go to America and is lost
to them. His father is a writer, a genial but impractical man who stuck
to journalism. He clings to his father with every fiber of his heart,
protecting him against the attacks of the mother who is tired of her
husband’s continual love affairs and cannot stand them any longer. The
father lives in a dreamy state continuously, passing from one ecstasy,
lasting from several days to a week, into another. He is not finicky in
his love adventures, drawing the line neither at servant girls nor at
prostitutes; daily he has some new rendezvous and in that way squanders
a great portion of his income. There are always quarrels in the house,
and the father does not like to stay at home, preferring to spend his
evenings in the public houses. The relations between mother and son are
as unpleasant as between the parents. The son always lets his mother
know that she is repulsive to him. If she attempts to come near him in
the room he avoids her, shouting: “_Don’t touch me, mir graust vor
dir,—you give me the shivers!_” He never permits her to fondle him, and
has no good word for the poor tortured woman. Towards his sister he is
also always sarcastic, aloof, and likes to meet her admirers to make
uncomplimentary remarks about her to them. The situation became
seriously aggravated, he had to leave the house, and now wants to meet
no one of the family except the father, whom he sees daily at the
newspaper office. He hates fanatically all women and dotes on
_Strindberg_ and _Weininger_.

Back of this hatred of women stands his great love for the mother, the
sisters, and all women. In that respect he is exactly like his father,
whose fate he does not want to share. He protects himself against the
love for his mother because he would be lost and subordinate to women if
he yielded. The gruesome quarrels which he witnessed during his
childhood showed him a father who ruined himself on account of women, a
man unable to achieve the full expression of his high ideal because he
squandered his energies on numerous love adventures. Homosexuality
serves him as a protection against all womanhood. His attachment to
waiters is explained through the fact that his mother had been a
waitress whom his father had married after she had become pregnant by
him so as to legitimatize the child. After two weeks he breaks up the
analysis because he feels that his attitude towards women is being
changed. In that attitude lies his security. Among waiters he prefers
small young boys who remind him of his sister.


This fixation upon the sister is not so rare, as is shown by the next
case, which dates back to my earlier psychoanalytic experience.


68. Mr. P. G., teacher in a high school (_Realschule professor_),
consults me on account of an ailment which began a few weeks ago and
which threatens to destroy all his joy of living. He is 26 years of age
and has had no sexual intercourse. In fact, he has not had even one
genuine love affair. A few months ago he met a girl whom he liked very
much and they became engaged. They were to be married in six months. She
is a friend of his sister’s, a girl to whom he had not previously paid
any particular attention but during an outing he got to know her and to
appreciate her so well that he fell suddenly in love with her. It was
not a great consuming passion,—rather a mutual understanding and a
strong spiritual kinship. He was abstinent through conviction. He wanted
to enter the marriage bond a pure man and was proud that in that respect
he was unlike his friends and colleagues. Then something happened in his
life which threatened to break him to pieces and even drove him to
thoughts of suicide. I relate the occurrence in his own words:

“In my class there is a very beautiful, physically imposing, slim,
bright young fellow whom I liked on account of his excellent answers and
fine manners. I directed my questions at him with great pleasure,
whenever the other boys could not answer, knowing that I would always
receive from him the correct answer, and I have often held this favorite
scholar of mine up to the others as an example of how they ought to be.
One night I dreamed that the boy was lying in my bed and that I embraced
and kissed him. I woke up, scared, and presently quieted down.
‘Nonsense,’ I said to myself. ‘Anything may come up in a dream!’ At
school that day I found myself somewhat uneasy towards that boy because
I could not help thinking about my dream. I avoided putting any
questions to him. As was frequently his habit, the boy waited for me
after school hours and asked permission to accompany me on the way. We
had to go the same road and I was pleased to pass the time talking with
him. He entertained me. I heard a great deal about what the pupils were
saying about the teachers and it seemed to me very interesting. Teaching
means building up souls, and so I wanted to implant every noble and high
ideal in the soul of this child.

“I granted him also that day, gladly, permission to come along. I was
strikingly distracted and silent. Whereas formerly I had been in the
habit of taking him by the arm now and then, this time I avoided all
intimate contact, because the dream stood between me and the handsome
young boy, rendering any intimacy or informality impossible. I reached
home and very promptly went to my bride. She found me absent-minded,
wanted to know the reason,—and about that, naturally, I could but be
silent. I wanted to show her tenderness; she goaded me with her kisses
and caresses. But, oh, horrors! In the midst of her kisses my mind
turned to the young fellow and when I felt her lips, so warm, I thought
it was the boy’s lips. I pushed her, scared, out of my arms, pretending
I did not feel well, and hurried back home.

“I was so excited that for a long time I could not fall asleep. I
decided I would fight the insane passion. I had heard before passingly
about boy love, knew also that it was the custom and fashion of the day
in ancient Greece, but I myself had never before entertained the least
thought of a man or boy. I felt I ought to remain a teacher no longer if
I failed to conquer the feeling and to master the impression of the
dream picture on my mind, conjured up, undoubtedly, by unconscious
wishes. I resolved to be strict with myself, to give up the attachment
to the boy, and to avoid his company after school hours. For it was I
who first spoke up and invited him to keep me company on the way home. I
resolved to be strong and to devote once more all my affection and my
love to my bride.

“Next school day I forced myself not to turn my gaze towards the boy’s
seat. But I could not help looking that way and the first glance rushed
the blood to my cheeks. He was as beautiful as a Greek boy, his form so
delicate, his eyes so smiling,—I could have lost myself for hours in the
contemplation of that wonderful face. I roused from my day dreaming,
which, fortunately, had passed unnoticed by the class. But I wanted to
neutralize the impression that my gazing at the boy may have made upon
the class and called upon the boy. I was severe, unmercifully severe
with him, and sought to catch him in some error. And who fails to find
an error when looking hard for it? Then I reprimanded the boy so
severely that he began to cry and returned to his seat weeping, and he
was unable to quiet down for some time after that. Then I became really
angry. I was trying to stifle the inner voice which was whispering: ‘It
is unfair for you to torture thus the innocent boy; he is not
responsible for your awful thoughts....’ I disregarded that and scolded
him.

“On the street the boy did not dare to offer to join me. I hurried past
him and wandered for hours on the streets like a madman. I reproached
myself, regretting the lost opportunity for enjoying the boy’s company
and wept over the breaking up of the beautiful friendship between
scholar and teacher. I resolved to be fair the next day with the boy and
to pay no attention to him. But a wild demoniac power, stronger than my
good resolutions, impelled me once more to hurt the boy’s feelings and
to humiliate him before the class. It looked as if I was bent on
revenging myself on him for the trouble he had cost me. I knew that I
punished myself doing so, that I suffered far more than the boy,
although he, too, changed in appearance, became timid, looked badly and
obviously suffered under the unjust treatment. I also became irritable,
morose, nervous. I lost completely my nervous equilibrium. I began to
avoid my bride’s company. It seemed to me a profanation on my part of
her pure love so long as I was consumed with such passion for a boy. She
also became cooler and more reserved, because she could not understand
me.

“Eventually things improved at school. I learned to control myself and
to act more fairly. We resumed the walks once more; the boy accompanied
me again after school hours; sometimes we walked on and on for hours,
and we even met specially during the holidays. In his company I felt
happy and all my wishes seemed gratified. I enjoyed his beauty and his
lively mind and counted the minutes to pass when we should meet again.

“Then something happened which opened my eyes. My bride wrote me a
letter breaking up our engagement. It did not even affect me as deeply
as I had thought it would, whenever reflecting previously on the
possibility. Very well—I thought to myself—now you can devote yourself
entirely to your beloved boy! At the same time I felt during the day the
same physical excitation which I had theretofore experienced only in my
dreams. Then I realized that I must avoid the boy if I was to keep from
committing a crime. My first task, I thought, would be to make up again
with the bride; secondly, I must give up the school so as to not meet
the boy again. My bride was resolute, however, insisting that she had
become convinced that I did not love her. I kept secrets from her. I was
on the very point of confessing everything and of telling her the whole
truth. I threw myself, weeping, to her feet. She said quietly: ‘Don’t!
What is done cannot be undone. It is better that we should part. Don’t
make the parting hard for me. Let’s leave one another good friends and
think kindly of me.’ Then she hurried out of the room and left me to
myself.

“Next day when I went to the school the boy was not there; he was ill.
Another boy reported he was kept at home on account of scarlet fever. My
anxiety about him was boundless. I could think of nothing but that boy.
A schoolmate had to bring me daily reports about his condition. Often I
wandered in the neighborhood of his home, up and down the streets, and
at night I watched the lamplit window of the room where a sister was
taking care of him. Finally I heard that he was convalescing, that all
danger was over, and that he would return to school in a few weeks. I
had to keep a strong grip on myself at school to be able to carry on my
lectures at all. My thoughts were perpetually centered on my beloved boy
pupil. Continually I kept thinking: How many days longer must I keep
longing? In three weeks he will be here! My heart danced with joy at the
thought....

“There had to be a change. I could not keep on living that way. I took
my father into confidence and he sent me to you, thinking that you would
be able to furnish good advice and aid in this difficult case.”


I offered at first no advice and no help. To begin with, I allowed the
love-sick fellow to speak out everything that was on his mind and that
in itself lightened his burden. Then I undertook to obtain an insight
into his mental life before the advent of his boy love.

It turned out that he had really loved and still loves but one person in
the wide world: his sister. The affection for the bride was but a
substitute for his love of the sister. His bride was also homosexual and
loved in him but the brother of her best girl friend. As the girl friend
(his sister) cooled off during their engagement, preferring another
friendship (obviously led thereto by unconscious jealousy of the
brother), her own affection for the young man cooled off and she
promptly made use of the opportunity to break off with him. The
opportunity arose conveniently enough and the severing of the engagement
reacted most painfully upon the school teacher who had reasons of his
own for reproaching himself most bitterly.

_The more his bride kept away from his sister the greater was his
indifference to the bride. But the boy resembled his sister very
closely._

He never thought of this similarity before. They had the same eyes, the
same color of hair, and the same voice, and these played a strong rôle
with him. During that critical period his sister was interested in a
certain physician. He felt he was about to lose her affection and sought
a substitute for her and that he found in his pupil....

Now he was in a position to come to an understanding with his sister.
She had the requisite psychologic insight to understand him fully and to
lend him intelligent assistance towards his recovery.

His whole tremendous excitation simmered down. The love for the boy
calmed down to an attitude of kindly interest which no longer troubled
him. He took his walks only with his sister who often called for him at
the school. Months later I heard that he was very quiet and had no
reason to complain. He succeeded in sublimating his affection for the
sister into joint intellectual interests, insofar as that is possible.
But frank relations create a healthy atmosphere in which it is easier to
overcome incestuous phantasies than in the byways and hidden bypaths of
repression and transference.


I have given a detailed account of this case because it is typical and
because the transference of affection from the sister to a boy is more
common than would be recognized _a priori_ in the light of our current
contributions on homosexuality. We must also bear in mind that the
sister represents a younger likeness of the mother _Imago_.[10]

But father, mother and sister do not exhaust the ideal of the
homosexual. I also know cases—one I have described in a previous
chapter—in which the love of an older brother plays a tremendous
rôle.[11] We are thus led to the conclusion that fixation on the family
plays a determinative rôle in the genesis of homosexuality, that
homosexuality often may represent a flight from incest. True, we have
also seen cases in which these roots are not traceable, particularly
cases of late homosexuality. But why may not other psychic forces,
manifesting themselves as hatred, disgust, fear and shame, likewise lead
to homosexuality?

Love of the family is a form of narcissism. Every member of the family
is a mirrored image of one’s own personality. One may love one’s self in
one’s parents or other members of the intimate family circle more
readily than through strangers. _Leo Berg_ was the first to express this
truth and he has done it very clearly. In his inspiring work,
_Geschlechter_ (_Kulturprobleme der Gegenwart_, 2nd ser., Vol. II,
Berlin, 1906), he states:


“What does the homosexual substitute for procreation? In the first place
self-seeking, the love of like (_die Liebe zum Gleichen_), plays a
greater rôle in his case than with the heterosexual who is responsive to
the unlike, and that is why the instinct of procreation is as a rule
very much weaker in the former though not entirely absent. A young
physician who confessed to me that he was homosexual, told me of a
colleague who was passionately attached to a child. It was a powerful
motherly instinct in him, a sign of his female sensitiveness in a male
body; he is wholly womanly, a submissive being, and loves like a woman
cursed only because he cannot bear a child for the man of his heart.”


_Berg_ also points out that the homosexuals transfer to the intellectual
sphere their reproductive and creative urge.

The case mentioned by _Berg_ shows nothing in itself more than a
complete identification with the mother. But I have observed long ago
that this love of the like bears some relations to purposive sterility.
The homosexual renounces the immortality implied in procreation. (Many
homosexual artists achieve immortality in the realm of spiritual
endeavor.) Such an attitude discloses a revolt against natural law and
order. The homosexual, in fact, always conceives himself as unique. The
world contains not his equal and that feeling is the hidden source of
his pride. The “bearing of aloofness,” already pointed out by
_Freimark_,[12] the pride of being “different,” determine also his
opposition to the procreative instinct. He does not care to be like
others. Against the notion that God had ordained man to have offspring
he wants to oppose all teleology and, in spite of God, maintain a
purposeless, meaningless love, contrary to nature, a love for its own
sake. Conceivably women manifest even more clearly the corresponding
revulsion against the motherly instinct.

Who will deny that fear of children, of motherhood, is an important
social manifestation? Can it be that this fear is characteristic only of
women and is not shared also by men? May it not manifest itself as a
form of flight from sexual determinism? We need only look around us.
There are any number of married couples who want no children and others
who want no more than a child or two. Undoubtedly this state of things
is partly due to homosexuality, to a deviation from the biblical
injunction concerning the duty of increasing offspring. But let us also
glance over our professional experience. The relationship between
children and their parents carries within itself the beginnings of a new
phase. The everlasting conflict between the new and the old generation,
between fathers and sons, mothers and daughters, children and parents,
requires, fosters new forms. Not without reason has our age been called
“the century of the child” with its slogan raised about the Rights of
Children. The greater the (unconsciously motivated) antagonism of the
child against his parents, the stronger will be the fear of its own
children, who loom up as potential enemies and rivals.[13] It seems that
our own image attracts and repels us at the same time, that there is a
fear of the like as strong as the fear of the unlike. The aboriginal
conflict between the old and the new goes on forever within us. Hungry
for the new though we be, yet we cling to the old. Having acquired the
new we turn longingly to the old.

This bipolarity shows itself nowhere so distinctly as upon the sexual
sphere. It means that contraries have the power of sexual attraction.
That is an observation substantiated by everyday experience. But there
is an extreme point at which the opposite touches upon the like. _Les
extrêmes se touchent_, extremes meet. In each of us there lives also
another who is the precise counterpart of ourselves. In the other sex we
love our counterpart and through the love for our own sex we endeavor to
run away from that counterpart.

The mother instinct and hatred of motherhood are not split in the human
soul. The homosexual woman always shows the hatred of motherhood and her
alleged love of children, when such a sentiment is claimed at all,
proves but a self-deception and lip-service at best. In our study of
_female dyspareunia_ we propose fully to prove that conclusion in
connection with the histories of several homosexual women. We do find
many instances of alleged affection for children but in reality these
are only caricatures of the true sentiment and only rarely the affection
as it is characteristic of normal woman. Our school teacher in love with
the boy pupil, whose case we gave in full in the preceding pages, did
not love children as such and did not care to have children of his own.
Through his love for the boy the repressed father instinct also found
outlet.

The life histories of homosexual women differ from those of males only
in the fact that occasionally there seems present a certain yearning for
children, as if the child could bring about release from the passion and
a new state of bliss. Beyond that the _urlind_ shows the same
psychogenesis as the _urning_. There is a strong fixation on the family,
though not always on the father, as _Hirschfeld_ claims. In addition to
that, rather commonly there is found affection for the mother which is
fairly open, and tenderness for some sister which persists through life
and assumes remarkable masks.

I want to conclude this chapter with the histories of some cases of
female homosexuality which may serve to illustrate clearly the points I
have just made:


69. Miss Ilse—we shall call her by that name—after a series of various
exciting episodes has fallen a victim to depression, during which she
lost a great deal of weight, but in spite of a successful fattening
régime her stay at a sanitarium did not effect a complete cure. She is
an impressively attractive girl, 24 years of age, voluptuous, feminine
in every way up to her angular, somewhat energetic nose and prominent,
curved eyebrows. Her mother, of whom the girl speaks with much feeling,
believes that the girl’s breakdown dates from the death of the father.
Ilse irritatedly contradicts the mother several times, breaking into a
quarrelsome attitude towards her mother over trifles. Reprimanded by her
mother, she falls into her depression and speaks no word. I take her
under treatment and for a week I have in her a heavy burden on my hands.
She hardly says anything, is very negativistic in her attitude, only
muttering from time to time: “Don’t trouble yourself. It will never be
any different. Better give me something that will put me quickly out of
the way.” She livens up somewhat only when referring to her
father,—thinks he should have not passed away. The mother should have
called in a specialist. In fact, it was as much her fault as anybody’s,
for she had failed to insist on calling the best aid while there was
time.

Gradually she extends me her confidence and one day she appears,—like a
changed person. She must tell me the truth. She is not a normal person.
Since childhood she has been homosexual and had never cared for men. Her
mother had implied as much when she said to me: “I cannot understand the
girl. She always fled from the room when young men called on Alfred (her
brother). The girl is a man hater.” This fact the girl had denied during
the first visit, but now she herself admitted. She had never cared for
men. On the other hand, at 11 years of age she had already fallen
passionately in love with a woman school teacher. She was a frolicsome
girl, often wore her brother’s clothes, and played with all the young
boys of the neighborhood. At 14 years of age she again fell in love with
a girl friend.

Her current depression is due to a terrible disappointment. She had
maintained a love affair with a French woman and was happy. She said
nothing about the character of the relations, but admitted that they
were very intimate. Suddenly she found out that the French woman was not
true to her, but was keeping up intimate relations more often with other
girls than with her. She suffered tremendously on account of her
jealousy. She began to feel a disgust against all women not unlike her
former aversion to men. Asked why she was so antagonistic to men, she
answered: “Because they are, all, without exception, disgusting
brutes....”

At this point Ilse begins to relate her past experiences. She was seven
years of age when she visited an uncle. He showed her his big _membrum
virile_ and asked her to hold it in her hand. She did this as well as
other things he requested her _usque et ejaculationem_. “How shall I
have any respect for men when they don’t hesitate thus to poison the
innocent soul of a child?” The uncle is still living.... She has since
thought that it must be some morbid tendency and has forgiven him. “It
happened only a few times and the uncle believes I have forgotten
it....”

Another traumatic incident impressed her more seriously; it was, in
fact, a series of traumas. Her mother was a light-minded person and is
so to this day, despite her 50 years. But she knows enough to dress
herself so attractively and with such a display of refinement that she
is still capable of achieving conquests. There follow a number of
serious complaints against the mother, which must have been true, for I
have had opportunity to convince myself of the truth of some of the
statements. The mother always kept on the string a number of lovers who
gratified her extravagant requirements. As a child she had been taken
along to a number of rendezvous and has repeatedly witnessed the display
of tendernesses between the lovers. She also recalled various household
scenes from her early childhood. As a child she was already very
sensuous and masturbated jointly with the sister and the brother. She
was precocious as well as prematurely spoiled and every one thought she
would early turn out to be like her mother. Then her sister underwent a
great change in character. She became religious and wanted to join a
nunnery. She made fun of her religious-minded sister but secretly
admired her for her chastity. She was 14 years of age at the time. She
now knows that she was in love with the family physician and that she
was interested in men, but at the same time she was in love at different
times with various teachers and girl friends. When her sister was 16
years of age she had a love affair with an army lieutenant and had to go
to a sanitarium to be curetted, fever set in after the operation, and
for several weeks the girl was seriously ill.

Her sister’s experience shook her to pieces. Inwardly she had been proud
that there was such a pure, innocent girl in the family. Now that her
sister followed the example of her mother it seemed to her that she,
too, was fated to follow in the same path and that there could be no
escape for her. During that period her character underwent a change and
she acquired a tremendous dislike for all small children. She could not
suffer to see a small child. She thought to herself, if she were its
mother she would strangle it. The feeling was so horrible that she could
not sleep. In time she improved somewhat, but the dislike of children
or, rather, the fear of them, that is, the fear that she might do some
harm to them, never left her.

I suspected that back of this feeling-attitude towards the children
might be found the solution of her problem. I reverted back to her
sixteenth year, for it was at that period that she turned definitely
against all men.

“Why do you hate children?”

“Not that, exactly.... In fact, I was at one time foolish over them. I
have always wanted children. When I told you that I always played boyish
games it was not exactly the truth. I remember now that I played nurse
to my doll and that we often played the game of childbirth. Brother was
the doctor and I was the pregnant lady in bed.”

“Did you happen to witness childbirth as a little girl?”

“Yes, everything.... Our aunt gave birth to a child in our home,—a
romantic story. An illegitimate child; her parents were not to know
anything about the birth, or they would have disowned her. But we
children knew everything. Afterwards she married the man but was very
unhappy with him. The little baby was with us for a time. I was very
fond of it and carried it around....”

“Have you other such aunts in the family?”

“Between us: mother’s family has a poor reputation. There were six
sisters, each more flighty than the next. None was a virgin at marriage.
Things were always happening and there was never any peace. That is why
I was so shocked over sister’s experience. I was getting to think it was
my fate also to become ... merely a prostitute. You will pardon me for
speaking so harshly about my own mother. But unfortunately it is the
truth....”

“A prostitute is purchasable.... There is some difference whether one is
light-minded through passion or for gain.”

(After a lengthy pause.) “Just what I did find out at the time. Mother
was to be had for money. Father was a humble employee, an unsuccessful
jurist, who eked out a living doing secretarial service for an attorney.
He could not keep up with the large household expenses even though he
occasionally transacted a business deal on the side which netted him a
considerable sum. Mother always had a friend who took care of our needs.
Thus we were brought up rather well educated, my brother could afford to
study, we did everything.”

“Did you know all that already as a child?”

“I knew it at a very early age....”

“You think, then, that your sister was also paid and that she sold
herself?”

“No, nothing like that. In addition to the paying lover mother always
had one, a purely heart affair, on the side. It was funny! The men
always brought us candies and all sorts of presents. When we grew older
mother became a little more careful. Still, there was enough going on to
bring shame as I look back. And so there came into our house also a
young lieutenant whom mother had picked up—God knows where. This fellow
was mother’s avowed lover and could do as he pleased. The terrible thing
was that he began to pursue also sister and after a few jealousy
quarrels mother had to put up with it,—she perhaps even encouraged the
affair. For I overheard once a talk between them and heard mother
reproach ‘Shikki,’—that was the lieutenant’s nickname,—that he had used
sister. She could have obtained a large sum of money for the girl
because she was a virgin and the girl would have been provided for. Then
there followed bitter quarrels between mother and sister.”


I interrupt the conversation at this point. It turns out that she, too,
was in love with the lieutenant, and so were the others of the
household, including the father and the brother; she was also jealous of
her mother. Her jealousy opened her eyes. That is how it happened that
she heard the unpleasant rumors about her mother circulating among the
neighbors. She began hating her mother, but that continued only for a
short time. Then her hatred turned to children. She hated first herself,
the child who bore no respect for the mother. She did not want to be
like her mother and her sister. She knew that she would have to submit
to similar experiences; that her fate was sealed. She strove against her
feminine and motherly instincts. But the analysis disclosed that she
really entertained one supreme wish which she was unwilling to
countenance openly: she wanted to be a mother and to bear many, many
children. But the neurotic reaction thwarted her powerful motherly
instinct. To be a mother meant identification with the despised mother.
Her better feelings prompted her to draw herself far apart from the
mother.

She did not want to be a woman. She did not want to be so easy-going as
her mother. At that time her brother also showed a temperamental change.
He became serious-minded, began to write verses, and to take an interest
in all sorts of idealistic endeavors. She linked herself to him and
before long she differentiated herself completely from the rest of the
household, and particularly from the mother. She sought earnest-minded
girl friends and came into frequent contact with her brother’s
companions, but was unapproachable, even though she expressed herself
freely and frankly about all subjects. Her strongly sensuous temperament
threw her next into the arms of the Frenchwoman and she preferred that
to a love affair with a man as she was afraid of children. After the
Frenchwoman’s breach of loyalty she fell into her depression.

This circumstance also disclosed an interesting sidelight. She confessed
to me that the Frenchwoman was also her brother’s sweetheart. It had
never been mentioned by the woman but she knew it even before she
entered into intimate relations with her. Nevertheless it was her
happiest period.

The depression is thus traceable to a second source. The brother had
abandoned the Frenchwoman, having chosen another sweetheart, of whom he
was very fond and whom he intended to marry. The Frenchwoman was only a
sensuous play affair with him, the brother belonged wholly to her. They
were always together and she knew all his secrets. She was never jealous
when she knew that he kept up relations with some girl or woman so long
as he did not love soulfully. But now the brother became acquainted with
a wealthy, beautiful girl, with whom he fell in love and whom he was
going actually to marry. This, for the brother, lucky event,—came to
nothing in the end on account of the opposition of the girl’s
family,—left her cool. All she saw was that she was losing her brother,
and that he no longer belonged to her. He could not marry the girl
because her parents required that he should first prove his ability to
support her. But the two lovers agreed to wait for one another and the
brother had gone already pretty far and he may yet succeed to marry the
girl, despite the mother’s deplorable reputation. He lives no longer
with his family and avoids the old home. He only sees her from time to
time and they are still good old pals, whenever they meet....


This interesting analysis illustrates all the chief points to be found
in the psychogenesis of male homosexuality. In fact the girl was on the
point of becoming as fond of men as her mother, perhaps of indulging in
bisexual activities. Her sister’s experience opened her eyes and acted
as a terrible warning. The yearning for purity which animates every soul
and is the polar counterpart of the desire for tasting every sort of
experience, became uppermost in her case, the fear of becoming like the
sister, or like the mother, and her hatred of the mother, jointly, had
the effect of shaping her into a different being. She probably would
have not yielded to the homosexual love of the Frenchwoman had she not
been overcome by the fact that the woman was her brother’s sweetheart.
It was a case of incest through a third person.... She hated her mother
and had to protect herself against the danger of having children who
grow up to be one’s enemies. Thus children became her enemies. The
father played a negligible rôle in her life and had no influence on the
development of her homosexuality.

I do not know well her subsequent history. Her depression was soon
relieved and her hatred of children disappeared entirely. But she left
Vienna and went to another country, obviously to get away from her
family and to forget her whole past. I had advised her to do so and the
fact that she had followed my advice permits us to hope that, after the
tempestuous course of her past life, she may have succeeded, at last, in
finding a friendlier harbor.




                                  III

  HOMOSEXUALITY AND JEALOUSY—MASKED JEALOUSY—THE JEALOUS WIFE OF A
      PHYSICIAN—WHY WOMEN ABUSE SERVANT GIRLS—TRANSFERENCE OF JEALOUSY
      TO THE SURROUNDINGS—JEALOUSY OF THE FATHER—JEALOUSY OF THE
      RESIDENCE—JEALOUSY OF THE PAST—A YOUNG WOMAN OVERSENSITIVE TO ANY
      NOISES.


_In der Eifersucht liegt mehr Eigenliebe als Liebe._

                                                       —_Rochefoucauld._




                                  III

_Jealousy involves self-love rather than love._

                                                       —_Rochefoucauld._


Jealousy is the projection of one’s own insufficiencies to the
surroundings.[14] It is an atavistic awakening of the brutal sense of
self such as was common to the primordial man protecting his
possessions. All children are jealous. Jealousy leads us back to the
sources of man’s instinctive life.

It is not my intention to take up the whole subject of jealousy. But
morbid jealousy shows certain definite, almost regular, relations to
homosexuality which we must consider. We have seen that homosexuality
may be hidden from consciousness. That is also true of jealousy. I have
seen many neurotics who have suffered tremendously on account of their
jealousy, without being aware of it. In the masking of neurosis jealousy
assumes most remarkable forms.

The next case illustrates the masking of jealousy, its fusion with
homosexuality, and contains various points of psychologic interest:


70. A highly intelligent subject, H. J., writes me: “Have you already
reflected on how we discern certain similarities on certain days and
fail to do so at other times? You are undoubtedly aware that neurotics
and normal persons are fond of finding resemblances when they formulate
identifications. The lover finds that the beloved walks like mother, or
that she talks like the latter, and if physically no resemblance can be
established he finds the same mental characteristics, the same soul,
perhaps the same shortcomings. But I want to speak of an entirely
different peculiarity. One forenoon I see a man, who looked enough like
my friend, X, the painter, to be taken for the latter. I walk up to him
and say: Hello, X,—still under the impression of that mistake. A strange
face wearing a beard of familiar form is staring at me. I offer the
usual apologetic explanation and go my way. After a while I see again my
friend X, this time somewhat dimly, not quite so certain of it as
before. I recover from this illusion quickly enough.

“By that time my psychologic curiosity is roused and it occurs to me
that my wife told me that morning she was going to visit the painter, X,
during the forenoon. I listened indifferently to the statement, merely
asking her to give him my greetings. But a certain unrest must have
risen in the unconscious: your wife goes to the painter who likes her
and makes love to her. Nothing of that in consciousness at all. Painters
are a light-minded class who do not take such things seriously. Who
knows whether your wife will be strong enough to resist?

“These secret fears led to a symptomatic act. I accosted a stranger as
X, the painter. In other words,—a wish fulfilment. For if I meet X on
the street he cannot possibly be in his studio at this time. My wish is
that he shall not be at home. My wife shall go to the studio and find:
Mr. X is not in.... That wish came up on three different occasions that
morning. For I thought I saw Mr. X in the street three different times.
Moreover, I project X upon strange faces. Because I think constantly of
X, because my mind is wholly preoccupied with him, because I am innerly
preoccupied with the uncountenanced thought: what does X now do with
your wife?—I see X everywhere. _Ringstrasse_ is filled with men looking
like him; every man is a Mr. X.

“The illusion at this juncture denotes also another suspicion. An
additional thought renders the first one pregnant with significance.
Yesterday I heard the opinion expressed at a gathering, ‘Any woman may
be had and there is no such thing as a virtuous woman!’ I opposed
vehemently that cynical thought (_Pauschalverdächtigung_) and I tried to
the best of my ability to point out the ridiculous and unfair
implications of this notion. And today I am surprised to find myself
entertaining the thought. These men who look like X, the great unknown,
are alike attractive and powerful men, just like X. You are reflecting:
Who knows whether this or that man is not actually your wife’s lover?
Why do the words from Faust come into my mind: ‘_The whole town has
her’?_... In justice to my wife’s honor I must now state that she is in
fact an exemplary woman and that I entertain no trace of suspicion about
her conduct. But I am deliberately looking for excuses to vindicate
myself. I mean to believe that every woman is guilty, including
therefore my own wife, so as to justify in my eyes my new love
affairs.... I am envious of X, of his free ways with women, and would
like to be in his place, receiving ladies in the studio. I would like to
be X. In my phantasy I am X, and see myself as X in every stranger.

“A lady of my acquaintance always saw her deceased husband on the street
in the person of some stranger who seemed closely to resemble him. This
peculiar resemblance to strangers was noticeable particularly when her
mind turned to light and frivolous thoughts. As if the image of the
husband came forward to warn and protect her: ‘It is only three years
since I have passed away and already you begin to turn your mind to
trivial joys? Beware. I watch you from Heaven and I see everything you
do.’”

We admit freely that our subject is a keen-minded psychologist
possessing an extraordinary capacity for introspection, yet this
excellent piece of self-analysis seemed to me to overlook something
important. I therefore write Mr. H. J. that I should like to talk this
interesting episode over with him and I invite him to call on me. He
accepts the invitation. From our conversation I report only some of the
more important points:

“Has it not struck you that the men who impressed you as bearing
resemblance were exclusively attractive and powerful men?”

“No, because my friend, X, the painter, is also an attractive and well
built man. Others would not look like him....”

“Are you also otherwise jealous?”

“No; not in the least; only about X,—and even that I did not know or was
perhaps too proud to admit to myself.”

“What is your attitude towards X? Do you care for him also as you
do...?”

“... For my wife, you mean? I do. I love him. He is a charming fellow.”

“Is it not strange that you should be jealous precisely of the one man
whom you also like so well?”

He reflects a while and finds no answer. I explain to him that it shows
a repressed homosexual disposition towards his friend. The trend of his
unconscious thought is: “_If I were a woman I could not withstand him._”
Perhaps the thought goes even further than that: “_Too bad I am not a
woman for then I would enjoy that beautiful man_....”

He sees at once the relationship between his jealousy and the
unrecognized inner homosexual disposition. He relates that this man is
the only friend whom he greets with a kiss after a prolonged absence,
that he likes to take him by the arm and to hold his hand.

In short, he himself is in love with his friend. He sees his friend
everywhere and the slightest resemblances impress themselves strongly on
his mind. They are emanations from his one thought: _I like him and I
wish I were a woman to yield to him._

It is very tempting to try to trace the various paths of unconscious
jealousy. But that would lead us too far off our present theme. As we
are confronted with a very complicated condition which may have the most
varied roots I propose to give a few clinical illustrations from my own
practice and to discuss the various forms of jealousy on the basis of
these data.


71. The first case of jealousy which I had occasion to observe was that
of a physician’s wife. The woman, 45 years of age, relates: “Perhaps you
can free me from a painful condition which embitters my whole life and
turns my marriage into a veritable hell. I have been married already 22
years and can assert that I have not yet had a happy day except when my
husband is all day alone with me and we have no occasion to come into
contact with another female person. He is a physician and already during
our engagement I was jealous of all his women patients. I did not know
this awful trait in myself before. At any rate it was not so pronounced
or I should have not married my husband. At first I was jealous of my
immediate acquaintances and friends, particularly of the very pretty
women among them. After marriage my condition grew worse and worse.
During the consultation hours I watched behind the door and shivered
with actual nervous chills in my excitement. My husband was a woman
specialist and a very popular woman specialist at that. I implored him
to abandon that specialty and to take up any other. I admit that the
fact of his being a woman specialist had at first excited my interest in
him and had a great deal to do with my choice of the man. I thought to
myself: the man sees so many beautiful women, he sees them naked, and
yet has chosen you,—the thought flattered me immensely. That was well
enough at first, but later the feeling of jealousy grew in its stead.

“I had a very pretty woman friend who was taking treatment from my
husband. What I endured during her visits is beyond my powers to
describe. I said to myself: ‘She is now taking off her blouse and now
her petticoat. He is now examining, looking at her bosom, and now she
lifts herself upon the examination table, she stretches her limbs
apart....’ I suffered hellish torments. I was convinced that my husband
could not withstand this woman’s charms and would kiss her. I had a
serious quarrel with him; I quarreled with my friend, who turned from me
with indignation. Our marriage relations grew worse on that account. I
tortured my husband so that he had to allow me to watch through a
carefully hidden peep-hole what was going on in the consultation room.
In that manner I convinced myself that my husband was physically true to
me. But even though he swore a thousand times that the women did not
excite him in the least I could not believe him. I stuck to one thing
which I harped on daily: ‘_Give up your specialty._’ Years thus passed
in quarrels and dispute. I have now a married daughter of my own and I
thought to myself that with advancing age my condition would change. But
not at all! It grows worse and I transfer now my jealousy also to my
son-in-law, I am jealous for my daughter. Fortunately, she has no real
reason to feel jealous and laughs at me....

“I am also jealous of my daughter. I would like to preserve her love for
myself only and I begrudge her husband. Although she made an excellent
match, I was not satisfied and treated my son-in-law very unfairly. I
was unhappy over it but could not help it. I have consulted already the
most famous specialists, have been for six weeks under hypnotic
treatment by Prof. X. I have already kept away from my husband for three
months at a stretch,—nothing has helped.”


That is the sufferer’s history. What is the meaning of this jealousy?

The root of this jealousy is a non-conscious homosexuality. She is
jealous of her woman friend because she herself is in love with the
friend. She puts herself in the rôle of the man, the physician, and
concludes that in his position she could not resist the temptation. She
imagines herself in the man’s place; she scrutinizes every woman with
hungry looks. The peep-hole in the consultation room serves on the one
hand the purpose of calming down her jealousy and of giving the poor
husband a few quiet hours; on the other hand it enables her to
participate in everything that is taking place and to gratify her
craving as _voyeuse_. This control is her daily homosexual excitant, the
means through which she rouses the flames of her passion only to still
them afterwards upon her husband.

After the explanation was reached there was a marked improvement in her
condition. The woman saw that her love for the daughter was homosexual
and that this was the reason why she was so jealous of her son-in-law.

The occurrence is far from rare, and many a marriage has been wrecked on
account of it. The angry mother-in-law is always the mother who cannot
live without her daughter and who wants to show her daughter that the
husband is untrue and does not appreciate her and how much more she
truly loves the daughter.... I have also often seen the daughter, after
a timorous attempt at married life, return penitently back to the
mother. I have seen mothers who fight for their daughters with a lover’s
passion and with their tremendous jealousy putting all sorts of
difficulties in the way of any pretenders to the daughter’s hand. I have
found that kind of jealousy frequently as the root of melancholia. I
refer in this connection to Case 132 in my “_Nervöse Angstzustände_”
(2nd ed., p. 363).


72. The next case of jealousy shows the same roots. A married woman, 30
years of age, consults me on account of an unexplainable jealousy which
has been torturing her for about four weeks. She tells the story of her
jealousy: She engaged a new servant, a very young girl, somewhat
coquettish, but who at first glance seemed to her very sympathetic.
After one week she felt jealous and found that her husband, who usually
did not so much as look at the servants in the house, was extremely
friendly and courteous towards that girl. It seemed to her even that he
was bestowing longing glances on the girl. At first she kept silent
because she hesitated to speak of the matter to her husband. But after a
time she reproached him about it: he must be more strict. She requested
him to assume a more severe tone in his relations with the girl. Her
husband laughed at her. He said he talked to the girl in his usual
manner and nothing more. It was all imagination on her part. The girl
was very good; he had no reason to call her down or to assume a more
severe tone towards her. That reassured her somewhat but only for a
short while. She watched her husband more carefully than ever and
thought he was much charmed by the girl. She arose several times during
the night to go into the servant’s room and investigate. Once her
husband had some gastric trouble and he had to leave the room several
times that night. She was convinced that it was but an excuse to go to
the girl and several times she followed him along the chilly passage
into the hall, so that her husband asked: “What is the matter with you
this time?” She said she was worried over his condition and wanted to
watch and see that he was all right. Finally her jealousy broke to
surface a number of times and she reproached her husband very bitterly
with her suspicions. She was absolutely certain that he was intimate
with the girl. Her husband was indignant and asked her to dismiss the
girl at once so that there might be an end to that “foolish notion.” The
remarkable thing was that she felt unable or unwilling to dismiss the
girl. The girl was so good and so faithful, it is so hard nowadays to
find an efficient girl servant, she insisted only that her husband must
show himself more strict with her. He had to declare on his oath again
that there was no intimacy between them. _Towards the girl she felt a
peculiar anger which she could not understand. At times she could have
flown at the girl to strike her, which was very baffling as she had
never been in the habit of striking a servant. But it would have been a
great satisfaction to her to have pummelled this girl who caused her so
much anguish. She had to restrain herself forcefully so as not to give
vent to her rage. She was very “touchy” with the girl and tolerated not
the least contradiction on her part._

Nevertheless she could not make up her mind to dismiss the girl, and yet
she was afraid to be alone with her.

All her troubles arose on account of her homosexual attitude towards the
girl who was in fact a charming blonde type of beauty. She herself was
in love with the girl; that is why she could not conceive that her
husband might be indifferent towards her. She figured: _If I were a man
I would love this girl!_ Interesting, and at the same time typical, is
her rage and desire to strike the girl. The love feeling is converted
into its opposite and the longing to touch the girl (that is, to come
into contact with her body) manifests itself in the inclination to
strike her. How often love contacts disguise themselves as angry blows
under the mask of anger!

I explain to the woman that she must dismiss the girl when she saw
clearly the meaning of her jealousy. After the girl left all the
unpleasant symptoms mentioned above vanished.

Another form of jealousy transfers itself from one object to another, or
to the whole surroundings. Such transference of jealousy serves the
purpose of masking from self and from others the real object of the
original jealousy.


73. Mrs. H. G. is a woman, 38 years of age, who has been living happily
with her husband. At present she is unhappy on account of jealousy. Here
is her statement: “I have called on you to ask you to relieve me of a
condition which I find simply unbearable. I have a good, fine husband
against whom I cannot complain of anything. He is a splendid and model
man in every way. I am the more distressed therefore to be so jealous of
him. I felt that way, first, while my husband was ill with typhus which
left him with heart trouble. He has to be more careful of himself
because of the illness he has been through, and whereas formerly he had
intercourse with me two and three times a week, now it happens only
about once a month. My husband is not well,—I know it; his physician has
expressly told me that he must keep very quiet and avoid all excitement.
Nevertheless I cannot help feeling that he is untrue to me. I am so
ashamed of it that I have not yet breathed a word about my jealousy to
my husband. In fact, we are nearly always together. I know all his
affairs and I often go along wherever he goes. But I cannot hang on to
him every minute. So I hold the watch in hand and count the minutes,
even the seconds, for him to return. Always the one thought: _He is
untrue to you this very minute!_ If he goes to another office, I think
he does it because there is a pretty office girl there with whom he is
in love. If he takes a meal at a restaurant, it is because he has a
_rendezvous_. If he is a few minutes late coming home from the office,
he was with a street woman. In short, I am tormented all the time by
these evil thoughts, I struggle against them but cannot put them out of
my mind.”

“How long have you been in that state?”

“It began when he went to Franzensbad on account of his heart trouble.
There he became acquainted with a spinster, a girl 46 years of age, who
was also alone. They two got together and kept each other company. I
know the girl; she is very honorable, and when my judgment is uppermost,
I say to myself: _Nothing has happened; the two have merely felt a
temporary intellectual interest in one another._ But in my evil hours my
mind conjures up the worst thoughts. I have once read a letter which
that woman had written my husband. She thanked him for his interesting
company during the cure. A few weeks after the Franzensbad cure, there
came a box of flowers and a letter for my husband. The woman wrote
thanking him for his pleasant company during the cure,—she was very glad
to have made the acquaintance of so prominent and intellectual a
gentleman and hoped their friendship would endure beyond the time of the
cure. At that I reproached my husband and tortured him with my jealousy.
He gave me his word of honor that his relations with the woman were
strictly of a friendly and formal character; aside of his own
considerations, he was a sick man and satisfied to be left alone. But I
asked him to give up all further correspondence with the woman and he
readily consented. He is really a fine fellow who grants me everything I
want, a man who reads in my eyes every wish of mine, and I am ashamed to
think ill of him all the time.”

Here we see one source of her jealousy. The woman was married to a man
who gratified her in every respect; suddenly she had to restrict herself
to an abstinent life. The enforced abstinence suggested the thought:
_You are still young and attractive, so many men are after you! Take a
lover._ She was filled with fancies of longing and projected them unto
her husband. If he were unfaithful it would furnish an excuse for her.
She needed it; she wanted him to be unfaithful, for that would have
served her as a defense. Her compulsive thinking is the masking of the
thought: _Oh, that my husband were unfaithful so that I, too, might take
a lover!_

The thought was suggested to her by the fact that the wife of one of her
husband’s colleagues, a very light-minded person, was able,
nevertheless, to keep up a very handsome social position. She spoke with
great feeling about that woman.

“Does that woman not take loyalty so seriously as you do?”

“That woman? She does not have one lover; she has six at a time, and
even more! She certainly enjoys life. And the lovers pay for everything.
She has the finest wardrobe, the prettiest hats, takes wonderful
journeys and her husband knows everything.”

“Isn’t her husband jealous?”

“Oh, no! He knows everything, and consoles himself in his own way. But,
do you know the curious part of it all? That flighty woman is jealous of
her husband! She quarrels bitterly with him when she hears of his
escapades, although she has no right. The two have taken reciprocal
freedom....”

This is also a common occurrence and very interesting. Married couples
living apart, each carrying on all sorts of adventures and love affairs,
yet jealous of each other, though usually they do not show it.[15] There
are persons who love each other very warmly, but in the struggle between
the sexes they regard loyalty as submissiveness, as a humbling before
the partner, and they would perish rather than submit to such a
love.[16]

Her calculating friend is a sophisticated woman possessing wonderful
tact, she tastes all forms of pleasure, plays a certain social rôle, and
enjoys every phase of life. Moreover she is a very attractive woman
appealing strongly to our jealous subject.

Back of her jealous thoughts, again, there stand homosexual fancies. At
the time when her husband began to restrict his marital indulgences her
homosexual longing began to assert itself. She did not want to be
unfaithful. She was thus inhibited against taking up a man. Therefore
her thoughts could only turn to woman. Her inner reflection was: _If I
were a man, I would enjoy a pretty woman every little while and more
particularly that flighty friend whom I like so well._

The flighty woman had roused every feeling in her. Not only her
homosexuality, but also all those prostituting tendencies which either
slumber deeply hidden in every woman’s soul or break to surface before
self and before the whole world. To be paid for the service of love, to
receive actual coin in recognition of her sexual charm—that is a fancy
looming up under various cover-symptoms among the neurotics.

That polygamic friend of hers achieved everything that a woman may wish,
and in spite of that she maintained her good social standing. She moved
in a select circle, folks merely shutting one eye so long as she was so
clever in covering her tracks.

That example is constantly before her eyes. She herself is sexually
ungratified, financially she can hardly make both ends meet, and she
sees the other woman getting everything she needs: money and love. The
question, Does it pay to be honest? continually recurs to her mind.

She unburdens herself of a mass of similar reflections but does not
think that the real cause of her jealousy depends on herself. She is
jealous also of the servant girl, the man-servant, and the children. She
is even jealous of her male friends. She has a certain good friend whom
she put in touch, so to speak, with a woman friend because he did not
mean anything to her. Since that time he has been keeping up a close
acquaintance with that woman and she is very jealous; she would like to
get him away from her and to have him entirely to herself. She cannot
bear to see a child familiar with other persons and is wild even when
the servant girl receives a letter or a show post card through the mail.
_It is the perseverance of the instinct of possession on account of
diminished sexual gratification._ She is reduced, so to speak, to small
rations and therefore wants to accumulate and reserve for herself
everything the environment yields in the form of love. The little she
has she wants to preserve for herself only and to protect as her own
exclusive possession. The same attitude is seen on the part of children
who have a favorite older brother or sister. They are extremely jealous
of their trifling possessions and are enraged when the other children in
the house attempt to touch their toys. The others may have more, but
what little they possess they want to preserve exclusively for
themselves.

The subject thus tells about her jealousy of everything and everybody.
But she displays but little understanding of psychic relationships, she
is afraid to come to me because while at my office she cannot watch her
husband, and stays away a few days. It seems as if she had something
important to tell me but does not quite find the courage to do so.

Soon she calls at my office again complaining that her jealousy grows
worse; she suffered terribly that day, and all through the previous
night she had hardly closed her eyes. And presently she confesses that
the jealousy actually began after the death of her mother.

“Do you know—dear doctor—my mother was the model of a noble woman. She
was virtuous, diligent, well educated, sweet tempered, a veritable angel
in human form. In spite of it all—I don’t know why—I was more strongly
attached to father. Possibly because he played more with us and paid
more attention to our games and excursions while mother was more strict
in her training and careful to inculcate in us a sense of orderliness.
Mother died of a painful growth. I said to myself: ‘Now you must take
mother’s place with father. You must take care of him.’ Father was
already 62 years of age, and suffered occasionally of gouty attacks. I
was tremendously shocked to see my father put aside mourning after a few
weeks and change into an elegant man-about-town,—he the respectable town
official, who had never before gone a step without mother.... He started
to frequent nightly disreputable dives and I soon heard that he was
having relations with various disreputable women of the town. I was so
disconsolate, in my anguish I visited daily mother’s grave. There I
threw myself to the ground and out of the bitterness of my heart I
implored mother and prayed to her. ‘Mother,’ I cried, ‘you must not let
this go on, you must not allow your good name and honor to be dragged
down that way. Mother, put an end to these shameful doings. Make father
so ill that he shall be unable to sin any more and besmirch your
memory.’ Thus I implored and prayed. But it did not do any good. Soon I
observed that father was intimate with our young servant girl and that
she was trying to get hold of his money. I drove her out of the house
with the aid of the police because I discovered that she was stealing
money from father. O, I was like a fury and irreconcilable because the
honor of my mother was at stake, and I had ceased to respect my father
who had been the dearest person in the world to me! After that I had
peace for a few weeks because father suffered one of his gout attacks. I
prayed to God and to the virgin mother to keep father confined to his
bed so that he should be able no longer to add to his sins. But father
got well soon and resumed his former care-free nocturnal rounds of
amusement places. Chorus girls, dancers, street women and others of that
ilk gathered at our house and were lavishly entertained. Then one day I
heard that father intended to marry again. He had become engaged to a
42-year-old widow. I knew at once that the woman had her eye on father’s
money. _I bought a revolver and, I tell you frankly: I should have
killed either the woman or my father if there had been any marriage.
Perhaps I would have done away with both, for I was determined to
protect mother’s memory against this insult and shame. I went to that
woman’s house and gave her such a warning that the engagement was soon
given up._ I told that shameless adventuress: ‘_You will never reach the
altar alive; that I swear solemnly on mother’s memory!_’ I was fully
determined to shoot them both. You can appreciate how excited I was.

“After that father avoided me and my sisters. But the proposed marriage
did not take place,—I had accomplished that much. I went no longer to
his house when he had suddenly a light stroke and was forced to appeal
to us children. Then we had a complete family reconciliation and since
that time I have again my father. Now I see him daily, we children take
turns in looking after him.”

“Have you no feeling of guilt and did you never think that your father
fell ill because you wished it? Did you not want him to be so crippled
and reduced to your care that he should be able no longer to carry on?”

“I don’t feel guilty and I have no regrets. Only satisfaction.... I
wished it to be that way and it has come out as I wished. For now I have
once more a father of whom I need not be ashamed. But you must not think
that I was jealous on my own account. I only felt myself the
representative of my mother.”

“You are not jealous of your sister?”

“Yes ... when father is very demonstrative with her, I feel the same
wild jealousy come over me, but I control myself....”


Here we see jealousy rising out of an incestuous wish first directed
upon a man, then transferred to the whole environment. This transference
of jealousy to every one serves more effectively to cover the genuine
jealousy of the father. The death of the mother left this young woman in
a critical position. Obviously her wish as a child was: “_When mother
dies I will marry father._” A wish which so many girls entertain and
even openly express. With the death of the mother the new situation
presented itself. A place close to father was vacated and now other
women filled it. The old father’s behavior showed that he was still a
man. But one thing stood against this fancy: her husband. So long as he
lived she could not go to live with her father. Her husband’s illness
brought matters prospectively nearer to an issue. The physician had
declared that he could not live long, his heart trouble was serious. She
might yet be free! Her agitation explains a number of peculiar dreams
she had. She dreamed repeatedly of quarreling with her husband and of
striking him. _Several times already she has beaten him up and she has
even shot him in her dreams. She is also unfair to the child, turning
against it with hatred on slightest provocation._

We see that the jealousy of the husband also has the rôle of
legitimizing a hatred which has its roots in other causes. For she
confesses that during her fits of jealousy, when she thinks that her
husband is unfaithful, she feels a bitter hatred against him and could
murder him.... The husband is in the way, her hatred corresponds to the
idea that he is a hindrance. During the night the hatred breaks forth
but during the waking hours it is rationalized as due to jealousy. For
she admits that she has really never fully loved her husband. Her
affection goes to her father. She imagines that she is fighting for the
preservation of her mother’s pure memory; that furnishes an ethical
cover and masks the true motives.

The relationship of this jealousy to homosexuality is interesting. It
furnishes an excellent proof of our findings concerning homosexuality.
One must bear in mind, first of all, that many factors contribute in
this instance to bring about the regression to the infantile level: her
husband’s serious illness, his relative impotence and abstinence, her
mother’s illness, the father’s change to a devil-may-care attitude,
showing her that one may change even in late years, and that it is never
too late fully to enjoy the fruits of love. Her homosexuality was always
ready to break forth in her. She identified herself with her father
looking at women through his eyes. She had protected herself at first by
a passionate love for her husband and minor various trivial homosexual
traits of her childhood were thus readily overcome. Her swing to
heterosexuality was very successful with the aid of her husband. Her
homosexuality was repressed, only to reappear at the beginning of the
menopause,—woman’s critical age. The involutive processes taking place
in the genital glands, and the general physical changes in woman at the
time play a certain rôle in that connection. Her husband’s impotence and
the friend’s exciting example of her attractive friend, with whom she
herself was secretly in love, again roused her homosexual feelings,
though the attitude showed itself only under the guise of jealousy. But
the father’s conduct, since her father was the deepest cause of her
aversion against man, was what really made her lose her balance. She
might have become an _urlind_, had her father remained the old, kindly,
bland and quiet gentleman. But since he abandoned the mask after the
death of the mother, he roused all the daughter’s evil instincts. Not
only the infantile erotic predisposition but the infantile criminal
tendencies as well. In her dreams she murdered her husband who prevented
her from turning entirely to her father and fulfill an infantile wish to
become her father’s wife. She also repeatedly killed the children and
her beloved friends. This woman during her critical period displayed not
only the craving for love but also the aboriginal emotion, the
primordial stuff, out of which everything beautiful and great has
evolved: hatred.

Hatred against the other sex and against her rivals, hatred against the
children whom she could have killed when anger seized her soul....


74. This is the case of a 30-year-old woman, victim of a remarkable form
of jealousy. She is jealous of her home, watching over it like one might
watch and protect a beloved. She has an older sister who has been
married for five years past and lives outside Vienna. That sister was
more to her than her mother or any other friend. She looked upon her as
a second mother, confided all her secrets in her and allowed herself to
be guided and advised by her at every step. She was supremely happy in
her companionship and desired nothing better. She loved only that one
sister,—towards the other members of the family she was more or less
indifferent. Suddenly the family decided to marry off that sister and an
aunt brought a suitor to the house. She found that suitor ridiculous,
unsuitable for the sister, and fought with all her limited powers
against the match. But the mother showed the greatest eagerness for an
early marriage. Then it happened that the girl awoke suddenly in the
night. Like a thunder a terrible thought flashed through her mind: “_You
must do away with your mother!_” (It was the last desperate soul cry in
the attempt to hold on forever to her sister. The mother was the
original cause of her misfortune. She could not live without the
sister.) The thought so shocked her, the subsequent regrets over it kept
her in a very depressed mood. She developed a severe neurosis,
consisting chiefly of a series of punishments and expiations to which
she deliberately subjected herself. And shortly after that she developed
her jealousy of the home. Her sister lived outside Vienna at a small
place in Hungary and occasionally came to Vienna. It was natural that
she should find a place in the comfortable old home of seven rooms which
the family occupied alone. But the girl could not tolerate the sister’s
presence in the house. She became depressed, began to cry, found that
the furniture was being abused and ruined, could not sleep nights, and
daily asked her sister: “How long are you going to stay in town?” so
that the sister cut her visit as short as possible.

This went on for several years. Year after year the sister brought a new
baby into the world and she could not tolerate her sister’s children in
the old home. Every time a visit with the children made her so seriously
ill that finally the mother begged the sister to find some other rooming
place. The children were hardly tolerated in the house; they had to be
kept in one certain room. The girl was always afraid that something in
the house would be ruined. That this was not jealousy of her mother is
shown by the fact that it did not affect her to have the mother visit
the sister. In fact she joined the mother readily on such visits and
behaved very pleasantly and quietly at her sister’s. Only when it was a
question of the old home she became a storming avenging angel. Naturally
she also wanted to have her mother to herself. Her boundless jealousy of
the sister had apparently disappeared altogether and had switched over
to the old home where the two had been once so supremely happy. Thoughts
of hatred against the sister’s children and phantasies about doing away
with them, also occurred. She thought of a subtle poison that could be
given with the food in her home. Perhaps she feared the presence of her
sister and sister’s children in the house for that very reason and the
fear may have been a protection against her criminal tendencies.

She had loved truly but one person: her sister. The latter was
everything in the world to her. She called her the second mother, her
friend, her beloved. Her first thought when she awoke in the morning was
of her sister, the endeavor to please her filled her life, and the last
thing she did before going to bed was to offer a prayer for her sister.
She was good and upright because she loved her sister and because she
felt happy that her sister gave all her spare time up to her. She was
trained by her, they went on walks together, her sister trained her
heart. She was supremely happy and wished nothing more than always so to
live beside her sister.

Then came the engagement and her sister’s marriage. Her heart bled at
that terrible act of treason and her feelings hardened. She hated
everything, she was against the whole world: against the mother who
instigated the match, against the other sisters, who had also favored
it, against the brothers who did not oppose it. Only an old nurse woman
who had always stood by her and was her staff of support, exceptionally
escaped her hatred remaining a sort of solitary ray of affection. But
the house was filled with memories of the beloved sister. The pieces of
furniture were mute but eloquent witnesses of her former happy love
state. They should not be profaned by the presence of the unfaithful,
changed sister! She hated the children, wishing they were dead and at
the same time she was afraid she might hurt them. Two souls struggled in
her breast: one a criminal, the other ethical. The sight of the children
was repulsive to her. They bore the traits of the sister and of the man
who had stolen her away.

Her whole possessions consisted now of her memory and the household
goods, the old rooms furnished the necessary real background for her
phantasies. “Memory is the only paradise from which we cannot be driven
out,” said _Jean Paul_. Her residence became to her a temple of memory,
a sanctuary where every piece of furniture recalled the past happiness
in which she still projected herself. For her days passed in dreaming
and weaving of fancies. She idled away sweet hours and days continually
dreaming only of her sister. Criminal fancies of poisoning all the
others finally led her, by way of punishment, to fear poisoning. She
quit eating anything at the table, as she formerly did. She suspected
poison in every food. She began to vomit after her meals. She kept away
from everybody except one woman friend who stuck to her faithfully and
who shared her revulsion of feeling against the sister. She lived
continually in fear she might kill her mother because the imperative
(kill her!) kept cropping up all the time. She avoided men. All attempts
to interest her in some man eventually to get her married off proved
fruitless....

The home was her temple which must not be soiled. All her devotion and
her affection were centered daily on that spot.

The case approaches closely the realm of psychosis.

After a course of psychoanalysis lasting about one half year she
improved a great deal. She was able to tolerate her sister’s visits, was
free of the obsessive thought of killing her mother, was again able to
eat any food and her “nervous” vomiting ceased altogether. A very
favorable offer of marriage she rejected. She still avoided men as
resolutely as ever.

We turn to the next case.


75. Mr. R. T., a well-known poet, only 31 years of age, is also a victim
of morbid jealousy and has already experienced very serious conflicts on
that account. He was always fixed on his family and lived exclusively
for his parents and other members of the immediate family circle. He
clung particularly to the mother, with worshipful affection. At 18 years
of age he began to fall in love with all his friends’ “girls.” He even
fell in love with a street woman whom his best friend often visited.
Already at that time he showed a strong jealous streak and he asked that
woman to give up her unfortunate way of living. (That is a typical
experience with young fellows who are fixed on the mother. They seek out
a polar obverse to their mother’s character and associate with that
person a fancy of being the savior. The savior phantasy covers,
according to my investigation, merely the wish to save one’s self....)
He was soon through with this love affair, although it had broken out
with great passion, and had to leave Berlin because he could not get
along with his parents. He always quarreled with his mother and that
interfered with his creative work.

Meanwhile he became very famous and was earning a very comfortable
income. He fell into the habit of spending his nights at restaurants and
other amusement places in the company of friends and of returning home
in the early morning hours. He woke up at noon and wrote a few hours
during the afternoon,—that was his only work.

At a certain cabaret he became acquainted with a girl who was in charge
of the bar. She was 35 years of age at the time, but gave her age as 28,
and in fact looked much younger than she was. He began having relations
with that girl, looking upon the affair as a trivial adventure, at
first. He knew that she was being supported by a Count but this did not
prevent him from allowing her to choose him for her “heart love.” He was
tremendously flattered that this girl, or perhaps we would better say,
this woman, preferred him to all others and loved him so
disinterestedly. His affection grew daily, also her love for him. She
finally gave up her Count and told our young man that she loved him
only, and would never again give herself to any other man. It made him
very happy; they rented lodgings together. But soon he requested her to
give up her position at the bar, because there she came into too close
contact with men. She did that very willingly. Before they had taken up
lodgings together he had asked her to give him a complete history of her
past life. She told him a very romantic life history and mentioned four
men who had had sexual relations with her. (As a matter of fact dozens
of men had cohabited with her.)

He was madly jealous of these men. She had to repeat to him the story of
her past over and over, then he became angry, also sexually very
excited, figured how he would revenge himself on his rivals, how he
would beat them, box their ears or shoot them down in a duel or cut them
up with his sword; his rage against the unfortunate woman grew all the
time, he scolded her, called her every bad name, threatened to leave her
at once, struck her, and in the end had intercourse with her,
experiencing powerful orgasm.

Before long he began to be troubled with the uncertainty whether she had
told the whole truth. He investigated her past, looking up questionable
episodes. A detective was engaged to watch her during his absence and to
look up her past. The fellow quickly picked up the gossip of the
neighborhood and reported the talk as true. Besides the adventures
frankly confessed to him a number of other liaisons were traced, which
the woman had failed to mention. She also had to admit that she was
older than she had held herself out to be.

There followed years of terrible torture and continual torture. First
thing in the morning he began to wonder who else among his acquaintances
or among strangers may have possessed the woman. He questioned her
persistently, his rage growing, he made her take a solemn oath, then he
struck her and tried to extract from her a forced confession. In vain
she implored him, begging him to realize that she was not responsible
for her past, that she did not know him at the time, that she was but a
child when she already had to support the whole household and a sick
mother; nothing helped, he was implacable.

When his investigations led accidentally to the discovery of another man
who had not previously figured in the list of her adventures he threw a
glass at her head and hurt her so seriously that she was ill several
weeks. He sought quarrels with her former sweethearts and challenged
them on the least provocation, wounding several in duel, as he was an
excellent duellist.

Finally the lovers separated. The woman could stand it no longer and
threatened to take her life. But, in a few weeks she fell ill and had
him called to her sick bed. Another time the reverse occurred. In
short—the pair could not keep away from each other. It was the last
love of this woman who had lost her early first charms. Through this
love she hoped to save herself and either marry or attain the
quasi-respectability of a similar state. But he had entered this
relationship lightly as he had done in similar cases and he now
suddenly found himself entangled in a tight net which isolated him
from the world. For he did not dare to go out with her. He always had
the unpleasant thought he might meet one of her former lovers,—he even
watched the faces of all passers-by to see whether they did not laugh
at him.

He had a friend who was very devoted to him. That friend hated his
partner, because she had robbed him of his best friend. That friend was
his complete slave. He became the poor woman’s guardian. But the friend
had a peculiar passion. He desired to possess all women who belonged to
his friends. (This is a transparent homosexual mask as I have already
pointed out in the present work.) Therefore he made love also to this
woman, who planned her revenge by apparently accepting his advances and
when she had in her hands proofs of the fellow’s intention, she turned
the proofs over to her beloved. A terrible scene ensued, including
revolver shots, but fortunately no one was hurt.

Next he began to torment the woman regarding her relations with that
friend. He obviously looked for an excuse to break with her, and
solemnly resolved to leave her for good if he should discover the least
thing out of the way in her conduct. But she was so cowed by his snares
that she did not dare to go out on the street alone....

The motives of his conduct are clear. We have here a pronounced case of
homosexuality manifesting itself as jealousy of other men. The thought
that this or that other man had possessed her is precisely what
constituted the woman’s highest charm in his eyes. When the man declares
that he would have been happy if he could have met this woman in her
virgin purity, he is mistaken. He will always seek the street walker,
the disreputable woman. She is the more charming because she is older
than he. For he is longing for the mother _Imago_ and therefore he is
most happy, too, when she mothers him. Like most homosexuals he is
strongly attached to the mother. But unlike the overt homosexuals he has
not carried out his flight all the way to the male, but has fled,
instead, to the _puella publica_, the dishonored woman....

He would like to get rid of this woman. But he has become more deeply
enmeshed with her through his feeling of guilt on account of the wound
he had caused her and which had left an ugly scar on her face. Since he
wishes she were dead in order to be free of her, his conscience
indissolubly binds him tenfold to his victim. His criminal fancies
center continually on the poor tortured woman and her former lovers.
Under the mask of his jealousy he gives free rein to his criminal
fancies. In addition, like most artists he is very superstitious and
believes that the woman had brought him good luck. Since he has her, he
has created his best work and under the inspiration of the strong
excitement, he has achieved his best results. It thus seems that the
relationship is fixed for life and he may never be able to give it
up....

Naturally there are also other forms of jealousy. But when it appears in
this pathologic form, it is never difficult to trace the homosexual
factor and with it the criminal tendencies back of it. The last case
given above is particularly convincing and the friend’s behavior very
characteristic.

Our subject feels impelled to think of the woman’s lovers driven thereto
by his homosexual longing. He thinks of them in a roundabout way, so to
speak, through and around the woman. Jealousy enables him to dwell on
the picture of the naked man; he thinks of the _phallus_ of his rival,
compares it with his own; he drinks in the bliss which his beloved must
have tasted through another man; he places himself entirely in the
woman’s rôle, so that, in his fancy, he is the woman. He hates the woman
in himself and transfers that hatred upon his second self, his beloved.
He hates the woman also because she cannot successfully substitute the
man for him. Before that liaison he spent his nights in cafès and wine
rooms in the exclusive company of men. He no longer does that. He does
not leave his beloved alone any more, thus lacking the excitation of
manly company. He tortures his mother as he does his beloved whenever he
goes home for a few days. He loves her so dearly that he cannot live
through a day without calling her up from Vienna all the way to Berlin,
where she lives, to talk to her. If he is somewhere where he cannot be
reached by telephone his mother must wire him daily. It is very
interesting how this love of the mother covers the deeper love of the
father. He plays the love of his mother as his trump card against the
father. He flees from the sexual love of the father, while yet he has
been repeatedly conscious of his incest phantasies towards the mother.
He always adds to his mother _Imago_ some kind of a father. He was most
jealous of an attorney, already grey haired and a married man, who
therefore stood as a symbol of the father. He has even gone so far as to
look up that man to demand an explanation from him, thereby making
himself ridiculous. His jealousy was particularly suitable as a means
for his latent sadism to become manifest. It enabled him to dwell on
bloodcurdling phantasies, it made it reasonable for him to injure his
beloved sweetheart, and to justify that insane deed as due to excess of
love. The analysis brought about a distinct improvement in the
situation. He joined again his comrades at the public houses and peace
was seldom disturbed after that.

How difficult it is at times to ferret out the homosexual root of
jealousy in such situations is shown by the next case, in which jealousy
is again masked before the subject’s consciousness.


76. Miss K. N. consults me for a peculiar trouble about her sleep. She
is extremely sensitive to noise. She lives with her sister who keeps a
very small apartment where one little room is rented to a gentleman. Her
nervousness consists of uncontrollable reflections, as soon as evening
begins, about the lodger’s return home. If he returns and goes to sleep
early, she herself is soon quiet and sleeps well through the night. But
if he is away, she cannot sleep. She may fall into slumber but sleeps so
lightly that she is awake at the least noise until she hears the lodger
return at last to his room. Then a terrible feeling of dread comes over
her and her heart begins to beat fast. Other noises also seem to disturb
her. The house in which she lives is near a railroad track. But the
trains do not disturb her, nor the electric cars. But voices in the next
room, and the sound of steps on the floor above, keep her awake.

One would suppose that she wishes the lodger would come to her and is
afraid of that. But she insists that the gentleman is indifferent to
her, she would not kiss him if he gave her millions in money for it. She
is an unlucky person. She will undoubtedly have to give up her sister’s
lodging. She has already had a similar experience. She was the mother’s
favorite, petted and fondled in every way. Her mother had a stroke of
paralysis and lost consciousness. After she came to herself, she clung
to the delusion that her favorite child had turned untrue to her and
began terribly to torture the poor child.[17] She reproached her with
occurrences wholly imaginary, scolded her as being cold, selfish and
indifferent. The girl could do nothing and finally had to leave the
house and go to live with strangers. She returned home only after the
death of the mother. Meanwhile the father had also passed away. The two
girls remained alone in the world and now only had each other. But
things were at sixes and sevens between them and they seldom had a quiet
hour between themselves.

At last the sister became actually abusive. She begged her sister “with
uplifted hands” to dismiss the lodger. She was willing to cover the room
rent out of her own pocket. She could not stand it any longer. She could
not sleep nights and was going physically and mentally to pieces. But
the sister became wild and started to scold her, using the same terrible
terms which she had heard her mother hurl at her. They rushed at each
other’s hair. She was so enraged she could have strangled her sister at
the time.

After that scene she came again to me in despair. I advised her to move
out. She cannot have everything her way and she must have quiet. But
what was her answer.

“That I cannot do. I cannot.”

“Why not? Does not your sister let you?”

“Oh no, it isn’t that ... only yesterday sister said to me: ‘Move out. I
will cherish the day when I will get rid of you.’”

“And you stand for that?”

“I cannot move out because....”

“You are in love with your sister and cannot live without her.”

“That’s it. I cannot live without sister and even her scoldings and her
angry words I will put up with rather than stand a day without seeing
her.”

“Still you will have to do it.... The conditions are unhealthy.”

“Yes.... Only yesterday I said to sister: ‘_I am going to move out and
you can keep your rooms and do with your lodger whatever you want. I
won’t protect you any more._’”

Thus it came out clearly that she was watching every night, whether the
lodger was going to the sister and that she dreaded moving out because
she knew that the sister would then be alone with the lodger in the
house and he could go to her every night. I made this clear to her but
she did not seem to see it at first. She admitted her homosexual love
for the sister....

She moved to other quarters. It was a quiet little room over a garden in
the home of an elderly woman living alone. But here also she could not
sleep. The old woman snored and she could not stand that. Then the
ticking of a clock disturbed her continually and kept her from falling
asleep, the striking of the hours even waking her up. She thus
continually sought everywhere for the reasons of her unrest which were
only in herself. The palpitation of her heart (symbolic substitute for
it: the clock) gave her no peace. She looked for other quarters, kept
looking and looking but found no place so satisfactory and quiet as the
sister’s lodging. She went there every evening returning to her outside
lodgings late in the night. She took advantage of a light illness of her
sister’s as an excuse and returned to her little room, again shivering
with dread whenever the lodger was late coming home. Even after she
chose for herself a lover who gave her complete sexual gratification her
quiet was temporary. The heterosexual component of her instincts drove
her more and more to her lover trying to forget her sister in his arms.
But she succeeded only intermittently and her thoughts kept revolving
again and again between her sister and that lodger. Finally her sister
gave in and the lodger had to move. An elderly young woman became the
new lodger. Then she quieted down and was able to sleep once more.

It is interesting that nearly all narcotic drugs not only proved useless
but made her worse. She did not want to sleep so as to keep watch over
her sister’s virtue.

As in all the cases previously mentioned, here, too, developments led to
overt attitudes, the subject stood on the brink of criminal passional
deeds. Hatred and love showed intimate relationships. She was also
afraid of murderers, barricaded the doors and shivered at every little
noise. That was the fear of her own criminal thoughts. Her infantile
criminal tendencies arose with her infantile love for the sister.

This case, like the former, illustrates the inner relations between
jealousy, homosexuality and sadism. For during her fits of anger she
entertained terrible thoughts of revenge. She thought of burning down
the home; of killing her sister, as well as herself, by turning on the
gas in the room; she tried to secure a revolver, supposedly as a
protection against thieves. Her dreams show a criminal personality in
sharp contrast to her customary mild character. Emotionally the criminal
in her was much more powerful than her cultural self, she could have
assaulted her sister and once actually drew a knife. After such
emotional outbreaks she crumpled and became again the quiet, soft girl,
beloved of everybody on account of her good nature.




                                   IV

  JEALOUSY AND PARANOIA—JEALOUSY AS PROJECTION OF ONE’S OWN
      INADEQUACY—FREUD’S RESEARCHES ON PARANOIA—THE INVESTIGATIONS OF
      JULIUSBURGER—THE JEALOUSY OF A PARANOIAC—JEALOUSY DELUSION OF A
      MERCHANT—JEALOUSY AND ALCOHOLISM—THE EVOLUTION OF MANKIND FROM
      BISEXUALITY TO MONOSEXUALITY—METAMORPHOSIS SEXUALIS PARANOICA—THE
      MONOTHEISM OF SEXUALITY—JEALOUSY AND CRIMINALITY.


_Die Eifersucht wird immer mit der Liebe geboren aber stirbt nicht immer
mit ihr._

                                                    —_La Rochefoucauld._




                                   IV

_Jealousy always arises with love but does not always die out with it._

                                                    —_La Rochefoucauld._


It is very striking that the feeling of jealousy breaks through all the
barriers of culture. Extraordinarily frequent are suspicions of
incest,[18] of homosexuality, of masturbation, and zoöphily. Women
accuse their husbands of relations with their daughter; or they accuse
the man of homosexual relations with a friend. Men bring similar
accusations against their wives. All such accusations are projections of
subjective sexual tendencies upon the object of their jealousy.
_Beaussart_ (_La Jalousie; Annales Psychiques_, vol. LXXI, 1913), who
maintains erroneously that morbid jealousy is more frequent among men
than among women, brings out very strongly this peculiarity of jealousy
and bases it on the absence of true motivation. But the motivation is
transparent enough. Among the cases reported by him I note that of a
75-year-old woman who tortured her husband to death with her groundless
jealousy and who, in a rage, one day, attacked him with a razor.
Jealousy is clearly a rationalization of hatred, it harks back to the
primary egoistic attitude of the aboriginal man. The phyletic raw
sexuality and criminality corresponds to man’s primary ontogenetic
attitude towards his environment.

Other jealous persons see their criminal tendencies reflected in the
surroundings. A jealous person has the hallucination that the supposed
lover of his wife intends to knife him. In this manner the killing of
the lover looms up as a logical necessity. Whereas men make use of
swords, revolvers, whips, tortures and shackles, woman’s criminality
breaks out in such jealousy acts as anonymous letters, libel, poisoning,
castration and throwing of acid (_Beaussart_).

In many cases the barrier between jealousy and insanity, between
neurosis and psychosis, is hardly to be distinguished. Often jealousy is
the first symptom of paranoia.

The next two cases have also pronounced paranoiac features. We are
indebted to _Freud_ for his significant contributions to our
understanding of the nature of paranoia, or _paraphrenia_, as _Freud_
terms the condition. In his fundamental contribution, _Psychoanalytische
Bemerkungen über einen autobiographisch beschriebenen Fall von Paranoia_
(_Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre_, 3rd ed., Franz
Deuticke, Leipzig and Vienna, 1913), he has shown that paranoiac
insanity is traceable back to the repressed homosexual components of the
sexual instinct. The persecution ideas of paranoiacs (by men) is the
projection outward of their own thoughts. The subject is pursued by his
own homosexual phantasies and out of those fancies he constructs his
notion of a pursuer. Love is transmuted by the subject into its bipolar
opposite, hatred. _Freud_ states on this point:

“‘I do not love him, in fact I hate him.’ This contrary attitude, which
cannot mean anything else in the unconscious does not assume that form
in the paranoiac’s consciousness. The mechanism governing the formation
of symptoms in paranoia requires that the inner apperception,—the
feeling of subjection,—should be replaced by some perception from
without. The proposition: ‘in fact I hate him,’ is thus changed through
projection into another: ‘he hates (pursues) me which consequently
justifies me in hating him.’ The unconscious feeling-motive thus appears
as though it were an objective perception, a deduction:

“‘_I do not love him, in fact I hate him, because he pursues me._’”

Observation leaves no doubt that the pursuer is none other than the
formerly beloved person.

_Freud_ here overlooks entirely the relations of paranoia to
criminality. Having persistently overlooked thus far the tremendous
significance of latent criminality in the psychogenesis of neurosis and
having emphasized only the sexual factors underlying all psychotic and
nervous manifestations, he neglects here also the important rôle of
criminality in the dynamics of paranoia. That is the reason why his
explanation does not fit all cases. For there is also a paranoia which
stands for a flight from criminality, even representing a
rationalization of criminal tendencies without any homosexuality. Such
cases are exceptional but they do occur. The fear of insanity which
oppresses so many neurotics, involves as a polar component the wish to
lose one’s mind. For the insane is responsible neither to himself nor
before the law. “He cannot help it.” That is why paranoiac conditions
break out so often with the commission of some crime. On the other hand
the paranoiac turns insane as a defence against committing a crime. We
shall yet find that isolation in an asylum for the insane corresponds
with many a victim’s hidden wish, because there they find peace of mind
and security.

The jealousy of paranoia like every other form of jealousy is an
expression of rage. But _it serves to rationalize the anger and lends
force as well as a measure of emotional justification to the criminal
impulse_. Many crimes of passion, so-called, are caused by the passion
for crime. We have as yet penetrated but little through the mask which
covers the inner criminal. We are still too anxiously concerned with the
superficial motivations which bring about sadism to find the path
leading towards the fundamental fact. The best measure of culture is the
manner in which the man’s primordial character manifests itself in us,
our conscious conduct. That is why the advancement of culture is bound
to lead to an increase of insanity in the proportion that the jails are
emptied.

I must again point out that _Juliusburger_ was the first to recognize
and describe clearly these relations. In fact the credit of having
discovered the relations between homosexuality and paranoia belongs to
him. In his work entitled, “_Die Homosexualität im Vorentwurf zu einem
deutschen Strafgesetzbuch_” (_Allgemeine Zeitschrift f. Psychiatrie_,
1911), he already stated:

“Furthermore we find in the insane the well-known delusion of
persecution and its motive is often derived from homosexuality inasmuch
as the patients complain that they are pursued with homosexual intent,
of which they themselves disclaim any guilt. Or, in their morbid state
of mind, they believe themselves victims of persecution because it is
proposed that they should be driven into the alleged ranks of
homosexuals, something they resent most scornfully. In both cases we see
a peculiar psychic process which must be conceived as a projection to
the surroundings, to the world of external reality, of unconscious
subjective notions. When an individual breaks down mentally complaining
to be a victim of watchfulness and persecution for alleged homosexual
purposes, the condition may be explained only in the sense that the
individual in question actually harbors within himself a powerful
homosexual tendency and the latter is projected unto the world of
external reality through a peculiar mental mechanism. The old
proposition: _ex nihilo nihil fit_ holds true also of the mental sphere
and it would be utterly unscientific to fail to recognize in this sphere
as well the law of strict causality or motivation. A careful examination
of the mental life of our insane man’s unconscious shows that
homosexuality is a powerful motive force much more frequently than is
ordinarily recognized and this attempt to turn the unconscious
subjective feeling of homosexuality into an objective reality,
constitutes a pathway for the release of inner psychic tension, so a
means for the individual to escape the feeling of guilt roused by his
erroneous perception of facts and to pass the responsibility onto other
shoulders. Many of the insane notions of our patients become
intelligible and we grasp their meaning only when we recognize the
powerful rôle which homosexuality plays in man’s unconscious.”

_Juliusburger_ also recognizes the significance of sadism and its
tremendous rôle in the psychogenesis of the delusion of jealousy. In his
contribution referred to previously, “_Zur Psychologie des
Alkoholismus_” (_Zentralblatt f. Psychoanalyse_, Vol. III, 1913), he
makes the following relevant observations:

“I agree with _Freud_ that the homosexual or homopsychic component of
man and woman finds one of its outlets, as sublimation, in the form of
companionship and social drinking. But thus far I remain unconvinced
that homosexuality or its psychic substitute plays also a similar rôle
in the pathogenesis of the delusion of jealousy. Therefore I still
adhere to the view expressed by my colleague, _Hans Oppenheim_, in his
contribution, “_Zur Frage der Genese des Eifersuchtswahns_” (published
in: _Zentralblatt f. Psychoanalyse_, 1911). As formerly I still regard
the sadistic-masochistic instinctive cravings as the strongest root of
the delusion of jealousy. I found particularly instructive a certain
case in which sadism broke forth in a jealous drinker more quickly than
I had ever seen that happen before. This man’s sadism manifested itself
concurrently in an incredible cruelty to dogs which could be only
explained by his sadism. The oft-recorded fact that the jealous drinker
is not satisfied and does not release his victim even after the latter,
in an attempt to quiet him, submits to some disgusting act, the
continual repetition by him of tortures and cruelties, may be explained
only as due to a deeply rooted sadistic impulse everlastingly craving
gratification. The delusion of jealousy is rooted in sadism, the
overstressed images accompanying the morbid feeling of jealousy are
generated by the sadistic tendency. Sadism is the fertile soil giving
rise to the delusions of persecution of the jealous alcoholics, and
intimately linked with sadism stands masochism, upon which the feeling
of jealousy feeds and grows.”

“Besides the sadistic-masochistic components the pathogenesis of the
delusion of jealousy displays also the transposition of a certain
feeling of guilt. In my cases at least it was easy to prove that the
jealous drinker who forces his wife to commit some punishable offence,
is himself inclined to carry out the incriminating acts and controls
himself only with difficulty. I found a similar situation in the case of
women, victims of delusions of jealousy. The more or less conscious
projection of their feeling of guilt upon the partner brings on mental
release and a certain sense of freedom, and at the same time furnishes
new fuel for the sadistic impulse. Finally for the explanation of the
delusion of jealousy we must take into consideration also another factor
which may be explained on the basis of atavism. We shall see later that
certain atavistic reminiscences play a great rôle in the psychology of
alcoholism. The will to power, the yearning to dominate and subdue woman
still lies dormant in man’s soul,—a remnant from old. The soul of the
alcoholic is particularly prolific in atavistic remnants which show
themselves upon close analysis and, besides, the chronic intoxication
rouses the _dormant atavistic trends_ which lie dormant at the bottom of
the soul and brings them to surface. The aboriginal tyrannical self
awakens in the drinker and flays a controlling whip over the cowering
woman; in the case of female victims of the delusion of jealousy the
reverse happens and the primordial matriarchal instinct becomes
manifest. We learn progressively to see and appreciate how atavistic
remnants break to the surface in the psyche of the insane.”

That conception of jealousy as the “projection upon the surroundings of
a subjective feeling of inadequacy” was at one time my starting point in
my characterological investigations of jealousy. But I soon learned that
the problem is much more complicated. When I found that the neurotics
represent regressive stages of development, I conceived jealousy to be a
primitive feeling of hatred, characteristic of man in his primordial
state. Paranoia discloses the primary tendencies which are glossed over
by our cultural development. One’s true character betrays itself in
one’s emotions. Jealousy shows us the true inner man in all his
passionate cravings and his hidden desires.

The next case illustrates all the characteristic features: the delusion
of persecution, the morbid jealousy and the brutal sadism. There is no
insight into the condition. The feeling of jealousy is adjudged as
justified. Ridiculous incidents are held forth as grounds for suspicion
in order to remove from self the sense of guilt. All the alleged
“persecutions,” which are looked upon as dangerous, lack any objective
grounds. Often sadism breaks through, though under the guise of
emotional paralogisms.


77. Mr. A. W., a manufacturer, 29 years of age, consults me for anxiety,
a condition which has already plunged him into very unpleasant
situations. His anxiety broke out in Tyrol the first time. He wanted to
meet a certain party and asked his landlord for directions. The latter
conducted him personally over the road, which was a very rough and badly
neglected one. Suddenly the man saw in front of him some
suspicious-looking persons. But he controlled himself, although he
surmised they were tramps if not a gang of highwaymen. Next he saw a
number of men on the hill hurrying in his direction. At that he broke
into a run, and kept running as fast as he could. A shot rang out in the
distance, intended for him.... He reached the valley, out of breath, and
reported the occurrence to the officer. The latter shook his head and
did not even care to question the landlord, who explained that he had
merely conducted the gentleman through a short cut in the road which is
also used by hunters. That short cut leads to the next broad highway.
But A. insisted that all was not well and that an attempt had been made
to hold him up. The officer said that in his 30-year experience such a
thing had never happened in that locality. But A. remained unconvinced
and to this day he believes that he had narrowly escaped a hold-up. That
might be thought possibly true if the occurrence stood alone. But he had
very many such experiences. During a journey through Sweden he saw the
hotel proprietor talk in subdued tones in Swedish with a number of
guests who thereupon stared at him queerly. There was no key to his room
and the room could not be locked. He could not sleep and kept peering
through the window. Then he saw a number of queer fellows foregathering
in the hall. He could not stay longer in that house. The owner told him
that as he had engaged the room he would have to keep it. They could not
come to an understanding. He saw an officer passing by and called upon
the representative of law to help him extricate himself. The officer
knew a few German words, he stepped in, and they went to the police
station together, and there a record was made of his remarkable
adventures. He left his lodgings a third time on similar grounds. On his
excursions he always carries a revolver and that gives him a certain
sense of security.

It is easy to diagnose this as a case of paranoia. The absence of
insight after the emotional episodes shows the psychotic character of
the trouble. A victim of anxiety neurosis may have similar experiences.
But afterwards, perhaps only a few hours after the occurrence, he says
to himself: “It was nonsense,” and is ashamed to speak of it later. But
this man dwells on his adventures trying to convince me of the dangers
he has gone through.

The notion of being watched and pursued is a product of his homosexual
leaning which he is unable to control. We inquire into his personal
habits and past life and find that his mother died when he was very
young and his father assumed also the place of a mother to him. With his
father he maintained a sort of “spiritual marriage” relationship up to a
few months ago. They always went out together, never one without the
other, and they slept in one room. The latter habit was but seldom
broken by the presence of friends.

A remarkable episode is brought to memory such as is always found among
the homosexuals. He once fell in love with a girl, an employee’s
sweetheart. That passion soon blew over. Another love affair, however,
almost turned him away from his customary leaning. There was another
girl employed in the office, a slim, diminutive figure, rather
plain-looking, and underdeveloped (a type resembling the male). That
girl was engaged and her young man was in the habit of calling to take
her home. Everybody in the store knew that the young man was waiting
outside at the closing hour (he claims she was cordial also with some
other men in the store). He fell in love with the girl and soon showed
that uncontrollable passion which is characteristic of homosexuals when
they attempt to save themselves from man,—when they try to fly from
homosexuality. He soon succeeded in winning her favor against his rival,
who was but a poor employee. The poor girl was supremely happy and proud
that the wealthy manufacturer’s son had his eye on her. He promptly
showed the girl that his intentions were honorable. He withdrew entirely
from his father who was bitterly opposed to the affair. He lived with
his thoughts exclusively on and for the girl. She had to leave the
office. The father requested it and, besides, the other employees
gossiped and spread rumors which were unpleasant to him. He received
anonymous communications pointing out to him that the girl was flighty.
Another employee told him that he had kissed the girl and she was not at
all a prude. These persons naturally did not know that their tales only
increased his passion for the girl. For it was precisely the thought
that she had been kissed by another man that made her so irresistible in
his sight. It made him angry and raging mad but his excitation reacted
upon his homosexual component. The more he was roused against the girl
the more closely he was enmeshed with her. He met her three times daily.
He called for her in the morning, at noon they took a walk together, and
the evenings, often the nights, belonged to the girl who proved with a
physician’s certificate that she was still _virgo intacta_. His
relations with her were of such a nature that her virginity was not
endangered. This attitude, this fearsome withholding from the task of
defloration under the excuse of ethical considerations, is typical of
the neurotic’s feeling of uncertainty and lack of confidence in himself,
fear of binding himself, and fear of consequences, and shows an
insufficient _libido_. The passion was something rather spiritual, a
transference, something unreal. For they passed some nights together and
he was satisfied merely to be in the same room (they never slept in one
bed). Her presence had chiefly a quieting effect on him. Through her he
felt himself protected against his homosexual thoughts. He also needed a
love affair to show the whole world that he was not homosexual and that
he was capable of loving a woman.

But during the very first days of this love affair his jealousy began to
assert itself, a peculiarity characteristic of these subjects,
permitting them to concentrate their mind perpetually on the subject of
men. First he began to investigate her past. She had to confess
everything to him. Then there followed endless torture over endless
days. In the morning he began to look questioningly at her. If she
showed blue dark streaks under her eyes, or looked pale, he felt sure
that she had been untrue to him that night. Although he conducted her
home late at night and called for her early next morning he still
thought that she slipped out of the house to meet some strange lover
somewhere. Often he stood on watch all night in the front of her home.
He saw curious shadows moving across her window blind and was sure that
it must be a man. He endured hellish torments over it. He engaged a
detective to watch the girl and caught her in an innocent lie. His
persistent questionings had cowed her and sometimes she had to lie in
order to pacify him. An innocent fib of that character was the starting
point of a quarrel which kept up for many weeks. She saw him patrol up
and down in front of her house. He looked badly run down as he did not
sleep nights and he neglected his affairs at the factory. She made him
promise that he would go home nights. He promised and immediately
afterwards felt uneasy over it. For he was certain that she made him
give that promise so as to be able to deceive him more easily.

Then terrible thoughts of revenge flashed through his mind. He wanted to
shoot the unknown lover and strangle the girl. Perhaps he sought a proof
of unfaithfulness so as to get rid of the girl and justify his own
disloyalty towards her.

He naturally pretended once to go on a journey only to return
unexpectedly to the girl. He thought he smelled cigar smoke, dragged her
by the hair, and wanted to force a confession from her. He also accused
her of intimacy with her 70-year-old guardian.

Such cases are not favorable for analysis and rather hopeless. I am not
as lucky as _Bjerre_[19] to be able to report a complete cure of a case
of paranoia. Usually these patients abandon the psychoanalysis, finding
some pretext to turn from the consultant. It is useless to explain to
them the mechanism of transference. From the moment when they perceive a
leaning towards their consultant that sympathetic feeling is changed
into anxiety and distrust. They are unwilling to recognize their
homosexuality. Their psychic disturbance is too deep and a correction is
no longer possible. Often the subjects stay away after only a few
visits. This sudden abandonment stands in sharp contrast to their
initial enthusiasm for the new method of treatment. Others stay on with
the analysis for a few weeks but make little or no progress. So long as
their homosexual tendencies are not touched upon, it is possible to keep
up the psychoanalysis a little longer but the psychoanalysis is
superficial under the circumstances, as they cannot be induced to apply
candor, always keep secrets from the consultant, and cover under silence
whatever comes into their mind bearing on their attitude towards their
physician.

He carried his revolver whenever he called at my office, always ready to
shoot down the alleged enemy. I tried to make him understand that he was
tortured by his own homosexual and criminal thoughts. He listened
incredulously but was not so averse as I have seen most paranoiacs.

This patient also stayed away after three weeks of analysis because the
analysis produced in him a tremendous excitement. He thought I was in
league with his father[20] to part him from his girl. The real object of
his love was the father who seems to me to play an important rôle in the
psychogenesis of male paranoia.

I saw him two years later during the war. He had joined the army as
volunteer, had made an excellent record for himself and had been
slightly wounded. Since the war he felt better. He had given up the
engagement shortly after the treatment. His ideas of persecution had
subsided to a great extent, he claimed.

The next case shows us a paranoiac jealousy with insane notions based on
proofs ferreted out and scrutinized with remarkable ingenuity. Such
cases form the borderline towards the class of querrulants who clamor
always for their “rights,” precisely because an inner voice clamoring
for “injustice” must be drowned.


78. Mr. S. D. is referred to me by his family physician from a distance.
I am asked to determine whether his jealousy is justified or the result
of a morbid state of mind.

He is a very energetic, active 30-year-old merchant, who conducts the
local inn in connection with his larger business in a small village. In
eight years he made a great success and attained affluence. He has
acquired all the retail business of the place, carries on also a
wholesale business with the neighboring retail dealers, and was on the
way to become a very wealthy man when he began to quarrel with his wife
on account of his jealousy. His wife was of a frigid temperament who
always remained cool during his embrace and it always worried him. After
the birth of a couple of children she grew somewhat more responsive.
When she had her first strong orgasm during his embrace he became
suspicious and concluded at once that she must have had some other
instructor in the art of love. How was it possible for a cool woman,
suddenly, over night, as it were, to turn into a passionate mate? He
began watching his wife and came to the conclusion that she must have
had intercourse with a certain man possessing a very long _phallus_.
There lived in that village a farmer who was no longer young, but
wealthy, and known for his long penis and his virility. That fellow was
his regular guest at the inn. What more natural than that the innkeeper
should conclude that he must be the guilty man. We note that his mind
must have been preoccupied for a long time with the size of that man’s
penis. That phantasy he projected to his wife. His curiosity and longing
to see that _phallus_ he ascribed to his wife. That is how thought
processes originate. Such _autism_ (_Bleuler_) renders us uncritical and
permits us to see the whole world through the subjective coloring of our
own emotions. How could his wife, a woman, fail to be interested in the
size of the peasant’s _phallus_, which was openly the talk of the
tavern, when he, a man, could not help being interested? Such,
approximately, is the logic of this thinking. He began to watch that
peasant and his wife. He pretended to go on a journey telling his wife
he would not be back before the following day. But he returned that very
evening. He tiptoed up the steps to the bedroom. He heard a dull thud.
Naturally it was the peasant, escaping through the window. It was—as the
woman explained—the cat who had been scared off. He insisted a man had
been in the room. His wife felt so indignant that she wanted to leave
him at once and refused to say another word. He became humble and begged
her imploringly for forgiveness telling her the reason for his jealousy.
The wife declared that she had always been passionate but was ashamed to
show it. Finally it came to her all of a sudden that it was foolish on
her part, also, she had learned to love him more than ever. She cannot
help it if she is now more responsive. There followed an interval of
peace but only for a few months. Soldiers were quartered in the place
and a physically impressive captain secured a room. From the moment of
his appearance at the place that captain roused the man’s suspicions. He
found that his wife gave the fellow the best cup of coffee, that she was
altogether too friendly with him, and that she showered upon him all
sorts of pleasant little courtesies. His wife explained to him that this
captain bought of them all the supplies for his company and was the
means of bringing them important business, and that she was friendly
only for business reasons, but that their relations had never trespassed
the limits of propriety. But he kept collecting indications of her
unfaithfulness. Among the proofs he found the butt of a cigarette in his
wife’s room. He questioned her closely and asked the officer’s orderly
to bring him a cigarette from his master’s case, claiming those
cigarettes had such a pleasant aroma he wanted to try one. He thus
secured a cigarette and found that it bore an identical mark. The fact
was he smoked the same brand of cigarettes, but he thought he discovered
a certain stripe which the other cigarettes did not have (I could not
detect the stripe in question). His other proofs were of a like
character. This time he had a terrible quarrel with his wife,—much more
serious than the previous ordeal. Trouble upon trouble followed after
that. He suspected his clerks and dismissed them one after another about
every two weeks. Every one was his wife’s lover. Finally he rushed at
his wife, in a fit of anger, to beat her, and began choking her. The
following day the woman left him, went to live with her sister, and
started proceedings for divorce. She claimed her husband was not normal
and he voluntarily came to Vienna to place himself under my observation.

First I turned my attention to his jealousy and I tried carefully to
correct that. He acknowledged some points, here and there, showed some
insight into his condition, and was not shocked when I refused to give
him a certificate of good health. Meanwhile he had removed his beard to
give himself a younger appearance. That change was not necessary as he
was young-looking enough, but it was part of the outbreak of his
feminine tendencies. He also had a string of dreams in which he was a
woman. Usually he rehearsed the old jealousy scenes and he repeatedly
killed his wife in his dreams.

Thus he dreamed:


_I am with my wife in an old room but dressed as a woman, so as not to
be recognized. My wife steps out of the room, it was very dark. The
captain comes into the room and wants to touch me under the dress. But
some one calls him out of the room. I jump at my wife, enraged: that is
the kind of a h—— you are. Now I know everything about you ... and I
stick a knife in her throat._


In another dream he lies hidden under the bed and feels the swaying
motion of coitus above. It was very characteristic that after quarrels
and scenes of violence he craved intercourse with his wife and his
_libido_ was much stronger ... clearly on account of the sadistic
excitation.

I saw this patient again five years after the psychoanalysis. He was
divorced from his wife and was apparently very quiet. He claimed to be
entirely well, said he was jealous no longer, and every now and then had
intercourse with women. I do not dare decide whether this result may be
ascribed to the analysis and the therapeutic-educational course of
treatment.

The various confusion states, called periodic insanity, must be looked
upon as an equivalent of permanent insanity. It is certainly striking to
see how many alcoholics, morphinists, opium eaters, cocaine fiends and,
in more recent years, victims addicted to adalin, veronal, medinal,
luminal, etc., fear insanity. If such a case is analyzed one always
finds the homosexual component and the repressed sadistic tendency. The
psychic mechanisms of these disorders are the same as those described in
the paranoid form of the jealousy delusion. We have in all these cases
an endopsychic perception that inner forces compel greater stress on the
delusions than on reality.

The next case is a pure example of this condition under a form which
often ends in suicide.


79. Mr. O. L., a very talented violinist, suffers unbearable anxieties,
among them the fear of insanity being the strongest. He also has hours
of terrific, unexplainable depressions for which he is unable to give
any cause. He only _has the feeling that he is about to commit some
terrible deed_ so as to rid himself of the anxiety and have peace once
more. He thinks he might commit some crime and be jailed so as to be
sure that there is nothing further for him to fear. During the first
weeks he speaks only of his anxiety over his father. He has the idea
fixed in his mind that his father will come to Vienna and have him
interned in an insane asylum. Rather than put up with that _he will
shoot his father first and then kill himself_. He reverts every little
while to the suspicion that I am in league with his father. (That is the
form which the identification of the physician with the father assumes
with this class of patients. The physician is the symbol of the father.)
He has been taking various narcotics for a number of years. Not,
exactly, to sleep. For he sleeps well without the aid of veronal or
pantopon. But he suffers so much of anxiety. And he feels that the
narcotics make a better man of him. He uses unbelievable doses of these
drugs. He has once taken with suicidal intent 10 g. veronal in one dose
with the only result that he slept 24 hours “like a top” and woke up
without any ill effects. He sleeps every day till 11 or noon, sometimes
into the afternoon hours, and still wakes up somewhat drowsy.

He now abstains strictly from alcohol. He has done a number of foolish
things under the influence of drink. Once he tackled an officer at a
night resort, wanted to embrace him, kiss him, made various suggestive
proposals and finally had to be thrown out. He has also had serious rows
which put him in the hands of the police. He gave his word of honor to
his father that he would not touch liquor any more because he was
threatened with internment at a sanitarium for alcoholics. He broke his
word only once but has turned to various narcotics. During a six-months
sojourn at a sanitarium he got completely well and abandoned the drugs.
One month after leaving the sanitarium he began again to use the drugs.

He is an impressive, handsome, very powerful man, very “lucky” with
women. But he is true to none for any length of time excepting the last
sweetheart. He did love her and does to this day. He would marry her if
he could support her.

He is tremendously jealous and his jealousy is that typical form which
is concerned with the past, an example of which we have seen in case 75.
He has to be told over and over by his sweethearts how they have been
seduced. He must hear with particular circumstantiality all the details
of the defloration. That causes him tremendous sexual excitation. Only
then is he able to achieve orgasm with women. Otherwise he may keep up
the sexual congress for a half hour without accomplishing
ejaculation.[21]

Finally ejaculation and orgasm are brought about through manual friction
of the penis by the woman. This form of sexual gratification leads back
to a particular incident in his youth when the choice was made. First,
he confesses that at 17 he maintained relations with a boy who gratified
him in that manner. Earlier reminiscences from childhood appear. The
incidents always relate to boys. Now he does not want to recognize any
homosexual tendencies. At 17 years he made a forceful attempt to tear
himself away from his friend and began passionately to run after women
and girls.

His homosexuality shows itself in the choice of his love objectives.
Usually he seduces the sisters of those of his friends whom he likes in
particular. I know no affair of his in which some man did not play a
rôle. When a man did not figure at the beginning he was brought in
later, so as to complete the constellation necessary for the rousing of
his libidinous craving. Very characteristic is the following episode,
among the others of the last few years:

He became acquainted at a sanitarium with a young woman who soon became
his sweetheart. One of his most intimate friends was also at that
sanitarium. He asked his friend to try his luck with the lady because he
wanted to test her faithfulness. The friend hesitated. He was afraid of
a misunderstanding and the woman was not worth that to him. Then our
subject tried to bring him and his sweetheart together in another way.
He wagered a large sum of money that he could not get at the girl. His
friend accepted the wager, and three days later proved that he had won
the bet. O. L. wanted to hear every detail about the seduction and
became so enraged that he could have killed his friend. Then that friend
seduced again another sweetheart of his, a few months later he attacked
him on the street and would have beaten him up if a few colleagues had
not restrained him.

Now here in Vienna he is convinced that “that d—— fellow” will seduce
also his present sweetheart, a girl whom he truly loves. But if so, he
will find the fellow and kill him as well as the girl. The woman has a
brother who plays an important rôle in the psychogenesis of this love.
Once the woman told him how devotedly she loved her brother. She could
understand how a sister may give herself to a brother. Now he urged the
woman to give herself to the brother, setting up but one condition: he
should witness the act. This phantasy assumed compulsive strength. On
every occasion he tortured her, insisting that she ought to grant him
the wish, and he kept calling in the brother when she did not want him.
Once they were alone. He broke his word and they drank merrily. He got
very drunk and made a passionate love declaration to his sweetheart’s
brother, begging him to accompany him to the house and take the sister’s
place.

His mother died when he was 15 years of age. The father engaged a young
woman to take care of the house and he fell in love with her. At the
same time he also hated her, fearing that his father would disinherit
him in favor of this woman. He even planned to put the woman out of the
way with poison. Wholly unconscious and most deeply repressed is his
love for the father, whom he worries and to whom he causes no end of
trouble. He was at the threshold of a wonderful career, all teachers had
prophesied that he would be some day one of the world’s greatest
violinists. His first concert was an unprecedented success. Then his
neurosis broke out and now he is through with his career. Done with it
and with life.

Back of the neurosis the motive of which is to worry the old father, to
irritate him and force him to pay attention to the unsuccessful son,
stands hidden his passionate love of the father, though he writes him
scolding letters, 20 sheets long, and threatens to shoot him, should he
dare cut down his rightful inheritance. A certain memory trace leads to
various childhood fancies resembling the affairs with boys already
mentioned. Finally he brings forth a reminiscence placing his father in
an unpleasant light. The father was also a drinker....

It seems as if he had tried to forget that fact. His fancies of murder
are directed against the father. That becomes clearer all the time. He
turns ill and addicted to veronal so as to commit no crime. He feels his
father slights and neglects him. They quarrel all the time on account of
his dissipations. The father threatens he will be no longer responsible
for his debts. The son must give up his expensive habits of living. Then
the war broke out. He was among the first volunteers to answer the call,
distinguished himself several times with his conduct, and finally met
his death in an engagement.

I have already pointed out elsewhere in this work the latent
homosexuality of drinkers. In the light of these new considerations, the
well-known jealousy of drinkers reveals an additional feature. The
intoxication is to a certain extent a periodic artificial paranoia
during which the ideas of persecution come to the foreground. This is
very clearly to be seen in many cases. In that particular respect the
alcohol addict is hardly different from the paranoiac. Both believe in
the objectivity of their insane notions.

The following two case histories of drinkers’ jealousy will conclude
this lengthy list of illustrative cases:


80. Mr. N. V., Captain, married at the age of 34 and has been married
two years. His marriage was unhappy from the very first day. Previous to
that he had had intercourse only with _puellæ publicæ_ and with them was
always potent. With his wife he is impotent. He is very unhappy over it
and consoles himself with street women. He began to drink and beats his
wife while intoxicated. He scolds her, calls her a whore and accuses her
of intimacy with all the officers. Although he had been drinking
formerly, he did so with moderation, but now he is a confirmed
_potator_, spends his time in dram shops and while intoxicated becomes
very friendly with the waiters and other underlings, kissing them and
toasting their comradeship. He is firmly convinced that his wife is
unfaithful to him and even suspects his boy whom he beats mercilessly
when under the influence of drink.

The woman left her husband and fled to her parents.

That affected the man so depressingly that, after a three months’ stay
at a sanitarium, he returned penitently, a changed man, and prevailed
upon the wife to return and live with him again. But in a few weeks his
old demoniac jealousy set in once more. This time he accused her of the
most horrible crimes. He reproached her that she allowed herself to be
licked by the dog and shot the animal. He watched her carefully and
denied her the least social intercourse. Finally he accused her of
intimacy with her 15-year-old brother. He found a small spot on the bed
linen and he cut that out to preserve as proof of her infidelity. He
pounced on her one night, choked her, and tried to force her to confess
her doings with the brother. Again she fled to her parents but hesitated
to turn her husband over to the lunacy board. She did not want to be the
cause of his commitment to a sanitarium.

Meanwhile the patient’s insanity grew rapidly. He drank to great excess
and raised a big row in front of her parents’ home. He complained to the
police that his wife and her younger brother, with whom she maintains
criminal relations, had set a number of desperate-looking characters on
his trail. He served notice that he would give those fellows something
to remember him by and that the first one who would dare come too close
to him would be shot down. Commitment. Delirium tremens. Exitus in
consequence of an intercurrent malady.

It is noteworthy that the suspected little brother-in-law had been a
great favorite of his; he had been fond of taking the boy along on his
hunting trips. When completely under the influence of drink he always
wanted to embrace him and pet him.

A connection between paranoia and alcoholism is shown also by the last
of this series of observations, which follows:


81. This is a woman no longer in her prime of life. She is the
grandmother of several children, 54 years of age, and, up to a few years
ago, she was not jealous. As soon as her husband ceased to have
intercourse with her she was seized with the idea that he must have
intercourse with a certain pretty girl who had been formerly in their
employ and had left. She had seen that girl often in the neighborhood
and wondered that the girl looked so well and was so well dressed. She
had always liked the girl very much. In fact, she wept when the girl
left the house. Now she tortured her husband with the accusation that he
was intimate with that girl,—she was sure of it. The man denied it,
but—grilled by her—he had to admit that he had met the girl on the
street a few times and had spoken to her. That led to such terrible
quarrels,—he had to leave the house and was gone for weeks on a journey.
He wanted to have peace and was energetic enough to bring it about. In
fact, he threatened to sue for separation.

The woman began to drink, specially liqueurs, but also ordinary whiskey.
When intoxicated she behaved very vulgarly and cursed the girl; called
her a whore, and shouted that she ought to have the clothes torn off
her. She threatened her youngest daughter’s husband and entertained the
notion of throwing acid at him. While intoxicated she also felt an
impulse to seek out her youngest daughter (obviously to find her
son-in-law) and ran to the railroad station, entered the wrong train,
and committed all sorts of nuisances so that she had to be committed. At
the asylum she had to give up drink but showed no ill effects from the
enforced abstinence, only she figured daily what her husband was up to
with the girl. Like most paranoiacs she claimed that she had telepathic
powers and felt at a distance that her husband was with the girl. That
was an absolute fact and no physician could convince her it was not so.

That contention embodied an inner truth: the man in her was with the
girl, that is, the man in her was continually preoccupied with the girl.
In fact, she had no other thought than the girl. It was as if she was
saying to herself: _If I were a man I would fall in love with this girl
and would not leave her alone a minute. She would have to be mine only._

After the marriage of her youngest daughter she fell into a depression
during which she first began the habit of indulging in alcoholic drinks.

Obviously the woman had two homosexual objectives which she fused: the
servant girl and the youngest daughter. In fact, she began early to
think that her husband was intimate with the daughter in question. She
even lodged with the authorities a complaint to that effect and asked to
be allowed to bring proofs of the assertion. Now her husband wanted to
poison her. She had been given coffee which had an arsenical smell.

She transfers to the surroundings her subjective criminal ideas. We see
that she had to drink in order to deafen in her the wild beast which
endeavored to break forth in all its primordial crudity. Her commitment
to an asylum did not change her leanings. She swore at her man who
conspired with the hateful son-in-law to have her put out of the way so
as to prevent her from exposing their evil doings before the whole
world.

How close the forbidden tendencies are to one another in such cases!
Almost uniformly the same picture throughout: criminality, homosexuality
and incest. After years of the compulsory yoke of a formal monosexuality
the repression gives way and the underlying pansexuality and criminal
tendencies manifest themselves in pathologic form. For all these case
histories center around the “other,” the second, self,—the repressed
component of human nature.

_We know_ many persons who prove themselves victims of our monosexual
culture. The race is paying for the development of monosexuality with
neurotic homosexuality, with all the various neuroses, with alcoholism
and paranoia!

But it would be erroneous for that reason to decry the course of
cultural development or to look for the improvement of conditions to
changes in law or in the formal code of morals. All lovers of mankind
surely must fight for the abandonment of the moral opprobrium and legal
persecution of homosexuals and for a greater freedom from bias in the
perception of the problem of all paraphilias. But we must not fail to
recognize that we are dealing here with tremendous social forces and
with developmental tendencies striving, beyond all human range, for the
attainment of unknown higher ideals. _The development of the race is
from bisexualism to monosexualism. Even the “genuine” homosexuality as
we know it today everywhere is a proof in favor of this contention._

For if homosexuality were an inborn trait, as _Hirschfeld_ and his
pupils maintain, it would be the pattern-type of health and homosexuals
would show no repressed heterosexuality; there would be no morphinists,
no drinkers, and no dipsomaniacs[22] among them. Their number may not be
large, but that is because the uranists’ homosexuality is already a
compromise, an attempt on the part of nature, and of the psyche, to
escape the insolvable bisexual conflict. The very fact that all
neurotics represent retrogressions shows that the race is advancing
towards monosexuality. The neurotic, as a bisexual being, might stand
for an earlier developmental phase, if the cultural standards of
morality would not hinder. When he attempts it (like, for instance,
_Oscar Wilde_) he draws upon himself the deadly scorn of his fellowmen;
he is ostracized as a citizen. Homosexuality leads but seldom to
paranoia when associated with heterosexuality, as happens in the reverse
instance,—heterosexuals trying to repress their homosexuality. That in
itself shows homosexuality to be a neurosis,—the premonitory phase of
the paranoiac psychosis. When paranoia breaks out, the homosexual holds
to the delusion that he belongs to the opposite sex and may go so far as
to disregard his genitalia and to acquire the feeling that he is
physically changed. The paranoia attempts to round out physically the
delusion of sexual transformation it has initiated psychically. The wish
of the male homosexual: “I want to be a woman!” is fulfilled in
paranoia. In that state he finds a thousand proofs that he is a woman.
Many such cases have been described especially by _Krafft-Ebing_, who
has called them “_metamorphosis sexualis paranoica_.” The subjects
imagine that they have the monthly flow because they have the nose-bleed
every four weeks (this happens also with nonparanoia _urnings_),—they
have a flow from the lower parts for five days at every full moon. A
patient of _Krafft-Ebing’s_ relates (Obs. 134, p. 245): “Every four
weeks at the full moon I have for 5 days the _molimina_, like any woman,
physically and mentally, only I do not flow,—but I have a sensation of
discharging fluid, a feeling of fulness about the genitals and the lower
part of the body (within); a very pleasant time it is, especially later
(in a couple of days) when the physiologic craving for procreation looms
forth with its all-pervading womanly force.” Another paranoiac claims
that he has always been woman, but when he was a child a French magician
had miraculously endowed him with male organs and, with a certain salve,
hindered the development of his breasts. A girl under my observation
felt her penis, pointed to the hairs on her face, and thought she was a
bewitched male. But she could feel her penis growing within and almost
coming through.

The following statement by the highest expert on homosexuality shows
that the repression of heterosexuality may have serious effects upon the
homosexual,—it may drive him to drink, or into a delusion of
persecution:

“I have seen, in the homosexual, states of precordial anxiety with
strong vasomotor excitation as serious as such conditions could be. Next
to anxiety neurosis, an occasional consequence of abstinence seems to me
to be the occurrence of a sort of persecution mania which is rather
difficult to determine whether it belongs to the compulsive neuroses or
is actually a part of the picture of paranoia. Such persons imagine
everybody suspects their homosexuality; they look at their hands and
laugh sheepishly because they wear no engagement or marriage ring; at
restaurants persons sitting at neighboring tables whisper and knowingly
nod among themselves as they talk about the ‘_eingefleischten
Junggesellen_’; porters and waiters at hotels ‘catch on’ to ‘what is up’
and treat them either more or less attentively than other customers;
passers-by on the street comment on their tripping gait; in short, they
feel that they are watched everywhere and are uncomfortably
self-conscious; some blush continually, others become morbidly
suspicious and timid, others again—and that is the worst—take to drink.
Convinced of the truthfulness of their notions and refractory in their
attitude towards the physician, patients of this type make up their
minds late and only after considerable struggle, to consult a physician
and even then they often do it under an assumed name. If the ideas of
persecution have already persisted for a long time, the condition is
hardly one that can be influenced by treatment,—in any case it requires
the greatest skill and patience on the part of the physician as well as
his whole therapeutic armamentarium, of which psychotherapy and
hydrotherapy are most important means, while drugs, rather excessively
favored nowadays, should be used but sparingly.” (_Hirschfeld, loc.
cit._, p. 455.)

This observation of _Hirschfeld’s_ discloses the homosexual’s deep
feeling of self-reproach which must be ascribed to hidden criminality
rather than to the homosexuality. Perhaps that fusion of homosexuality
with criminality, of pathologic self-love and repressed hatred, that
incapacity for true love, is the reason why men struggle against
monosexuality and why innumerable victims fall in that struggle, their
refined souls crushed by the conflict. Just as we no longer have the
gods of antiquity—men with female bosoms and women with a tremendous
_phallus_—just as we have accepted the division of God into three
components (man, woman, and child) which unitedly represent but one
force, so we must choose, in our day, our ideal. _That is the monotheism
of sexuality,—more unyielding and strict than religious monotheism. “To
love means to find one’s God,” I stated. But there must be no other gods
besides that one. This struggle for the single god of love sums up the
erotic tragedies of our cultural development: the struggle for the true
ideal and for monogamy which for the present appears the utmost sexual
ideal of our current cultural level. Between the primitive man’s
pansexualism and the monosexuality of modern man may be found all the
developmental phases and inhibitions which manifest themselves as
neuroses, paraphilias, drunkenness, psychoses, etc._

The analysis of jealousy has shown us clearly that with the outbreak of
the repressed homosexuality criminality, too, comes to the surface. The
patients whose histories we have recorded, fight, carry revolvers and
threaten murder. Many a jealousy murder is due to the instinctive
asocial cravings. We must bear in mind that the repression keeps down
the homosexuality as well as the other paraphiliac instincts, including
the criminal tendencies. When the repressed homosexuality breaks through
the protecting covers and out of the unconscious, it carries along and
brings to surface all the repressed antagonistic cravings. This mental
mechanism explains the gruesome crimes which the paranoiacs commit who
believe themselves pursued or threatened. They project to their
surroundings not only the pursuit with homosexual intent but their
subjective criminal tendencies as well. Someone is after them to kill
them ... it really means: “_I want to kill and therefore I assume, that
others want to kill me._”

Looking upon homosexuality as an archaic symptom, a regressive
manifestation, we may understand also that the incest, in all its forms,
must play a greater rôle among homosexuals than among the normals. The
_urning_, in point of psychic progression, is nearer the ancient
_Œdipus_ and the _urlind_ is nearer ancient _Elektra_ than the normal
man. Their will to power also manifests itself through stronger
tendencies. The very repression of his heterosexual component shows that
the homosexual tries to achieve mastery over self, and is a proof of the
one-sided emphasis of his stubborn will to self-control. The will to
power breaks out in violent, affectively stressed jealousy deeds, which
shows the intimate inner relations between homosexuality and sadism,—a
subject to which we shall give more careful consideration in our next
chapter.




                                   V

  HOMOSEXUALITY AND SADISM—THE ANALYSIS OF A HOMOSEXUAL—EARLIEST
      MEMORIES—FIRST ACCOUNT OF HIS ATTITUDE—FEAR OF TUBERCULOSIS—HIS
      ATTITUDE TOWARDS HIS PARENTS—FIRST DREAM—DREAMS OF URINALS—ANAL
      EROTICISM—COPROPHAGIA—THE MOTHER AS A TYRANT—TRANSVESTITISM—AN
      IMPORTANT DREAM—VOYEUR AND EXHIBITIONIST—OTHER DREAMS—POEMS TO THE
      MOTHER—MATERNAL BODY DREAMS—SADISTIC PHANTASIES—A SPERMATOZOAN
      DREAM—THE DREAM ABOUT WILD BEARS—SUMMARIZATION OF THE ANALYTIC
      DATA IN THE CASE—THE FORMULA OF HOMOSEXUALITY.


_Man missversteht das Raubtier und den Raubmenschen (z. b. Cesare
Borgia) gründlich, man missversteht die “Natur,” so lange man noch nach
einer “Krankhaftigkeit” in Grunde dieser gesundesten aller tropischen
Untiere und Gewächse sucht, oder gar nach einer ihnen eingeborenen
“Hölle” wie es bis her fast alle Moralisten gethan haben._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._




                                   V

_The nature of the wild beast and of predatory man,—Cesare Borgia, for
instance,—is misunderstood, “Nature” herself is misunderstood, so long
as we look for “morbidity” back of these healthiest of all monstrosities
and excrescences, or for some “inner depravity” peculiar to them,—as
most moralists have done thus far._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._


Our investigation of the problem of jealousy has led us repeatedly to
the relationship between homosexuality and sadism, a subject we have
already considered briefly in connection with the repression-symptoms of
the homosexuals. We have succeeded in proving the sadistic trend of
homosexuals in most of the cases which we have examined. This
relationship is so typical that I am surprised previous investigators
have not been impressed by the regularity of its occurrence. The
frequency of abnormal sexual cravings among homosexuals has been pointed
out by many physicians and has been interpreted by them as indicative of
a degenerative trend. But since the physicians were satisfied with their
patients’ account and they were unfamiliar with the technique of
psychoanalysis, this constant relationship escaped their observation.
The next chapter will be devoted to a complete history of such cases and
in that connection we shall see more clearly how unsatisfactory the
patients’ first account of their own trouble must be. I have already
mentioned that many investigators suspect that the homosexuals decidedly
lack veracity. Moreover all neurotics drive their sadistic tendencies
back into the unconscious. Their repressed tendencies are among the
persistently overlooked features,—the unconsidered inventory,—of the
homosexual’s psyche.

The sadistic tendency breaks to the foreground of consciousness only
occasionally and then it lends its characteristic coloring to the
paraphilic disorder. In such cases the sadistic trend is not directed
only against the opposite sex. Sexual lust and cruelty are inextricably
interwoven; the antisocial cravings cannot be sublimated;[23] the ailing
individual becomes a danger to the community, he gets into conflict with
the law, and lands in jail or in the asylum. For such cases show us a
morbidly enlarged and distorted picture of the average homosexual.

The following observation by _Fleischmann_[24] may serve as an
illustration of this fact:


82. “Physically the patient shows the early signs of _Basedow’s_
disease. His temperament is very uneven, he shifts from one extreme to
another. He is suspicious, very mendacious and very irritable—for
instance, he struck his father in his rage. He is not particularly
religious. His whole conduct shows a very weak will and lack of energy.
Since his 17th year the patient has been addicted to excessive drink.
His sexual history reveals the following facts: As a boy, 10 years of
age, he came across a book containing an illustration of a scene of
violence (beating) which gave him great pleasure. Ever since he thinks
of that picture placing himself in the position of the one being beaten.
The mere word ‘_Peitschen_,’ cuffing, has something appealing, something
exciting about it to his mind. From the very beginning the patient
thought this was an unhealthy trait and was uncomfortably self-conscious
over it. At that time he took a journey into the country with his
mother. They passed over a river and he saw standing on the shore a
naked man who was bathing. That scene stuck in his mind for months. At
11 years of age the patient asked his father to punish him because he
had an impure conscience, but did not attain his aim. His fancies were
growing. He liked to put himself in Captain Dreyfus’ place, wanted to
experience the latter’s degradation and suffering. So constantly was his
mind preoccupied with his fancies that the boy neglected his school
studies; he became distraught, and suffered headaches. At 15 years of
age the boy began to enact his phantasies; he undressed in a room, tied
his hands with a rope and suspended himself. He also tied weights to his
lower limbs. This produced orgasm and ejaculation. An illustration of
tortures which he found in an illustrated work on world history
suggested to him new methods. He was specially fond of staging scenes of
crucifixion. In all these scenes the boy fancied that he was the victim
of all the imaginary tortures. He never connected these fancies of
torture with one sex or the other. He had sexual gratification without
reflecting particularly about sex. The gratifications led to orgasm and
ejaculation. Then the craving for self-torture quieted down somewhat,
his imagination cooled off and the patient began to seek sexual
gratification through masturbation. He drew his penis downwards and
backwards between his limbs and rocked his pelvis sideways. During these
acts there arose the first homosexual fancies. While masturbating, which
he did at first regularly once every four weeks, later daily and
afterwards, five to ten times in succession,[25] he pictured to himself
the hips of a young boy. At first that fancy, without any further
details, was enough. Later he fancied carrying out _coitus intra
femora_. His contrary sexual feelings showed themselves also in other
ways. For instance, he took such a strong fancy to a younger comrade
that he resolved to stay voluntarily back one year so as to sit in the
same classroom with that boy. On account of his lack of veracity his
father put him in a training institution; there his comrades initiated
him into sex matters and he learned mutual masturbation. He was not
aware of being untruthful because he had lost the faculty of discerning
between phantasy and fact. At 17 years of age the patient picked up a
peasant girl and induced her to sleep with him; but she did not allow
coitus; the patient thinks that at that time he would have found coitus
pleasurable.[26] During that period he was in the habit of abusing daily
one of his best friends,—in his phantasy. He had the latter stand naked
before his eyes and played with his private parts. In his phantasy he
felt all over the fellow’s body, finally advancing to a complete
homosexual act, always fancying a one-sided active _immissio penis in
anum_; at the same time he masturbated in the manner described above.
After one year he was no longer able to control himself. He prevailed on
his friend to undress before him and lie, face down, on the sofa. Then
the patient crawled on top and attempted _immissio_; he did not succeed
on account of a sudden feeling of nausea. He desisted, but ejaculated
_ante portas_; afterwards he was ashamed of it. The patient parted from
this friend later as the result of a quarrel. Then the sadistic
tendencies again came to surface. He imagined all sorts of tortures,
reserving to himself merely the rôle of devising the punishment to be
applied. The actual carrying out of the deeds he left to other imaginary
persons conjured up for the purpose. He chose his victims preferably
from among his younger comrades. Patient had devised 36 different kinds
of torture assigning to each a written symbol. He selected by lot
(drawing numbers) the intended victim, as well as the torture to be
applied and the instruments therefor. The patient played this game for
hours.

“He kept this up a couple of years. Suddenly the whole thing lost its
charm for him. His phantasy cooled down. Finally he gave up the game
altogether. At 18, the patient attempted for the second time normal
coitus. He had an erection but premature ejaculation _ante portas_. A
third attempt failed on account of drunkenness. Again he reverted to his
masturbation habit, his thoughts during the act once more centered on
the hips of a young boy; this was a fetich to him. Masochistic fancies
he entertained no longer; but he dwelt profusely on homosexual
phantasies. Later the patient thought of _coitus inter femora_ with
boys. He became very friendly with a 14-year-old boy, kissed him, and
allowed the boy to touch his own genitals. But when he found that the
boy had hairy hips his passion for the boy cooled off at once. During
that time the patient (20 years old) entertained thoughts of suicide
because he felt that his life was a failure. An attempt at analysis only
excited him worse instead of quieting him. Again the patient linked
himself in intimate friendship with a 14-year-old boy; as that boy
resented any physical display of affection, his attachment remained
purely platonic. Every now and then patient masturbated fancying he was
carrying out _coitus inter femora_ with his friend. His sadistic fancies
again broke to the surface. He became more and more restless, enticed a
boy (under a slight pretext) to visit him and devised most refined ways
of abusing him; for instance, hanging over the boy’s back with the hands
clasped around his neck, or beating him over hips and buttocks with a
reed cane; for every stroke the boy was to receive a sum of money. As a
consequence of this action the patient was brought to the clinic.”[27]

_Fleischmann_, in his psychologic examination of this case, lays
stress particularly on the significance of trauma and ascribes to the
masturbation a predominant rôle in the psychogenesis of the
paraphilia: “This case proves clearly that the various sexual
anomalies differ only in their sexual objective and aim,—their
developmental interrelationship—but that the mechanism of their
development must be looked upon as identical.”

But of particular significance in this case is the constant association
of sadism and masochism, a condition with which but few sexologists thus
far have been impressed as a bipolar expression of the same underlying
tendency; next, the tremendous sense of guilt which no masochist lacks;
further, the defense reaction against the homosexual tendencies: disgust
of the _immissio penis in anum_, and the unpleasant feelings roused by
the sight of the boy’s hairy thighs.

This patient also illustrates the overwhelming rôle of the father in the
psychogenesis of homosexuality and the recurrence of the “specific
scene.” At 11 years of age he requested his father to beat him because
he felt guilty. At 25 years he carried out that very act on a boy under
a very refined form. One must be a victim of psychic blindness not to
see that he there played the rôle of the father who punishes the child.
The development of this attitude may be surmised to have taken place
approximately as follows: His primary phantasy was undoubtedly generated
by the wish that his father be tender with him. He wanted to replace the
mother in his father’s affection (_coitus inter femora_). Probably
jealousy thoughts against the mother, revenge fancies against the father
on account of unrequited love; these mental sins gave rise to his
feeling of guilt, as displayed in his masochism. For as I shall prove in
another work[28] in this Series, sadism is always the primary attitude
and is transposed into masochism in consequence of the feeling of guilt,
or else the two appear side by side.

I must comment on _Fleischmann’s_ remark that psychoanalysis only
disturbed the patient and did not cure him. It is not proper to ascribe
all failures of psychoanalysis to the method. Psychoanalysis is a
difficult art and will always be conducted expertly only by a relatively
small number of specialists. Not everything that goes under the name of
psychoanalysis is genuine. Often the patient submits for a few days to
psychoanalysis then drops it (when a successful psychoanalysis may
require several months) and claims it did him no good.[29] A thorough
psychoanalysis of the above case would have certainly led to a deeper
understanding of the mental mechanism involved and would have revealed
much new light.

Undoubtedly various sexual repressed tendencies may become manifest
during psychoanalytic treatment. That is even necessary,—they must be
met and overcome with the consultant’s aid. The next case below is an
illustration that latent homosexuality may become manifest after a few
seances in the course of psychoanalysis.

83. Mr. Delta, medical student, 24 years of age, hereditary history
negative, physically healthy in every respect, suffers of depressions
and inability to concentrate on his work. The most important facts
bearing on his anamnesis and his later history he relates in the
following letter:


“From my earliest childhood I have been extraordinarily sensuous. It was
the custom (an evil one) in our family for the children to crawl into
the parents’ bed in the morning. I naturally always went to mother’s
bed, while my sisters preferred to go to father’s bed. We children also
went to one another’s bed and on such occasions I was in the habit of
trying to crawl with my head under the covers with the intention,
frankly, of carrying out _cunnilingus_ especially on my sister N., who
was already married. Why I preferred N., at the time I do not understand
clearly, possibly because she was receptive towards me and such
practices are possible only if the female partner is at least
unconsciously agreeable to it. I was 5 years of age at the time. I have
also carried on _cunnilingus_ on my sister B., at 15 years of age, while
she was asleep. These fancies later played a tremendous rôle in my
mental life, causing also a profuse sweating of the palms of my hands
which disappeared in part when I became consciously aware of them. The
killing of the chickens by our cook produced an extraordinarily exciting
effect upon me. When the cook gripped the chicken between her limbs near
her genital region to kill it she excited me to the point of a true
orgasm. I tried to imitate her by catching flies and squeezing them to
death between my limbs, near my genitals, or by drowning them in urine.
My attitude towards friends, colleagues, etc., was also extremely
peculiar. I cultivated preferably the friendship of children of the
proletarian class, while children of my own set never attracted me in
particular, although I was friendly with them. Children of that class
also submitted more willingly to various homosexual acts, something
which I did not quite dare carry on with children of my own set. I
remember one boy in particular, with whom I attempted _coitus in os_. I
recall also a dream of my childhood years: An awful butchery is going on
in our court yard and my sister W., and a certain man are in it. I am
pursued by both, they throw me on the ground, and I am killed with a
single blow on the forehead. I may add that killing invoked in my mind
the picture of the aggressor sitting astride over the victim’s face and
mouth, rider-fashion. That at any rate was the manner in which we boys
killed one another. Girls of my age were a torture to me but to older
girls and adult women I extended my greatest admiration,—a sentiment
which was purely platonic with me at the time. At the public school I
fell in love with every strict teacher, once I was in love with two of
them at the same time. I wanted the two to punish me and that, in a very
strange way. I wanted to be taken to bed and to be squeezed to death by
them,[30]—naturally between their genitalia. The _immictio in os_ by a
woman was also a favorite form of torture in my day dreaming.

“Now comes puberty. I consider the starting point of my later neurosis
the fact that I cared for contact only with persons who could offer me
some sexual satisfaction and that even as a child. During puberty this
peculiarity showed even more markedly. For a time I preserved my
platonic admiration of women older than myself. Young girls were still
repulsive to me until I fell passionately in love with one. I followed
that little one for years like a shadow, but in spite of the
encouragement she gave me I could not bring myself to speak to her. When
I finally did so, I saw in a flash the reason for my remarkable
hesitation, I did not say what I started to say, the whole charm was
gone in an instant,—she seemed to me common and inferior,—although my
objective judgment at other times told me precisely the reverse. In
short, my affection reawakened in its earlier intensity only some time
after I recovered from the shock of my personal acquaintance with her.
At that time I became very friendly with a certain colleague, Joseph Z.
The tie that linked us was that very bewitching dark girl. He also was
in love with her (one would have thought that this would have broken our
friendship). We never tired admiring her charms between us and our
friendship came to an end only when I discovered that he was not true to
our idol. At the same time nothing disgusted me during that period so
much as the sight of a pair of lovers. _I had the feeling that a man
loses something of his manliness and dignity through intimacy with a
woman._

“My next friend was Herbert. I had few sexual points of contact with
him, except that we visited together the red light resorts for the first
time and jointly made love to the various inmates. Herbert was so witty
a fellow that I almost loved him, especially as he was slavishly devoted
to me. But my neurosis made tremendous leaps for the worse even at that
time and I became more and more timid and awkward in my ways and when
finally he turned on me with his wit our friendship came to an end.

“Next came Friedrich. He clung to me with fanatic love, this went on for
about three years, until he married, and then I felt lonely in the
world. My beloved mother to whom I was extremely devoted as a child
could only try to console me, but I was hopelessly disconsolate. As a
child I had been inseparable from her for years; _Mendelssohn’s_
well-known Spring song brought tears to my eyes because the thought of a
mother losing her child seemed atrocious to me. Although I felt a great
measure of that affection for mother which is common in every one’s
childhood experience, a certain craving remained ungratified. I became
acquainted with psychoanalysis and it brought to my mind the youthful
perversities of my youth. I decided to give expression to my conscious
instincts and I have come to the following conclusion:

“_My attitude towards the other sex will never be satisfactory, I must
stand either above or below woman, must be either hammer or anvil, an
unprejudiced relationship I find impossible, because as soon as I see a
pretty woman I lose my senses, and would like preferably to be at her
feet and obey her like a slave. But women do not wish that, they want to
be submissive themselves, they want to feel the man above them._
Intercourse on the level of equality I find tiresome, so there remains
only sadism for me, through which, I may confess frankly, I have already
enjoyed pleasant times. True friendship on the basis of mutual love and
respect I am capable of maintaining only with men, as in my childhood.”


This sounds like the history of a typical bisexual strongly on the way
to become a genuine homosexual. Let us turn to his psychoanalytic
treatment before we examine his sexual attitude. He went to a
psychoanalyst who had been recommended to him by _Freud_. He was wholly
unable to work, impotent with women at the time, and had recourse to
masturbation. During the first sitting he learned that he had been in
love with his mother. The knowledge of this fact acted as a “relief,”
according to his testimony. (He even told it to his mother.) Shortly
afterwards he had his first successful coitus with a woman. But the
neurosis did not change and in a short time he came to me for analysis.
I found a tremendous resistance against the discovery of the true
attitude. He employed all sorts of subterfuges to take up the time
during the consultation hours and to disclose only what he wanted. He
soon exhausted the account of his pronounced sadism and of his
masochistic tendencies. But concerning his relations to his father he
was very hazy. He became able to go to work, attended the lectures and
turned once more diligently to his studies. I saw the hopelessness of my
endeavors and broke the analysis under some pretext or other.... There
are patients, whom I have described as the psychoanalytic
_Ahasverus-type_[31] who are among the most thankless of subjects for
our professional endeavors. They rush from one analyst to another,
imploring the new consultant to remove the last of their troublous
symptoms, and stay all the time very much as they have been from the
beginning. They look upon the analysis, too, as a test of power, they
want to triumph over their consultant, they want to come out stronger
than he and—what is most important—they do not want to recognize the
real background of their attitude. They stubbornly overlook the real
foundation of their neurotic trouble and their ‘unwillingness to see’ is
made worse by their superficial acquaintance with psychoanalysis and
their fragmentary introspection. They thus run from one physician to
another, criticize the first to the second, the second to a third, the
third to a fourth. This conduct stands partly in relation to their
attitude towards the father,—a subject to which we shall have occasion
to revert more fully later.

It happened precisely as I had surmised. He went back to _Freud_, who
recommended a third analyst, because he refused stubbornly to return to
the first. After a few months he gave up the treatment and considered
himself well. One half year later he came back to me and told me that
since adopting exclusively homosexual relations he was entirely well,
able to work, and as lively “as a fish in the brook.” But something
still seemed to be lacking. At my request he wrote the account which I
have given above, stating that he had no objection to its publication.
He added orally a few statements which I shall use later.

The characteristic feature of his attitude towards woman is emphasized
in his own written statement. Either he must torture or he must be
tortured—he can either love or must hate, and only to excess. He is
afraid of his terrific love passion. Therefore he feels impelled to
humble himself before woman, to serve her as a slave, which is his
symbolic expression for the longing after _cunnilingus_ and for his
willingness to submit to _mictio in os_. He wants to serve woman as a
means for the attainment of gratification, as a vessel for her excreta,
to be a submissive slave to all her whims. His submissiveness goes so
far that he is willing to be killed by woman. This sadistic
transposition of this attitude signifies: only through doing away with
the sexual partner one achieves complete mastery and may claim complete
possession.

In his feeling-attitude towards woman he vacillates between two
extremes: hatred to the point of annihilation and a love so great as to
include the willingness to be sacrificed. Clearly, he must protect
himself so as not to give way to his hatred and become a murderer. A
deeper insight into the parallelogram of the psychic forces involved in
such situations leads plainly to the conviction that the instinct to
live and the will to power prevent him from subjecting himself to woman
actually to the point of self-annihilation. His feeling-attitude towards
woman is too affective for him to be able to reduce it to a proper
emotional level. How plain is the significance of his boyhood
experience,—his great passion for the girl whom he followed like a
shadow. But he did not dare to bring that love affair down to reality.
He was afraid of himself, afraid of the subjection. The girl gave him to
understand that he need not belittle himself at all. In his eyes that
was enough for her to lose her charm after he became acquainted with
her; she attracted him again only after all danger of his trying himself
out with her was over. He considered himself plain-looking and thought
he could not attract any one. He hated the women on account of their
charm, because he himself would have liked to have been a pretty woman.

He also cleverly covered that wish by beginning to overstress the value
of manliness. “I had a feeling,” he states, “that a man loses something
of his manliness and dignity through his intimacy with a female person.”
One must bear in mind that this man esteemed his mother very highly,
holding her above all others as a person and as a woman. The normal
person forms the image of his ideal woman after his mother. But he looks
upon his mother as an exception and, like many other homosexuals,
excepts his mother alone from the scorn with which he looks down upon
the whole female sex. Now he tolerates woman but only with a sadistic
feeling-attitude. For hatred vanquishes woman easier than love.

The question, what is he seeking in man and why does he prefer men to
women?, he answers as follows: “I seek the penis in man. I think chiefly
of his penis. With men I find no resistance at all. Woman I consider
ugly while man is beautiful. I look chiefly for womanly men who to me
stand for the girl with the penis. _I was attracted only once to an
elderly man with a very energetic face._ And what particularly attracts
me to man: there is no question of any submissiveness with him. Man does
not humble himself,—only woman does that.”

But he does not seek the submissive woman. He needs a strong woman who
shall domineer over him. He confesses that intercourse with a woman
sadist would gratify him. But, as he states in his written account:
women do not care to domineer, they want to be overpowered themselves.

We note that the polar sexual tension between male and female is most
extreme in his case. He could kill the woman who humiliates him,
belittles him, as Judith killed Holofernes, because he had conquered her
sexually.[32]

His peculiar manner of masturbating (squeezing flies to death against
the penis) discloses his specific onanistic fancy. He squeezes a woman
to death, he strangles her, while cohabiting with her. A short time
after the first analysis he had sexual intercourse with a servant girl.
He described her to me: “a gigantic girl, and so powerful that she could
have overpowered me with one hand!” With such a girl he felt safe. But
he never dared to have sexual intercourse with weak persons, even though
they exerted a stronger sexual attraction on him. He had every reason to
flee from woman, because he feared the transposition of his excessive
love passion into a deadly aggressive hatred. He claims he could have
intercourse now only with a woman addicted to all sorts of perversities.
Only such a woman could rouse his passion and could offer him something.
He has never tried this out. It looks as if he feared the involvement of
his heart, but that could use woman merely as a vehicle for his lust. A
perverse woman would drown the urgings of his strongest paraphilia: the
impulse to kill a woman.

Now we may understand through his family history how this attitude must
have arisen.

He belonged to a family where both parents had very pronounced
individualities of their own. The father was a self-made man, who rose
through his own efforts and became a millionaire. He was strict,
energetic, always preoccupied with his business, and never had any spare
time for his family. With the children he was tender while they were
small and pretty playthings. Later he changed completely his attitude
and the patient was required and expected to show a good record of his
conduct at school. He continued to be tender with the girls, so that the
boy must have unconsciously envied his sisters. This change from
tenderness to severity on the part of parents is very common and is
responsible for many instances of stubborn contrariness on the part of
children, especially towards the father. The child always longs for the
early childhood when the father was so loving and tender. Perhaps this
longing for early childhood is the reason why so many homosexuals are of
a decidedly infantile type.[33] The kindly old gentleman sought by so
many homosexuals is perhaps merely the affectionate father of their
youth, who never punished severely....

Our patient’s mother was a remarkably intelligent and very beautiful
woman, who all her life contended with her husband for rulership over
the house. I had an opportunity to obtain a deep insight into that
marriage situation. I know of no other marriage where the struggle for
supremacy was so bitter between the two personalities. There were
constantly quarrels in the house, often on the point of breaking out in
violence. Each one avoided showing any affection for the other. To do so
would have meant acknowledging the other’s superiority. They did
everything they could to each other. They bore themselves with aloofness
and appeared indifferent towards one another, though keeping up a
continuous quarrel. If the husband noticed some other man courting his
handsome wife, he smiled indulgently and accorded his rival a free
field, as if to prove to his wife that he was not jealous in the least,
and was willing to accord her every freedom. She also seemed to overlook
the seamy side, in her husband’s conduct. Nevertheless they were ready
to jump at each other on the slightest provocation. Once the situation
reached a crisis and the woman pointed a revolver at her husband
threatening to end everything in a terrible tragedy.

The children divided between the contesting parents, taking sides. The
son was entirely with his mother. He was unhappy because she had to put
up with so much and he goaded her on all the time, urging her to carry
the fight to a successful issue and even advising her to seek separation
from her husband. He had nothing good to say about his father, outside
the latter’s business ability. He described the father as a cold-blooded
fellow without a heart, a mere adding machine, etc.... On a superficial
examination it looked as if he loved his mother and hated his father.
But back of that hatred there stood the carefully preserved love of his
earlier years. That love, however, he was unwilling to acknowledge. That
was the critical point in the analysis. He always recoiled whenever the
analysis led to his fondness of the father, or various signs pointed out
his aboriginal attitude towards the father. Any analysis leads sooner or
later to a similar experience. Nothing is more difficult than to
dissolve the father hatred and reduce it back to its infantile
components,—love.

But in his homosexual acts he played the rôle of the father who is
tender with the child. We also perceive now why he felt himself suddenly
attracted to that elderly gentleman with the energetic face. He was an
image of his own strict father.

Having witnessed in his childhood a terrific struggle between man and
woman, and having himself taken a part in that merciless struggle for
supremacy, he was bound to conceive the problem of love as a struggle
for supremacy, a competitive struggle in the will to power. His supreme
question always was: “_Who is the stronger one?_” This case shows us
with remarkable clearness the mechanisms on which _Alfred Adler_ lays
such great stress. But it also shows the incestuous love for the sister,
a tendency of which he was aware. In the young men he sought the
reproductions of his sister’s picture. He also showed a fixation upon
the mother, with whom he was seldom on agreeable pleasant terms.
Nevertheless he has not forgotten the early tendernesses of his father.
In the wish to be squeezed to death, his masochistic fancies revolve
around the masked image of his severe father standing like a shadow. To
be master, to be slave—his whole system of thinking revolved around
these two notions. He has social intercourse only with men towards whom
he feels himself superior. Already as a child he chose his comrades
among the children of the poor, because he could domineer them. He
abandoned one friendship because his friend made jokes at his expense.
He was not a handsome child. That drove him into the path of hatred and
envy. He hated all women because they were his rivals with the father.
He thought he would have been liked better if he had been a handsomer
fellow.

He was a slave to his family and unable to wean himself away. He moved
to another city in order to free himself of the family ties. That made
him homesick. His mother had to visit him. He was proud when they went
on walks together and were taken for a pair of lovers. But secretly he
really yearned for his father, and never forgives himself that he did
not interrupt that vacation journey to go to his father.

In reality he continued the struggle between his parents. Within him
struggled man and wife. Possibly also the child, though acting more in
the rôle of a bystander, and ready to give the stereotypic answer “both”
to the question, “whom do you like better?” He thinks he has overcome
the man in him. I consider his homosexuality a passing phase. He will
achieve health only after complete emotional detachment from the family
circle.

We often note that the neurotic gets well only after the death of one of
the parents or of both. But in many cases, the parents even after they
are dead continue to hold their sway over the infantile soul and their
dominion ends only with the death of their child who, in that devotion
to them, loved but himself and loved himself unto death....




                                   VI

  HISTORY AND ANALYSIS OF A HOMOSEXUAL—CHILDHOOD REMINISCENCES—ANAL
      EROTISM—ATTACHMENT TO THE MOTHER—INTERPRETATION OF DREAM
      SYMBOLISMS—LOVE OF THE FATHER—REGRESSION THEORY OF HOMOSEXUALITY.


_Was ist das Siegel der erreichten Freiheit?—Sich nicht mehr von sich
selber schämen._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._




                                   VI

_What is the stamp of achieved freedom?—To be no longer ashamed of one’s
self._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._


The complete analysis of a homosexual would require a whole volume.
Before concluding the present work I propose to give a portion of such
an analysis. The treatment lasted six weeks, when it was interrupted by
the war. This analysis, too, only led as far as the father complex. But
even so it yields important data and enables us to draw together the
observations made in connection with the various briefer illustrations
already discussed.


84. Mr. Sigma, a student from Denmark, 28 years of age, consults me on
account of various nervous difficulties. For a number of months past he
has felt very depressed, is always fatigued, generally unable to sleep
and unable to concentrate on his work. He is facing his final
examinations but is unable to study. He complains of a lack of any sense
of joy in living. He admits having entertained also ideas of suicide
which he has rejected chiefly on account of his mother. He is very much
afraid that he may yield some day to just such a temptation.

Sigma is consciously homosexual. He emphasizes: He has never felt any
interest in the female sex and already as a child he fell in love only
with boys. He is the only son of a very hard-working, brave, mother in
comfortable circumstances who is wholly wrapped up in him. His father
died a few years ago. He lives a wholly retired existence, he has no
friends,—for his mother prevents that. Once—he was 17 years of age at
the time—he had a close friend to whom he felt very attached, but his
mother interfered and broke up their friendship. Now he is completely
isolated. All his spare time he devotes to his mother, when he is not
gone to the theater or to a concert. He also visits no families; his
mother prevents it.

He begins—spontaneously—an account of his life with his first
recollections:

I was 2 years of age and we—a number of children—played out of doors. A
pretty lady walked up and threw a ball into the grass. She said: He who
catches the ball may keep it. I was nearest to it but did not dare to
trespass upon the finely kept lawn. Therefore another one caught the
ball....

This recollection seems typical of Sigma. Like all first recollections
it contains the determinants of his whole life.[34] It shows us a man
who lacks self-confidence, whose activity is inhibited by considerations
regarding others. He explains that for the sake of his mother he has
renounced all pleasures in life. He is always hesitant (_kleinmütig_),
overwhelmed by his feeling of inferiority and dares not assume any
important enterprise.

His sexuality awoke very early. He played always with girls and felt
more like a girl. He liked to put on his mother’s hat and clothing. His
mother was the master in the house, the breadwinner and law giver. The
father always played a subordinate rôle. We see again a reiteration of
the fact that the child identifies itself with the stronger parent.
Under the circumstances it was natural that Sigma should identify
himself with the mother....

Already, in the public school, at seven years of age, he fell in love
with his teacher. That is why he became one of the best scholars. He
also loved some of his colleagues, but was too bashful to betray himself
to them. At 12 years of age he began to masturbate and during the act
his fancies were centered on the image of a naked man. He was very
religious up till that time and during confession distinguished himself
by the lengthy list of his sins and the depth of his dejection. At 12
years of age he became free and progressively developed into a
full-fledged atheist. The struggle against masturbation began at 14
years of age, when he heard that the habit was very harmful. After that
he indulged more rarely. Great feeling of fatigue on day after
pollution. The subject regards his present condition a consequence of
his masturbation habit.

Already during his gymnasium years (high school) his mind was distracted
and he barely managed to squeeze through his finals (_Matura_). He was
always bashful and avoided the colleagues who spoke cynically among
themselves about girls so that he was called “Miss Sigma.” For a few
years he lived away from home. They lived formerly in the country and he
had to stay in Copenhagen. He lived with some older sisters with whom he
did not get along very well. He played music with them, joined them on
walks, experienced considerable excitation ... short of erotism. His
whole erotic feeling was directed only to men and boys. In the course of
his endless day dream fancies he never thought of a woman at any time in
his life. He dreams only of men and thinks only of them. That concludes
the first visit.

Sigma again emphasizes his one-sided inclination towards men.
Nevertheless he must correct a small detail of his account as given on
the previous day. This, I repeat, is a common typical occurrence in the
anamnesis of homosexuals. When giving an account of their life they
neglect entirely all the heterosexual episodes. But today Sigma adds
that occasionally he did have erotic dreams concerning women; perhaps
four or five times. But not more often than that. These dreams led to
pollutions and were rather indefinite as to content. Sigma was also in
love, transiently, with a girl cousin, at sixteen years of age. He at
once attempts to weaken the force of this declaration: it was merely a
pastime, a pose, because an uncle was in love with the same girl. He
thought it was his duty also to make love to this girl cousin. But it
was soon over. And he must emphasize again that he never indulged in any
phantasies centering on women. He had such phantasies. But they were
always about men.

He was brought up almost wholly in female society. If his mother was
away, there was an aunt in the house who looked after him. He was taken
to school and was called for when he was already a grown-up boy—the
typical training for dependence. His mother wanted to procure friends
for him. There were always some boys whom she wished he would accept as
his friends. But usually he himself found nothing in those particular
boys to interest him. If he himself chose some boy for a friend his
mother was sure to interpose her veto as soon as their friendship became
too warm. And he was always prone to fall in love with his friends. He
composed poetry at a very early age, deifying his friends; to this day
his poems are devoted almost wholly to Eros Uranos.

At this point he reflects for a while; and he continues: “I identified
myself always with the female figures who were mostly strong, aggressive
women. I could always enthuse over such strong, energetic women
displaying male aggressiveness about them. If a woman or a girl ever
interested me and played a rôle in my day dreams, she was of this type.”
Next he recalls a heterosexual episode. He admired for a time the
landlady’s daughter, kept company with her, they played music together,
but he felt very unhappy when she married off afterwards.

The Eulenberg trial made him aware of his own homosexuality. That made
him very unhappy for he discovered that he was unlike others. In the
high school he was always looked upon as peculiar and he kept aloof from
his schoolmates. The famous trial made it clear to him that his end
would be either insanity or jail. He went through some dreadful days. He
was in love with a friend and when the latter asked him why he was so
depressed, he broke into bitter tears and poured out his heart
circuitously describing his passion. He felt that he was not like
others, he felt lonely and closed in, unrecognized and weak. His friend
advised him to devote himself more to art. He looked upon the subject’s
suffering as due to thwarted ambition.

His typical dreams are concerned with pursuit by men and breaking in. A
particular dream made a strong impression on him: He was pursued in bed
by a great mass of bedbugs and finally himself turned into a bedbug.[35]
Like all homosexuals he had for a time the fear of infection and
especially of tuberculosis. He was almost convinced that he would die
prematurely of tuberculosis.

We are also familiar with tuberculosis (as well as syphilis) as the
representative of what is evil, of incest and homosexuality. But for the
present our patient sheds no light on this aspect of the subject. We do
not care to influence Sigma and therefore do not disturb the course of
his associations. Sigma shows but little interest in the analysis. He is
mistrusting and hesitant. He does not have much time and seems relieved
when the sitting is over.

The next sitting opens as follows: “I have come to ask you to make an
appointment with me for tomorrow. I want to skip today. I must take a
little rest and gather strength. Yesterday’s sitting has sort of taken
me to pieces....”

During the first couple of sittings I had hardly spoken a word and had
allowed Sigma to do all the talking. But the flight reflex, which
dominates all homosexuals, because they are afraid of the truth, is here
already coming to surface:

“What roused you so yesterday?”

“That you kept so quiet. It was an uncanny silence....”

“Would you have preferred to see me excited?”

“No.... I know, of course, that the physician must keep his balance. But
that is precisely what I lack. What an awful impression I must have made
on you!”

_Hinc illae lacrimae!_ The subject is concerned over the impression he
makes upon the physician. He wants to know whether the physician has
sympathy for him, whether he is impressed or indifferent. He is afraid
of making himself appear ridiculous. The physician becomes the chief
person around whom his own life interests are being centered for the
time.

“But that is irrelevant. You want to get well; and that has nothing to
do with personal matters.”

“To be sure,—that is just what I was saying to myself. Doctor, you are
my last hope. And yet, I am already losing patience and feel like
running off. It is less than two weeks since I went to purchase a
revolver intending to shoot myself. The plan fell through only on
account of my lack of adroitness. I was unable to procure a revolver.
The saleslady demanded to be shown a purchase permit and I did not have
one. There must have also been a tremor in my voice. I was so
excited.... If I had been able to procure that revolver I would not be
now sitting in your office.”

“Why did you want to die?”

“A life full of trouble! No friends! No prospect of improvement! The
everlasting depression!”

“And did you not think of the suffering you would have caused your
mother? To your mother who sacrificed her life for you?”

“No, I was indifferent about that. It would have only served her right,
because it is she who has ruined my life. It might have been the end of
her too.... But I was truly sorry for my friend. He has so many cares
and so much to think about. It would have shaken him up. He is a writer
and is now at work on a new novel. It would have certainly thrown him
out of the writing mood and it would have interfered with his creative
activity.”

“What has your mother done you that you should want to punish her so
severely?”

This brings out the last repressed grudge against the mother who came
near separating him from his much beloved friend.

“Mother has ruined my whole life,” he continues, “she has separated me
from my only and best friend. You have no idea what I suffered. He came
daily to our house. He accompanied me on the piano so that we enjoyed
unforgettable evenings together. Father was once a good singer. As there
was no accompanist at hand he neglected the beautiful gift. Now we
resurrected the old songs once more. Every evening was a festival. On
account of a pulmonary apical catarrh I had to go to Egypt. During my
absence a catastrophe occurred. Mother found that my friend was robbing
her of a son’s love. She was jealous because he heard more often and
received longer letters from me than the parents. She compelled my
father to write Ernst a curt letter forbidding him to come to the house
any longer or to correspond with me. From Ernst, to whom I wrote
regularly three times weekly while he answered once, I received next an
ironic letter, stating that I ought to enclose the parent’s permission
next time I write him. Only then will he write me again. I did not
understand what that meant until I read the enclosed father’s letter. I
felt like one against whom the gates of heaven have been suddenly closed
tight. I returned to Copenhagen at once, but did not dare to take openly
a stand against mother. She had a bad heart spell the first time I
reproached her bitterly and all the relatives called me her murderer. I
made up secretly with Ernst and met him on the street. But mother found
out. She followed me stealthily and when she discovered that I was
meeting Ernst there followed terrible quarrels which I am unable to
relate. I was thus very badly embittered and that innocent relationship
was turned into a morbid whim. You will appreciate, therefore, that I
cannot but hold a grudge against mother....”

“Have you not tried to rebel openly against the situation?”

“I was too weak for that. Father begged me not to disturb the happiness
of our family circle. It was a terrible situation and I did not see my
way out of it. That happened when I was 19 years of age. I have since
told mother that I must meet Ernst once in a while. She is against the
idea and wants to link me up to other friends. I am brought into contact
with girls in the hope that I will take an interest in them. But the
very fact that they are brought in my way under mother’s patronage, as
it were, makes them repulsive to me from the outset. Moreover, I know
that mother would be equally jealous if I should really love a girl. She
will stand for no other love besides her. I am too broken up to ever
break away and be self-reliant. So I remain everlastingly a mother’s
boy. But I cannot endure this sort of thing any longer. I have had
enough of this torture and want to see an end to it....”


“I feel much better. Last evening I worked fairly well, for the first
time in a long period. I am beginning to like Vienna. I was out in the
woods (_Wienerwald_) and I was pleased with the sight of the first
violet. I am again beginning to feel pleasure in nature’s beauties. It
was my first excursion.”

“Don’t you go out of doors otherwise?”

“Yes, every Sunday. Always in mother’s company. We start in the morning,
have our lunch out of doors and spend the day together.”

“Do you not go on excursions with your friend?”

“Unfortunately, I do not. But hold on! I did, just once. I was going to
tell you about it anyway, today. He invited me to join him with a number
of his colleagues on an excursion to a distant island. I was
enthusiastic over the plan at once for I hoped that it would prove an
opportunity for greater intimacy between us. But I was disillusioned. We
were happy the whole day. I was thinking all the time of the night. I
hoped we would have a room with double bed.... Unfortunately all the
rooms in the hotel were taken and we had to be content with occupying
quarters in common. Here, too, luck failed to serve me. My friend slept
next to another member of the party. Next day, under the pretext of
fatigue, I started back. I felt unhappy and was all day long on the
point of tears. I reached the next village alone. It was on a holiday. I
did not know what to do. So I went into the church....”

“To pray?”

“Not at all. I was no longer religious at the time. I went to be among
people. It did no good. The many dressed up folks, the holiday
atmosphere, the music, the songs, the organ. I calmed down a little.
Next I went to a restaurant because I felt a great craving for something
sweet. Thus the majestic and the trivial stand close in my case.[36]
Then I returned home, after first driving around through the streets and
was happy when it was so late that I had to go back to the house....”

There follow various accounts of his passion for his friend Ernst. He
always dreams of physical union with the friend and has no other
thought. Only once he attempted aggression on his friend. In a urinal he
suddenly reached for his friend’s penis. The latter good-naturedly
avoided him and never afterwards referred to the incident. But he saw
clearly that he would never achieve his aim. Meanwhile his friend fell
in love with an actress. He was jealous only so long as his friend did
not confide in him. Thereafter he was happy because the actress
preferred another man and paid no attention to Ernst. He was in a
position to console his friend like a mother. He emphasizes that his
feelings are distinctly maternal towards men who are ill or unhappy and
that he makes an excellent nurse,—thus bringing out his pronounced
identification with the mother. But he was unable to nurse his father
when the latter was taken with gastric cancer; the disease was terribly
repulsive to him....

He has dreamed the following dream:


_I am called up in school. I had to solve a mathematical problem but
could not arrive at the right result. Next it was an English translation
from Shakespeare. I did not know the vowels. It seemed that the various
persons of the play were represented by some of the colleagues in
theatrical costumes._


The analysis of this dream would lead us into endless bypaths. The most
important feature is the affective character of the dream which in
simplest terms may be formulated as follows: “I am facing problems in
life for which I do not feel prepared. I am an actor and I am wearing a
theatrical costume. I am playing the homosexual, I have transposed one
aboriginal trend into another. The English play, _The Merchant of
Venice_, comes to his mind. The teacher who examined him in mathematics
was also _Kaufmann_ (merchant) by name. This _Kaufmann_ is the center of
a rather tragic episode in his life. He was studying “exact” branches
(_Realschule_) but was interested in the classical (_Gymnasium_) course;
he was always weak in mathematics; he failed in his last examination for
engineering. His attitude towards money matters has always been morbid.
His mother continually reproaches him for not appreciating the value of
money and for being unable to handle money wisely. He is different from
his parents, both of whom are merchants.”

The _Merchant of Venice_ portrays the tragedy of the relations of a Jew
to his only daughter. She runs off with her beloved and abandons the
greedy father, who, however, never begrudged her anything. He wants to
do likewise. He would like to flee with his friend and abandon the
mother. His basic problem is: how to get around his mother, how to free
himself of her.

He places great weight on the jewel box scene, which has always
impressed him. He, too, is confronted by the difficult problem of a
choosing among the boxes. There are three paths open before him: man,
woman and child. He is a child, would like to be a woman and is afraid
to be a man. His inner conflicts are locked up like the valuables in the
box. We shall see whether analysis is capable of disclosing them....

There are some vague relations to Shylock’s coldbloodedness. He
emphasizes the pound of flesh. The associations lead to certain sadistic
trends which are wholly unconscious. At any rate, the first dream in the
analysis is of greatest significance. Its complete solution and
interpretation becomes possible much later....

He dwells for a long time on his attitude towards money. One familiar
with dream analysis at once suspects that this money complex has its
bearing on anal eroticism. He keeps to his theme. Requests to leave
early.

Again comes very late and asks whether he may leave early. He is hungry.
(One notices his extremely resistant attitude. He is afraid he might
disclose something.) He has dreamed wild and profuse dreams, he can no
longer remember what. He must have spoiled his stomach for he vomited in
the morning.

This vomiting in the morning, a symptom which appears in many neurotics
and also in the case of many neurotic children is a reaction of the
ethical, moral self against the dreams of the previous night. Plainly,
one is disgusted with one’s self. Hence the vomiting which is
subsequently ascribed to something inoffensive that may have been eaten
on the previous evening. But the subject believes that the beer he drank
did not agree with the dessert....

He is asked whether he can recall at all the dream.

“No, not a trace.”

“Better try and see.”

“I only remember scraps; nothing worth mentioning.”

“Please tell me these scraps.”

“I have dreamed only about various water closets and urinals. There was
a urinal here and one in the office ... the rest is gone. I cannot
recall.”

“The vomiting in the morning seems to me to point at something going on
in the urinal which strikes you as disgusting.”

“May I not have simply spoiled my stomach?”

“Indeed. That is a possibility not to be excluded. But the other is also
a possibility to be thought of. Do you often vomit in the morning?”

“Yes, but only as I did today. Only fluid. It is more a nausea than real
vomiting. May I leave now?”

“You know that I never compel you to stay. Only I want to draw your
attention that I am fully aware you want to hide something from me. How
do you imagine you can get well if you do not have the courage to
confide in your consultant? Or perhaps you are afraid that you will lose
something of my respect if you should disclose the peculiarities of your
sexual life? You are anxious to run off and keep your secret. Very well.
You are free to do as you wish. But do not expect, under the
circumstances, that a consultant should spend his time on your case. One
who wants really to get well must first be willing to face his problems
clearly.”

“You are right, doctor. I have kept from you the most important thing: I
do indulge in a form of sexual excitation which is perhaps the most
unpleasant possible. You will appreciate at once why I have kept the
knowledge of this from you so long. I thought I have told you already
too much and I wanted to keep to myself this particular morbid turn. But
you will surely despise me.”

“I despise no sufferer.”

“Already as a small boy I had felt the greatest interest in the water
closet. My wish was always: to see another man in the act of defecating.
In my school fancies I always thought of the teacher being compelled to
defecate in my presence. I was always trying to watch other men in the
act. If I succeeded in witnessing the act I became very excited and
masturbated. My whole mind and thought to this day revolves around the
water closet and the feces. Think of it! I, a person with certain
æsthetic tastes, an artist, poet, enthusiastic musician, a man aspiring
to all that is beautiful and noble,—to be fettered down to so horrible a
perversion! Think of this abyss between my body and my soul! If I become
acquainted with a new man and I like him, my first thought is: I should
like to see him empty his bowels.”[37]

“Have you perhaps, as a child, witnessed such a scene which may have
made a deep impression on you?”

“I do not remember. I only know that already in the primary grades I was
interested in watching my schoolmates. In Denmark there is a greater
freedom about these matters than elsewhere. Sexual freedom, too, seems
to me to be greater in our country. In later years I found sufficient
opportunity to satisfy my craving. Finally I had recourse to a tiny
augur which I keep always with me as an aid to secure the opportunities
for observation which have now become indispensable to me. But usually I
find boring holes unnecessary. Little appropriate convenient holes may
be found when one looks for them. I must have many colleagues for I have
found that most closets show these observation spots. Here in Vienna,
too, I have seldom come across a water closet, where it was not possible
to watch the act. I fight with all my powers against this unfortunate
trend. But I give in each time again. I think of it all forenoon. By
noontime I am wholly out of patience. I am impelled to seek a public
lavatory. There I wait till a man comes along. When I see him defecate,
I masturbate....”

“Have you watched women, too?”

“No, I find women disgusting when I think of them in this situation.”

We are here confronted with a form of anal erotism of a pronounced
infantile character. All children without exception show a great
interest in the lavatory and in the processes of micturition and
defecation. These processes form the theme of a whole group of infantile
sexual theories. The children come through the anus, they are generated
through the urine, etc. It is quite likely that we have here an instance
of the fixation of certain infantile impressions. The fact that the
first phantasies which he is able to recall revolve around his teacher,
proves that someone who was an authority played a rôle as the
intermediary for these early infantile impressions. Who can that
authority be? We can only surmise. We must await patiently the further
development of the analysis.

He complain that he has an ugly appearance, because everything about him
is so unprepossessing; his whole physiognomy seems to him womanly, soft,
and the obverse of striking. He often turns to the looking-glass and
examines himself. As in the picture of Dorian Grey he finds the traces
of his paraphilia expressed in his features. He symbolizes his mental
processes and localizes them in his face. He fights, a relentless fight
against his scatologic phantasies and trends, he seems to himself weak,
womanly, repulsive. Vice, low thoughts, animal cravings, low passion—all
that he sees expressed in his face.


His first recollection of his paraphilia is noteworthy. He is playing
with a little friend, an uncle, who wants to defecate near the street.
He points out that people may pass and prevents the deed.... This
recollection already indicates the two tendencies: the coprophiliac
trend and the struggle against it.

Moreover, his coprophilia reaches farther than he has confessed thus
far. We discover today that there is present a predisposition to
coprophagia, that the condition is really a mixture of homosexuality and
stark infantilism. He would like to allow the partner to defecate on
him. Identifications with lavatory come to surface. The place chosen for
the deposition of the feces is the abdomen, occasionally the mouth.
There are also frequent phantasies of _fellatio_, active and passive.
The reading of various medical and popular books excites his phantasy
and feeds his paraphilia.


He relates two dreams. In the first he was running after an electric car
which he could not reach. He tried to jump on but in vain, the car just
passed before his nose. In the second dream he led his dog for a walk,
the dog met another and copulated while he himself ran off. The first
dream represents an unattainable ideal. The second illustrates the
endeavor to get rid of the animal-like trends (within himself). He
avoids similarly coitus with a woman.

He relates that for a long time he has been in the habit of writing up
phantastic homosexual orgies and that he carries around these erotic
stories for months. The last story he wrote some 14 days ago. He is much
interested in these doings, because the writing and the reading excite
him tremendously. He tells me the content of the last phantasy which he
has written up: A round table of sixteen soldiers. One of them holds a
naked woman on his knees. She must urinate in a glass. The soldier pours
beer in that glass. Then all those present partake of the beer.[38]

He confesses next that he has already carried out a number of times
various urolagnic acts and felt great pleasure doing so. In fact these
cravings did not bother him only so long as the friend visited him daily
and he was keeping up his spiritual love for the fellow. That is why he
was so broken up when his mother deprived him of that friend.

He relates a number of episodes illustrating his activity as _voyeur_.
At first it was chiefly men of advanced age who roused him. They had to
have very clean and attractive linen. Ejaculation ensued when he had an
opportunity to see the man naked and the phallus interested him more
than the podex.

He also admits having entertained phantasies about his father. But he
found these phantasies unbearable and they proved at last so
discomforting that he had to abandon them. On the other hand he was able
to state emphatically that his mother never figured as an erotic object
in his fancies.

As a genuine homosexual he was very much surprised that a “naked woman”
should figure in his last phantasy or story and he could not explain the
intrusion. But he is telling me everything without reserve....

He fears that perhaps his mother is having some understanding with me.
She is in the habit of tracing all his secrets.... I point out to him
the fact that the mothers of homosexuals always show the strongest
opposition against the analysis when they find out that their sons free
themselves and turn their affection (temporarily, of course) to the
analyst. Sigma’s mother, who has accompanied him to Vienna, also
tolerates no intimate friendship on her son’s part, as we know. Thus he
tells me that she had reproached him yesterday for leaving her alone on
Sunday. She wants to be everything to him. She also tries to be tender
with him, to coddle him, a habit which he strongly resents. He believes
that this resentment is due to his aversion against all womanhood. This
sort of protection against all tendernesses on mother’s part is typical
of all sons who are incestuously fixed on their mother.

He relates how his mother once confessed to him that she found no
support in his father and actually felt lonely. On that occasion he wept
over his mother’s plight and passed a sleepless night.... His further
associations lead him to his father’s fatal illness: it was a slow
breaking down due to cancer. He could not take care of his father, and
was but of little service to the latter. It was shortly after his father
had dismissed his friend. He was still too absorbed in his own troubles.
He witnessed with detachment the terrible phases of the dying man’s last
struggle. A few days before the end he dreamed that he saw his father’s
body lying peacefully on the bier. It was plainly a dream of impatience.
He could hardly await his father’s passing away. He declares that he
hated his father heartily at the time, because the latter had allowed
himself to be induced by the mother to write that letter to his friend.
Strangely, he was never so angry with his determined mother as he was
with his weak-willed father. During the father’s funeral and upon
returning home he was unable to weep. This occurrence is typical of
those men for whom a death is the fulfillment of an old wish. In point
of fact the father was a burden and drag in the house. The mother
sacrificed herself and his death was a release for everybody. Moreover
his attitude towards his father had always been rather peculiar. They
had never had much in common....

He reports a number of small details illustrating how tirelessly his
mother endeavors to bind him to herself. Yesterday afternoon he was at
the theater and later went to the _Prater_. In the evening he found his
mother morose and pouting. She looked at him reproachfully saying: “Did
it not occur to you during your rounds of pleasure that you are leaving
your poor mother alone?”

He must think only of his mother and always feel that he is bound to her
forever. Aunts and neighbors always come to him to tell him how much
suffering he causes his poor mother by neglecting her. While he was
still suffering acutely the distress caused by his mother’s breaking up
his friendship with Ernst, he met the latter once secretly and they went
to a theater together. The mother knew it in some way and when he
returned home he found her in bed, her head wrapped in towels. Her
disappointment made her ill and she had to keep to her bed for a week.
Finally an aunt accused him of behaving like a murderer towards his
mother. She cannot understand that passion of his for that friend! Was
he perhaps in love with the young man’s sister? Happy to have a way out
of his difficulty suggested to him he answered the question in the
affirmative. That roused his mother’s jealousy to the highest pitch. But
she soon convinced herself that she had been fooled by him and that he
had no interest whatever in the girl.

He found the household ties so unbearable that at one time he
entertained the notion of shooting his parents and running off. There
were frequent quarrels during which he displayed unexpectedly a terrible
venom against his mother and an unexplainable tendency to violence. But
these episodes soon blew over, and he again felt himself helpless under
the tyrannic sway of her love. Perhaps not as unwillingly as he makes
out ... for there were opportunities available for freeing himself and
he did not take advantage of them. He remained inactively at home, to be
taken care of and to allow his mother to worry over him....

He dreamed of visiting numerous urinals running from one to the other.
This dream portrays him as searching for something. It appears that he
is trying to trace down a particular infantile scene. He relates how
obsessed he becomes with the desire to go from lavatory to lavatory
until he finally sees the longed-for scene. He is seldom satisfied.
Often there follows a feeling of disappointment and disgust.
Occasionally an uncommon sense of peace during which he is able to
gather his thoughts.

“I did not tell you the truth when I denied transvestitism
(_Verkleidungstrieb_). I often entertain such fancies. I am particularly
fond of Salome and I often portrayed myself in that rôle with keenest
interest. My teachers were the prophets whose cold, severed head I
kissed.”

This trend distinctly sadistic is fortified by numerous small details.
He is jealous. He saw once his friend entertaining himself in friendly
and lengthy conversation with a lady and the thought occurred to him
that perhaps his friend was in love with her. He figured that he would
be justified to take his friend’s life for he loved him more than any
one else in the world. He pictured to himself that deed and what he
would do to his friend. The chief motive he confessed reluctantly: “I
should abuse sexually his body.” With that fancy there is linked also
the portrayal of immense sadness.

The two features he mentions today are represented in the _Merchant of
Venice_. A scene which always excited him, representing transvestitism.
Portia as judge and the Jew bent on carving out a pound of flesh.
Shylock and Salome. The bloody head of John is obvious enough.

Today, too, he is in a hurry and must get through quickly. He is always
relieved when the hour is over. This raises the suspicion that he is
trying to cover up further revelations....

He relates particulars regarding his homicidal fancies against his
friends. His favored phantasy is the thought of pushing his favored
friend into an abyss. They often take walks on the seashore. At a
certain spot the coast is very steep and rocky and a fall there would
mean certain death. He is also obsessed with the reflection: what would
he do afterwards? Run away? No ... he would jump after his friend to be
united with the latter in death....

The next dream carries us deeply into the structure of his
homosexuality. First he relates the dream as he had written it down and
then he adds reluctantly the portion indicated as “additional.” The
addition usually contains the most important features.

The dream just before falling asleep:


_Place_: _the grotto across the_ Schönbrunn _Castle. I was descending
the rocky incline and reached the lowermost declivity. I was very much
afraid of falling into the water basin. I was wondering what to do, and
I had the feeling that back of me, instead of rocks there were high
stairs which I could never climb up. Suddenly I found myself on level
ground, beyond the water. An automobile passed me by noiselessly and
with lightning rapidity disappearing specter-like in the bushes. I saw
no driver and nobody else in the machine. It seemed very uncanny but
presently I knew that I was at home and in my bed. I should have liked
to keep on dreaming but the wish to hold on to what I had dreamed thus
far prevailed over all other desires. I was afraid I should forget my
phantasy so far as it had unfolded and that I should have nothing to
report to my consultant._

_Shortly afterwards I fell actually asleep and i dreamed a great deal. I
have tried to recall some of the things in the morning. It seems
noteworthy that the dreams were but lightly intimated rather than
carried out; there was always still something more about to take place
but the next dream picture intruded before the previous one was all
done._

Additional: _Once I found myself in a theater in the first row of a
balcony. Tristan was being given for the occasion. Instead of the
orchestra leader, André Rose was leading. A fine one-year volunteer_,
Einjahrig-Freiwilliger, _back of me, in the second row, was singing
Tristan in the style of the modern recital song. Next to me sat my aunt
who is linked with memories of my kindergarten age. I had the unpleasant
feeling that I was involuntarily sliding down towards the ground floor,
and therefore I leaned heavily back in my seat stretching out my legs
and trying to support myself by pressing my toes against the foot
support (bed foot-board?). I had the uncanny feeling that the foot rest
might give way and fall off like a piece of paste board. I begged my
aunt to lift me carefully. I felt like a very sick person. Sitting again
upright I felt well and refreshed and I was just in time to see the
curtain drop over the stage and a number of persons appearing in front
of it, among them several gentlemen in evening dress. Obviously the
performance is being cancelled. The public broke into ironic applause,
whistled and howled._

Another dream: _Late at night in a big garden. Many people about to take
their leave after an afternoon spent in irrelevant gossip. My parents
were also among those present. My father was in a hurry to get to town.
He leaves. It is very dark. Presently a station bell, the whistle of a
locomotive. I shout into the night’s darkness not knowing whether any
one hears me or not: he is lucky! He is just in time to catch the train.
And I think of following in an hour. I am very tired. I am happy in my
bed at home._

_Sunny afternoon in a poor quarter of a suburb. Under a window of an
apartment window there are a number of tin vessels which I know, belong
to the woman above. An elderly woman is preoccupied with the vessels,
holding each vessel up to the light, as if testing them, but I know that
she is merely awaiting the opportunity to run off with them. A window is
raised in the neighboring house, a woman calls out to the woman living
in the apartment under whose window the vessels are lying, to watch out
for the stranger. By that time I myself am standing in the owner’s room.
She is just putting on her best toilette. The warning neighbor appears
and scolds the vain woman who on account of her vanity neglects to watch
out for her things._

Addition: _I was in the next room. The woman had a little girl with her.
I held my penis in hand pursued the two and wanted them to take it in
their hand; and thus the ejaculation...._

_The woman’s hands disgusted me because they were dirty._


This is hardly the place for a complete analysis of the whole dream. The
first part, the falling into a deep basin is a hypnagogic vision and
represents the process of falling asleep, the descent into the depths of
primordial man. The rapidly passing automobile, the danger. The
representation of Tristan refers to a great passion for a queen.
_Schœnbrunn_, the former Kaiser’s summer residence, refers to the
parental home. Isolde is also a queen, who is lost forever for Tristan.
Is it not rather remarkable that he should dream of Tristan and Isolde,
the quintessential epic of heterosexual love? And does not the
cancellation correspond precisely to his cryptic wish? The thought of a
fall into the depths is continually recurring as well as the inhibitions
about things not holding out (hence the steadying with the feet for
support). The man in evening dress represents the love of a modern
cultural man in contrast with a Tristan. He himself is Tristan, the
onlooker and the singing _Einjährig-Freiwillige_. Finally another
picture: parting, _i.e._, his father’s death: “He was lucky.” What is
the meaning of that? He has caught the train on time! Recalling that in
one of his previous dreams the subject was unable to catch the electric
car, we understand that his father found time to attain his aim,—a
tempo—while he himself is late. We shall be informed presently about the
meaning of this aim. And back of all inhibitions another picture breaks
forth: he runs after an old woman with his erect membrum (the child is a
symbol for the genitalia. _Cp._, in this connection, _The Language of
Dreams_, _Dreams and Sex_, Chapter, “Children in Dreams,” translation by
_James S. Van Teslaar_, Badger, Gorham Press, Boston, 1922).

He is not a little surprised that his dreams portray heterosexual
feelings. Heretofore he had paid no attention to his dreams.

I have not yet stated whom the old woman represents. He is asked to
mention any woman that occurs to him and after some hesitation he
states: my mother.

Here we come across one of the roots of his homosexuality, one that
perhaps we anticipated. But thus far I avoided any inquiries about his
attitude towards the mother.

What is the meaning of that portion of the dream which portrays a number
of tin dishes? I perceive this as follows: He does not possess many
treasures, it is all mere tin, but such as it is it all belongs to the
woman above ... the mother. The neighbor warns the mother that another
woman might rob her of her son’s affection. The mother is very vain and
spends considerable time preparing her toilette.

The key to the dream rests in the pollution with which it ends and the
deepest effect: the disgust on account of the dirty, unclean hands of
the woman above.

We see that the pollution is slowly prepared. First there is a
representation of the heterosexual love (Tristan). But his inner
voices—the public—express themselves against that love, the latter is
deprecated: there is whistling and shouting and ironic applause. Next
the father is upon the scene of action. He is represented in the act of
leaving. Other women appear,—the old woman, the neighbor. But the orgasm
is achieved only through the “woman above” (“upstairs,”—_Frau da oben_,
literally, woman above),—the mother. This form of pollution, which at
bottom represents merely an unconscious onanism (unclean hands!) brings
on a feeling of disgust in him.

The next dream portrays a scene in which a man talks about his son. The
scene takes place in a lavatory. Probably this reproduces an infantile
scene wherein he may have observed his father at the lavatory. The dream
following that is much clearer. I reproduce here both:


_I found myself in a lavatory compartment and I watched my “victim.” The
man turned his back to me and spoke to himself about his son. I noticed
that the woman guardian was keeping watch on me from the outside and I
started to leave, grabbing my hat just as she was opening the door to
catch me at my observation post. I acted as if I were unconcerned,
quietly picked up my handkerchief on which I had knelt down, picked off
the floor the various things of mine that were still strewn about,
gloves, muffler, etc., and went off with the feeling that through my
cool behavior I disarmed the woman of her suspicions and had avoided a
public scandal...._

_I went upstairs to a wide open store. Half way across I saw the
saleswoman standing in a corner. At the sight of her I am seized with
tremendous bowel cramps. I turned around and defecate publicly in the
room. The woman over there will not see me?_


This dream reminds him of the childhood incident already mentioned: When
he was two years of age he was playing out of doors with another boy who
prepared himself to move his bowels close to the street, in the open.
Now he admits also that his own _libido_ is greatly increased if he
imagines he is watched during defecation. This is a typical instance of
sexual infantilism. He is not only _voyeur_; he is also exhibitionist.

The first dream discloses the fear that the mother, the guardian, might
find out his scatological tendencies. In the second, the woman upstairs
was the onlooker during an infantile scene. It reproduces undoubtedly a
frequent scene of childhood.

He has carried out a number of homosexual acts at public baths. In
Denmark the men bathe together in steam rooms. Thus he had opportunity
to permit himself bodily contact with others to the extent of inducing
_ejaculatio_. He must also add something to yesterday’s dream about
defecation. Once at the seashore he heard a man groan in the lavatory.
He climbed upon the side wall and saw the man masturbate. This so
excited him that he climbed down at once and also masturbated. The
stranger revenged himself by looking on in his turn and that increased
tremendously the subject’s _libido_.

His dreams today are very characteristic.


_I am in a carriage and I am playing with an infant in swaddling
clothes. I would gladly be rid of it. A man advises me to pack the child
in a tin box,[39] and I actually do to._


Interpretation: he wants to be rid of his infantilism; he preserves it
in a tin box. Compromise between the two trends. The next dream relates
about a minister of the gospel who stands before a big hole in the
ground and who interprets that hole to mean that asceticism is not a
possible ideal. It is necessary to masturbate, at least occasionally.
There were roots in that hole, which looked like hair. Next he is with
his mother in a carriage. The mother turns into the holy Madonna or the
holy Zara(?)

The earth, too, stands for the mother: mother earth. The hole refers to
both, birth and death. One comes from the mother and returns to the
mother. The mother appears again as the holy one, and as the Czarina,
hence the mystifying Zara. The father is the Czar, just as in the
Tristan dream he is represented by the king. Further meaning is obvious.

Hairs recall his peculiar attitude. Women’s hairs are abhorrent to him.
His mother has long blond hair. The father was very hairy. Formerly all
hairy men were abhorrent to him. Downy, young, feminine men are his
ideal. He is continually seeking woman in man....

He reverts once more to the dream about the hole in the ground. He now
recalls that dream very clearly.

I am again a pupil at school and I am being conducted to confession
along with the other school mates. We stand in a wide, round
amphitheater scooped out of the ground. The natural wall rises to a
height of about 2 meters, all around. Above it there stands a wonderful
temple-like edifice. A monk points to the wet spots upon the earthen
walls and compares them to the erotic thoughts, which are also not to be
rooted out of the believer’s conscience. I notice a bunch of roots on
the wall and involuntarily I think of pudendal hair. The monk condemns
asceticism.

A dream full of religious meaning. Already in some of the previous
dreams the woman “upstairs,” or “above,” was perceived through religious
over-determination as mother Mary to whom alone his love belongs and
which he therefore must not squander on any earthly woman. He sees his
grave which like a _memento mori_ admonishes him to regard this life as
a preparation for the next.

Woman seems to be here the quintessence of sinfulness. Now we understand
why the woman upstairs had a little child by her. It was little Jesus.
He has soiled his pure faith. The brain which holds his belief (the
earthen wall!) is likewise stained with his sinful erotic thoughts.

The great wall surrounding the place to a height of a couple of meters
symbolizes all the inhibitions. He himself is the monk, he had a passing
desire to become an ecclesiastic, he is a heterosexual ascete....

Last night many dreams of going through urinals. In one urinal he found
a man who instead of a _phallus_ had a vagina.

Dissolute dreams. Among others a dream that he _podicem lambit_ a
friend. He also entertains consciously fancies of like character....
Further dreams of mutual masturbation with a strange man. Finally the
scraps of dreams culminate in a lengthier one in which he finds himself
in the company of the girl he was very fond of as a boy. The struggle
against the heterosexual tendencies goes on throughout the night and
finally he is conquered.

Obvious resistance against the uncovering of the heterosexual
tendencies.

One dream out of a large number deserves to be reproduced:


_I go on a walk with mother. We are tender with one another and she
tells me sweet words. I pluck wonderful anemones from a river and want
to make a garland to crown my mother with it. But the petals fall off
and only the empty green stems remain in my hand._


Any one familiar with the symbolism of plucking flowers (_vid._ my
_Dreams and Sex: The Language of Dreams_, translated by _Dr. James S.
Van Teslaar_, Badger, Gorham Press, Boston, 1922, Publisher) will
readily recognize that this is a reference to an indulgence of an erotic
nature. These love pats lead to empty stems. The love cannot come to
blossoms or fruition.

He dwells on his relations with his mother. It is virtually a marriage
without any erotic elements. He does not tolerate his mother’s
tendernesses and he has asked her to refrain. There is now between them
genuine shyness. Erotic matters are never so much as touched upon.
Against his incestuous leanings he secures himself by the wall of an
apparent aloofness. But they live together, they go out together, they
share every enjoyment. His mother is a woman who has a grip on his whole
life. And at bottom he is not angry because she has interfered with his
other friendship. He understands her, that is, he sympathizes with her.
That friendship was an attempt to free himself of the mother. But the
mother instinctively did the right thing when she stepped in between her
son and his friend. He does not at bottom care to be liberated from the
slavery of his affection. He allows himself to be led about and to be
treated as a child. He talks as if the love and the chain were
disagreeable to him. Both trends—towards the mother and away from
her—are active in his soul: bipolarity.

The treatment should improve his neurotic condition only but should not
interfere with his attitude towards his mother. He dreams that he is
well and that he tells his mother, now he is all well and they are going
to be happier together than ever.

In connection with a dream another love affair comes to surface, dating
some 16 years back. He courted a certain girl and sent her some poems.
He thinks it was mere play, an attempt to “imagine” that he was also
capable of loving girls. That is how he endeavors to dismiss lightly his
heterosexual tendencies. But he thinks that the love poems were
irrelevant. He also composed poems to his mother, when he was away from
home for a short time:

              “_Du meines keuschen Herzens Allgebieterin,
              Der ich mich neige in tiefer Demut_ ...”

              _“You, mistress of my chaste heart,
              To whom I bow in deep humility_ ...”

The verses are full of yearning and passion. His blood calls for her,
his heart is filled only with yearning for her. These are the utterances
of a man who has lost his head by falling in love.

This case illustrates plainly the manner in which monosexuality leads to
homosexuality. But the subject himself did not want to recognize any of
these relations. All the powers of sublimation at his disposal he had
turned into his love for the mother. Therefore he had to cling to a
portion of his mysophilia (dirt compulsion). What he overdid on one side
in the way of cleanliness was compensated for on the other by a sinking
into filth. It is noteworthy that he does not care to be cleared of his
homosexuality. He looks upon it as a protection and as something that
sets him apart from other men. This again shows the hopelessness of any
therapeutic endeavors in most cases of this type.

Since taking account of his dreams he is astonished how often
heterosexual excitations come to the surface. Last night he dreamed,
first, that he was with a naked woman, of wonderful build and that he
_in vaginam et in anum immisit_ his finger.

Further, another remarkable dream, which played an important rôle in the
solution of his neurosis:


_I am with mother at the Opera. A long hallway at the end of which one
obtains a view of Vienna. One sees the wonderful St. Stephen’s Church, a
fine cloud like a smoke or like a fine powdery water spray over its
tower. The Opera is changed. Instead of Don Juan, the Donna carissima._


Already the first dream indicated a definite trend towards woman and now
the change of program discloses the source of his neurosis. I ask him
for a description of the woman in the first dream. He did not see her
face at all. He merely saw the wonderful bewitching white body.

Such dreams—figures without faces—are very frequent and serve to hide
the beloved person and to prevent recognition. I know dreamers who have
pollutions with such half figures. The face is never visible. Often only
a portion of the body. Through the second dream we may assume that the
figure represents the mother. Otherwise it is hardily possible to
explain why the face should have been subjected to the dream’s
censorship.

The second dream belongs to the category of maternal body fancies. He is
within the mother’s womb. The long passage he associates with: life’s
pathway. It is in fact the pathway through which he came into life.
Stephen’s tower is a phallic symbol. The smoking room, _ejaculatio_ or
_mictio_. It is a representation of the illusion that he is within the
maternal body and is able to observe from that point of vantage the
process of generation. The dream becomes even more transparent when we
learn that his father’s name is Stephen.[40]

Now his sexual infantilism becomes intelligible. He is under the spell
of _Mutterleibsphantasie_, maternal body phantasy. Every lavatory
becomes for him the symbol of the maternal body. There he watches the
man urinating as he might have watched the father in the maternal body
if he had had enough intelligence to do so as an embryo. It seems
unbelievable that intelligent persons should become victims of so
puerile a phantasy. Various facts always uphold the sense of such a
phantasy. In this particular instance there was dislike for, and
unpleasant sensations in, closed rooms, also a series of paraphiliac
trend which found their explanation only through that phantasy. He
revelled in the thought of permitting himself to be besprinkled with the
spermatic fluid by his beloved male friend; he had a craving _membrum
erectum amati viri fellare_; his urolagnic and coprolagnic proclivities,
too, were dominated by the same phantasy. He behaved as if he were still
in the maternal body.

But the dream declares clearly that a change of program is taking place
in the play of his life. Don Juan becomes a _Donna_—_Carissima_,—she who
is most dear to him. He has changed programs; and the love for the
father he has transferred to his mother. He is within the maternal
body,—he himself is the mother. He seeks himself, he is his dearest
woman, he loves the womanly in himself. We have here the never absent
love of the homosexual for himself—narcissism.

Various recollections come to surface, all showing alike that his
earliest predisposition was distinctly heterosexual. Thus, for instance,
at five years of age he fell in love with a girl, wanted to marry her,
and called her his bride. We hear only of three heterosexual episodes
belonging to his later life. It is not yet clear how this complete
turning away from woman came about. Further inquiries reveal dreams of
which I can only give a part. Thus he dreams:


_I study for an hour. My textbook is on various physical experiments,
further on it turns into history. There is something in it about
Bavarian history. The year 4005 plays an important rôle. The whole thing
ends with a fairy tale about three pines which stand on a winter’s night
before the house and signify three dead women._

_Later I act successfully as an imitator of women._


The figure 4005 brings the following associations: 00 is the sign for
lavatory; 45 is the opus number of one of his favorite opera scores, the
Salome of Richard Strauss; 4 and 5 are the bad marks at school.

The Salome of Strauss and a previous dream lead us to his sadistic
trends. It becomes progressively clearer that his aboriginal sadism was
extraordinarily great. To this day he revels in phantasies about sexual
crimes, violent murders, etc. He toyed with the plan of killing himself
as well as his whole family. Any opposition at home immediately suggests
to him thoughts of murder. His original attitude towards woman, too, was
sadistic. The chief motive of Salome is the severed head of the prophet.
Also the pound of flesh in Shylock, in the first dream, refers to this
trend; finally the dream about the bedbug. His religious trend set in
early, thus protecting him against the wild beast within him. At six
years of age he played that he was a preacher and he had his own altar.
He fled from woman because he was not sure of himself....

He has a large number of idiosyncrasies which may be explained through a
repressed sadism. He cannot eat peaches because their skins resemble
human skin; he cannot tolerate the skin on parboiled milk, it brings on
disgust and nausea; he often turns against meat and for a long time he
confined himself to vegetarianism. Meat he calls animal carcass. The
thought of a menstruating woman is particularly repulsive to him. All
associations with blood are strongly affective, partly in a positive and
partly in a negative way.

What is the meaning of the three pines which symbolize dead women in the
dream? Has he lost three female ideals? He associates with “_Ein
Fichtenbaum stand einsam im Norden auf kahler Höhe_,” etc., “a pine tree
stood lonely on the bleak heights of the north,” the famous poem by
_Heine_. That pine tree dreams of palms in the glowing climate of the
Southern Country. There are no further associations. The theme “dead
women” is met with considerable resistance.

I pass over a number of days which amounted merely to a preparation for
the coming solution; and I shall report merely the most significant of
the dream material.

Very important appears the following dream:


_Standing with father at a wide stream. A little white steamboat departs
from us, turning and twisting like a reptile. I would have liked very
much to be on it (though I do not know where I could have found place,
it was like a microcosm). The ship is delayed and now we have to return
by train. That the ship would have made better time is an opinion I dare
not share with father._

_Next day I enter a grotto through which a number of others are
wandering ahead of me. The pathway is tortuous and leads upwards. Who
among my acquaintances is joining me I do not know. My whole attention
is centered on snakes which I carry on a cord. They have very friendly
heads, yet somehow I have the impression they can bite. I say to some
one close by that their poison glands have already been removed.
Eventually I reach a house in full daylight and at the top they turn
into dogs who escape my control and quickly clatter down the deep
stairway. Presently they are back and allow meekly to be held in leash._

_At home I find a package of handkerchiefs neatly wrapped in tissue
paper._


This is a combination of a spermatozoon dream and a maternal body
phantasy. The stream in which the tiny boat is moving about, the life
stream, the stream of spermatic fluid carries a particular spermatozoon,
himself. He, now grown up, wants to revert back to the tiny thing,
wiggling like a reptile. He wants to be tiny again, not a child merely,
a spermatozoon (_Samenfaden_). He is dissatisfied with life and would
like to begin his life all over. The path leads from the stream into a
grotto cave,—the maternal body. At the same time the dream symbolizes
his whole life, which leads him upwards through pitfalls and dangers to
the sunshiny heights. His thoughts are represented here as snakes. They
have friendly heads, to be sure, _i. e._, sin beckons, but he holds them
captive. All sins are overcome, all snakes are captive and wear muzzles.
The shiny house is the church. Thus this dream shows the life’s
beginning and end.

The next dream about handkerchiefs, becomes intelligible when we find
out that he masturbates into his handkerchiefs. The packing in tissue
paper shows that the specific masturbatory phantasy is covered up.

The dream is concerned with the father. During the last few days he has
been thinking a great deal about his father. He tells me about that:

“I have had some hard days and I only see now how strongly I was fixed
on father and what a tremendous rôle he has played in my life. Yesterday
I felt in me all the strong hatred that I bore for years against
father.”

“Why did you hate your father?”

“In the first place because he made me and passed on to me his weakly
characteristics. Such men should have no children. I have taken over all
his morbid predispositions. Then I hated him because he parted me from
my friend through that letter which he wrote at mother’s behest.”

“Then you ought to hate your mother. Is it not strange that you should
condone the same conduct in the mother but not in the father? You seem
to appreciate your mother’s side but not your father’s.”

“Naturally, when you put it that way I see clearly that I was unfair to
father. The letter was but an excuse for the great hatred. I recall with
shuddering his last day. I had the feeling that father was afraid of me.
He gazed at me continually with his great glassy eyes while holding on
to mother’s hand. I felt something like jealousy over mother,—now I know
that I was always jealous. My maternal body phantasy means, of course,
that I want to be present at the parental love act. I want to replace
the father in mother’s life. As a small child I loved him very devotedly
and I suffered on account of his coolness. He was immeasurably loving
and devoted; nevertheless I felt that there was something lacking.”

He looked for tendernesses from his father. To this day he indulges in
two phantasies during his sexual acts. He is the boy watching his father
during coitus. That is the particular lavatory phantasy when he watches
elderly men. He permits himself to be used as a _receptaculum seminis_
by a favored person. (Strong desire to carry on _fellatio_ on his
teachers or to subject himself to pederasty.) He is within the maternal
body _und wird vom Vater päderastiert oder felliert_. Or else, he
himself is the father, he identifies himself with the latter, and seeks
young boys who in that case stand for himself.

But we see that these phantasies differ as widely as possible from
reality. He is unable to secure his contact with reality, because he is
continually under the sway of the maternal body phantasy, as shows by
his peeping into lavatories.

His love for the father proves to be the strongest root of his
homosexuality. He wanted to assume the mother’s place in the father’s
life. In his phantasies he is either the father or the mother; he has
not attained his own individuality. He loves himself either with
maternal or with paternal feelings.

I record the following dream among many others. It shows us his typical
attitude towards the mother:


_Am going with mother to the country where we expect to spend a few days
to recuperate ourselves. Locality: forest neighborhood. The journey,
stopping station, roadway familiar partly from actuality partly through
precious dreams. Wonderful woods with fragrant blooming flowers. But the
blooms show numerous brown spots of decay, as after excessive rains.
Elder bushes badly torn up by the weather and by plunderers. The path
leads to an incline which offers a view of the numerous villas in the
valley. I find that we have wandered off, in order to reach the place
where we proposed to stay for a while; we should have taken the path to
the right half way up the road._


This dream represents a love whose bloom is decaying. They have wandered
off (note the double meaning of the expression, _vergehen_), and they
are off the right path.

His past is illumined not only by his dreams. Among his youthful
compositions he finds a poem which portrays clearly a paternal body
phantasy and speaks longingly of the time when he was yet “unformed and
rested quietly in his father’s loins.”...

The revelations in the course of the following days bring to light new
associations. His reveries continually slight the immediate past and
carry him back over a number of generations. He is a person of wonderful
ancestry, he is not at all the son of his father, he is a child whom
gypsies have changed in the cradle, he has fallen into the midst of his
family by accident.

It turns out that two lives were much talked of at home and that has had
a great deal to do with determining his life course and specifically his
fear of woman. In the first place, there was his father’s life. The man
had been previously married to a woman whom he caught in a breach of
marital faithfulness and it led him to fight a duel. He carried a scar
on his forehead as a memento. Then, an uncle took his life when he found
out that his wife whom he considered loyal, proved unfaithful.

These lessons stood before his eyes already when he was a mere boy. They
served as terrible warnings: beware of woman!

During the next days his fear of woman is the chief theme of his
associations. His father’s and his uncle’s fate stand before him as a
perpetual warning. Already as a small child he had absorbed very clearly
the thought: one must beware of women! His mother did everything to fix
permanently this fear in his mind.

But every fear is the fear of self. This fear of women must have a
deeper determinant. The deeper relations are indicated by the following
dream:


_I am on the street and it is towards evening. The roadbed in front of
me is badly torn up. A wagon drives by; it rolls past at dusk and the
farther end of the street is already plunged in darkness. Horse and
driver will not be able to see that the road is torn. A powerful bear
jumps up to warn the horse, the driver draws tight his reins, the animal
turns around at the same time holding his head anxiously away from the
torn pavement until he finally reaches again the straight road. Before
the wagon disappears into the night the powerful bear jumps once more at
it._

_I am tremendously roused to think that such wild animals are sent out
as warning. There might be small children in the wagon who would be
frightened to death._


Every statement in this dream is a psychic disclosure. The dream records
his life’s journey. A portion of the street is torn and impassable. He
can only go through the homosexual pathway. The heterosexual is so
broken up as to be unusable. It is dark and he might easily meet with
disaster in his life’s journey over this point. The darkness symbolizes
the forgetting of the aboriginal determinants; the driver is
consciousness, the horses are the instincts.

A bear warns him of the dangers of the torn-up road. He is angered at
this form of warning. The reference to small children shows that the
warnings date back to childhood, when he was actually threatened with a
bear.

“There may be small children in the wagon who would be frightened to
death,” records the dream. As a child he has heard repeatedly about his
uncle’s suicide, because of the wife’s faithlessness. In the depths of
his soul this story could not but act as a perpetual warning against
woman. The story of his father’s duel, too, and the latter’s scar on the
forehead influenced his childhood and filled him with fear of woman.[41]
It made him resolve to submit to no woman. And is not hatred the surest
self-defence against the dangers of love?

Who or what is the mysterious bear in the dreams? Naturally,—like every
figure in the dream, it is the dreamer himself. There is the power of a
wild beast in his breast. We recall that one of his dreams was staged at
_Schönbrunn_, the Zoölogical Garden of Vienna, where the wild beasts may
be seen. We recall Shylock, the pound of flesh, and the various sadistic
determinants of his neurosis.

We now approach the kernel of his homosexual neurosis which turns out to
consist of a powerful protective wall against his criminal self. His
attitude towards woman is characterized by a tremendous hatred. He is a
_Lustmörder_, the wild bear who attacks women, who strangles them and
would drink their blood. The bear represents his own image and a
terrible warning.

Beware of the women! It will turn you into a murderer. Better remain a
child, enjoy whatever brings gratification to a child. Woe to you if
your life’s journey should lead you through the open road where all wild
passions lurk which have already filled you as a child! Oh, better if
you had never been born, or if you could begin life all over....

Blood is his true requirement. Spermatic fluid, urine, fæces,—all these
are substitutions representing blood.[42]

Now we begin to understand why he must not be a man and why he wants to
be a woman. His great aggressive trend is linked with the notion of
maleness. The passive attitude, suffering, patience, is identified with
femaleness.

After these revelations, which were supported by a large mass of
memories, the patient stayed away for a few days. Then he reappeared and
told me that he had successful intercourse with a _puella publica_. He
thought he might be able to overcome his homosexuality. But he received
a telegram recalling him to Denmark.

I have not heard anything about his subsequent history. Did he become
bisexual? Did he overcome his infantilism? Did the torn portion of the
road become passable at last?

I am unable to state anything definite. But we have obtained here a
clear insight into the psychogenesis of homosexuality and we have seen
that many determinants are at work shaping the original predisposition.

Let us briefly mention the most important data in this clinical history.
It must be looked upon really as but a fragment of an analysis. But it
leads us to the core of the neurosis and shows us the subject’s inner
predisposition, so sharply contrasting with his conscious attitude.

This man carries within himself the aboriginal instincts of mankind. His
dreams carry him back to the paternal body and back to the prehistoric
phase of his existence not without reason. He carries within himself the
engrams of thousands of years, the remnants of the wildest instinct of
primordial man. The phylogenesis of his being corresponds with his
ontogenesis. What does he lack for a typical primordial being? In his
dreams and phantasies he shows the terrible blood lust, the
imperativeness of wishes, the brutal egoism of the periods of long past.
Even man’s primordial toleration of filth is not absent; this subject’s
history discloses urolagnistic and coprophagic tendencies.

Consider the contrast between his instinctive and his cultural self. He
is a man of refinement and a marked personality, a genuine artist, a man
who appreciates the beautiful, a man who is transfixed before a
representation of Tristan, or before a statue and whom the beauties of
nature plunge into ecstasy; a man who seems capable of adding some day
to the world’s art possessions a worthy contribution.


This case proves most decidedly that my view that homosexuality
represents a regression is correct. Other physicians will prefer to
speak of degeneration. Indeed,—but this subject has no sign of physical
degeneration, there is no pathologic family history such as might be
regarded as predisposing to degeneration. One might as well consider all
artists degenerates inasmuch as all artists show the primordial cravings
which we find in our patients. The very fact that all human progress is
brought about through individuals who represent regressions should teach
us more carefully the term degeneration and to apply it only to the
cases in which the conjunction of physical signs of degeneration with
moral inferiority leaves no doubt.

We trace here the operation of that primordial hatred which threatens to
smother the mind’s safety valve as it presses for expression. A portion
of this hatred may turn into love and lead the subject into the pathway
which makes prophets, religious reformers, philanthropists or champions
of the people. Another part of it persists and strengthens infantile
trends.

What is _Sigma’s_ conscious attitude? Love for men, indifference towards
women, hatred of the father, a bipolar vacillation towards his
mother,—love and hate![43] But unconsciously he loves his father and
hates all women,—perhaps because he must love them. His ordinary
attitude requires the projection of his love feeling in its bipolar form
upon all the objectives of his affection. One loves and hates at the
same time. But he hates only the women. How has this primordial hatred
been attained by the subject? Why is he incapable of assuming the usual
bipolar attitude towards women?

If we go far back into his childhood we find that he was in love with
his father and jealous of his mother. At that time all women were
possible rivals in love for the father. He himself wanted to be a woman,
the woman to love his father. This father _Imago_ he seeks to this day
in all his teachers, older friends, in his superiors. He must
necessarily stand in a homosexual relationship towards them so long as
he is unable to overcome his infantile constellations. Everything
peculiar about his attachment to the mother is traceable back to his
identification with the father. From the latter he has derived his
quiet, timid, patient temperament,—that attitude of passivity which
really masks a tremendous aggressivity. That infantile attitude
determines the survival of all infantile excitations in his _vita
sexualis_.

How may the cure be effected? The subject must be made to understand
that he will never really carry out the crimes which contact with women
suggest to his unconscious. He must learn to apply love in its bipolar
form alike to men and women. His plethora of cravings should enable him
to awaken within himself the hitherto badly neglected love for woman.
Before the analysis all his erotic trends were directed towards male
friends. The cure leads through approach of woman as friend. First she
is a friend, and subsequently—after much struggle and searching—the
beloved. He must learn to play the rôle of father to some strange woman.

Is analysis the proper means? Who, in the present state of our
knowledge, knows another? What can we accomplish through commands,
punishment, formal training, or hypnosis? Primordial love achieves
supremacy only through the exacting process of self-knowledge and
through the recognition of the primordial instincts, including the
primordial hatred. The subject has concentrated his primordial love
feeling wholly upon his own person.

Like all homosexuals he loves only himself. This peculiarity, too, he
shares with all primordial beings. Does primordial man know any other
love than love of self?[44]

I have already pointed out that _urnings_ always seek themselves first
and assume subsequently the rôle of another person; or else they seek in
the male different variants of their own childhood. The same is true
_pari passu_ also of the _urlinds_. To be in love always means to find
one’s self in another. But why do _urnings_ not find themselves in the
female _Imago_? This question cannot be covered with a generalization
that will hold good for all cases. In the two last cases the fact that
the subjects regarded themselves as the reverse of handsome played an
important rôle. They had a sense of inferiority with regard to woman and
a feeling of envy. Self-love induced fear of defeat by woman on account
of lack of attractiveness. How could they feel confident of conquering
woman in view of their ugliness? How could they play the rôle of a Don
Juan to which their latent homosexuality might otherwise have driven
them? Among men physical beauty does not matter. What is important is
the size of the genitalia.

If love capacity be measured by the size of one’s genitalia, the patient
_Delta_ (Case 83) could measure himself against any one. He took
ridiculous pride in his great penis,—a pride shown by many men. His
whole sexuality was centered upon the symbol of masculinity. With
_Sigma_, with whom the penis played but a secondary rôle, the case was
different. _Sadger_ who sees in narcissism the love of one’s genitalia
would find his view corroborated by the history of the first case but
not by the second, the subject in the latter instance showing not the
least interest in his penis.

The first of these cases portrays the mechanisms described by _Adler_,
the second barely a trace. This shows how easy it is to build certain
assumptions through a one-sided selection of cases. It is obvious that
every earnest investigator must come upon certain aspects of the truth.
What we obtain always are mere sectional views of homosexuality. A cross
section yields merely a corresponding view of the picture. Only the
apposition of the various sectional views can furnish us the proper
perspective for reconstructing the whole picture of homosexuality.

Infantile reminiscences in both cases were partial determinants which
lead to a lasting fear of women and to withdrawal from heterosexual
love. _Delta_ had witnessed an unhappy marriage as a child, _Sigma_
heard a great deal about faithlessness and about woman’s lack of
loyalty. Both shared also a strong sadism, a feature which we have
observed in all cases of homosexuality thus far analyzed.

We are thus led to a synthetic formulation of male homosexuality which,
in reversed terms, holds true also of women:


_The homosexual neurosis is a flight back to one’s own sex induced by a
sadistic predisposition towards the opposite sex._




                                  VII

  THE NEUROTIC’S INABILITY TO LOVE—THE NARCISSISM OF THE
      HOMOSEXUAL—PROGRESSIVE SEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION WITH THE GROWTH OF
      CULTURE—THE POSITION OF THE HOMOSEXUAL IN THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN
      SEXES—THE SOCIAL CAUSES OF HOMOSEXUALITY—HOMOSEXUALITY AMONG
      GREEKS—INCREASE OF POLAR SEXUAL TENSION—VARIOUS THERAPEUTIC
      MEASURES—HYPNOSIS—MOLL’S ASSOCIATION THERAPY—PSYCHOANALYSIS—THE
      PATH TOWARDS CURE AND THE CONDITIONS FOR RECOVERY.


_Im Hass ist Furcht, ein grosser, guter Teil Furcht. Wir Furchtlosen
aber, wir geistigeren Menschen dieses Zeitalters, wir kennen unseren
Vorteil gut genug, um gerade als die Geistigeren in Hinsicht auf dieser
Zeit ohne Furcht zu Leben. Man wird uns schwerlich köpfen, einsperren,
verbrennen; man wird nicht einmal unsere Bücher verbieten und
verbrennen. Man ist seines Faches um den Preis, auch das Opfer seines
Faches zu sein._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._




                                  VII

_Hatred means fear, it contains a great, big part of fear. But we the
Fearless ones, we the more intellectual men of our age, precisely as the
more emancipated ones, with reference to our age, are well aware of our
advantage of living without fear. We shall be bitterly pursued, jailed,
burned at the stake; our books will more than once fall under the ban
and be burned. One is a man after one’s own kind only at the risk of
paying the price demanded of one’s kind._

                                                           —_Nietzsche._


We have seen with what powerful hatred the homosexual encounters his
environment. Whether he turns his hatred towards the other sex, his own,
or, under certain circumstances, against himself, he remains the
inveterate hater vainly trying to reconcile the feeling of man’s
aboriginal nature with the ethical requirements of later culture. The
question rises whether he is at all capable of loving. One may point out
that in a certain sense he does love his mother, father, some friend or
that perhaps he even has a “sweetheart.” But it only seems that he loves
them! The truth is that he is unable to love. That peculiarity he shares
with all artists who, in fact, are also incapable of loving. I repeat
myself and reproduce below my statements on this point as incorporated
in my work “_Die Träume der Dichter_.”[45]

All my inquiries into the psychogenesis of these disorders have led me
back to the manifestations of hatred. Already in my work, _Die Sprache
Des Traumes_ (_the Language of Dreams_), I have pointed out that
antagonism (or hatred) is man’s primary feeling responsible for the
development of neuroses in those ethical-minded persons who still
preserve strongly their aboriginal instinctive cravings. “_The neurosis
is the endopsychic perception of hatred in terms of a guilty
conscience_” (_The Language of Dreams_, page 563 of the 1st German
edition; English version of the latter edition is now in preparation by
the translator of the present volume.)

I believe I have proven successfully that the homosexual is a neurotic,
that he represents a type of regression to man’s primordial instincts;
and that homosexuality is a sort of compromise healing process in the
mental conflict between the abnormal, raw cravings, and the cultural
need for their suppression.

But we must not think that, like the average neurotic, the homosexual is
incapable of love. Only, all his love is a love centered exclusively on
self. Yet all cultural progress consists of the sublimation of self-love
into social love. That is the meaning of the majestic injunction: _love
thy neighbor as thyself_!

Since the homosexual loves only himself he seeks only himself in others.
That, however, is a feature of all love. What appears to be the most
extreme manifestation of altruistic feeling is at bottom but the outcome
of egoistic cravings. Love is but egoism potentialized. Every neurotic
suffers of narcissism. He is a slave to self and cannot escape that
bondage. The homosexual loves, or appears to love, his own sex, but even
superficial examination shows this to be but part of his narcissism. In
truth he loves neither man nor woman. He has to overcome a hatred
stronger than the corresponding feeling in the normal. That hatred is
the theme of his childhood. As perpetual infant, he fails to sublimate
sufficiently that hatred, or to fix it upon objectives considered proper
in our current cultural development.

All who investigate homosexuality find an early awakening of the sexual
instinct. It is perhaps the greatest social function of sexual instinct,
next to reproduction, to provide for the conquest of hatred. Though the
selfish child becomes a loving person, the child’s love is still
entirely self-centered. The child loves the persons who serve it. In
vain one tries to point out that it ought to love also the teachers who
are severe but mean well, that parents must punish in order to teach!
This view belongs to the adult mind and is what enables the adult to
forget the childish notions of revenge which he entertained as a child
whenever he suffered punishment which he looked upon as unjust before
his higher sense of responsibility had asserted itself. But in the
neurotics, including homosexuals, sexual precocity brings early to
surface cravings which involve the love of others; they are therefore
inclined to renounce or modify their hatred. The proportionate share of
hatred against some beloved person is withdrawn and turned against the
others. These infantile feeling-attitudes may undergo a second
transformation in later years. A boy may love the father and hate the
mother, because she is his rival in the father’s affection. At the same
time the sisters may be hated because they draw to themselves a certain
quantum of the father’s love, which the self-centered jealous boy wishes
to secure exclusively for himself. Later the mother and sisters are
loved, and the father recedes to the background.

Jealousy is an infantile feeling. Its appearance in later years always
signifies a regression to infantile attitudes. The homosexual spreads
his hatred from one persons to the whole sex under the form of jealousy.
Let us assume that he loves the father insofar as he is at all capable
of loving. The mother is looked upon as a rival. With the formulation of
that attitude, all other women become likewise potential rivals, capable
of robbing him of his father’s affection. Therefore he hates all
women,—the subject is on the road to homosexual neurosis. At the onset
of homosexuality stands jealousy and the latter, therefore, preserves
its infantile value throughout life.

I have already mentioned that it is the function of sexuality to conquer
hatred. But that task is never completely carried out. An eternal
rivalry persists between the two sexes giving rise to the so-called
“struggle between the sexes.” I have no doubt that man’s capacity for
loving has increased in the course of our racial evolution. What subtle
refinements our erotism has undergone! How complicated the psychic
processes displayed by the man and the woman in love! But the antagonism
or hatred which divides the two sexes has grown apace. Modern love owes
its profuse affectivity to this conquest of hatred, this periodic
regression back to the feeling-attitude of hatred and its renewed
subdual.

The question arises: Have we in fact any proof that the polar tension
between man and woman has diminished? He who fails to see a proof of
this in the improvement of woman’s social position and her acquisition
of equal rights may turn to biologic facts. _These biologic data prove
that the sexual differentiation between man and woman has increased with
growth of culture._ In primitive times woman was not so womanly, the man
less manly, than the man and woman of civilization. _Fehlinger_[46]
compares the primitive peoples with the Europeans and shows that _the
secondary sexual characters are much more pronounced among the civilized
peoples than among the savages_. Subtler stimuli are required to excite
the domesticated sexual instinct.

That sexual differentiation is more pronounced among Europeans is shown
also by the fact that the period from the onset of sexual adolescence to
the attainment of complete physical growth is more prolonged among
civilized peoples than among the colored races. The primitive races show
a great similarity between male and female types and that is most
pronounced among the various pygmean races. The latter are characterized
by an infantile physique, which, as is well known, is sexually but
little differentiated.

_Since the homosexual represents retrogressively a stage of racial
development during which the bisexual character of the organism was more
pronounced, he carries _ab ovo_ the inclination to project himself unto
both sexes._ He passes into the world of sexual differentiation as into
some strange, inimical, and, to his mind, incomprehensible realm of
existence. He belongs to the primordial period in which a man, if
necessary, could have replaced the woman. His _engrams_ perceive the
homosexual feeling as something as natural as if he had come a few
hundreds of thousands of years sooner into the world. But into the
cultural age in which love plays such a tremendous rôle he brings with
him also the antagonism of bygone ages. That feeling of hatred becomes a
powerful lever in the struggle between the sexes. Physically he stands
between man and woman but he is not suited for the rôle of mediator
because he has not learned to subdue the eternal struggle between male
and female within his breast. The love-attitude which is a mixture of
love and hatred, he splits into its two components directing one
separately towards each of the two sexes. Towards woman he turns his
primordial hatred, while man he loves as a representative of culture.
When he is grown up that deadly hatred is repressed and stands a hidden
stumblingblock between himself and woman. Unable to be a complete man,
unable to extricate himself from that infantile feeling-attitude, he
also hates the woman in him. He overvalues manliness and in his
excessive appraisal of it turns to it with his whole love. The hatred of
all women corresponds to his scorn of the woman in himself,—a reaction
due to his personal inability to overcome the woman in his own make up
and to become a complete man. Finally in the course of the continuous
struggle between the man and the woman within his breast he reaches the
curious compromise of accepting the feeling that he is a woman. That is:
he excepts a single woman from his hatred ... himself. In that manner he
becomes a transvestite. He may be active heterosexually, he may,
apparently, have overcome his homosexuality, yet, as penance for his
hatred, he puts on the clothes which had seemed once so hateful to him.
_The latent homosexual becomes a transvestite only on account of his
guilty conscience._

Our investigations have proven that homosexuality has no uniform
psychogenesis. But all cases showed an archaic emphasis on bisexuality.
Although I speak of regressive manifestations I should not care to see
that conception confused with the notion of “hereditary taint” or of
“degeneration.” For my investigations of artists have convinced me that
they present the same tendencies as the homosexuals. They, too, are
neurotics. In fact, the number of homosexual artists, even of homosexual
persons of rare genius, as given by _Hirschfeld_, is impressive. I hold
the view that every great creative work has been and is being achieved
through these regressions. It is as if nature attempted to rejuvenate
herself and once more to absorb creative energy by dipping down into the
primordial source of all energy. It might be more proper, perhaps, to
speak of them as _dégénérés supérieurs_, in the sense of _Magnan_. It
seems to me that true degeneration, as seen in the stigmata of physical
decay, and which manifests itself in an insufficient adjustment to the
ethical requirements of society, represents rather the terminal point of
an exhausted stem, gravitating downwards, while the neurotic represents
a progression. Degeneration and regressions certainly have a great deal
in common. But similar causes often bring on varying results. I need
refer only to the well-known laws of inbreeding, for instance. The
summation of good qualities through the intermarriage of relatives may
lead to the birth of a true genius, but the same step causes more or
less degeneration by reinforcing morbid tendencies.

I see in such an atavistic tendency the predisposition to homosexuality,
common to all neurotics. Perhaps organic changes, such as I have found
in more or less pronounced form in most homosexuals also play a certain
rôle. Persons of pronounced bisexual type do not necessarily become
homosexual, but this does not disprove that the organic condition may be
a factor. Here is where I agree with _Hirschfeld’s_ “intermediate sex”
theory. But beyond this point our standpoints diverge. The organic
factors remain yet to be investigated. We are but at the beginning of
our studies of organic bisexuality. The ascertainment of unilateral
hermaphroditism, it seems to me, will play a particularly important rôle
in future investigations. Already the data obtained through the
examination of large groups of persons, for which the World War
furnished me an opportunity, impressed me with the fact, that contrary
sexual _Anlage_ is to be found particularly often on the left side of
the body. (In men this shows itself in the form of unilateral
gynecomasty, scant hair growth, asymmetry of the face, the left side
being more pronouncedly of feminine type.) The finding of infantile
features must also be considered of significance in the diagnosis of an
organic predisposition to homosexuality.

These interesting facts do not relieve us of the need of establishing
the psychogenesis of homosexuality on a sound basis. But the multitude
of conditions which may lead to homosexuality admit no hard-and-fast
line. Every case is a problem of its own; these are the very cases where
we must carefully individualize and guard ourselves against hindering
future research by laying down any hard-and-fast rules.

A question which no investigator of sexual problems has thus far
satisfactorily answered, now suggests itself: Why is it that
homosexuality and particularly male homosexuality has become the object
of such terrific social abhorrence? Why is our penal code so backward in
that respect?

We can understand the reasons for that only in the light of the historic
aspect of the problem. It is a striking fact that although female
homosexuality always appears along with the male, it is not nearly so
abhorred but is rather tolerated under the cover of silence. Austria is
the only European country in which sexual intimacy between women is a
penal offence. Probably the difference in this attitude bears some
relation to the problem of reproduction, since man, as the fertilizing
agent, plays a more active rôle than the woman.[47] The seed, that most
precious possession with which a man may fructify several women, must
not be squandered.

The decided struggle against homosexuality began energetically with
Judaism. Monosexualism developed with monotheism. The Bible hardly
refers to homosexuality. The blessings of children, of reproduction, the
advantage of numbers were the needs to which the sexual cravings had to
be subordinated. There is, therefore, justification for the contention
that Judaism has fought against homosexuality,—impelled by social
motives. On the other hand it was also an account of another set of
social motives that, in Greece, homosexuality was not only tolerated but
permitted and even expressly introduced. _Aristotle_ is of the opinion
that in accordance with their customs and beliefs the Dorians expressly
intended to limit the increase in population through the encouragement
of boy love and the separation of women from society.[48] But that in
itself would not explain the high regard in which homosexuality was held
in ancient Greece.

I refer those interested in the subject to the interesting work of a
philologist, Prof. _E. Bethe_.[49]

Like many other philosophers and investigators of history, _Bethe_ falls
into the error of pointing to the Christian church as the agent
responsible for the newer orientation in sexual matters. In the first
place these writers overlook the fact that the new attitude had set in
already with Judaism. Secondly, they fail to see that religions are,
themselves, but the result of social conditions. Religious teachings
always adjust themselves to the social needs of their day and even
fulfill them. Religious formulæ prove meaningless only to the
progressive, emancipated, free and forward-striving persons, the
imperatives of religion are superfluous only for those above the
average. The crowds must cling to religious formulæ and will always need
sexual inhibitions of a religious character.

Sexuality is changing all the time, it undergoes progressive refinement.
No careful observer can deny that fact. More and more of our instinctive
cravings are gradually throttled. But when the process of repression
becomes too severe there are regressions such as we have witnessed in
the agitation for free love of the last decades and in the current more
frank discussion of sexual matters. But if all signs do not fail the
high tide of the agitation for sexual freedom has passed and the wave of
that agitation is receding. Pioneers in the movement for sexual freedom
are beginning to uphold monogamy; and the problem of population made
pressing by the World War does not favor the abandonment of the current
social and legal proscriptions against homosexuality. On the contrary.
There is likely to be in the near future a stronger revulsion against
homosexuality inasmuch as society finds itself compelled to revert at
all costs back to the Old Testament attitude of fostering reproduction.

I have already pointed out that the secondary sexual characters are
becoming more strongly accentuated through culture. The prehistoric
stage was probably characterized by an undifferentiated sexual feeling,
such as _Max Dessoir_ ascribes to the pre-adolescent stage. _The polar
tension between male and female has increased!_ That explains the
difference between the old Greek and the modern attitude towards
homosexuality. The Greek was a bisexual being. He was capable of loving
his friend and wife and woman slave alongside the boy. The modern
homosexual, carrying within him the bisexual instincts of the most
archaic developmental stage, finds himself confronted with another
sex-attitude. He is confronted, so to speak, with the need of making a
new choice, and therefore he seeks always the type to which he himself
belongs, the man who is a woman, or the woman who is a man. Exceptions
do not disprove this rule. But in proportion as the polar tension
between the sexes increases, the basic antagonism between man and woman
also grows. As we have seen—the last case was particularly instructive
in that regard—the homosexual, who apparently stands above that
struggle, is inspired from within by a feeling-attitude of extreme
hatred. He hates woman with such deadly antagonism that the fear of his
own passion makes him avoid woman. His hatred is a will of annihilation.
But that feeling involves its polar alternative: love to the point of
self-annihilation, a willingness to be utterly humbled. Subject No. _83_
gives us a history clearly illustrating this interplay of forces.

But it is plain that the number of homosexuals will not decrease. On the
contrary. _I am of the opinion that under certain conditions the extreme
polar tension between man and woman will always drive to homosexuality
certain individuals possessing the requisite bisexual predisposition and
that the number of homosexuals will increase._ Since I look upon
homosexuality as a neurosis, a morbid condition, if one insists on the
term, I am decidedly opposed to the policy of penalizing the homosexual,
and against those legal proscriptions which have been and are the cause
of much misery. It is a striking fact that in France and Italy
homosexuality plays a lesser rôle than in Germany, for instance,
although in those countries the offence is not so severely penalized.
Dangers and prohibitory laws often excite the strongest attraction and
the neurotic is the very person who likes to become a martyr. Homosexual
relations or acts, carried on under mutual understanding and with the
consent of the parties thereto, should not come under the province of
penal law, as provided in the _Codex Napoleonis_. The latter penalizes
only public nuisances (_outrage à la pudeur_) that is, acts committed in
public or carried on in the presence of witnesses; the _Code Napoléon_
penalizes coercion and protects the minors and the feeble-minded.

With these provisions the requirements of our current ethical standards
are fully met. I cannot conceive the State compelling the homosexuals to
reproduce. Although I do not accept _Tarnowsky’s_ viewpoint that their
offspring is degenerate,—because personal observation has often
convinced me of the contrary—I look upon the rise of the homosexual
neurosis as a sort of social instinct. The homosexual possesses an
endopsychic perception of his asocial tendencies. He feels himself
beyond the pale of society and does not care to adjust himself into the
social order with regard to his sexuality. His struggle against
reproduction is perhaps best for society. Considering the strength of
his sadistic inclinations we can appreciate that through his voluntary
sterilization in certain cases he renders society a genuine service.

The question rises whether it is advisable to clear the homosexual’s
path towards woman through psychoanalysis. That brings up the chief
question whether homosexuality is at all amenable to therapy.

My personal experience has convinced me that here and there
psychoanalysis is successful in effecting a cure. But only under certain
conditions. The homosexual must be genuinely willing to be cured. He
must actively desire a change in his leaning.

But experience shows also that this will to health is found only in the
lighter forms of homosexuality in which latent sadism does not dominate
the condition.[50] That in a certain sense the homosexual of this type
is curable I am in a position to affirm on the basis of my personal
experience. The cure proceeds spontaneously but it may be hastened
through psychotherapeutic endeavor.

The proper psychotherapeutic method can never be _hypnosis_. What may we
expect hypnosis to accomplish so long as the homosexual himself remains
in the dark regarding his false attitude, so long as he has not learned
to acknowledge openly the repressions against which he has fought so
long? Contrary to _Krafft-Ebing_, _Schrenk-Notzing_, and _Alfred Fuchs_,
I have never met with a lasting cure through hypnotic treatment. We must
accept with greatest caution the statements of homosexuals claiming to
have been cured by us.[51] Case _62_ recorded in this work, illustrates
that there are some homosexuals who in order to please the physician and
conclude the treatment with flying colors, claim they are well without
having changed in the least their deeply rooted feeling-attitude.
_Moll’s_ association therapy I am also unable to accept. That method of
treatment consists of the systematic development of normal and the
equally deliberate destruction of the perverse, associations. _Moll_,
who has proposed this therapy and given it that designation, has the
homosexual cultivate deliberately feminine company so as to come
strongly under the specific female influences, he regulates the
subject’s reading and helps him overcome the homosexual phantasies. The
subject must think of “normal pictures” only, before going to sleep and
thus influence his dreams in the proper direction.[52] But one must not
think, as _Moll_ concludes, that the heterosexual dream pictures which
follow are due to the association therapy. The pictures thereby are
merely rendered _bewusstseinsfähig_, tolerable to consciousness. They
were always present. But the patient lacked the courage to acknowledge
them.

I do not mean to deny a certain relative value to the association
method. It is certainly not an advantage for the homosexual who
earnestly strives to get cured to continue to frequent homosexual
circles and to have constantly dinned into his ears the assertion that
his condition is inborn and hopeless. I have quoted some cases showing
that latent homosexuality may become manifest through contact with and
the example of homosexuals while the heterosexual leaning may be
disturbed thereby. But I did not intend to suggest the advisability of
any compulsory measures for restricting the homosexual’s freedom of
action or social intercourse. I have already expressed myself clearly
against compulsions and punishments. It is advisable to urge the
homosexual anxious to get cured to give up contact with homosexual
circles.

But that the association therapy alone is capable of effecting a
complete cure I cannot but doubt. The subject must first learn to see
himself clearly and to recognize the source of the evil against which he
is fighting. We must bear in mind the many subjects with whom repressed
sadism is the true cause of the fear of woman. Such subjects must first
consciously overcome their sadism, they must recognize that the fear is
a ridiculous attempt at protecting themselves against leanings which
under normal conditions never break through.

_The first condition for the successful cure of homosexuality is
adequate self-knowledge._ That can be accomplished only through
persistent psychoanalysis. The physician must devote himself to the
subject for some months until the side-tracked leanings which the
patient has stubbornly overlooked are brought into the field of
consciousness and clearly acknowledged. The subject is like a person
with torticollis looking constantly in one direction and avoiding a turn
of his head on account of the pain. This mental torticollis must be
overcome. The homosexual—if he is to get well—must be able to turn his
gaze unrestrictedly over his whole mental horizon.

That is by no means a simple task. It is an achievement challenging the
whole medical art, requiring insight, diplomacy, sympathy, friendliness,
and patience. But few physicians are fitted for the task. Perhaps the
opposition to psychoanalysis would not be so sharp if it were practiced
only by competent psychotherapeutists and experienced professional men
possessing the requisite tact. The physician is like the sculptor
engaged in the task of bringing forth a certain form out of raw
material.

Unfortunately I must point out in this connection that the
psychoanalytic method inaugurated by _Freud_ is in danger of falling
into discredit through careless application. On the one hand the
exaggerations of the master and his pupils have repelled many
practitioners; on the other many of the patients have themselves become
psychoanalysts, without being completely cured of their own trouble.
What would one think of a hydrotherapeutist, expert though he be in his
own specialty, who undertook a laparotomy? Analysis is comparable to a
serious operation requiring a steady, experienced and skilful hand.
Psychoanalysis does not permit dilettantism like hypnosis. Only from an
experienced master may one learn the difficult art of psychoanalysis and
in turn become a master of the art.

It is quite likely that the analysis of today will be ridiculed in the
future as a raw beginning. Various subtleties and gradations remain to
be uncovered by the future generations.

The psychoanalytic realm is not yet completely laid out.

How firmly I held to all the Freudian mechanisms so long as the
deceptive proximity of the great founder confused my own understanding!
How much I had to unlearn, correct, tone down, or underscore, overcome
or forget, or see with a different eye, before I realized that we are as
yet but at the beginnings of our knowledge and that we must use our
present findings as but so many spring boards to enable us to reach a
little farther out! _Finally, each psychotherapeutist formulates in the
end his own technique. The most important prerequisite for
psychoanalysis—as for every scientific investigator—is to approach the
subject without any preconceptions, to look upon every patient as a new
problem and not to be surprised if one’s case does not fit in with one’s
ready-made systems or if it disproves one’s favorite notion._ For even
the physician with years of experience is startled to meet so many new
forms under which neurosis manifests itself.

But in spite of the variegated pictures, this bewildering variety of
causes leading to the trouble, one thing remains true and unalterable:
the neurotic’s unwillingness to see, that peculiarity which _Freud_ has
called _repression_, and the consequent _psychic conflict_. We must
first appreciate that the patient’s mind is shattered over the hopeless
character of his conflict, that for him the neurosis is a
necessity,—something that enables him in one way or another to put up
with his hardships,—something with which softly to hide his wounds on
the one hand and on the other, show his suffering to the world; when we
appreciate all that, we may gradually acquire the subtle skill of
dissolving the ties and bringing the wound to light. We see the wound
but the patient will not, cannot, see it. He may go so far as to claim
that he has no wound and is well; that he was born with the ties that
bind him; or else, that he came with that wound into the world.

These difficulties are in no psychoneurosis so great as in
homosexuality. As I have already stated: the homosexual neurosis is a
flight to one’s own sex induced by the sadistic feeling-attitude towards
the opposite sex. It is the task of analysis to uncover the mental
conflict which finds expression in this onesidedness and to enable the
patient to see the cruelty trend which he has derived from the childhood
of the race and has carried through his own childhood into his adult
life. _When the homosexual becomes aware of his bisexuality and sees the
causes of his monosexual leaning we have accomplished the requisite
educational task. Beyond that point the patient must help himself. If he
is truly earnest about his desire to get well he will accomplish it
without being pushed to it. If he lacks the inner will the situation is
hopeless in spite of the analysis._

For that reason I am not in favor of the practical management of
homosexuality as carried out by many physicians and particularly by some
psychoanalysts. They urge the homosexual to adopt heterosexual ways, and
consider the subject cured when he is able to have normal coitus a few
times. Unfortunately unpleasant reactions often follow alleged cures
such as are often claimed for persuasion-therapy and hypnosis. The
homosexual abandons all further attempts and prefers his original
monosexual attitude.

We may claim a cure only after the subject under treatment falls in love
with a suitable person of the other sex. _Potentia cœundi_ is not
enough. He must be able to give up dividing the feeling-complex
hatred—love between the two sexes—and to achieve the bipolar attitude
“hatred and love” towards the opposite sex. Such a miracle only love can
perform. Experience proves that the homosexual flees from the
heterosexual love to save himself. The latter looms up in his mind as a
test of power, in which he is anxious to come out the winner, even at
the cost of doing away with his heterosexual partner. He must accept the
subjection to woman implied in love and recognize that in true love both
lovers rule and both obey. He must also learn to recognize the essential
unity of erotism and sexuality. Only when the homosexual finds it
possible to fix his erotism and sexuality upon the same goal, in a
person of the opposite sex,—in other words, when he learns to love in
adult manner,—have we the right to claim a cure. It is only then, at any
rate, that the greatest healer of all ages, love, achieves its easy
victory and the former patient, like all neurotics, thinks that mere
chance has brought him face to face with his ideal. With that end in
view the fixation on the family—through which the homosexual loses his
erotic freedom, occasionally also the sexual—must be severed. I have
brought strong proofs to show that we must transform the homosexual into
a bisexual being, in order to cure him. Practical experience does not
favor bisexuality. We must reckon with the fact that we live in a
monosexual age. The homosexual must transpose his whole sexuality and
must try to overcome or sublimate his one-sided leanings.

The necessary educational discipline takes a long time. The treatment of
homosexuality therefore is a formidable task, both for the analyst and
for the patient. The end-result of the treatment may not be known
definitely for some years.

I have tried to describe the technique of the analysis in the individual
cases. From those various indications the reader may form a picture of
the difficulties. A systematic account of the technique of the analysis
would require a volume in itself. Perhaps after finishing my _Disorders
of the Instincts and Emotions Series_ I may write such a work in order
to acquaint with my experience the practitioners who want to grapple
with the same problems.

A new generation of physicians, not brought up in the midst of the
prejudices of the older, will further the psychologic investigation of
the neuroses.

Naturally the high school must change its attitude towards the problem
of sex. Departments of Sexology and Psychotherapy are necessary to
instruct the young physicians in the essentials of sexual life and its
morbid changes, in order to prepare the future practitioner to deal
effectively with these troubles, heretofore erroneously looked upon as
hopeless. The next volumes in this Series will prove how little the
paraphilias are inborn and how much they are the result of training and
environment. But what is formulated through faulty training may be
corrected by proper reëducation, even though the hold of infantilism
appears unconquerable.

I have called the paraphilias _the struggle between spinal cord and
brain_. They are, even more truly, _the Struggle of Child against
Adult_. For at bottom these neuroses are but infantilisms struggling for
survival. The adult fights against the child; the adult race, ripe for
monosexuality, fights against its childhood manifesting itself in
bisexuality and sadism. The physician can see to it that the warfare is
carried on in humane fashion and with means worthy of civilization. He
can turn the hidden into an open warfare. It means overcoming the
evil—or that which the moralists call evil—by meeting it face to face.

He who looks for more than a few words on the subject of the prophylaxis
of homosexuality and onanism will be disappointed. I believe it is best
that we turn our attention to these themes only when we are called upon
to do so in our professional capacity. I advise all parents and
educators not to watch whether a child masturbates or not. The child
quits the habit when it finds other ways for releasing the tension. And
our analyses have abundantly shown us that it is almost impossible to
prevent masturbation. The evil effects produced upon the child
witnessing marital bickerings, the household inspiration it receives
with regard to judgment-feelings about women and men, the decisive
manner in which parents affect it when they transfer their conflicts on
the child,—these capital facts the life histories of homosexuals given
above illustrate very clearly for any one willing to look squarely at
the truth. We do not as yet appreciate how careful we must be in our
relations with the children. Our educators are still guilty of a serious
blunder when they conceive their duty to be to instill goodness in the
child through the instrumentality of fear. There are only two
educational levers: one’s own example and—love. The healthiest children
come from happy marriages. It is love that determines whether a marriage
shall be a happy one and whether the offspring will be healthy or weak.
The unconscious sexual instinct, manifesting itself in love is the guide
for the regeneration of the human race.[53] Social conditions favoring
early love marriages are the only social reform to which I look for
results....




                           INDEX OF SUBJECTS


 Abstinence, 81, 191

 Adult Love, 314

 Age, 50

 Aggressivity, 283

 Ahasuerus-Type, 214

 Alcoholism, 27, 69, 178, 183

 Ambisexuality, 12

 Anal Eroticism, 245

 Anamnesis (of H.), 231

 Anger, 69, 120, 152

 Antagonism, 94, 304

 Anxiety, 15, 164, 178
   neurosis, 28, 76, 191

 Asocial (Cravings), 194

 Associations, 250

 Association Therapy, 307

 Atavism, 169, 297

 Attachment (to Father), 182

 Autism, 173

 Aversion, 29, 31, 57, 97


 Bipolarity, 157, 206, 218, 265, 283

 Bisexuality, 12, 296


 Censorship, 267

 Christianity, 301

 Compromise, 189, 290

 Compulsion Neurosis, 192

 Conflict, Psychic, 311
   Psychology of, 93

 Confusion States, 176

 Conscience, 144

 Coprophilia, 247

 Cravings, 180

 Creative Energy, 296

 Crime Passionelle, 23, 158

 Criminality, 13, 18 passim, 20, 70, 133, 138, 144, 151, 157, 187

 Culture, 159

 Cunnilingus, 209, 216


 Day Dreaming, 138

 Defence of Jealousy, 123

 Degeneration Theory, 282, 296 passim

 Delusion of Jealousy, 161
   vs. Reality, 177

 Depression, 96, 104, 187

 Differentiation, Sexual, 294

 Disgust, 15, 21, 29, 62, 63, 207

 Dorian Love, 300

 Dreams, 82, 131 passim, 176, 240, 247, 254 passim, 267, 269, 271, 277

 Drinkers’ Jealousy, 183

 Drug Addiction, 176, 178

 Dyspareunia, 18, 95

 Dyspnea, 72


 Egoism, 291

 Elektra, 195

 Engrams, 295

 Epilepsy, 22 passim

 Ethics, Sexual, 317


 Family, Love of, 91

 Fancies, Homosexual, 247, 253

 Father Complex, 227

 Father Imago, 35, 36, 39, 49, 61 passim, 77, 283

 Fear, 57, 62, 67
   of Sexual Partner, 15 passim, 17, 20, 38
   of Women, 286

 Feeling-Attitude, 216

 Fellatio, 73, 247

 Fetichism, 44

 Fixation, 47, 70, 79, 81
   Emotional, 223

 Flight Reflex, 234


 Greek Love, 82 passim

 Guilty Conscience, 296

 Guilt, Feeling of, 207


 Hair Symbolism, 262

 Hatred, 19, 38, 79, 80, 103, 132, 134, 145, 273, 289, 304

 Hermaphroditism, Unilateral, 297

 Heterosexuality, 269

 Horror Feminae, 14

 Hypnosis, 306

 Hysteria, 22


 Identification, 49, 103, 110

 Impotentia, 40, 69

 Inability to Love, 289

 Inbreeding, 297

 Incest Phantasy, 33, 105, 146, 155, 181, 187, 194, 222, 265

 Infantile Attitude, 283, 292, 295
   Reminiscences, 286
   Sexual Theory, 211, 246

 Infantilism, 44, 133, 220

 Inferiority, Feeling of, 229

 Insanity, 156, 158
   Fear of, 176, 177
   Periodic, 176

 Intermediate Sex Theory, 217

 Inversion, 41, 43, 49


 Jealousy, 76, 102, 109, 127 passim, 131, 135, 156, 292

 Judaism, 299

 Late Homosexuality, 50

 Latent Criminality, 137
   Homosexuality, 296, 308

 Law of Substitution, 89, 90

 Libido, 29, 44, 260

 Love, 157
   Attitude, 295


 Masochism, 207

 Masturbation, 16, 55, 64, 66, 155, 230, 245

 Maternal Body Phantasy, 268, 272

 Melancholia, 118

 Monogamy, 303

 Monosexuality, 187 passim, 299

 Monotheism, Sexual, 193

 Mother Imago, 34, 41, 49, 89, 144, 146

 Mother-in-Law, 118

 Motherhood, 95

 Motivations, 159


 Narcissism, 47, 48, 91, 269, 291

 Neurasthenia, 72

 Neurosis, Epileptic, 27

 Non-Conscious H., 117


 Œdipus, 195

 Ontogenesis, 156, 281

 Orgasm, 63

 Overcleanliness, 266

 Over-valuation (of Manliness), 217, 295


 Pansexualism, 193

 Paranoia, 156, 163, 166, 190

 Paraphilia, 200, 219

 Pederasty, Epileptic, 26

 “Penetrating Eye” Symbolism, 61

 Permanence of H., 46

 Persecution, Delusion of, 159, 171, 192

 Phylogenesis, 156, 281

 Philosophy, 39

 Polar tension, 293, 303

 Pollution Symbolism, 259

 Precocity, Sexual, 291

 Primordial Hatred, 282

 Progression, 297

 Projection, Psychic, 159

 Prophylaxis, 316

 Protection, 80

 Pseudo-Heterosexuality, 14

 Psychoanalysis, 139, 146, 170, 176, 200, 208, 284, 310

 Psychogenesis of H., 105, 181, 280, 298
   Paranoia, 171

 Psychosexual Infantilism, 148

 Psychosis, 156

 Puellæ Publica, 194

 Purity, 105


 Querrulants, 172


 Rage, 19, 158

 Regression, 90, 132, 163, 194, 195, 282, 292

 Religion, 301

 Reminiscences, 179

 Repressed Sadism, 270

 Repression, 34, 43, 49, 190, 194

 Revenge Fancies, 169, 292

 Revolt, 92

 Rivalry, between Sexes, 293


 Sadism, 38, 49, 69, 159, 161 passim, 200

 Sadistic Trend, 177

 Scatologie Fancies, 244, 246, 260

 Scent, 46

 Scorn, 15, 32

 Self-Knowledge, 309

 Self-Love, 284, 291
   Pathologic, 193
   Punishment, 135
   Torture, 202

 Servant Girl, 119

 Severity, Parental, 220

 Sexual Infantilism, 260

 Sister Imago, 88

 Social Abhorrence of H., 298

 Specific Phantasy, 78

 Spermatozoan Dream, 272

 Spiritual Marriage, 166, 264

 Sublimation, 88, 90

 Submissiveness, 135

 Suicide, 76

 Supremacy, Struggle for, 220, 222

 Symbolism, 44

 Sympathetic Act, 111


 Telepathy, 186

 Tenderness, Craving for, 274
   Parental, 220

 Third Sex Theory, 15

 Transposition, Emotional, 162

 Transvestitism, 252, 296

 Trauma, Psychic, 98

 Tuberculosis, Symbolism of, 233


 Uncertainty, 168

 Unconscious, 160, 194

 Uranism, 34, 189

 Urlind, 95, 133, 195, 284

 Urning, 14, 31, 33, 47, 48 passim, 194, 284

 Urolagnia, 248


 Voyeurism, 117

 Vomiting, Symptomatic, 242


 Warning, 105

 Water Closet Symbolism, 244 passim

 Wish, 207
   Fulfillment, 111
   Incestuous, 131, 133


 Zoöphily, 155




                             INDEX OF NAMES


 Adler, 15, 222, 285

 Aristotle, 299


 Beaussart, 155

 Berg, 91, 92 passim

 Bjerre, 170

 Bloch, 14

 Bethe, 300 passim

 Burchard, 27


 Dessoir, 308


 Eulenburg, 21, 317


 Fehlinger, 294

 Fleischmann, 200, 206, 208

 Freimark, 93

 Freud, 156, 161, 213, 215, 310, 311

 Fuchs, 306


 Havelock Ellis, 220

 Heine, 271

 Hirschfeld, 11, 12 passim, 14, 21, 26, 27, 29, 30 passim, 48, 90, 95,
    188 passim, 193, 296 passim, 297, 299


 Ibsen, 89


 Juliusburger, 159, 160


 Kafka, 233

 Krafft-Ebing, 190 passim


 Magnan, 296

 Moll, 307


 Nietzsche, 10, 11, 198, 199, 288, 289


 Oppenheim, 161


 Paul (Jean), 138

 Platen, 43

 Praetorius (Numa), 29


 Raffalovich, 284

 Rank, 90

 Rochefoucauld, 108, 109, 154, 155


 Sadger, 36 passim, 38, 39, 43, 46, 48, 71, 285

 Schnitzler, 125

 Schopenhauer, 52, 53

 Schrenk-Notzing, 306

 Schrecker, 229

 Stekel, 200, 258, 264, 268, 290

 Strindberg, 80


 Tannenbaum, 125

 Tarnowsky, 305


 Van Teslaar, 18, 23, 90, 207, 258, 264, 268, 290


 Weininger, 80


 Ziemcke, 205

-----

Footnote 1:

  “Homosexuals who display their inclination clearly only after puberty
  show an interest in the other sex before and during the period of
  puberty. For instance, I have been told by a 23-year-old typical
  homosexual, today a victim of horror feminae, that at 16 and 17 years
  of age he entertained strong fancies about girls and ran after them,
  although without any particular sexual feeling desire. This transitory
  and undefined preoccupation of homosexuals with the opposite sex is a
  sort of ‘pseudoheterosexuality.’” (_Bloch_, _loc. cit._, p. 597.)

Footnote 2:

  In vol. III of _Disorders of Instincts and Emotions: The Sexual
  Frigidity of Woman; Psychopathology of Woman’s Love Life_. English
  translation by _Dr. James S. Van Teslaar_.

Footnote 3:

  _Nervöse Angstzustände_, 2nd ed., p. 336.

Footnote 4:

  Vol. V. in: _Disorders of Instincts and Emotions_. English version by
  _Dr. Van Teslaar_.

Footnote 5:

  _B. Tarnowsky_, _Die krankhaften Erscheinungen des Geschlechtssinnes_
  (The Morbid Manifestations of the Sexual Instinct). _Eine
  forensisch-psychiatrische Studie._ Berlin, 1886, p. 51 ff.

Footnote 6:

  _Jahrbuch f. sexuelle Zwischenstufen_, vol. IX, 1908, p. 504.

Footnote 7:

  _Fragment der Psychoanalyse eines Homosexuellen_ (_Jahrb. f. sexuelle
  Zwischenstufen_, vol. IX, 1908). [A typical illustration of the wrong
  way of carrying on a psychoanalysis, the kind of painful ordeal during
  which the subject calls out in distress: “But, pardon me, what _must_
  I tell you? You just torture me, nothing less!” The most important
  relations are overlooked, the patient is tortured to admit that he is
  in love with _Sadger_, so that after fourteen hours of this sort of
  torment he runs off.]

Footnote 8:

  _J. Sadger_: _Ist die konträre Sexualempfindung heilbar? Zeitschr. f.
  Sexualwissenschaft_, 1908, p. 712.

Footnote 9:

  _Jahrb. f. psychoanalytische u. psychopathol. Forschungen_, vol. II,
  1910.

Footnote 10:

  _Ibsen_, the great psychologist, has described in masterly fashion the
  transposition of sister love into boy love. In “_Little Eyolf_,”
  Almers, the writer, suddenly loses the love for his wife and turns his
  affection exclusively to his child. That child is called ‘little
  Eyolf,’ like his sister, who had once put on boy’s clothes and called
  herself ‘little Eyolf.’ The parents had expected a boy. Almers turns
  his affection for the sister, which pervades the whole drama, into the
  love for the boy. He has discovered for himself _the law of
  substitution_ which corresponds to the changes spoken of in these
  pages. Little Eyolf in fact is the dramatisation of the latent
  homosexual fixation on the sister. Almers cannot split his
  personality, he cannot be both homo- and heterosexual. This inability
  to split his self, the root of all homosexuality, forms the background
  of the whole drama. Rita cannot divide her personality any more than
  Almers can do it; he must give his whole personality self. Almers
  cannot divide wife and sister. He embraces his wife and thinks of the
  sister (That sister, whom he calls his little and his big Eyolf. The
  sister in trousers, who embodied his ideal, a woman in male clothes, a
  bisexual being which need not be split up at all). “_Love of brothers
  and sisters is the only relationship not subject to the law of
  transformation._” _Rank_ (_Das Inzestmotiv in Dichtung und Sage_,
  1919, p. 654) and _Pfister_ (_Anwendung der Psychoanalyse in der
  Pädagogik und Seelsorge_, p. 72) find the incest motive easily but
  overlook the fact that the situation involves the outbreak of
  homosexuality and its psychogenesis. It represents a flight from the
  sister to man, a wavering homosexuality sublimated into love for the
  boy. The drama contains numerous other familiar points well worth
  careful analysis. For Almers, his wife, and his child, are the
  representatives of the male, female, and infantile components which we
  endeavor to synthetize in our character (_trinity_). Regression to the
  infantile level sets in with flight from the world (flight to the
  solitude of the mountain top). The solitary Ibsen, as road builder,
  undertakes to construct a new highway which shall lead up to solitary
  heights and does not observe that the road leads really straight back
  to the realm of his youth. Somewhere in the vast expanse of his soul
  the ‘dead child’ is floating around and staring with wide open eyes
  into infinity. A child is killed in this drama. It stands for the
  miscarried regression back to infantilism. Childhood is finally
  subdued and forgetfulness once more drowns in the soul’s vast expanse
  all gnawing and biting reproaches. The memories are all dead ... and
  the next drama has for its theme: When the dead awaken. But in little
  Eyolf they are already awake.... The dead, whom Ibsen carried in his
  breast, the corpse to which Rita refers so often.... The child in him
  is dead and now the man in him also threatens to die. It recalls the
  admission of impotence, described with such tremendous realism in the
  great Rita-Almers scene. The man in him dies and the woman in him
  persists with yearnings. A more detailed treatment of these
  endopsychic processes will be found in my book on _Masochism_
  (Translation by _Van Teslaar_, in preparation).

Footnote 11:

  The following passage, from an observation by _Hirschfeld_, shows how
  early such fixation on the brother may take place, only to disappear,
  apparently, and to be mistaken for inborn homosexuality: “I hated boys
  and boyish games; my sister was my _alter ego_, while my brother, who
  was 13 years older and a very beautiful man, had powerfully charmed my
  childish, pure and innocent heart. I worshipped him for his physical
  beauty even more than on account of his sterling qualities. At the
  same time I grew continuously more sensitive in my overt attitude
  towards him. I remember clearly that during the 6th or 7th year my
  brother’s physical beauty caused me to shake before him with every
  fiber of my body in admiration as before some mystery revealed. At 10
  years of age I wept through a whole night intoxicated with joy because
  it fell to my lot to lie down near his intoxicatingly sweet presence
  for rest. I had a feeling of shame such as I did not experience in the
  presence of my mother or sister. Clearly and deliberately, although
  unbeknown, of course, to him, I deified my brother from the 10th to
  the 15th year, and this worshipful attitude reached its highest from
  my 10th to the 12th year, when he married. I was disconsolately
  unhappy over it because that event removed him from our midst and I
  felt it was dreadful that he should lose his virgin beauty, as I
  thought.” (_Hirschfeld_, _loc. cit._, p. 46.)

Footnote 12:

  _Zuchtbarkeit der Homosexualität._ _Sexualprobleme_, 6 Jahrg., 1910,
  No. 12.

Footnote 13:

  This thought is very wonderfully expressed in _Gerhart Hauptmann’s
  Griseldis_. The father is jealous of the son because he, in turn, had
  been his father’s enemy and rival....

Footnote 14:

  _Cf._ chapter on Jealousy in my collection of essays, “_Was am Grunde
  der Seele ruht_...,” Wien, 1909, Hofbuchhandlung Paul Knepler. English
  Version, _The Depths of the Soul_, translated by _Dr. S. A.
  Tannenbaum_, Moffat, Yard & Co., N. Y.

Footnote 15:

  With his wonderful psychologic mastery _Arthur Schnitzler_ has
  described such a pair in his best piece entitled, “_Das weite Land_.”
  Hofrichter, the manufacturer, who flutters from one love affair to
  another, and his wife, who consoles herself in the arms of a young
  Cadet, are the kind of a pair who love each other but go down in ruin
  rather than openly acknowledge their love.

Footnote 16:

  _Cf._ chapter entitled, “_Der Kampf der Geschlechter_,” in my work,
  _The Beloved Ego_, translated by _Dr. S. A. Tannenbaum_, Moffat, Yard
  & Co., N. Y.

Footnote 17:

  The flaring up of jealousy in old age during exhaustive conditions, an
  extraordinarily common occurrence, seems to be determined partly by
  endocrinic disorders and partly by the awakening of infantile
  predispositions. We also find frequent mention of the fact that morbid
  jealousy manifests itself after a prolonged convalescence in bed. Some
  physicians are inclined to trace the condition back to an
  intoxication. It seems to me more likely that the unusual opportunity
  of mulling things over in the mind is more likely the cause. We must
  also take into consideration that facing closely the possibility of
  death all ungratified wishes, including the homosexual, once more
  flare up, urgently pressing for gratification. This alone may lead to
  the flaring up also of paraphilias and homosexual tendencies during
  old age, when it must also be considered that on account of organic
  changes in the brain cortex the inhibitions are also weakened. I have
  repeatedly noticed that nursing care by a person of the same sex as
  the patient also plays a certain rôle. I have even seen directly as a
  consequence of prolonged invalidism the development of a homosexual
  feeling-attitude towards the nursing person, for instance, the flaring
  up of a passion for mother or sister. Regressions back into childhood
  frequently occur after infectious diseases. All the various infantile
  attitudes manifest themselves. Psychosexual infantilism, a subject
  which will be fully treated in a forthcoming volume of our “_Disorders
  of the Emotions and the Instincts_,” is most likely to break out
  particularly after a period of illness when one feels one’s self again
  a child.

Footnote 18:

  Cf. _Willy Schmidt_, _Inzestuöser Eifersuchtswahn, Gross’ Archiv_,
  vol. LVII, 1914, p. 257.

Footnote 19:

  _Zur Radikalbehandlung der chronischen Paranoia. Jahrbuch f.
  psychoanalytische Forsch._, Vol. III, 1912.

Footnote 20:

  A symbolic representation of the identification of myself with the
  father.

Footnote 21:

  A form of sexual disorder not infrequent among neurotics, suggesting a
  different sexual objective.

Footnote 22:

  _Hirschfeld_ naturally traces this morbid tendency back to the social
  ostracism of the homosexual. In my opinion that is a forced
  explanation. The very proneness of the homosexuals to affective
  disorders, their heightened sensibility, their morbid irritability,
  their endogenous depression prove that all homosexuals are severe
  neurotics. _Hirschfeld_ may be able to trace the homosexual’s acute
  outbreaks of affective psychoses back to the actual conflicts. But it
  is impossible to link this heightened affectivity to the feminine
  attitude of the urnings. For if it were so, how could we explain the
  equally distressing analogous disorders among the _urlinds_?
  _Hirschfeld_ refers to the anxiety states of the homosexuals (p. 916)
  and expressly states:

  “This very condition is found frequently also among homosexuals who
  are psychically normal so far as their home relations are concerned.”

  No—they are not normal with regard to home relations, they are severe
  neurotics on account of the repression of their heterosexuality.
  Superficial appearances are deceptive and many a person who appears
  outwardly to be the picture of health, a well balanced temperament, is
  inwardly the victim of a serious neurosis.... _Hirschfeld_ refers
  further to the homosexual’s proneness to persecution manias and to
  delusions of reference. Concerning homosexual women he states:

  “Compelled against their inclination to fulfill their marital duties
  the homosexual women become very nervous and, in addition to anxiety
  attacks, they suffer severe depressions.”...

  How does _Hirschfeld_ know that the depressions are due to the
  enforced fulfillment of marital duties? I know homosexual women who
  are divorced and suffer even more; I know homosexual unmarried women,
  who are as neurotic as the married women, and, like the latter, suffer
  of serious depressions. All these facts prove that the homosexual pays
  for his monosexuality just as dearly as the neurotic monosexual who is
  heterosexual.

Footnote 23:

  _Cf. Stekel, Berufswahl und Neurose, Gross’ Archiv_, vol. XIX.

Footnote 24:

  _Beiträge zur Lehre von der konträrer Sexualempfindung Zeitschr. f.
  Psychol. u. Neurol._, vol. VII, 1911.

Footnote 25:

  I have at the present time under observation a soldier who for about
  three weeks masturbated 15 times (!) daily. Advanced hypochondriac.
  The motive seems to have been the development of a neurosis so he
  would be freed of military service.

Footnote 26:

  The history of the same patient, as given by _Ziemcke_, refers to the
  same episode as follows: “At 17 years of age the first coitus with a
  peasant girl, pleasurable, no disorder.” A proof that the heterosexual
  episodes are always corrected in memory and modified in favor of a
  homosexual predisposition.

Footnote 27:

  Regarding this occurrence _Ziemcke_ relates: “Towards the last of his
  studies at Kiel he brought to his room a 12-year-old boy from the
  street under the pretext of carrying some books for him. When the boy
  returned he suggested making some experiments on him, tapped him first
  on the knee cap, then had him take off his stockings and kneel on the
  edge of the lowermost cabinet drawer; next he forced the boy to stand
  up stripped to the waist while he pricked him with a pen in the armpit
  and under the fingernails. After that he hung him by a rope tied
  around his hands, but the rope broke. Then he had the boy lie down on
  the sofa, lowered his trousers so as to expose the hips and gluteal
  region and proposed to pay the boy 5 pfennig for every one of 50 cane
  strokes. After the 43rd stroke the boy could not endure the pain any
  longer, so he increased the pay to 10 pfennig and gave him 5
  additional strokes. It has been ascertained that the man had been
  drinking hard the night before carousing until daylight and according
  to his own testimony he was very nervous next day and had palpitation
  of the heart. He also stated that he had acted impulsively; he
  remembered well all the details of the occurrence but everything took
  place as in a haze. After the deed he had a feeling of relief, his
  usual excitement and unrest promptly subsided. Examination showed
  nothing physically abnormal and absence of any serious intellectual
  defect as well.”

Footnote 28:

  The volume on _Sadism and Masochism_, in my Series on the _Disorders
  of the Instincts and of the Emotions_. English version by _Van
  Teslaar_.

Footnote 29:

  At a meeting of the medical society in Odessa, a colleague was
  presented as one who had been treated unsuccessfully by me. He
  suffered compulsions of a most serious character and was one week
  under my care. I had proposed three months. Nevertheless he was
  brought forth as proof of the inefficacy of psychoanalysis. It
  happened that colleague Dr. W. was present, and he knew that the
  alleged analysis was of one week’s duration. He was able to apprise
  the meeting of the fact. In a few weeks that honorable sick physician
  placed himself under the professional care of Dr. W....

Footnote 30:

  An “infantile sexual theory,” in which coitus is conceived
  sadistically as a squeezing.

Footnote 31:

  _Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, Vol. IV.

Footnote 32:

  _Cf._ also my essay, _Der Kampf der Geschlechter, the Struggle between
  the Sexes_, in my work, _The Beloved Ego_, Moffat, Yard & Co., N. Y. I
  have now under treatment a very sick woman who has gone to pieces over
  a similar problem. She was anesthetic with all men. The one man who
  had just once roused her during sexual intercourse she hated and could
  kill.

Footnote 33:

  _Havelock Ellis_ and _Moll_ (_Handbuch der Sexualwissenschaften_,
  Leipzig, F. C. W. Vogel, 1912) draw attention to this fact: “Both
  sexes often show a remarkable youthfulness in appearance which is
  preserved late into the adult state. The love of green, which is
  chiefly, normally, a favorite color with children, and especially with
  girls, is often observed. A certain degree of histrionic talent is not
  uncommon as well as an inclination towards tenderness, occasionally
  also a feminine love of adornments and jewels. It may be said of many
  of these physical and psychic characteristics that they denote a
  certain degree of infantilism, and this fits in with the view that
  homosexuality is traceable to aboriginal bisexuality; for the deeper
  we penetrate into the life history of the individual, the nearer we
  approach the bisexual stage.”

Footnote 34:

  _Dr. Paul Schrecker, Die Individualpsychologische Bedeutung der
  Kindheitserrinnerungen_, Zentralbl. f. Psychoanalyse, Vol. IV.

Footnote 35:

  _Cp._ the novel by _Kafka_, _Die Verwandlung_ (Verlag von Kurt Wolff).
  It portrays the transformation of a man into a bedbug. It is obviously
  a sadistic fancy (the bedbug sucks blood). This meaning is not
  imparted to the patient so as not to influence the course of his
  associations.

Footnote 36:

  The mouth as an erogenous zone. He expected kisses and meanwhile was
  satisfied with other sweets as a substitute. He is a confirmed lover
  of dainties and still relies on sweets which he is in the habit of
  carrying in his pockets.

Footnote 37:

  This is a thought which troubles many neurotics. It is their way of
  belittling the persons who impress them and who thus make them realize
  their own inferiority.

Footnote 38:

  Later will be shown the sadistic meaning of this phantasy. Urine is
  often a substitute for blood in the dream....

Footnote 39:

  _Cp._ the boxes in the first dream (_Merchant of Venice_).

Footnote 40:

  _Cp._ _Sex and Dreams: The Language of Dreams_, vol. I. Translation by
  _James S. Van Teslaar_.

Footnote 41:

  _Cp._ Chapter on _Maternal Body Dreams_, in work mentioned above, Vol.
  II.

Footnote 42:

  In the Tristan phantasy these reminiscences return. The father is the
  betrayed King. The episode of the father’s departure in that dream
  becomes clear only now. He died in time to avoid the experience of a
  second deception in love.

Footnote 43:

  _Cp._ my laws of symbolic equivalents in _Language of Dreams_: All
  secretions and excreta are equal to one another as symbols.

Footnote 44:

  _Raffalovich_, author of a small monograph on _Die Entwickelung der
  Homosexualität_ (The Development of H.), Berlin, 1895, states in a few
  pages more truths than many authors disclose in heavy volumes of
  writing. He states, for instance, that “there are no distinct barriers
  between heterosexuals and homosexuals.” He also emphasizes the strong
  self-love of homosexuals: “They have _die Leidenschaft der
  Æhnlichkeit_.”

Footnote 45:

  Page 248, of the German edition. “The neurotic’s attachment to the
  family is an overcorrection of former lack of love and is induced by a
  feeling of remorse.” “Poets formulate a longing for love because of
  their inability to love and that drives them to their continuous chase
  after love adventure. Love becomes the overstressed idea and the
  unattainable ideal of poets.” “The poet differs from the criminal
  because he is aware of his incapacity to love as a handicap, and from
  hatred and scorn of humanity he turns to love his fellow men.”

Footnote 46:

  _Domestikation und die secundären Geschlechtsmerkmale. Zeitschrift f.
  Sexualwissenschaft_, Vol. III, No. 6–7, 1916.

Footnote 47:

  An excellent account of the history of homosexuality may be found in
  the work of _Hirschfeld_ (_loc. cit._).

Footnote 48:

  Politics, II. Quoted after _Havelock Ellis_ and _I. A. Symonds_, _Das
  konträre Geschlechtsgefühl_, Leipzig, George H. Wiegands Verlag, 1896.

Footnote 49:

  _Die dorische Knabenliebe_ (_Ihre Ethik and ihre Idee_), _Rheinisches
  Museum f. Philologie_ (Neue Folge), vol. 69, 1907.

  The authors prove that boy love in Hellas was introduced by the
  Dorians. Although traces of the custom are found also among the
  Ionians, boy love, like knighthood, became fashionable in Greece
  through the Dorians. “It was permitted only to the free citizen, the
  knight, while slaves were forbidden to indulge in the practice often
  under penalty of death. The practice was regulated by strict rules and
  became a state institution. In Sparta, Crete, Thebes the training for
  (arety) ἀρεθή, among the dominant class was based on pederasty. The
  lovers in Sparta were held to a strict accountability for their
  ‘companions’ who became attached to them from their 12th year; so that
  they and not their youthful companions were punished for any shameful
  act on the part of the latter.” “The battlefield at _Chaironeia_ was
  covered with the lovers ... lying in pairs.” In Crete the choice of
  boy lovers assumed the form of bridal theft. The lover advised the
  boy’s family of his intention of stealing the boy. If the family did
  not like the “match” it tried to avoid the capture of the boy. The
  higher the lover’s social position the greater was the honor felt by
  the boy and his family. The chosen one was afterwards sent home
  carrying gifts....

  In fact, at Thebes, Thera and in Crete _such unions even enjoyed
  religious sanction_. “The engagement of the lovers or rather their
  physical union certainty occurred under the protection of some god or
  hero at Thera and at Thebes. At Thebes we find the language
  unmistakably clear in the high archaic field inscriptions of the
  Seventh Century, chiselled in large letters upon the holy promontory
  near the City, at a distance of 50–70 meters from the temple of
  _Apollo Karneios_ and on the holy site dedicated to _Zeus_. They read
  as follows: “On this holy place, under protection of _Zeus_, _Kerion_
  has consummated his union with the son of _Bathykles_ and proclaiming
  it proudly to the world dedicates to it this imperishable memorial.
  And many Thereans with him, and after him, have united themselves with
  their boys on this same holy spot.””

  At Crete it was considered a shame for a boy to possess no knightly
  lover. On the other hand it was a great honor for a boy to be wanted
  by many lovers.

  For the lovers and for the boys these relations had an excellent
  effect. Each was inspired to do his best in order to prove his mettle
  and be ἀγαθός ανήρ (_agathoi anyr_). The heroic tales even took note
  of this love. The wondrous deeds of a _Herakles_ were carried out in
  honor of the male lover _Eurystheus_. Repelling a wooing knight was
  considered ignominious,—a blot on one’s honor. _Plutarch_ relates the
  story how _Aristodamus_ struck down with his sword an obstinate boy:
  “Man gerät unwilkürlich in die Sprache unseres ritterlichen
  Ehrenkomments,”—states _Bethe_.

  With that act the knight transferred his ἀρετή (arety), knighthood,
  upon the boy. It had a symbolic meaning. Among the Spartans the
  pæderast was called εἰοπνήλας (eiopnylas), from εἰοπνειν (eiopnein),
  meaning, _the one who blows something in_ (the inblower). But what was
  it that the pederast blew into the boy? Clearly the πνευμα (pneuma),
  the soul, a belief which has come down from the oldest period (Bible)
  surviving to this day in Christianity. According to primitive
  conceptions the soul of man resided in his various secreta and
  excreta. Urine, fæces, blood and semen were magical substances
  inasmuch as they contained the life principle. With his male seed the
  Dorian endowed his boy with knightly prowess. (Similarly the savages
  in New Guinea drink the urine of the chieftain in order to acquire his
  skill and strength. _Bethe_ mentions numerous similar instances.) The
  semen was regarded as the seat of the soul.

  _Bethe_ points out also that the liver, the heart and more
  particularly the _phallus_ were similarly identified with the soul.
  The reader is referred to the original study for further details.

  The remarkable notion of blowing one’s soul into another _a
  posteriori_, is traced by the author to primitive beliefs. Animals
  showed no objection to these love-offerings; and men who ascribed
  magical properties to urine and fæces undoubtedly lacked any feeling
  of revulsion against these excreta.... Since the anus was looked upon
  as the portal for angry demons, why should not the benevolent magical
  power of heroes be introduced the same way?

  “The notion which led to the development of pæderasty as a State
  Institution among the Dorians, could not long endure. It had to give
  way finally.... But boy love persisted as a widespread custom and
  stood throughout antiquity and throughout the whole extent of Greek
  culture as a necessary feature of decent superior Greek citizenship.
  The Christian church fought the heathen custom from the beginning and
  was the first to drive pæderasty from Christian society; unable to
  root it out by spiritual means, it adopted criminal punishment in the
  year 342.”

  That is, briefly, the philologist’s account, who also states that
  during the pre-Doric period (_Homer_, for instance) the custom of boy
  love had as yet no roots as an Institution.

Footnote 50:

  _Zur Psychologie der Vita Sexualis, Allg. Zeitschr. f. Psychol._,
  1894.

Footnote 51:

  I am unable to corroborate the contention of _Ferenczi_ in his _Zur
  Nosologie der männlichen Homosexualität_ (_Homoerotik_), published in
  _Zeitschrift f. ärztl. Psychoanalyse_, Vol. II, 189, 1914. He assumes
  two forms of homosexuality: 1. _the passive subject-homoerotic_, who
  represents an inborn state and stands for an intermediary type in
  _Hirschfeld’s_ sense and is incurable and 2. the _active
  object-homoerotic_, a type he describes as a special form of
  compulsion neurosis. The passive type never consults the physician for
  his trouble,—he is a genuine homosexual; the active type is unhappy
  over his condition, he shows the typical symptoms. Both share in
  common the peculiarity that their own sex is an essential condition
  for the attainment of their love-object and remains so throughout
  life.

  I have seen many homosexuals who are interchangeably active or
  passive. On the other hand I have seen active homosexuals who were
  very much troubled over their condition and passive homosexuals who
  have been cured. Incidentally I may mention that _Ferenczi_ borrows
  thoughts from my essay on _Masken der Homosexualität_, without
  indicating the source. Since _Freud_ has decreed against me his
  anathema, the narrower Freudian school looks upon my work as common
  property to be appropriated at will by any one.

Footnote 52:

  _Handbuch der Sexualwissenschaften_, p. 664.

Footnote 53:

  A new orientation in matters of sexual morality is on the way in spite
  of tremendous opposition. I refer those interested to _Eulenburg’s_
  excellent work, _Moral und Sexualität_ (Verlag, Marcus & Webster,
  Bonn, 1916).

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOMOSEXUAL NEUROSIS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






