  Halcyon Classics Series
  THE WORKS OF JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU


  Contents:
  THE SOCIAL CONTRACT
  THE CONFESSIONS
  EMILE
  A DISCOURSE ON POLITICAL ECONOMY
  INEQUALITY AMONG MEN
    CONSIDERATIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT OF POLAND
    CONSTITUTIONAL PROJECT FOR CORSICA




  THE SOCIAL CONTRACT
  OR PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL RIGHT
  by Jean Jacques Rousseau
 
  Foreword
  Book I
  1. Subject of the First Book
  2. The First Societies
  3. The Right of the Strongest
  4. Slavery
  5. That We Must Always Go Back to a First Convention
  6. The Social Compact
  7. The Sovereign
  8. The Civil State
  9. Real Property
  Book II
  1. That Sovereignty is Inalienable
  2. That Sovereignty is Indivisible
  3. Whether the General Will is Fallible
  4. The Limits of the Sovereign Power
  5. The Right of Life and Death
  6. Law
  7. The Legislator
  8. The People
  9. The People (continued)
  10. The People (continued)
  11. The Various Systems of Legislation
  12. The Division of the Laws
  Book III
  1. Government in General
  2. The Constituent Principle in the Various Forms of Government
  3. The Division of Governments
  4. Democracy
  5. Aristocracy  6. Monarchy
  7. Mixed Governments
  8. That All Forms of Government Do Not Suit All Countries
  9. The Marks of a Good Government
  10. The Abuse of Government and Its Tendency to Degenerate
  11. The Death of the Body Politic
  12. How the Sovereign Authority Maintains Itself
  13. The Same (continued)
  14. The Same (continued)
  15. Deputies or Representatives
  16. That the Institution of Government is not a Contract
  17. The Institution of Government
  18. How to Check the Usurpations of Government
  Book IV
  1. That the General Will is Indestructible
  2. Voting
  3. Elections
  4. The Roman Comitia
  5. The Tribunate
  6. The Dictatorship
  7. The Censorship
  8. Civil Religion
  9. Conclusion
 
  FOREWORD
  This little treatise is part of a longer work which I began years ago without realising my limitations,
and long since abandoned. Of the various fragments that might have been extracted from what I wrote,
this is the most considerable, and, I think, the least unworthy of being offered to the public. The rest no
longer exists.
 
  BOOK I
I MEAN to inquire if, in the civil order, there can be any sure and legitimate rule of administration,
men being taken as they are and laws as they might be. In this inquiry I shall endeavour always to unite
what right sanctions with what is prescribed by interest, in order that justice and utility may in no case
be divided.
I enter upon my task without proving the importance of the subject. I shall be asked if I am a prince
or a legislator, to write on politics. I answer that I am neither, and that is why I do so. If I were a prince
or a legislator, I should not waste time in saying what wants doing; I should do it, or hold my peace.
  As I was born a citizen of a free State, and a member of the Sovereign, I feel that, however feeble
the influence my voice can have on public affairs, the right of voting on them makes it my duty to study
them: and I am happy, when I reflect upon governments, to find my inquiries always furnish me with
new reasons for loving that of my own country.
  1. SUBJECT OF THE FIRST BOOK
  MAN is born free; and everywhere he is in chains. One thinks himself the master of others, and still
remains a greater slave than they. How did this change come about? I do not know. What can make it
legitimate? That question I think I can answer.
  If I took into account only force, and the effects derived from it, I should say: "As long as a people
is compelled to obey, and obeys, it does well; as soon as it can shake off the yoke, and shakes it off, it
does still better; for, regaining its liberty by the same right as took it away, either it is justified in
resuming it, or there was no justification for those who took it away." But the social order is a sacredright which is the basis of all other rights. Nevertheless, this right does not come from nature, and must
therefore be founded on conventions. Before coming to that, I have to prove what I have just asserted.
  2. THE FIRST SOCIETIES
  THE most ancient of all societies, and the only one that is natural, is the family: and even so the
children remain attached to the father only so long as they need him for their preservation. As soon as
this need ceases, the natural bond is dissolved. The children, released from the obedience they owed to
the father, and the father, released from the care he owed his children, return equally to independence.
If they remain united, they continue so no longer naturally, but voluntarily; and the family itself is then
maintained only by convention.
  This  common  liberty  results  from  the  nature  of  man.  His  first  law  is  to  provide  for  his  own
preservation, his first cares are those which he owes to himself; and, as soon as he reaches years of
discretion, he is the sole judge of the proper means of preserving himself, and consequently becomes
his own master.
  The family then may be called the first model of political societies: the ruler corresponds to the
father, and the people to the children; and all, being born free and equal, alienate their liberty only for
their own advantage. The whole difference is that, in the family, the love of the father for his children
repays him for the care he takes of them, while, in the State, the pleasure of commanding takes the
place of the love which the chief cannot have for the peoples under him.
  Grotius denies that all human power is established in favour of the governed, and quotes slavery as
an example. His usual method of reasoning is constantly to establish right by fact.1 It would be possible
to employ a more logical method, but none could be more favourable to tyrants.
  It is then, according to Grotius, doubtful whether the human race belongs to a hundred men, or that
hundred men to the human race: and, throughout his book, he seems to incline to the former alternative,
which is also the view of Hobbes. On this showing, the human species is divided into so many herds of
cattle, each with its ruler, who keeps guard over them for the purpose of devouring them.
  As a shepherd is of a nature superior to that of his flock, the shepherds of men, i.e., their rulers, are
of a nature superior to that of the peoples under them. Thus, Philo tells us, the Emperor Caligula
reasoned, concluding equally well either that kings were gods, or that men were beasts.
  The reasoning of Caligula agrees with that of Hobbes and Grotius. Aristotle, before any of them,
had said that men are by no means equal naturally, but that some are born for slavery, and others for
dominion.
  Aristotle was right; but he took the effect for the cause. Nothing can be more certain than that every
man born in slavery is born for slavery. Slaves lose everything in their chains, even the desire of
escaping  from  them:  they  love  their  servitude,  as  the  comrades  of  Ulysses  loved  their  brutish
condition.2 If then there are slaves by nature, it is because there have been slaves against nature. Force
made the first slaves, and their cowardice perpetuated the condition.
I have said nothing of King Adam, or Emperor Noah, father of the three great monarchs who shared
out the universe, like the children of Saturn, whom some scholars have recognised in them. I trust to
getting due thanks for my moderation; for, being a direct descendant of one of these princes, perhaps of
the eldest branch, how do I know that a verification of titles might not leave me the legitimate king of
the human race? In any case, there can be no doubt that Adam was sovereign of the world, as Robinson
Crusoe was of his island, as long as he was its only inhabitant; and this empire had the advantage that
the monarch, safe on his throne, had no rebellions, wars, or conspirators to fear.
  3. THE RIGHT OF THE STRONGEST
  THE strongest is never strong enough to be always the master, unless he transforms strength into
right, and obedience into duty. Hence the right of the strongest, which, though to all seeming meant
ironically, is really laid down as a fundamental principle. But are we never to have an explanation of
this phrase? Force is a physical power, and I fail to see what moral effect it can have. To yield to force
is an act of necessity, not of will — at the most, an act of prudence. In what sense can it be a duty?
  Suppose for a moment that this so-called "right" exists. I maintain that the sole result is a mass ofinexplicable nonsense. For, if force creates right, the effect changes with the cause: every force that is
greater  than  the  first  succeeds  to  its  right.  As  soon  as  it  is  possible  to  disobey  with  impunity,
disobedience is legitimate; and, the strongest being always in the right, the only thing that matters is to
act so as to become the strongest. But what kind of right is that which perishes when force fails? If we
must obey perforce, there is no need to obey because we ought; and if we are not forced to obey, we are
under no obligation to do so. Clearly, the word "right" adds nothing to force: in this connection, it
means absolutely nothing.
  Obey the powers that be. If this means yield to force, it is a good precept, but superfluous: I can
answer for its never being violated. All power comes from God, I admit; but so does all sickness: does
that mean that we are forbidden to call in the doctor? A brigand surprises me at the edge of a wood:
must  I  not  merely  surrender  my  purse  on  compulsion;  but,  even  if  I  could  withhold  it,  am  I  in
conscience bound to give it up? For certainly the pistol he holds is also a power.
  Let us then admit that force does not create right, and that we are obliged to obey only legitimate
powers. In that case, my original question recurs.
  4. SLAVERY
  SINCE no man has a natural authority over his fellow, and force creates no right, we must conclude
that conventions form the basis of all legitimate authority among men.
  If an individual, says Grotius, can alienate his liberty and make himself the slave of a master, why
could not a whole people do the same and make itself subject to a king? There are in this passage plenty
of ambiguous words which would need explaining; but let us confine ourselves to the word alienate. To
alienate is to give or to sell. Now, a man who becomes the slave of another does not give himself; he
sells himself, at the least for his subsistence: but for what does a people sell itself? A king is so far from
furnishing his subjects with their subsistence that he gets his own only from them; and, according to
Rabelais, kings do not live on nothing. Do subjects then give their persons on condition that the king
takes their goods also? I fail to see what they have left to preserve.
  It will be said that the despot assures his subjects civil tranquillity. Granted; but what do they gain,
if the wars his ambition brings down upon them, his insatiable avidity, and the vexatious conduct of his
ministers press harder on them than their own dissensions would have done? What do they gain, if the
very tranquillity they enjoy is one of their miseries? Tranquillity is found also in dungeons; but is that
enough to make them desirable places to live in? The Greeks imprisoned in the cave of the Cyclops
lived there very tranquilly, while they were awaiting their turn to be devoured.
  To say that a man gives himself gratuitously, is to say what is absurd and inconceivable; such an act
is null and illegitimate, from the mere fact that he who does it is out of his mind. To say the same of a
whole people is to suppose a people of madmen; and madness creates no right.
  Even if each man could alienate himself, he could not alienate his children: they are born men and
free; their liberty belongs to them, and no one but they has the right to dispose of it. Before they come
to years of discretion, the father can, in their name, lay down conditions for their preservation and well-
being, but he cannot give them irrevocably and without conditions: such a gift is contrary to the ends of
nature, and exceeds the rights of paternity. It would therefore be necessary, in order to legitimise an
arbitrary government, that in every generation the people should be in a position to accept or reject it;
but, were this so, the government would be no longer arbitrary.
  To renounce liberty is to renounce being a man, to surrender the rights of humanity and even its
duties.  For  him  who  renounces  everything  no  indemnity  is  possible.  Such  a  renunciation  is
incompatible with man's nature; to remove all liberty from his will is to remove all morality from his
acts.  Finally,  it  is  an  empty  and  contradictory  convention  that  sets  up,  on  the  one  side,  absolute
authority, and, on the other, unlimited obedience. Is it not clear that we can be under no obligation to a
person from whom we have the right to exact everything? Does not this condition alone, in the absence
of equivalence or exchange, in itself involve the nullity of the act? For what right can my slave have
against me, when all that he has belongs to me, and, his right being mine, this right of mine against
myself is a phrase devoid of meaning?  Grotius and the rest find in war another origin for the so-called right of slavery. The victor having,
as they hold, the right of killing the vanquished, the latter can buy back his life at the price of his
liberty; and this convention is the more legitimate because it is to the advantage of both parties.
  But it is clear that this supposed right to kill the conquered is by no means deducible from the state
of war. Men, from the mere fact that, while they are living in their primitive independence, they have
no mutual relations stable enough to constitute either the state of peace or the state of war, cannot be
naturally enemies. War is constituted by a relation between things, and not between persons; and, as the
state of war cannot arise out of simple personal relations, but only out of real relations, private war, or
war of man with man, can exist neither in the state of nature, where there is no constant property, nor in
the social state, where everything is under the authority of the laws.
  Individual combats, duels and encounters, are acts which cannot constitute a state; while the private
wars, authorised by the Establishments of Louis IX, King of France, and suspended by the Peace of
God, are abuses of feudalism, in itself an absurd system if ever there was one, and contrary to the
principles of natural right and to all good polity.
  War then is a relation, not between man and man, but between State and State, and individuals are
enemies only accidentally, not as men, nor even as citizens,3 but as soldiers; not as members of their
country, but as its defenders. Finally, each State can have for enemies only other States, and not men;
for between things disparate in nature there can be no real relation.
  Furthermore, this principle is in conformity with the established rules of all times and the constant
practice  of  all  civilised  peoples.  Declarations  of  war  are  intimations  less  to  powers  than  to  their
subjects. The foreigner, whether king, individual, or people, who robs, kills or detains the subjects,
without declaring war on the prince, is not an enemy, but a brigand. Even in real war, a just prince,
while laying hands, in the enemy's country, on all that belongs to the public, respects the lives and
goods of individuals: he respects rights on which his own are founded. The object of the war being the
destruction of the hostile State, the other side has a right to kill its defenders, while they are bearing
arms; but as soon as they lay them down and surrender, they cease to be enemies or instruments of the
enemy, and become once more merely men, whose life no one has any right to take. Sometimes it is
possible to kill the State without killing a single one of its members; and war gives no right which is not
necessary to the gaining of its object. These principles are not those of Grotius: they are not based on
the authority of poets, but derived from the nature of reality and based on reason.
  The right of conquest has no foundation other than the right of the strongest. If war does not give
the conqueror the right to massacre the conquered peoples, the right to enslave them cannot be based
upon a right which does not exist. No one has a right to kill an enemy except when he cannot make him
a slave, and the right to enslave him cannot therefore be derived from the right to kill him. It is
accordingly an unfair exchange to make him buy at the price of his liberty his life, over which the
victor holds no right. Is it not clear that there is a vicious circle in founding the right of life and death on
the right of slavery, and the right of slavery on the right of life and death?
  Even if we assume this terrible right to kill everybody, I maintain that a slave made in war, or a
conquered people, is under no obligation to a master, except to obey him as far as he is compelled to do
so. By taking an equivalent for his life, the victor has not done him a favour; instead of killing him
without profit, he has killed him usefully. So far then is he from acquiring over him any authority in
addition to that of force, that the state of war continues to subsist between them: their mutual relation is
the effect of it, and the usage of the right of war does not imply a treaty of peace. A convention has
indeed  been  made;  but  this  convention,  so  far  from  destroying  the  state  of  war,  presupposes  its
continuance.
  So, from whatever aspect we regard the question, the right of slavery is null and void, not only as
being illegitimate, but also because it is absurd and meaningless. The words slave and right contradict
each other, and are mutually exclusive. It will always be equally foolish for a man to say to a man or to
a people: "I make with you a convention wholly at your expense and wholly to my advantage; I shall
keep it as long as I like, and you will keep it as long as I like."  5. THAT WE MUST ALWAYS GO BACK TO A FIRST CONVENTION
  EVEN if I granted all that I have been refuting, the friends of despotism would be no better off.
There will always be a great difference between subduing a multitude and ruling a society. Even if
scattered individuals were successively enslaved by one man, however numerous they might be, I still
see no more than a master and his slaves, and certainly not a people and its ruler; I see what may be
termed an aggregation, but not an association; there is as yet neither public good nor body politic. The
man in question, even if he has enslaved half the world, is still only an individual; his interest, apart
from that of others, is still a purely private interest. If this same man comes to die, his empire, after him,
remains scattered and without unity, as an oak falls and dissolves into a heap of ashes when the fire has
consumed it.
  A people, says Grotius, can give itself to a king. Then, according to Grotius, a people is a people
before it gives itself. The gift is itself a civil act, and implies public deliberation. It would be better,
before examining the act by which a people gives itself to a king, to examine that by which it has
become a people; for this act, being necessarily prior to the other, is the true foundation of society.
  Indeed, if there were no prior convention, where, unless the election were unanimous, would be the
obligation on the minority to submit to the choice of the majority? How have a hundred men who wish
for  a  master  the  right  to  vote  on  behalf  of  ten  who  do  not?  The  law  of  majority  voting  is  itself
something established by convention, and presupposes unanimity, on one occasion at least.
  6. THE SOCIAL COMPACT
I SUPPOSE men to have reached the point at which the obstacles in the way of their preservation in
the state of nature show their power of resistance to be greater than the resources at the disposal of each
individual for his maintenance in that state. That primitive condition can then subsist no longer; and the
human race would perish unless it changed its manner of existence.
  But, as men cannot engender new forces, but only unite and direct existing ones, they have no other
means of preserving themselves than the formation, by aggregation, of a sum of forces great enough to
overcome the resistance. These they have to bring into play by means of a single motive power, and
cause to act in concert.
  This sum of forces can arise only where several persons come together: but, as the force and liberty
of each man are the chief instruments of his self-preservation, how can he pledge them without harming
his own interests, and neglecting the care he owes to himself? This difficulty, in its bearing on my
present subject, may be stated in the following terms:
  "The  problem  is  to  find  a  form  of  association  which  will  defend  and  protect  with  the  whole
common force the person and goods of each associate, and in which each, while uniting himself with
all, may still obey himself alone, and remain as free as before." This is the fundamental problem of
which the Social Contract provides the solution.
  The clauses of this contract are so determined by the nature of the act that the slightest modification
would make them vain and ineffective; so that, although they have perhaps never been formally set
forth, they are everywhere the same and everywhere tacitly admitted and recognised, until, on the
violation of the social compact, each regains his original rights and resumes his natural liberty, while
losing the conventional liberty in favour of which he renounced it.
  These clauses, properly understood, may be reduced to one — the total alienation of each associate,
together with all his rights, to the whole community; for, in the first place, as each gives himself
absolutely, the conditions are the same for all; and, this being so, no one has any interest in making
them burdensome to others.
  Moreover, the alienation being without reserve, the union is as perfect as it can be, and no associate
has anything more to demand: for, if the individuals retained certain rights, as there would be no
common superior to decide between them and the public, each, being on one point his own judge,
would ask to be so on all; the state of nature would thus continue, and the association would necessarily
become inoperative or tyrannical.
  Finally, each man, in giving himself to all, gives himself to nobody; and as there is no associateover whom he does not acquire the same right as he yields others over himself, he gains an equivalent
for everything he loses, and an increase of force for the preservation of what he has.
  If then we discard from the social compact what is not of its essence, we shall find that it reduces
itself to the following terms:
  "Each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the supreme direction of the general
will, and, in our corporate capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole."
  At once, in place of the individual personality of each contracting party, this act of association
creates a moral and collective body, composed of as many members as the assembly contains votes,
and receiving from this act its unity, its common identity, its life and its will. This public person, so
formed by the union of all other persons formerly took the name of city,4 and now takes that of
Republic or body politic; it is called by its members State when passive. Sovereign when active, and
Power when compared with others like itself. Those who are associated in it take collectively the name
of people, and severally are called citizens, as sharing in the sovereign power, and subjects, as being
under the laws of the State. But these terms are often confused and taken one for another: it is enough
to know how to distinguish them when they are being used with precision.
  7. THE SOVEREIGN
  THIS formula shows us that the act of association comprises a mutual undertaking between the
public and the individuals, and that each individual, in making a contract, as we may say, with himself,
is bound in a double capacity; as a member of the Sovereign he is bound to the individuals, and as a
member  of  the  State  to  the  Sovereign.  But  the  maxim  of  civil  right,  that  no  one  is  bound  by
undertakings made to himself, does not apply in this case; for there is a great difference between
incurring an obligation to yourself and incurring one to a whole of which you form a part.
  Attention must further be called to the fact that public deliberation, while competent to bind all the
subjects  to  the  Sovereign,  because  of  the  two  different  capacities  in  which  each  of  them  may  be
regarded, cannot, for the opposite reason, bind the Sovereign to itself; and that it is consequently
against the nature of the body politic for the Sovereign to impose on itself a law which it cannot
infringe. Being able to regard itself in only one capacity, it is in the position of an individual who
makes a contract with himself; and this makes it clear that there neither is nor can be any kind of
fundamental law binding on the body of the people — not even the social contract itself. This does not
mean that the body politic cannot enter into undertakings with others, provided the contract is not
infringed by them; for in relation to what is external to it, it becomes a simple being, an individual.
  But the body politic or the Sovereign, drawing its being wholly from the sanctity of the contract,
can never bind itself, even to an outsider, to do anything derogatory to the original act, for instance, to
alienate any part of itself, or to submit to another Sovereign. Violation of the act by which it exists
would be self-annihilation; and that which is itself nothing can create nothing.
  As soon as this multitude is so united in one body, it is impossible to offend against one of the
members without attacking the body, and still more to offend against the body without the members
resenting it. Duty and interest therefore equally oblige the two contracting parties to give each other
help; and the same men should seek to combine, in their double capacity, all the advantages dependent
upon that capacity.
  Again, the Sovereign, being formed wholly of the individuals who compose it, neither has nor can
have any interest contrary to theirs; and consequently the sovereign power need give no guarantee to its
subjects, because it is impossible for the body to wish to hurt all its members. We shall also see later on
that it cannot hurt any in particular. The Sovereign, merely by virtue of what it is, is always what it
should be.
  This, however, is not the case with the relation of the subjects to the Sovereign, which, despite the
common interest, would have no security that they would fulfil their undertakings, unless it found
means to assure itself of their fidelity.
  In fact, each individual, as a man, may have a particular will contrary or dissimilar to the general
will which he has as a citizen. His particular interest may speak to him quite differently from thecommon interest: his absolute and naturally independent existence may make him look upon what he
owes to the common cause as a gratuitous contribution, the loss of which will do less harm to others
than the payment of it is burdensome to himself; and, regarding the moral person which constitutes the
State as a persona ficta, because not a man, he may wish to enjoy the rights of citizenship without being
ready to fulfil the duties of a subject. The continuance of such an injustice could not but prove the
undoing of the body politic.
  In  order  then  that  the  social  compact  may  not  be  an  empty  formula,  it  tacitly  includes  the
undertaking, which alone can give force to the rest, that whoever refuses to obey the general will shall
be compelled to do so by the whole body. This means nothing less than that he will be forced to be free;
for this is the condition which, by giving each citizen to his country, secures him against all personal
dependence. In this lies the key to the working of the political machine; this alone legitimises civil
undertakings, which, without it, would be absurd, tyrannical, and liable to the most frightful abuses.
  8. THE CIVIL STATE
  THE passage from the state of nature to the civil state produces a very remarkable change in man,
by substituting justice for instinct in his conduct, and giving his actions the morality they had formerly
lacked. Then only, when the voice of duty takes the place of physical impulses and right of appetite,
does man, who so far had considered only himself, find that he is forced to act on different principles,
and to consult his reason before listening to his inclinations. Although, in this state, he deprives himself
of some advantages which he got from nature, he gains in return others so great, his faculties are so
stimulated  and  developed,  his  ideas  so  extended,  his  feelings  so  ennobled,  and  his  whole  soul  so
uplifted, that, did not the abuses of this new condition often degrade him below that which he left, he
would be bound to bless continually the happy moment which took him from it for ever, and, instead of
a stupid and unimaginative animal, made him an intelligent being and a man.
  Let us draw up the whole account in terms easily commensurable. What man loses by the social
contract is his natural liberty and an unlimited right to everything he tries to get and succeeds in getting;
what he gains is civil liberty and the proprietorship of all he possesses. If we are to avoid mistake in
weighing one against the other, we must clearly distinguish natural liberty, which is bounded only by
the strength of the individual, from civil liberty, which is limited by the general will; and possession,
which is merely the effect of force or the right of the first occupier, from property, which can be
founded only on a positive title.
  We might, over and above all this, add, to what man acquires in the civil state, moral liberty, which
alone makes him truly master of himself; for the mere impulse of appetite is slavery, while obedience to
a law which we prescribe to ourselves is liberty. But I have already said too much on this head, and the
philosophical meaning of the word liberty does not now concern us.
  9. REAL PROPERTY
  EACH member of the community gives himself to it, at the moment of its foundation, just as he is,
with all the resources at his command, including the goods he possesses. This act does not make
possession, in changing hands, change its nature, and become property in the hands of the Sovereign;
but, as the forces of the city are incomparably greater than those of an individual, public possession is
also, in fact, stronger and more irrevocable, without being any more legitimate, at any rate from the
point of view of foreigners. For the State, in relation to its members, is master of all their goods by the
social contract, which, within the State, is the basis of all rights; but, in relation to other powers, it is so
only by the right of the first occupier, which it holds from its members.
  The right of the first occupier, though more real than the right of the strongest, becomes a real right
only  when  the  right  of  property  has  already  been  established.  Every  man  has  naturally  a  right  to
everything he needs; but the positive act which makes him proprietor of one thing excludes him from
everything else. Having his share, he ought to keep to it, and can have no further right against the
community. This is why the right of the first occupier, which in the state of nature is so weak, claims
the respect of every man in civil society. In this right we are respecting not so much what belongs to
another as what does not belong to ourselves.  In general, to establish the right of the first occupier over a plot of ground, the following conditions
are necessary: first, the land must not yet be inhabited; secondly, a man must occupy only the amount
he  needs  for  his  subsistence;  and,  in  the  third  place,  possession  must  be  taken,  not  by  an  empty
ceremony, but by labour and cultivation, the only sign of proprietorship that should be respected by
others, in default of a legal title.
  In granting the right of first occupancy to necessity and labour, are we not really stretching it as far
as it can go? Is it possible to leave such a right unlimited? Is it to be enough to set foot on a plot of
common ground, in order to be able to call yourself at once the master of it? Is it to be enough that a
man has the strength to expel others for a moment, in order to establish his right to prevent them from
ever returning? How can a man or a people seize an immense territory and keep it from the rest of the
world except by a punishable usurpation, since all others are being robbed, by such an act, of the place
of habitation and the means of subsistence which nature gave them in common? When Nunez Balboa,
standing on the sea-shore, took possession of the South Seas and the whole of South America in the
name of the crown of Castile, was that enough to dispossess all their actual inhabitants, and to shut out
from them all the princes of the world? On such a showing, these ceremonies are idly multiplied, and
the Catholic King need only take possession all at once, from his apartment, of the whole universe,
merely making a subsequent reservation about what was already in the possession of other princes.
  We can imagine how the lands of individuals, where they were contiguous and came to be united,
became the public territory, and how the right of Sovereignty, extending from the subjects over the
lands they held, became at once real and personal. The possessors were thus made more dependent, and
the forces at their command used to guarantee their fidelity. The advantage of this does not seem to
have  been  felt  by  ancient  monarchs,  who  called  themselves  Kings  of  the  Persians,  Scythians,  or
Macedonians, and seemed to regard themselves more as rulers of men than as masters of a country.
Those of the present day more cleverly call themselves Kings of France, Spain, England, etc.: thus
holding the land, they are quite confident of holding the inhabitants.
  The  peculiar  fact  about  this  alienation  is  that,  in  taking  over  the  goods  of  individuals,  the
community,  so  far  from  despoiling  them,  only  assures  them  legitimate  possession,  and  changes
usurpation into a true right and enjoyment into proprietorship. Thus the possessors, being regarded as
depositaries of the public good, and having their rights respected by all the members of the State and
maintained against foreign aggression by all its forces, have, by a cession which benefits both the
public and still more themselves, acquired, so to speak, all that they gave up. This paradox may easily
be explained by the distinction between the rights which the Sovereign and the proprietor have over the
same estate, as we shall see later on.
  It may also happen that men begin to unite one with another before they possess anything, and that,
subsequently occupying a tract of country which is enough for all, they enjoy it in common, or share it
out among themselves, either equally or according to a scale fixed by the Sovereign. However the
acquisition be made, the right which each individual has to his own estate is always subordinate to the
right which the community has over all: without this, there would be neither stability in the social tie,
nor real force in the exercise of Sovereignty.
I shall end this chapter and this book by remarking on a fact on which the whole social system
should rest: i.e., that, instead of destroying natural inequality, the fundamental compact substitutes, for
such  physical  inequality  as  nature  may  have  set  up  between  men,  an  equality  that  is  moral  and
legitimate, and that men, who may be unequal in strength or intelligence, become every one equal by
convention and legal right.5
 
  BOOK II
  1. THAT SOVEREIGNTY IS INALIENABLE
  THE first and most important deduction from the principles we have so far laid down is that the
general will alone can direct the State according to the object for which it was instituted, i.e., the
common good: for if the clashing of particular interests made the establishment of societies necessary,the agreement of these very interests made it possible. The common element in these different interests
is what forms the social tie; and, were there no point of agreement between them all, no society could
exist. It is solely on the basis of this common interest that every society should be governed.
I hold then that Sovereignty, being nothing less than the exercise of the general will, can never be
alienated, and that the Sovereign, who is no less than a collective being, cannot be represented except
by himself: the power indeed may be transmitted, but not the will.
  In reality, if it is not impossible for a particular will to agree on some point with the general will, it
is at least impossible for the agreement to be lasting and constant; for the particular will tends, by its
very nature, to partiality, while the general will tends to equality. It is even more impossible to have any
guarantee of this agreement; for even if it should always exist, it would be the effect not of art, but of
chance. The Sovereign may indeed say: "I now will actually what this man wills, or at least what he
says he wills"; but it cannot say: "What he wills tomorrow, I too shall will" because it is absurd for the
will to bind itself for the future, nor is it incumbent on any will to consent to anything that is not for the
good of the being who wills. If then the people promises simply to obey, by that very act it dissolves
itself and loses what makes it a people; the moment a master exists, there is no longer a Sovereign, and
from that moment the body politic has ceased to exist.
  This does not mean that the commands of the rulers cannot pass for general wills, so long as the
Sovereign, being free to oppose them, offers no opposition. In such a case, universal silence is taken to
imply the consent of the people. This will be explained later on.
  2. THAT SOVEREIGNTY IS INDIVISIBLE
    SOVEREIGNTY, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, is indivisible; for will either is, or is
not, general;6 it is the will either of the body of the people, or only of a part of it. In the first case, the
will, when declared, is an act of Sovereignty and constitutes law: in the second, it is merely a particular
will, or act of magistracy — at the most a decree.
  But our political theorists, unable to divide Sovereignty in principle, divide it according to its
object: into force and will; into legislative power and executive power; into rights of taxation, justice
and war; into internal administration and power of foreign treaty. Sometimes they confuse all these
sections, and sometimes they distinguish them; they turn the Sovereign into a fantastic being composed
of several connected pieces: it is as if they were making man of several bodies, one with eyes, one with
arms,  another  with  feet,  and  each  with  nothing  besides.  We  are  told  that  the  jugglers  of  Japan
dismember a child before the eyes of the spectators; then they throw all the members into the air one
after another, and the child falls down alive and whole. The conjuring tricks of our political theorists
are very like that; they first dismember the Body politic by an illusion worthy of a fair, and then join it
together again we know not how.
  This error is due to a lack of exact notions concerning the Sovereign authority, and to taking for
parts of it what are only emanations from it. Thus, for example, the acts of declaring war and making
peace have been regarded as acts of Sovereignty; but this is not the case, as these acts do not constitute
law, but merely the application of a law, a particular act which decides how the law applies, as we shall
see clearly when the idea attached to the word law has been defined.
  If we examined the other divisions in the same manner, we should find that, whenever Sovereignty
seems to be divided, there is an illusion: the rights which are taken as being part of Sovereignty are
really all subordinate, and always imply supreme wills of which they only sanction the execution.
  It would be impossible to estimate the obscurity this lack of exactness has thrown over the decisions
of writers who have dealt with political right, when they have used the principles laid down by them to
pass judgment on the respective rights of kings and peoples. Every one can see, in Chapters III and IV
of the First Book of Grotius, how the learned man and his translator, Barbeyrac, entangle and tie
themselves up in their own sophistries, for fear of saying too little or too much of what they think, and
so offending the interests they have to conciliate. Grotius, a refugee in France, ill-content with his own
country, and desirous of paying his court to Louis XIII, to whom his book is dedicated, spares no pains
to rob the peoples of all their rights and invest kings with them by every conceivable artifice. Thiswould also have been much to the taste of Barbeyrac, who dedicated his translation to George I of
England. But unfortunately the expulsion of James II, which he called his "abdication," compelled him
to use all reserve, to shuffle and to tergiversate, in order to avoid making William out a usurper. If these
two writers had adopted the true principles, all difficulties would have been removed, and they would
have been always consistent; but it would have been a sad truth for them to tell, and would have paid
court  for  them  to  no  one  save  the  people.  Moreover,  truth  is  no  road  to  fortune,  and  the  people
dispenses neither ambassadorships, nor professorships, nor pensions.
  3. WHETHER THE GENERAL WILL IS FALLIBLE
  IT follows from what has gone before that the general will is always right and tends to the public
advantage; but it does not follow that the deliberations of the people are always equally correct. Our
will is always for our own good, but we do not always see what that is; the people is never corrupted,
but it is often deceived, and on such occasions only does it seem to will what is bad.
  There is often a great deal of difference between the will of all and the general will; the latter
considers only the common interest, while the former takes private interest into account, and is no more
than a sum of particular wills: but take away from these same wills the pluses and minuses that cancel
one another,7 and the general will remains as the sum of the differences.
  If, when the people, being furnished with adequate information, held its deliberations, the citizens
had no communication one with another, the grand total of the small differences would always give the
general will, and the decision would always be good. But when factions arise, and partial associations
are formed at the expense of the great association, the will of each of these associations becomes
general in relation to its members, while it remains particular in relation to the State: it may then be said
that there are no longer as many votes as there are men, but only as many as there are associations. The
differences become less numerous and give a less general result. Lastly, when one of these associations
is so great as to prevail over all the rest, the result is no longer a sum of small differences, but a single
difference; in this case there is no longer a general will, and the opinion which prevails is purely
particular.
  It is therefore essential, if the general will is to be able to express itself, that there should be no
partial society within the State, and that each citizen should think only his own thoughts:8 which was
indeed  the  sublime  and  unique  system  established  by  the  great  Lycurgus.  But  if  there  are  partial
societies, it is best to have as many as possible and to prevent them from being unequal, as was done by
Solon, Numa and Servius. These precautions are the only ones that can guarantee that the general will
shall be always enlightened, and that the people shall in no way deceive itself.
  4. THE LIMITS OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER
  IF the State is a moral person whose life is in the union of its members, and if the most important of
its cares is the care for its own preservation, it must have a universal and compelling force, in order to
move and dispose each part as may be most advantageous to the whole. As nature gives each man
absolute power over all his members, the social compact gives the body politic absolute power over all
its members also; and it is this power which, under the direction of the general will, bears, as I have
said, the name of Sovereignty.
  But, besides the public person, we have to consider the private persons composing it, whose life and
liberty are naturally independent of it. We are bound then to distinguish clearly between the respective
rights of the citizens and the Sovereign,9 and between the duties the former have to fulfil as subjects,
and the natural rights they should enjoy as men.
  Each man alienates, I admit, by the social compact, only such part of his powers, goods and liberty
as it is important for the community to control; but it must also be granted that the Sovereign is sole
judge of what is important.
  Every service a citizen can render the State he ought to render as soon as the Sovereign demands it;
but the Sovereign, for its part, cannot impose upon its subjects any fetters that are useless to the
community, nor can it even wish to do so; for no more by the law of reason than by the law of nature
can anything occur without a cause.  The undertakings which bind us to the social body are obligatory only because they are mutual; and
their nature is such that in fulfilling them we cannot work for others without working for ourselves.
Why is it that the general will is always in the right, and that all continually will the happiness of each
one, unless it is because there is not a man who does not think of "each" as meaning him, and consider
himself in voting for all? This proves that equality of rights and the idea of justice which such equality
creates originate in the preference each man gives to himself, and accordingly in the very nature of
man. It proves that the general will, to be really such, must be general in its object as well as its
essence; that it must both come from all and apply to all; and that it loses its natural rectitude when it is
directed to some particular and determinate object, because in such a case we are judging of something
foreign to us, and have no true principle of equity to guide us.
  Indeed, as soon as a question of particular fact or right arises on a point not previously regulated by
a general convention, the matter becomes contentious. It is a case in which the individuals concerned
are one party, and the public the other, but in which I can see neither the law that ought to be followed
nor the judge who ought to give the decision. In such a case, it would be absurd to propose to refer the
question to an express decision of the general will, which can be only the conclusion reached by one of
the parties and in consequence will be, for the other party, merely an external and particular will,
inclined on this occasion to injustice and subject to error. Thus, just as a particular will cannot stand for
the general will, the general will, in turn, changes its nature, when its object is particular, and, as
general, cannot pronounce on a man or a fact. When, for instance, the people of Athens nominated or
displaced its rulers, decreed honours to one, and imposed penalties on another, and, by a multitude of
particular decrees, exercised all the functions of government indiscriminately, it had in such cases no
longer a general will in the strict sense; it was acting no longer as Sovereign, but as magistrate. This
will seem contrary to current views; but I must be given time to expound my own.
  It should be seen from the foregoing that what makes the will general is less the number of voters
than  the  common  interest  uniting  them;  for,  under  this  system,  each  necessarily  submits  to  the
conditions he imposes on others: and this admirable agreement between interest and justice gives to the
common deliberations an equitable character which at once vanishes when any particular question is
discussed, in the absence of a common interest to unite and identify the ruling of the judge with that of
the party.
  From  whatever  side  we  approach  our  principle,  we  reach  the  same  conclusion,  that  the  social
compact sets up among the citizens an equality of such a kind, that they all bind themselves to observe
the same conditions and should therefore all enjoy the same rights. Thus, from the very nature of the
compact, every act of Sovereignty, i.e., every authentic act of the general will, binds or favours all the
citizens equally; so that the Sovereign recognises only the body of the nation, and draws no distinctions
between those of whom it is made up. What, then, strictly speaking, is an act of Sovereignty? It is not a
convention between a superior and an inferior, but a convention between the body and each of its
members. It is legitimate, because based on the social contract, and equitable, because common to all;
useful, because it can have no other object than the general good, and stable, because guaranteed by the
public force and the supreme power. So long as the subjects have to submit only to conventions of this
sort, they obey no-one but their own will; and to ask how far the respective rights of the Sovereign and
the citizens extend, is to ask up to what point the latter can enter into undertakings with themselves,
each with all, and all with each.
  We can see from this that the sovereign power, absolute, sacred and inviolable as it is, does not and
cannot exceed the limits of general conventions, and that every man may dispose at will of such goods
and liberty as these conventions leave him; so that the Sovereign never has a right to lay more charges
on one subject than on another, because, in that case, the question becomes particular, and ceases to be
within its competency.
  When these distinctions have once been admitted, it is seen to be so untrue that there is, in the
social contract, any real renunciation on the part of the individuals, that the position in which they find
themselves as a result of the contract is really preferable to that in which they were before. Instead of arenunciation, they have made an advantageous exchange: instead of an uncertain and precarious way of
living they have got one that is better and more secure; instead of natural independence they have got
liberty, instead of the power to harm others security for themselves, and instead of their strength, which
others might overcome, a right which social union makes invincible. Their very life, which they have
devoted to the State, is by it constantly protected; and when they risk it in the State's defence, what
more are they doing than giving back what they have received from it? What are they doing that they
would not do more often and with greater danger in the state of nature, in which they would inevitably
have  to  fight  battles  at  the  peril  of  their  lives  in  defence  of  that  which  is  the  means  of  their
preservation? All have indeed to fight when their country needs them; but then no one has ever to fight
for himself. Do we not gain something by running, on behalf of what gives us our security, only some
of the risks we should have to run for ourselves, as soon as we lost it?
  5. THE RIGHT OF LIFE AND DEATH
  THE question is often asked how individuals, having no right to dispose of their own lives, can
transfer to the Sovereign a right which they do not possess. The difficulty of answering this question
seems to me to lie in its being wrongly stated. Every man has a right to risk his own life in order to
preserve it. Has it ever been said that a man who throws himself out of the window to escape from a
fire is guilty of suicide? Has such a crime ever been laid to the charge of him who perishes in a storm
because, when he went on board, he knew of the danger?
  The social treaty has for its end the preservation of the contracting parties. He who wills the end
wills the means also, and the means must involve some risks, and even some losses. He who wishes to
preserve his life at others' expense should also, when it is necessary, be ready to give it up for their
sake. Furthermore, the citizen is no longer the judge of the dangers to which the law-desires him to
expose himself; and when the prince says to him: "It is expedient for the State that you should die," he
ought to die, because it is only on that condition that he has been living in security up to the present,
and because his life is no longer a mere bounty of nature, but a gift made conditionally by the State.
  The death-penalty inflicted upon criminals may be looked on in much the same light: it is in order
that we may not fall victims to an assassin that we consent to die if we ourselves turn assassins. In this
treaty, so far from disposing of our own lives, we think only of securing them, and it is not to be
assumed that any of the parties then expects to get hanged.
  Again, every malefactor, by attacking social rights, becomes on forfeit a rebel and a traitor to his
country; by violating its laws be ceases to be a member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a case
the preservation of the State is inconsistent with his own, and one or the other must perish; in putting
the guilty to death, we slay not so much the citizen as an enemy. The trial and the judgment are the
proofs that he has broken the social treaty, and is in consequence no longer a member of the State.
Since, then, he has recognised himself to be such by living there, he must be removed by exile as a
violator of the compact, or by death as a public enemy; for such an enemy is not a moral person, but
merely a man; and in such a case the right of war is to kill the vanquished.
  But,  it  will  be  said,  the  condemnation  of  a  criminal  is  a  particular  act.  I  admit  it:  but  such
condemnation is not a function of the Sovereign; it is a right the Sovereign can confer without being
able itself to exert it. All my ideas are consistent, but I cannot expound them all at once.
  We may add that frequent punishments are always a sign of weakness or remissness on the part of
the government. There is not a single ill-doer who could not be turned to some good. The State has no
right to put to death, even for the sake of making an example, any one whom it can leave alive without
danger.
  The right of pardoning or exempting the guilty from a penalty imposed by the law and pronounced
by the judge belongs only to the authority which is superior to both judge and law, i.e., the Sovereign;
each its right in this matter is far from clear, and the cases for exercising it are extremely rare. In a well-
governed State, there are few punishments, not because there are many pardons, but because criminals
are rare; it is when a State is in decay that the multitude of crimes is a guarantee of impunity. Under the
Roman Republic, neither the Senate nor the Consuls ever attempted to pardon; even the people neverdid so, though it sometimes revoked its own decision. Frequent pardons mean that crime will soon need
them no longer, and no one can help seeing whither that leads. But I feel my heart protesting and
restraining my pen; let us leave these questions to the just man who has never offended, and would
himself stand in no need of pardon.
  6. LAW
  BY  the  social  compact  we  have  given  the  body  politic  existence  and  life;  we  have  now  by
legislation to give it movement and will. For the original act by which the body is formed and united
still in no respect determines what it ought to do for its preservation.
  What is well and in conformity with order is so by the nature of things and independently of human
conventions. All justice comes from God, who is its sole source; but if we knew how to receive so high
an inspiration, we should need neither government nor laws. Doubtless, there is a universal justice
emanating from reason alone; but this justice, to be admitted among us, must be mutual. Humanly
speaking, in default of natural sanctions, the laws of justice are ineffective among men: they merely
make for the good of the wicked and the undoing of the just, when the just man observes them towards
everybody and nobody observes them towards him. Conventions and laws are therefore needed to join
rights to duties and refer justice to its object. In the state of nature, where everything is common, I owe
nothing to him whom I have promised nothing; I recognise as belonging to others only what is of no
use to me. In the state of society all rights are fixed by law, and the case becomes different.
  But what, after all, is a law? As long as we remain satisfied with attaching purely metaphysical
ideas to the word, we shall go on arguing without arriving at an understanding; and when we have
defined a law of nature, we shall be no nearer the definition of a law of the State.
I have already said that there can be no general will directed to a particular object. Such an object
must be either within or outside the State. If outside, a will which is alien to it cannot be, in relation to
it, general; if within, it is part of the State, and in that case there arises a relation between whole and
part which makes them two separate beings, of which the part is one, and the whole minus the part the
other. But the whole minus a part cannot be the whole; and while this relation persists, there can be no
whole, but only two unequal parts; and it follows that the will of one is no longer in any respect general
in relation to the other.
  But when the whole people decrees for the whole people, it is considering only itself; and if a
relation is then formed, it is between two aspects of the entire object, without there being any division
of the whole. In that case the matter about which the decree is made is, like the decreeing will, general.
This act is what I call a law.
  When I say that the object of laws is always general, I mean that law considers subjects en masse
and actions in the abstract, and never a particular person or action. Thus the law may indeed decree that
there shall be privileges, but cannot confer them on anybody by name. It may set up several classes of
citizens, and even lay down the qualifications for membership of these classes, but it cannot nominate
such and such persons as belonging to them; it may establish a monarchical government and hereditary
succession, but it cannot choose a king, or nominate a royal family. In a word, no function which has a
particular object belongs to the legislative power.
  On this view, we at once see that it can no longer be asked whose business it is to make laws, since
they are acts of the general will; nor whether the prince is above the law, since he is a member of the
State; nor whether the law can be unjust, since no one is unjust to himself; nor how we can be both free
and subject to the laws, since they are but registers of our wills.
  We see further that, as the law unites universality of will with universality of object, what a man,
whoever he be, commands of his own motion cannot be a law; and even what the Sovereign commands
with regard to a particular matter is no nearer being a law, but is a decree, an act, not of sovereignty, but
of magistracy.
I therefore give the name "Republic" to every State that is governed by laws, no matter what the
form of its administration may be: for only in such a case does the public interest govern, and the res
publica rank as a reality. Every legitimate government is republican;10 what government is I willexplain later on.
  Laws are, properly speaking, only the conditions of civil association. The people, being subject to
the laws, ought to be their author: the conditions of the society ought to be regulated solely by those
who come together to form it. But how are they to regulate them? Is it to be by common agreement, by
a sudden inspiration? Has the body politic an organ to declare its will? Who can give it the foresight to
formulate and announce its acts in advance? Or how is it to announce them in the hour of need? How
can a blind multitude, which often does not know what it wills, because it rarely knows what is good
for it, carry out for itself so great and difficult an enterprise as a system of legislation? Of itself the
people wills always the good, but of itself it by no means always sees it. The general will is always in
the right, but the judgment which guides it is not always enlightened. It must be got to see objects as
they are, and sometimes as they ought to appear to it; it must be shown the good road it is in search of,
secured from the seductive influences of individual wills, taught to see times and spaces as a series, and
made to weigh the attractions of present and sensible advantages against the danger of distant and
hidden evils. The individuals see the good they reject; the public wills the good it does not see. All
stand equally in need of guidance. The former must be compelled to bring their wills into conformity
with their reason; the latter must be taught to know what it wills. If that is done, public enlightenment
leads to the union of understanding and will in the social body: the parts are made to work exactly
together, and the whole is raised to its highest power. This makes a legislator necessary.
  7. THE LEGISLATOR
  IN order to discover the rules of society best suited to nations, a superior intelligence beholding all
the passions of men without experiencing any of them would be needed. This intelligence would have
to be wholly unrelated to our nature, while knowing it through and through; its happiness would have to
be independent of us, and yet ready to occupy itself with ours; and lastly, it would have, in the march of
time, to look forward to a distant glory, and, working in one century, to be able to enjoy in the next.11
It would take gods to give men laws.
  What Caligula argued from the facts, Plato, in the dialogue called the Politicus, argued in defining
the civil or kingly man, on the basis of right. But if great princes are rare, how much more so are great
legislators? The former have only to follow the pattern which the latter have to lay down. The legislator
is the engineer who invents the machine, the prince merely the mechanic who sets it up and makes it
go. "At the birth of societies," says Montesquieu, "the rulers of Republics establish institutions, and
afterwards the institutions mould the rulers."12
  He who dares to undertake the making of a people's institutions ought to feel himself capable, so to
speak, of changing human nature, of transforming each individual, who is by himself a complete and
solitary whole, into part of a greater whole from which he in a manner receives his life and being; of
altering man's constitution for the purpose of strengthening it; and of substituting a partial and moral
existence for the physical and independent existence nature has conferred on us all. He must, in a word,
take away from man his own resources and give him instead new ones alien to him, and incapable of
being made use of without the help of other men. The more completely these natural resources are
annihilated, the greater and the more lasting are those which he acquires, and the more stable and
perfect the new institutions; so that if each citizen is nothing and can do nothing without the rest, and
the resources acquired by the whole are equal or superior to the aggregate of the resources of all the
individuals, it may be said that legislation is at the highest possible point of perfection.
  The legislator occupies in every respect an extraordinary position in the State. If he should do so by
reason of his genius, he does so no less by reason of his office, which is neither magistracy, nor
Sovereignty. This office, which sets up the Republic, nowhere enters into its constitution; it is an
individual and superior function, which has nothing in common with human empire; for if he who
holds command over men ought not to have command over the laws, he who has command over the
laws ought not any more to have it over men; or else his laws would be the ministers of his passions
and would often merely serve to perpetuate his injustices: his private aims would inevitably mar the
sanctity of his work.  When Lycurgus gave laws to his country, he began by resigning the throne. It was the custom of
most Greek towns to entrust the establishment of their laws to foreigners. The Republics of modern
Italy in many cases followed this example; Geneva did the same and profited by it.13 Rome, when it
was most prosperous, suffered a revival of all the crimes of tyranny, and was brought to the verge of
destruction, because it put the legislative authority and the sovereign power into the same hands.
  Nevertheless, the decemvirs themselves never claimed the right to pass any law merely on their
own authority. "Nothing we propose to you," they said to the people, "can pass into law without your
consent. Romans, be yourselves the authors of the laws which are to make you happy."
  He, therefore, who draws up the laws has, or should have, no right of legislation, and the people
cannot,  even  if  it  wishes,  deprive  itself  of  this  incommunicable  right,  because,  according  to  the
fundamental compact, only the general will can bind the individuals, and there can be no assurance that
a particular will is in conformity with the general will, until it has been put to the free vote of the
people. This I have said already; but it is worth while to repeat it.
  Thus in the task of legislation we find together two things which appear to be incompatible: an
enterprise too difficult for human powers, and, for its execution, an authority that is no authority.
  There is a further difficulty that deserves attention. Wise men, if they try to speak their language to
the  common  herd  instead  of  its  own,  cannot  possibly  make  themselves  understood.  There  are  a
thousand kinds of ideas which it is impossible to translate into popular language. Conceptions that are
too general and objects that are too remote are equally out of its range: each individual, having no taste
for any other plan of government than that which suits his particular interest, finds it difficult to realise
the advantages he might hope to draw from the continual privations good laws impose. For a young
people to be able to relish sound principles of political theory and follow the fundamental rules of
statecraft, the effect would have to become the cause; the social spirit, which should be created by these
institutions, would have to preside over their very foundation; and men would have to be before law
what they should become by means of law. The legislator therefore, being unable to appeal to either
force or reason, must have recourse to an authority of a different order, capable of constraining without
violence and persuading without convincing.
  This is what has, in all ages, compelled the fathers of nations to have recourse to divine intervention
and credit the gods with their own wisdom, in order that the peoples, submitting to the laws of the State
as to those of nature, and recognising the same power in the formation of the city as in that of man,
might obey freely, and bear with docility the yoke of the public happiness.
  This sublime reason, far above the range of the common herd, is that whose decisions the legislator
puts into the mouth of the immortals, in order to constrain by divine authority those whom human
prudence could not move.14 But it is not anybody who can make the gods speak, or get himself
believed when he proclaims himself their interpreter. The great soul of the legislator is the only miracle
that can prove his mission. Any man may grave tablets of stone, or buy an oracle, or feign secret
intercourse with some divinity, or train a bird to whisper in his ear, or find other vulgar ways of
imposing on the people. He whose knowledge goes no further may perhaps gather round him a band of
fools; but he will never found an empire, and his extravagances will quickly perish with him. Idle tricks
form a passing tie; only wisdom can make it lasting. The Judaic law, which still subsists, and that of the
child of Ishmael, which, for ten centuries, has ruled half the world, still proclaim the great men who
laid them down; and, while the pride of philosophy or the blind spirit of faction sees in them no more
than lucky impostures, the true political theorist admires, in the institutions they set up, the great and
powerful genius which presides over things made to endure.
  We should not, with Warburton, conclude from this that politics and religion have among us a
common object, but that, in the first periods of nations, the one is used as an instrument for the other.
  8. THE PEOPLE
  AS, before putting up a large building, the architect surveys and sounds the site to see if it will bear
the  weight,  the  wise  legislator  does  not  begin  by  laying  down  laws  good  in  themselves,  but  by
investigating the fitness of the people, for which they are destined, to receive them. Plato refused tolegislate for the Arcadians and the Cyrenæans, because he knew that both peoples were rich and could
not put up with equality; and good laws and bad men were found together in Crete, because Minos had
inflicted discipline on a people already burdened with vice.
  A thousand nations have achieved earthly greatness, that could never have endured good laws; even
such as could have endured them could have done so only for a very brief period of their long history.
Most peoples, like most men, are docile only in youth; as they grow old they become incorrigible.
When once customs have become established and prejudices inveterate, it is dangerous and useless to
attempt their reformation; the people, like the foolish and cowardly patients who rave at sight of the
doctor, can no longer bear that any one should lay hands on its faults to remedy them.
  There are indeed times in the history of States when, just as some kinds of illness turn men's heads
and make them forget the past, periods of violence and revolutions do to peoples what these crises do to
individuals: horror of the past takes the place of forgetfulness, and the State, set on fire by civil wars, is
born again, so to speak, from its ashes, and takes on anew, fresh from the jaws of death, the vigour of
youth. Such were Sparta at the time of Lycurgus, Rome after the Tarquins, and, in modern times,
Holland and Switzerland after the expulsion of the tyrants.
  But such events are rare; they are exceptions, the cause of which is always to be found in the
particular constitution of the State concerned. They cannot even happen twice to the same people, for it
can make itself free as long as it remains barbarous, but not when the civic impulse has lost its vigour.
Then disturbances may destroy it, but revolutions cannot mend it: it needs a master, and not a liberator.
Free peoples, be mindful of this maxim: "Liberty may be gained, but can never be recovered."
  Youth is not infancy. There is for nations, as for men, a period of youth, or, shall we say, maturity,
before which they should not be made subject to laws; but the maturity of a people is not always easily
recognisable, and, if it is anticipated, the work is spoilt. One people is amenable to discipline from the
beginning; another, not after ten centuries. Russia will never be really civilised, because it was civilised
too soon. Peter had a genius for imitation; but he lacked true genius, which is creative and makes all
from nothing. He did some good things, but most of what he did was out of place. He saw that his
people was barbarous, but did not see that it was not ripe for civilisation: he wanted to civilise it when it
needed only hardening. His first wish was to make Germans or Englishmen, when he ought to have
been making Russians; and he prevented his subjects from ever becoming what they might have been
by persuading them that they were what they are not. In this fashion too a French teacher turns out his
pupil to be an infant prodigy, and for the rest of his life to be nothing whatsoever. The empire of Russia
will aspire to conquer Europe, and will itself be conquered. The Tartars, its subjects or neighbours, will
become its masters and ours, by a revolution which I regard as inevitable. Indeed, all the kings of
Europe are working in concert to hasten its coming.
  9. THE PEOPLE (continued)
  As nature has set bounds to the stature of a well-made man, and, outside those limits, makes
nothing but giants or dwarfs, similarly, for the constitution of a State to be at its best, it is possible to fix
limits that will make it neither too large for good government, nor too small for self-maintenance. In
every body politic there is a maximum strength which it cannot exceed and which it only loses by
increasing in size. Every extension of the social tie means its relaxation; and, generally speaking, a
small State is stronger in proportion than a great one.
  A thousand arguments could be advanced in favour of this principle. First, long distances make
administration  more  difficult,  just  as  a  weight  becomes  heavier  at  the  end  of  a  longer  lever.
Administration therefore becomes more and more burdensome as the distance grows greater; for, in the
first place, each city has its own, which is paid for by the people: each district its own, still paid for by
the people: then comes each province, and then the great governments, satrapies, and vice-royalties,
always costing more the higher you go, and always at the expense of the unfortunate people. Last of all
comes the supreme administration, which eclipses all the rest. All these over charges are a continual
drain upon the subjects; so far from being better governed by all these different orders, they are worse
governed than if there were only a single authority over them. In the meantime, there scarce remainresources enough to meet emergencies; and, when recourse must be had to these, the State is always on
the eve of destruction.
  This is not all; not only has the government less vigour and promptitude for securing the observance
of the laws, preventing nuisances, correcting abuses, and guarding against seditious undertakings begun
in distant places; the people has less affection for its rulers, whom it never sees, for its country, which,
to its eyes, seems like the world, and for its fellow-citizens, most of whom are unknown to it. The same
laws  cannot  suit  so  many  diverse  provinces  with  different  customs,  situated  in  the  most  various
climates, and incapable of enduring a uniform government. Different laws lead only to trouble and
confusion among peoples which, living under the same rulers and in constant communication one with
another, intermingle and intermarry, and, coming under the sway of new customs, never know if they
can call their very patrimony their own. Talent is buried, virtue unknown and vice unpunished, among
such a multitude of men who do not know one another, gathered together in one place at the seat of the
central administration. The leaders, overwhelmed with business, see nothing for themselves; the State is
governed by clerks. Finally, the measures which have to be taken to maintain the general authority,
which all these distant officials wish to escape or to impose upon, absorb all the energy of the public, so
that there is none left for the happiness of the people. There is hardly enough to defend it when need
arises, and thus a body which is too big for its constitution gives way and falls crushed under its own
weight.
  Again, the State must assure itself a safe foundation, if it is to have stability, and to be able to resist
the  shocks  it  cannot  help  experiencing,  as  well  as  the  efforts  it  will  be  forced  to  make  for  its
maintenance; for all peoples have a kind of centrifugal force that makes them continually act one
against another, and tend to aggrandise themselves at their neighbours' expense, like the vortices of
Descartes. Thus the weak run the risk of being soon swallowed up; and it is almost impossible for any
one to preserve itself except by putting itself in a state of equilibrium with all, so that the pressure is on
all sides practically equal.
  It may therefore be seen that there are reasons for expansion and reasons for contraction; and it is
no small part of the statesman's skill to hit between them the mean that is most favourable to the
preservation of the State. It may be said that the reason for expansion, being merely external and
relative, ought to be subordinate to the reasons for contraction, which are internal and absolute. A
strong and healthy constitution is the first thing to look for; and it is better to count on the vigour which
comes of good government than on the resources a great territory furnishes.
  It may be added that there have been known States so constituted that the necessity of making
conquests entered into their very constitution, and that, in order to maintain themselves, they were
forced to expand ceaselessly. It may be that they congratulated themselves greatly on this fortunate
necessity, which none the less indicated to them, along with the limits of their greatness, the inevitable
moment of their fall.
  10. THE PEOPLE (continued)
  A BODY politic may be measured in two ways — either by the extent of its territory, or by the
number of its people; and there is, between these two measurements, a right relation which makes the
State  really  great.  The  men  make  the  State,  and  the  territory  sustains  the  men;  the  right  relation
therefore is that the land should suffice for the maintenance of the inhabitants, and that there should be
as many inhabitants as the land can maintain. In this proportion lies the maximum strength of a given
number of people; for, if there is too much land, it is troublesome to guard and inadequately cultivated,
produces more than is needed, and soon gives rise to wars of defence; if there is not enough, the State
depends on its neighbours for what it needs over and above, and this soon gives rise to wars of offence.
Every people, to which its situation gives no choice save that between commerce and war, is weak in
itself: it depends on its neighbours, and on circumstances; its existence can never be more than short
and uncertain. It either conquers others, and changes its situation, or it is conquered and becomes
nothing. Only insignificance or greatness can keep it free.
  No fixed relation can be stated between the extent of territory and the population that are adequateone to the other, both because of the differences in the quality of land, in its fertility, in the nature of its
products, and in the influence of climate, and because of the different tempers of those who inhabit it;
for some in a fertile country consume little, and others on an ungrateful soil much. The greater or less
fecundity of women, the conditions that are more or less favourable in each country to the growth of
population, and the influence the legislator can hope to exercise by his institutions, must also be taken
into account. The legislator therefore should not go by what he sees, but by what he foresees; he should
stop not so much at the state in which he actually finds the population, as at that to which it ought
naturally to attain. Lastly, there are countless cases in which the particular local circumstances demand
or allow the acquisition of a greater territory than seems necessary. Thus, expansion will be great in a
mountainous country, where the natural products, i.e., woods and pastures, need less labour, where we
know from experience that women are more fertile than in the plains, and where a great expanse of
slope  affords  only  a  small  level  tract  that  can  be  counted  on  for  vegetation.  On  the  other  hand,
contraction is possible on the coast, even in lands of rocks and nearly barren sands, because there
fishing  makes  up  to  a  great  extent  for  the  lack  of  land-produce,  because  the  inhabitants  have  to
congregate together more in order to repel pirates, and further because it is easier to unburden the
country of its superfluous inhabitants by means of colonies.
  To these conditions of law-giving must be added one other which, though it cannot take the place of
the rest, renders them all useless when it is absent. This is the enjoyment of peace and plenty; for the
moment at which a State sets its house in order is, like the moment when a battalion is forming up, that
when its body is least capable of offering resistance and easiest to destroy. A better resistance could be
made at a time of absolute disorganisation than at a moment of fermentation, when each is occupied
with his own position and not with the danger. If war, famine, or sedition arises at this time of crisis,
the State will inevitably be overthrown.
  Not that many governments have not been set up during such storms; but in such cases these
governments are themselves the State's destroyers. Usurpers always bring about or select troublous
times to get passed, under cover of the public terror, destructive laws, which the people would never
adopt in cold blood. The moment chosen is one of the surest means of distinguishing the work of the
legislator from that of the tyrant.
  What people, then, is a fit subject for legislation? One which, already bound by some unity of
origin, interest, or convention, has never yet felt the real yoke of law; one that has neither customs nor
superstitions deeply ingrained, one which stands in no fear of being overwhelmed by sudden invasion;
one which, without entering into its neighbours' quarrels, can resist each of them single-handed, or get
the help of one to repel another; one in which every member may be known by every other, and there is
no need to lay on any man burdens too heavy for a man to bear; one which can do without other
peoples, and without which all others can do;15 one which is neither rich nor poor, but self-sufficient;
and, lastly, one which unites the consistency of an ancient people with the docility of a new one.
Legislation is made difficult less by what it is necessary to build up than by what has to be destroyed;
and what makes success so rare is the impossibility of finding natural simplicity together with social
requirements. All these conditions are indeed rarely found united, and therefore few States have good
constitutions.
  There  is  still  in  Europe  one  country  capable  of  being  given  laws  —  Corsica.  The  valour  and
persistency with which that brave people has regained and defended its liberty well deserves that some
wise man should teach it how to preserve what it has won. I have a feeling that some day that little
island will astonish Europe.
  11. THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS OF LEGISLATION
  IF we ask in what precisely consists the greatest good of all, which should be the end of every
system of legislation, we shall find it reduce itself to two main objects, liberty and equality — liberty,
because all particular dependence means so much force taken from the body of the State and equality,
because liberty cannot exist without it.
I have already defined civil liberty; by equality, we should understand, not that the degrees ofpower and riches are to be absolutely identical for everybody; but that power shall never be great
enough for violence, and shall always be exercised by virtue of rank and law; and that, in respect of
riches, no citizen shall ever be wealthy enough to buy another, and none poor enough to be forced to
sell himself:16 which implies, on the part of the great, moderation in goods and position, and, on the
side of the common sort, moderation in avarice and covetousness.
  Such equality, we are told, is an unpractical ideal that cannot actually exist. But if its abuse is
inevitable, does it follow that we should not at least make regulations concerning it? It is precisely
because the force of circumstances tends continually to destroy equality that the force of legislation
should always tend to its maintenance.
  But these general objects of every good legislative system need modifying in every country in
accordance with the local situation and the temper of the inhabitants; and these circumstances should
determine, in each case, the particular system of institutions which is best, not perhaps in itself, but for
the State for which it is destined. If, for instance, the soil is barren and unproductive, or the land too
crowded for its inhabitants, the people should turn to industry and the crafts, and exchange what they
produce for the commodities they lack. If, on the other hand, a people dwells in rich plains and fertile
slopes, or, in a good land, lacks inhabitants, it should give all its attention to agriculture, which causes
men to multiply, and should drive out the crafts, which would only result in depopulation, by grouping
in a few localities the few inhabitants there are.17 If a nation dwells on an extensive and convenient
coast-line, let it cover the sea with ships and foster commerce and navigation. It will have a life that
will be short and glorious. If, on its coasts, the sea washes nothing but almost inaccessible rocks, let it
remain barbarous and ichthyophagous: it will have a quieter, perhaps a better, and certainly a happier
life. In a word, besides the principles that are common to all, every nation has in itself something that
gives them a particular application, and makes its legislation peculiarly its own. Thus, among the Jews
long ago and more recently among the Arabs, the chief object was religion, among the Athenians
letters, at Carthage and Tyre commerce, at Rhodes shipping, at Sparta war, at Rome virtue. The author
of  The  Spirit  of  the  Laws  has  shown  with  many  examples  by  what  art  the  legislator  directs  the
constitution towards each of these objects. What makes the constitution of a State really solid and
lasting is the due observance of what is proper, so that the natural relations are always in agreement
with the laws on every point, and law only serves, so to speak, to assure, accompany and rectify them.
But if the legislator mistakes his object and adopts a principle other than circumstances naturally direct;
if his principle makes for servitude while they make for liberty, or if it makes for riches, while they
make  for  populousness,  or  if  it  makes  for  peace,  while  they  make  for  conquest  —  the  laws  will
insensibly lose their influence, the constitution will alter, and the State will have no rest from trouble
till it is either destroyed or changed, and nature has resumed her invincible sway.
  12. THE DIVISION OF THE LAWS
  IF the whole is to be set in order, and the commonwealth put into the best possible shape, there are
various relations to be considered. First, there is the action of the complete body upon itself, the relation
of the whole to the whole, of the Sovereign to the State; and this relation, as we shall see, is made up of
the relations of the intermediate terms.
  The  laws  which  regulate  this  relation  bear  the  name  of  political  laws,  and  are  also  called
fundamental laws, not without reason if they are wise. For, if there is, in each State, only one good
system, the people that is in possession of it should hold fast to this; but if the established order is bad,
why should laws that prevent men from being good be regarded as fundamental? Besides, in any case, a
people is always in a position to change its laws, however good; for, if it choose to do itself harm, who
can have a right to stop it?
  The second relation is that of the members one to another, or to the body as a whole; and this
relation should be in the first respect as unimportant, and in the second as important, as possible. Each
citizen would then be perfectly independent of all the rest, and at the same time very dependent on the
city; which is brought about always by the same means, as the strength of the State can alone secure the
liberty of its members. From this second relation arise civil laws.  We may consider also a third kind of relation between the individual and the law, a relation of
disobedience to its penalty. This gives rise to the setting up of criminal laws, which, at bottom, are less
a particular class of law than the sanction behind all the rest.
  Along with these three kinds of law goes a fourth, most important of all, which is not graven on
tablets of marble or brass, but on the hearts of the citizens. This forms the real constitution of the State,
takes on every day new powers, when other laws decay or die out, restores them or takes their place,
keeps a people in the ways in which it was meant to go, and insensibly replaces authority by the force
of habit. I am speaking of morality, of custom, above all of public opinion; a power unknown to
political  thinkers,  on  which  none  the  less  success  in  everything  else  depends.  With  this  the  great
legislator concerns himself in secret, though he seems to confine himself to particular regulations; for
these are only the arc of the arch, while manners and morals, slower to arise, form in the end its
immovable keystone.
  Among the different classes of laws, the political, which determine the forms of the government,
are alone relevant to my subject.
 
  BOOK III
  BEFORE speaking of the different forms of government, let us try to fix the exact sense of the
word, which has not yet been very clearly explained.
  1. GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL
I WARN the reader that this chapter requires careful reading, and that I am unable to make myself
clear to those who refuse to be attentive. Every free action is produced by the concurrence of two
causes; one moral, i.e., the will which determines the act; the other physical, i.e., the power which
executes it. When I walk towards an object, it is necessary first that I should will to go there, and, in the
second place, that my feet should carry me. If a paralytic wills to run and an active man wills not to,
they will both stay where they are. The body politic has the same motive powers; here too force and
will are distinguished, will under the name of legislative power and force under that of executive
power. Without their concurrence, nothing is, or should be, done.
  We have seen that the legislative power belongs to the people, and can belong to it alone. It may, on
the other hand, readily be seen, from the principles laid down above, that the executive power cannot
belong to the generality as legislature or Sovereign, because it consists wholly of particular acts which
fall outside the competency of the law, and consequently of the Sovereign, whose acts must always be
laws.
  The public force therefore needs an agent of its own to bind it together and set it to work under the
direction  of  the  general  will,  to  serve  as  a  means  of  communication  between  the  State  and  the
Sovereign, and to do for the collective person more or less what the union of soul and body does for
man. Here we have what is, in the State, the basis of government, often wrongly confused with the
Sovereign, whose minister it is.
  What then is government? An intermediate body set up between the subjects and the Sovereign, to
secure their mutual correspondence, charged with the execution of the laws and the maintenance of
liberty, both civil and political.
  The members of this body are called magistrates or kings, that is to say governors, and the whole
body bears the name prince.18 Thus those who hold that the act, by which a people puts itself under a
prince, is not a contract, are certainly right. It is simply and solely a commission, an employment, in
which the rulers, mere officials of the Sovereign, exercise in their own name the power of which it
makes them depositaries. This power it can limit, modify or recover at pleasure; for the alienation of
such a right is incompatible with the nature of the social body, and contrary to the end of association.
I call then government, or supreme administration, the legitimate exercise of the executive power,
and prince or magistrate the man or the body entrusted with that administration.
  In government reside the intermediate forces whose relations make up that of the whole to the
whole, or of the Sovereign to the State. This last relation may be represented as that between theextreme  terms  of  a  continuous  proportion,  which  has  government  as  its  mean  proportional.  The
government gets from the Sovereign the orders it gives the people, and, for the State to be properly
balanced, there must, when everything is reckoned in, be equality between the product or power of the
government taken in itself, and the product or power of the citizens, who are on the one hand sovereign
and on the other subject.
  Furthermore,  none  of  these  three  terms  can  be  altered  without  the  equality  being  instantly
destroyed. If the Sovereign desires to govern, or the magistrate to give laws, or if the subjects refuse to
obey, disorder takes the place of regularity, force and will no longer act together, and the State is
dissolved and falls into despotism or anarchy. Lastly, as there is only one mean proportional between
each relation, there is also only one good government possible for a State. But, as countless events may
change the relations of a people, not only may different governments be good for different peoples, but
also for the same people at different times.
  In attempting to give some idea of the various relations that may hold between these two extreme
terms, I shall take as an example the number of a people, which is the most easily expressible.
  Suppose the State is composed of ten thousand citizens. The Sovereign can only be considered
collectively and as a body; but each member, as being a subject, is regarded as an individual: thus the
Sovereign is to the subject as ten thousand to one, i.e., each member of the State has as his share only a
ten-thousandth part of the sovereign authority, although he is wholly under its control. If the people
numbers a hundred thousand, the condition of the subject undergoes no change, and each equally is
under the whole authority of the laws, while his vote, being reduced to a hundred-thousandth part, has
ten times less influence in drawing them up. The subject therefore remaining always a unit, the relation
between him and the Sovereign increases with the number of the citizens. From this it follows that, the
larger the State, the less the liberty.
  When I say the relation increases, I mean that it grows more unequal. Thus the greater it is in the
geometrical sense, the less relation there is in the ordinary sense of the word. In the former sense, the
relation,  considered  according  to  quantity,  is  expressed  by  the  quotient;  in  the  latter,  considered
according to identity, it is reckoned by similarity.
  Now, the less relation the particular wills have to the general will, that is, morals and manners to
laws, the more should the repressive force be increased. The government, then, to be good, should be
proportionately stronger as the people is more numerous.
  On the other hand, as the growth of the State gives the depositaries of the public authority more
temptations and chances of abusing their power, the greater the force with which the government ought
to be endowed for keeping the people in hand, the greater too should be the force at the disposal of the
Sovereign for keeping the government in hand. I am speaking, not of absolute force, but of the relative
force of the different parts of the State.
  It follows from this double relation that the continuous proportion between the Sovereign, the
prince and the people, is by no means an arbitrary idea, but a necessary consequence of the nature of
the body politic. It follows further that, one of the extreme terms, viz., the people, as subject, being
fixed and represented by unity, whenever the duplicate ratio increases or diminishes, the simple ratio
does the same, and is changed accordingly. From this we see that there is not a single unique and
absolute form of government, but as many governments differing in nature as there are States differing
in size.
  If, ridiculing this system, any one were to say that, in order to find the mean proportional and give
form to the body of the government, it is only necessary, according to me, to find the square root of the
number of the people, I should answer that I am here taking this number only as an instance; that the
relations of which I am speaking are not measured by the number of men alone, but generally by the
amount of action, which is a combination of a multitude of causes; and that, further, if, to save words, I
borrow for a moment the terms of geometry, I am none the less well aware that moral quantities do not
allow of geometrical accuracy.
  The government is on a small scale what the body politic which includes it is on a great one. It is amoral person endowed with certain faculties, active like the Sovereign and passive like the State, and
capable of being resolved into other similar relations. This accordingly gives rise to a new proportion,
within which there is yet another, according to the arrangement of the magistracies, till an indivisible
middle term is reached, i.e., a single ruler or supreme magistrate, who may be represented, in the midst
of this progression, as the unity between the fractional and the ordinal series.
  Without encumbering ourselves with this multiplication of terms, let us rest content with regarding
government  as  a  new  body  within  the  State,  distinct  from  the  people  and  the  Sovereign,  and
intermediate between them.
  There is between these two bodies this essential difference, that the State exists by itself, and the
government only through the Sovereign. Thus the dominant will of the prince is, or should be, nothing
but the general will or the law; his force is only the public force concentrated in his hands, and, as soon
as he tries to base any absolute and independent act on his own authority, the tie that binds the whole
together begins to be loosened. If finally the prince should come to have a particular will more active
than the will of the Sovereign, and should employ the public force in his hands in obedience to this
particular will, there would be, so to speak, two Sovereigns, one rightful and the other actual, the social
union would evaporate instantly, and the body politic would be dissolved.
  However, in order that the government may have a true existence and a real life distinguishing it
from the body of the State, and in order that all its members may be able to act in concert and fulfil the
end for which it was set up, it must have a particular personality, a sensibility common to its members,
and a force and will of its own making for its preservation. This particular existence implies assemblies,
councils, power and deliberation and decision, rights, titles, and privileges belonging exclusively to the
prince and making the office of magistrate more honourable in proportion as it is more troublesome.
The difficulties lie in the manner of so ordering this subordinate whole within the whole, that it in no
way alters the general constitution by affirmation of its own, and always distinguishes the particular
force it possesses, which is destined to aid in its preservation, from the public force, which is destined
to the preservation of the State; and, in a word, is always ready to sacrifice the government to the
people, and never to sacrifice the people to the government.
  Furthermore, although the artificial body of the government is the work of another artificial body,
and has, we may say, only a borrowed and subordinate life, this does not prevent it from being able to
act with more or less vigour or promptitude, or from being, so to speak, in more or less robust health.
Finally, without departing directly from the end for which it was instituted, it may deviate more or less
from it, according to the manner of its constitution.
  From all these differences arise the various relations which the government ought to bear to the
body  of  the  State,  according  to  the  accidental  and  particular  relations  by  which  the  State  itself  is
modified, for often the government that is best in itself will become the most pernicious, if the relations
in which it stands have altered according to the defects of the body politic to which it belongs.
  2. THE CONSTITUENT PRINCIPLE IN THE VARIOUS FORMS OF GOVERNMENT
  TO  set  forth  the  general  cause  of  the  above  differences,  we  must  here  distinguish  between
government and its principle, as we did before between the State and the Sovereign.
  The body of the magistrate may be composed of a greater or a less number of members. We said
that the relation of the Sovereign to the subjects was greater in proportion as the people was more
numerous, and, by a clear analogy, we may say the same of the relation of the government to the
magistrates.
  But the total force of the government, being always that of the State, is invariable; so that, the more
of this force it expends on its own members, the less it has left to employ on the whole people.
  The more numerous the magistrates, therefore, the weaker the government. This principle being
fundamental, we must do our best to make it clear.
  In the person of the magistrate we can distinguish three essentially different wills: first, the private
will  of  the  individual,  tending  only  to  his  personal  advantage;  secondly,  the  common  will  of  the
magistrates, which is relative solely to the advantage of the prince, and may be called corporate will,being  general  in  relation  to  the  government,  and  particular  in  relation  to  the  State,  of  which  the
government forms part; and, in the third place, the will of the people or the sovereign will, which is
general both in relation to the State regarded as the whole, and to the government regarded as a part of
the whole.
  In a perfect act of legislation, the individual or particular will should be at zero; the corporate will
belonging to the government should occupy a very subordinate position; and, consequently, the general
or sovereign will should always predominate and should be the sole guide of all the rest.
  According to the natural order, on the other hand, these different wills become more active in
proportion as they are concentrated. Thus, the general will is always the weakest, the corporate will
second, and the individual will strongest of all: so that, in the government, each member is first of all
himself, then a magistrate, and then a citizen — in an order exactly the reverse of what the social
system requires.
  This granted, if the whole government is in the hands of one man, the particular and the corporate
will are wholly united, and consequently the latter is at its highest possible degree of intensity. But, as
the use to which the force is put depends on the degree reached by the will, and as the absolute force of
the government is invariable, it follows that the most active government is that of one man.
  Suppose, on the other hand, we unite the government with the legislative authority, and make the
Sovereign  prince  also,  and  all  the  citizens  so  many  magistrates:  then  the  corporate  will,  being
confounded with the general will, can possess no greater activity than that will, and must leave the
particular will as strong as it can possibly be. Thus, the government, having always the same absolute
force, will be at the lowest point of its relative force or activity.
  These relations are incontestable, and there are other considerations which still further confirm
them. We can see, for instance, that each magistrate is more active in the body to which he belongs than
each citizen in that to which he belongs, and that consequently the particular will has much more
influence on the acts of the government than on those of the Sovereign; for each magistrate is almost
always  charged  with  some  governmental  function,  while  each  citizen,  taken  singly,  exercises  no
function of Sovereignty. Furthermore, the bigger the State grows, the more its real force increases,
though  not  in  direct  proportion  to  its  growth;  but,  the  State  remaining  the  same,  the  number  of
magistrates may increase to any extent, without the government gaining any greater real force; for its
force is that of the State, the dimension of which remains equal. Thus the relative force or activity of
the government decreases, while its absolute or real force cannot increase.
  Moreover, it is a certainty that promptitude in execution diminishes as more people are put in
charge of it: where prudence is made too much of, not enough is made of fortune; opportunity is let
slip, and deliberation results in the loss of its object.
I have just proved that the government grows remiss in proportion as the number of the magistrates
increases;  and  I  previously  proved  that,  the  more  numerous  the  people,  the  greater  should  be  the
repressive force. From this it follows that the relation of the magistrates to the government should vary
inversely to the relation of the subjects to the Sovereign; that is to say, the larger the State, the more
should the government be tightened, so that the number of the rulers diminish in proportion to the
increase of that of the people.
  It should be added that I am here speaking of the relative strength of the government, and not of its
rectitude: for, on the other hand, the more numerous the magistracy, the nearer the corporate will comes
to the general will; while, under a single magistrate, the corporate will is, as I said, merely a particular
will. Thus, what may be gained on one side is lost on the other, and the art of the legislator is to know
how to fix the point at which the force and the will of the government, which are always in inverse
proportion, meet in the relation that is most to the advantage of the State.
  3. THE DIVISION OF GOVERNMENTS
  WE  saw  in  the  last  chapter  what  causes  the  various  kinds  or  forms  of  government  to  be
distinguished according to the number of the members composing them: it remains in this to discover
how the division is made.  In the first place, the Sovereign may commit the charge of the government to the whole people or to
the majority of the people, so that more citizens are magistrates than are mere private individuals. This
form of government is called democracy.
  Or it may restrict the government to a small number, so that there are more private citizens than
magistrates; and this is named aristocracy.
  Lastly, it may concentrate the whole government in the hands of a single magistrate from whom all
others hold their power. This third form is the most usual, and is called monarchy, or royal government.
  It should be remarked that all these forms, or at least the first two, admit of degree, and even of very
wide  differences;  for  democracy  may  include  the  whole  people,  or  may  be  restricted  to  half.
Aristocracy,  in  its  turn,  may  be  restricted  indefinitely  from  half  the  people  down  to  the  smallest
possible number. Even royalty is susceptible of a measure of distribution. Sparta always had two kings,
as its constitution provided; and the Roman Empire saw as many as eight emperors at once, without it
being  possible  to  say  that  the  Empire  was  split  up.  Thus  there  is  a  point  at  which  each  form  of
government passes into the next, and it becomes clear that, under three comprehensive denominations,
government is really susceptible of as many diverse forms as the State has citizens.
  There are even more: for, as the government may also, in certain aspects, be subdivided into other
parts, one administered in one fashion and one in another, the combination of the three forms may
result in a multitude of mixed forms, each of which admits of multiplication by all the simple forms.
  There  has  been  at  all  times  much  dispute  concerning  the  best  form  of  government,  without
consideration of the fact that each is in some cases the best, and in others the worst.
  If, in the different States, the number of supreme magistrates should be in inverse ratio to the
number of citizens, it follows that, generally, democratic government suits small States, aristocratic
government those of middle size, and monarchy great ones. This rule is immediately deducible from the
principle laid down. But it is impossible to count the innumerable circumstances which may furnish
exceptions.
  4. DEMOCRACY
  HE who makes the law knows better than any one else how it should be executed and interpreted. It
seems then impossible to have a better constitution than that in which the executive and legislative
powers are united; but this very fact renders the government in certain respects inadequate, because
things which should be distinguished are confounded, and the prince and the Sovereign, being the same
person, form, so to speak, no more than a government without government.
  It is not good for him who makes the laws to execute them, or for the body of the people to turn its
attention away from a general standpoint and devote it to particular objects. Nothing is more dangerous
than the influence of private interests in public affairs, and the abuse of the laws by the government is a
less evil than the corruption of the legislator, which is the inevitable sequel to a particular standpoint. In
such a case, the State being altered in substance, all reformation becomes impossible, A people that
would never misuse governmental powers would never misuse independence; a people that would
always govern well would not need to be governed.
  If we take the term in the strict sense, there never has been a real democracy, and there never will
be. It is against the natural order for the many to govern and the few to be governed. It is unimaginable
that the people should remain continually assembled to devote their time to public affairs, and it is clear
that they cannot set up commissions for that purpose without the form of administration being changed.
  In fact, I can confidently lay down as a principle that, when the functions of government are shared
by several tribunals, the less numerous sooner or later acquire the greatest authority, if only because
they are in a position to expedite affairs, and power thus naturally comes into their hands.
  Besides, how many conditions that are difficult to unite does such a government presuppose! First,
a very small State, where the people can readily be got together and where each citizen can with ease
know all the rest; secondly, great simplicity of manners, to prevent business from multiplying and
raising thorny problems; next, a large measure of equality in rank and fortune, without which equality
of rights and authority cannot long subsist; lastly, little or no luxury — for luxury either comes of richesor makes them necessary; it corrupts at once rich and poor, the rich by possession and the poor by
covetousness; it sells the country to softness and vanity, and takes away from the State all its citizens,
to make them slaves one to another, and one and all to public opinion.
  This is why a famous writer has made virtue the fundamental principle of Republics;E1 for all these
conditions could not exist without virtue. But, for want of the necessary distinctions, that great thinker
was  often  inexact,  and  sometimes  obscure,  and  did  not  see  that,  the  sovereign  authority  being
everywhere the same, the same principle should be found in every well-constituted State, in a greater or
less degree, it is true, according to the form of the government.
  It may be added that there is no government so subject to civil wars and intestine agitations as
democratic or popular government, because there is none which has so strong and continual a tendency
to change to another form, or which demands more vigilance and courage for its maintenance as it is.
Under such a constitution above all, the citizen should arm himself with strength and constancy, and
say,  every  day  of  his  life,  what  a  virtuous  Count  Palatine19  said  in  the  Diet  of  Poland:  Malo
periculosam libertatem quam quietum servitium.20
  Were there a people of gods, their government would be democratic. So perfect a government is not
for men.
  5. ARISTOCRACY
  WE  have  here  two  quite  distinct  moral  persons,  the  government  and  the  Sovereign,  and  in
consequence two general wills, one general in relation to all the citizens, the other only for the members
of the administration. Thus, although the government may regulate its internal policy as it pleases, it
can never speak to the people save in the name of the Sovereign, that is, of the people itself, a fact
which must not be forgotten.
  The first societies governed themselves aristocratically. The heads of families took counsel together
on public affairs. The young bowed without question to the authority of experience. Hence such names
as priests, elders, senate, and gerontes. The savages of North America govern themselves in this way
even now, and their government is admirable.
  But, in proportion as artificial inequality produced by institutions became predominant over natural
inequality,  riches  or  power21  were  put  before  age,  and  aristocracy  became  elective.  Finally,  the
transmission of the father's power along with his goods to his children, by creating patrician families,
made government hereditary, and there came to be senators of twenty.
  There are then three sorts of aristocracy — natural, elective and hereditary. The first is only for
simple peoples; the third is the worst of all governments; the second is the best, and is aristocracy
properly so called.
  Besides the advantage that lies in the distinction between the two powers, it presents that of its
members being chosen; for, in popular government, all the citizens are born magistrates; but here
magistracy is confined to a few, who become such only by election.22 By this means uprightness,
understanding, experience and all other claims to pre-eminence and public esteem become so many
further guarantees of wise government.
  Moreover, assemblies are more easily held, affairs better discussed and carried out with more order
and diligence, and the credit of the State is better sustained abroad by venerable senators than by a
multitude that is unknown or despised.
  In a word, it is the best and most natural arrangement that the wisest should govern the many, when
it is assured that they will govern for its profit, and not for their own. There is no need to multiply
instruments, or get twenty thousand men to do what a hundred picked men can do even better. But it
must not be forgotten that corporate interest here begins to direct the public power less under the
regulation of the general will, and that a further inevitable propensity takes away from the laws part of
the executive power.
  If we are to speak of what is individually desirable, neither should the State be so small, nor a
people so simple and upright, that the execution of the laws follows immediately from the public will,
as it does in a good democracy. Nor should the nation be so great that the rulers have to scatter in orderto govern it and are able to play the Sovereign each in his own department, and, beginning by making
themselves independent, end by becoming masters.
  But if aristocracy does not demand all the virtues needed by popular government, it demands others
which are peculiar to itself; for instance, moderation on the side of the rich and contentment on that of
the poor; for it seems that thorough-going equality would be out of place, as it was not found even at
Sparta.
  Furthermore,  if  this  form  of  government  carries  with  it  a  certain  inequality  of  fortune,  this  is
justifiable in order that as a rule the administration of public affairs may be entrusted to those who are
most able to give them their whole time, but not, as Aristotle maintains, in order that the rich may
always be put first. On the contrary, it is of importance that an opposite choice should occasionally
teach the people that the deserts of men offer claims to pre-eminence more important than those of
riches.
  6. MONARCHY
  So far, we have considered the prince as a moral and collective person, unified by the force of the
laws, and the depositary in the State of the executive power. We have now to consider this power when
it is gathered together into the hands of a natural person, a real man, who alone has the right to dispose
of it in accordance with the laws. Such a person is called a monarch or king.
  In contrast with other forms of administration, in which a collective being stands for an individual,
in this form an individual stands for a collective being; so that the moral unity that constitutes the
prince is at the same time a physical unity, and all the qualities, which in the other case are only with
difficulty brought together by the law, are found naturally united.
  Thus the will of the people, the will of the prince, the public force of the State, and the particular
force of the government, all answer to a single motive power; all the springs of the machine are in the
same hands, the whole moves towards the same end; there are no conflicting movements to cancel one
another, and no kind of constitution can be imagined in which a less amount of effort produces a more
considerable amount of action. Archimedes, seated quietly on the bank and easily drawing a great
vessel  afloat,  stands  to  my  mind  for  a  skilful  monarch,  governing  vast  states  from  his  study,  and
moving everything while he seems himself unmoved.
  But if no government is more vigorous than this, there is also none in which the particular will
holds more sway and rules the rest more easily. Everything moves towards the same end indeed, but
this end is by no means that of the public happiness, and even the force of the administration constantly
shows itself prejudicial to the State.
  Kings desire to be absolute, and men are always crying out to them from afar that the best means of
being so is to get themselves loved by their people. This precept is all very well, and even in some
respects very true. Unfortunately, it will always be derided at court. The power which comes of a
people's love is no doubt the greatest; but it is precarious and conditional, and princes will never rest
content with it. The best kings desire to be in a position to be wicked, if they please, without forfeiting
their mastery: political sermonisers may tell them to their hearts' content that, the people's strength
being their own, their first interest is that the people should be prosperous, numerous and formidable;
they are well aware that this is untrue. Their first personal interest is that the people should be weak,
wretched, and unable to resist them. I admit that, provided the subjects remained always in submission,
the prince's interest would indeed be that it should be powerful, in order that its power, being his own,
might  make  him  formidable  to  his  neighbours;  but,  this  interest  being  merely  secondary  and
subordinate, and strength being incompatible with submission, princes naturally give the preference
always to the principle that is more to their immediate advantage. This is what Samuel put strongly
before the Hebrews, and what Machiavelli has clearly shown. He professed to teach kings; but it was
the people he really taught. His Prince is the book of Republicans.23
  We found, on general grounds, that monarchy is suitable only for great States, and this is confirmed
when we examine it in itself. The more numerous the public administration, the smaller becomes the
relation between the prince and the subjects, and the nearer it comes to equality, so that in democracythe ratio is unity, or absolute equality. Again, as the government is restricted in numbers the ratio
increases and reaches its maximum when the government is in the hands of a single person. There is
then too great a distance between prince and people, and the State lacks a bond of union. To form such
a bond, there must be intermediate orders, and princes, personages and nobility to compose them. But
no such things suit a small State, to which all class differences mean ruin.
  If, however, it is hard for a great State to be well governed, it is much harder for it to be so by a
single man; and every one knows what happens when kings substitute others for themselves.
  An  essential  and  inevitable  defect,  which  will  always  rank  monarchical  below  the  republican
government, is that in a republic the public voice hardly ever raises to the highest positions men who
are not enlightened and capable, and such as to fill them with honour; while in monarchies those who
rise to the top are most often merely petty blunderers, petty swindlers, and petty intriguers, whose petty
talents cause them to get into the highest positions at Court, but, as soon as they have got there, serve
only to make their ineptitude clear to the public. The people is far less often mistaken in its choice than
the prince; and a man of real worth among the king's ministers is almost as rare as a fool at the head of
a republican government. Thus, when, by some fortunate chance, one of these born governors takes the
helm  of  State  in  some  monarchy  that  has  been  nearly  overwhelmed  by  swarms  of  "gentlemanly"
administrators, there is nothing but amazement at the resources he discovers, and his coming marks an
era in his country's history.
  For a monarchical State to have a chance of being well governed, its population and extent must be
proportionate to the abilities of its governor. It is easier to conquer than to rule. With a long enough
lever, the world could be moved with a single finger; to sustain it needs the shoulders of Hercules.
However small a State may be, the prince is hardly ever big enough for it. When, on the other hand, it
happens that the State is too small for its ruler, in these rare cases too it is ill governed, because the
ruler, constantly pursuing his great designs, forgets the interests of the people, and makes it no less
wretched by misusing the talents he has, than a ruler of less capacity would make it for want of those he
had not. A kingdom should, so to speak, expand or contract with each reign, according to the prince's
capabilities; but, the abilities of a senate being more constant in quantity, the State can then have
permanent frontiers without the administration suffering.
  The  disadvantage  that  is  most  felt  in  monarchical  government  is  the  want  of  the  continuous
succession which, in both the other forms, provides an unbroken bond of union. When one king dies,
another is needed; elections leave dangerous intervals and are full of storms; and unless the citizens are
disinterested and upright to a degree which very seldom goes with this kind of government, intrigue
and corruption abound. He to whom the State has sold itself can hardly help selling it in his turn and
repaying himself, at the expense of the weak, the money the powerful have wrung from him. Under
such an administration, venality sooner or later spreads through every part, and peace so enjoyed under
a king is worse than the disorders of an interregnum.
  What has been done to prevent these evils? Crowns have been made hereditary in certain families,
and an order of succession has been set up, to prevent disputes from arising on the death of kings. That
is to say, the disadvantages of regency have been put in place of those of election, apparent tranquillity
has  been  preferred  to  wise  administration,  and  men  have  chosen  rather  to  risk  having  children,
monstrosities, or imbeciles as rulers to having disputes over the choice of good kings. It has not been
taken into account that, in so exposing ourselves to the risks this possibility entails, we are setting
almost all the chances against us. There was sound sense in what the younger Dionysius said to his
father, who reproached him for doing some shameful deed by asking, "Did I set you the example?"
"No," answered his son, "but your father was not king."
  Everything conspires to take away from a man who is set in authority over others the sense of
justice and reason. Much trouble, we are told, is taken to teach young princes the art of reigning; but
their education seems to do them no good. It would be better to begin by teaching them the art of
obeying. The greatest kings whose praises history tells were not brought up to reign: reigning is a
science we are never so far from possessing as when we have learnt too much of it, and one we acquirebetter by obeying than by commanding. "Nam utilissimus idem ac brevissimus bonarum malarumque
rerum delectus cogitare quid aut nolueris sub alio principe, aut volueris."24
  One result of this lack of coherence is the inconstancy of royal government, which, regulated now
on one scheme and now on another, according to the character of the reigning prince or those who reign
for him, cannot for long have a fixed object or a consistent policy — and this variability, not found in
the other forms of government, where the prince is always the same, causes the State to be always
shifting from principle to principle and from project to project. Thus we may say that generally, if a
court is more subtle in intrigue, there is more wisdom in a senate, and Republics advance towards their
ends by more consistent and better considered policies; while every revolution in a royal ministry
creates a revolution in the State; for the principle common to all ministers and nearly all kings is to do
in every respect the reverse of what was done by their predecessors.
  This incoherence further clears up a sophism that is very familiar to royalist political writers; not
only is civil government likened to domestic government, and the prince to the father of a family —
this error has already been refuted — but the prince is also freely credited with all the virtues he ought
to  possess,  and  is  supposed  to  be  always  what  he  should  be.  This  supposition  once  made,  royal
government is clearly preferable to all others, because it is incontestably the strongest, and, to be the
best also, wants only a corporate will more in conformity with the general will.
  But if, according to Plato,25 the "king by nature" is such a rarity, how often will nature and fortune
conspire to give him a crown? And, if royal education necessarily corrupts those who receive it, what is
to be hoped from a series of men brought up to reign? It is, then, wanton self-deception to confuse royal
government with government by a good king. To see such government as it is in itself, we must
consider it as it is under princes who are incompetent or wicked: for either they will come to the throne
wicked or incompetent, or the throne will make them so.
  These difficulties have not escaped our writers, who, all the same, are not troubled by them. The
remedy, they say, is to obey without a murmur: God sends bad kings in His wrath, and they must be
borne as the scourges of Heaven. Such talk is doubtless edifying; but it would be more in place in a
pulpit than in a political book. What are we to think of a doctor who promises miracles, and whose
whole art is to exhort the sufferer to patience? We know for ourselves that we must put up with a bad
government when it is there; the question is how to find a good one.
  7. MIXED GOVERNMENTS
  STRICTLY speaking, there is no such thing as a simple government. An isolated ruler must have
subordinate magistrates; a popular government must have a head. There is therefore, in the distribution
of the executive power, always a gradation from the greater to the lesser number, with the difference
that sometimes the greater number is dependent on the smaller, and sometimes the smaller on the
greater.
  Sometimes the distribution is equal, when either the constituent parts are in mutual dependence, as
in the government of England, or the authority of each section is independent, but imperfect, as in
Poland. This last form is bad; for it secures no unity in the government, and the State is left without a
bond of union.
  Is a simple or a mixed government the better? Political writers are always debating the question,
which must be answered as we have already answered a question about all forms of government.
  Simple government is better in itself, just because it is simple. But when the executive power is not
sufficiently dependent upon the legislative power, i.e., when the prince is more closely related to the
Sovereign than the people to the prince, this lack of proportion must be cured by the division of the
government; for all the parts have then no less authority over the subjects, while their division makes
them all together less strong against the Sovereign.
  The same disadvantage is also prevented by the appointment of intermediate magistrates, who leave
the government entire, and have the effect only of balancing the two powers and maintaining their
respective rights. Government is then not mixed, but moderated.
  The opposite disadvantages may be similarly cured, and, when the government is too lax, tribunalsmay be set up to concentrate it. This is done in all democracies. In the first case, the government is
divided  to  make  it  weak;  in  the  second,  to  make  it  strong:  for  the  maxima  of  both  strength  and
weakness are found in simple governments, while the mixed forms result in a mean strength.
  8. THAT ALL FORMS OF GOVERNMENT DO NOT SUIT ALL COUNTRIES
  LIBERTY, not being a fruit of all climates, is not within the reach of all peoples. The more this
principle, laid down by Montesquieu,E2 is considered, the more its truth is felt; the more it is combated,
the more chance is given to confirm it by new proofs.
  In all the governments that there are, the public person consumes without producing. Whence then
does it get what it consumes? From the labour of its members. The necessities of the public are supplied
out of the superfluities of individuals. It follows that the civil State can subsist only so long as men's
labour brings them a return greater than their needs.
  The amount of this excess is not the same in all countries. In some it is considerable, in others
middling, in yet others nil, in some even negative. The relation of product to subsistence depends on the
fertility of the climate, on the sort of labour the land demands, on the nature of its products, on the
strength of its inhabitants, on the greater or less consumption they find necessary, and on several further
considerations of which the whole relation is made up.
  On the other side, all governments are not of the same nature: some are less voracious than others,
and the differences between them are based on this second principle, that the further from their source
the  public  contributions  are  removed,  the  more  burdensome  they  become.  The  charge  should  be
measured not by the amount of the impositions, but by the path they have to travel in order to get back
to those from whom they came. When the circulation is prompt and well-established, it does not matter
whether much or little is paid; the people is always rich and, financially speaking, all is well. On the
contrary, however little the people gives, if that little does not return to it, it is soon exhausted by giving
continually: the State is then never rich, and the people is always a people of beggars.
  It  follows  that,  the  more  the  distance  between  people  and  government  increases,  the  more
burdensome tribute becomes: thus, in a democracy, the people bears the least charge; in an aristocracy,
a  greater  charge;  and,  in  monarchy,  the  weight  becomes  heaviest.  Monarchy  therefore  suits  only
wealthy nations; aristocracy, States of middling size and wealth; and democracy, States that are small
and poor.
  In fact, the more we reflect, the more we find the difference between free and monarchical States to
be this: in the former, everything is used for the public advantage; in the latter, the public forces and
those of individuals are affected by each other, and either increases as the other grows weak; finally,
instead of governing subjects to make them happy, despotism makes them wretched in order to govern
them.
  We find then, in every climate, natural causes according to which the form of government which it
requires can be assigned, and we can even say what sort of inhabitants it should have.
  Unfriendly and barren lands, where the product does not repay the labour, should remain desert and
uncultivated, or peopled only by savages; lands where men's labour brings in no more than the exact
minimum necessary to subsistence should be inhabited by barbarous peoples: in such places all polity is
impossible. Lands where the surplus of product over labour is only middling are suitable for free
peoples; those in which the soil is abundant and fertile and gives a great product for a little labour call
for  monarchical  government,  in  order  that  the  surplus  of  superfluities  among  the  subjects  may  be
consumed by the luxury of the prince: for it is better for this excess to be absorbed by the government
than  dissipated  among  the  individuals.  I  am  aware  that  there  are  exceptions;  but  these  exceptions
themselves confirm the rule, in that sooner or later they produce revolutions which restore things to the
natural order.
  General laws should always be distinguished from individual causes that may modify their effects.
If all the South were covered with Republics and all the North with despotic States, it would be none
the less true that, in point of climate, despotism is suitable to hot countries, barbarism to cold countries,
and good polity to temperate regions. I see also that, the principle being granted, there may be disputeson its application; it may be said that there are cold countries that are very fertile, and tropical countries
that are very unproductive. But this difficulty exists only for those who do not consider the question in
all its aspects. We must, as I have already said, take labour, strength, consumption, etc., into account.
  Take two tracts of equal extent, one of which brings in five and the other ten. If the inhabitants of
the first consume four and those of the second nine, the surplus of the first product will be a fifth and
that of the second a tenth. The ratio of these two surpluses will then be inverse to that of the products,
and the tract which produces only five will give a surplus double that of the tract which produces ten.
  But there is no question of a double product, and I think no one would put the fertility of cold
countries, as a general rule, on an equality with that of hot ones. Let us, however, suppose this equality
to exist: let us, if you will, regard England as on the same level as Sicily, and Poland as Egypt —
further south, we shall have Africa and the Indies; further north, nothing at all. To get this equality of
product, what a difference there must be in tillage: in Sicily, there is only need to scratch the ground; in
England, how men must toil! But, where more hands are needed to get the same product, the superfluity
must necessarily be less.
  Consider, besides, that the same number of men consume much less in hot countries. The climate
requires sobriety for the sake of health; and Europeans who try to live there as they would at home all
perish  of  dysentery  and  indigestion.  "We  are,"  says  Chardin,  "carnivorous  animals,  wolves,  in
comparison with the Asiatics. Some attribute the sobriety of the Persians to the fact that their country is
less  cultivated;  but  it  is  my  belief  that  their  country  abounds  less  in  commodities  because  the
inhabitants need less. If their frugality," he goes on, "were the effect of the nakedness of the land, only
the  poor  would  eat  little;  but  everybody  does  so.  Again,  less  or  more  would  be  eaten  in  various
provinces, according to the land's fertility; but the same sobriety is found throughout the kingdom.
They are very proud of their manner of life, saying that you have only to look at their hue to recognise
how far it excels that of the Christians. In fact, the Persians are of an even hue; their skins are fair, fine
and smooth; while the hue of their subjects, the Armenians, who live after the European fashion, is
rough and blotchy, and their bodies are gross and unwieldy."
  The nearer you get to the equator, the less people live on. Meat they hardly touch; rice, maize,
curcur, millet and cassava are their ordinary food. There are in the Indies millions of men whose
subsistence  does  not  cost  a  halfpenny  a  day.  Even  in  Europe  we  find  considerable  differences  of
appetite between Northern and Southern peoples. A Spaniard will live for a week on a German's dinner.
In  the  countries  in  which  men  are  more  voracious,  luxury  therefore  turns  in  the  direction  of
consumption. In England, luxury appears in a well-filled table; in Italy, you feast on sugar and flowers.
  Luxury in clothes shows similar differences. In climates in which the changes of season are prompt
and violent, men have better and simpler clothes; where they clothe themselves only for adornment,
what is striking is more thought of than what is useful; clothes themselves are then a luxury. At Naples,
you may see daily walking in the Pausilippeum men in gold-embroidered upper garments and nothing
else. It is the same with buildings; magnificence is the sole consideration where there is nothing to fear
from the air. In Paris and London, you desire to be lodged warmly and comfortably; in Madrid, you
have superb salons, but not a window that closes, and you go to bed in a mere hole.
  In hot countries foods are much more substantial and succulent; and the third difference cannot but
have an influence on the second. Why are so many vegetables eaten in Italy? Because there they are
good, nutritious and excellent in taste. In France, where they are nourished only on water, they are far
from nutritious and are thought nothing of at table. They take up all the same no less ground, and cost
at least as much pains to cultivate. It is a proved fact that the wheat of Barbary, in other respects
inferior to that of France, yields much more flour, and that the wheat of France in turn yields more than
that of northern countries; from which it may be inferred that a like gradation in the same direction,
from equator to pole, is found generally. But is it not an obvious disadvantage for an equal product to
contain less nourishment?
  To all these points may be added another, which at once depends on and strengthens them. Hot
countries need inhabitants less than cold countries, and can support more of them. There is thus adouble surplus, which is all to the advantage of despotism. The greater the territory occupied by a fixed
number of inhabitants, the more difficult revolt becomes, because rapid or secret concerted action is
impossible, and the government can easily unmask projects and cut communications; but the more a
numerous people is gathered together, the less can the government usurp the Sovereign's place: the
people's leaders can deliberate as safely in their houses as the prince in council, and the crowd gathers
as rapidly in the squares as the prince's troops in their quarters. The advantage of tyrannical government
therefore lies in acting at great distances. With the help of the rallying-points it establishes, its strength,
like that of the lever,26 grows with distance. The strength of the people, on the other hand, acts only
when concentrated: when spread abroad, it evaporates and is lost, like powder scattered on the ground,
which catches fire only grain by grain. The least populous countries are thus the fittest for tyranny:
fierce animals reign only in deserts.
  9. THE MARKS OF A GOOD GOVERNMENT
  THE question "What absolutely is the best government?" is unanswerable as well as indeterminate;
or rather, there are as many good answers as there are possible combinations in the absolute and
relative situations of all nations.
  But if it is asked by what sign we may know that a given people is well or ill governed, that is
another matter, and the question, being one of fact, admits of an answer.
  It is not, however, answered, because everyone wants to answer it in his own way. Subjects extol
public tranquillity, citizens individual liberty; the one class prefers security of possessions, the other
that of person; the one regards as the best government that which is most severe, the other maintains
that the mildest is the best; the one wants crimes punished, the other wants them prevented; the one
wants the State to be feared by its neighbours, the other prefers that it should be ignored; the one is
content if money circulates, the other demands that the people shall have bread. Even if an agreement
were come to on these and similar points, should we have got any further? As moral qualities do not
admit of exact measurement, agreement about the mark does not mean agreement about the valuation.
  For my part, I am continually astonished that a mark so simple is not recognised, or that men are of
so bad faith as not to admit it. What is the end of political association? The preservation and prosperity
of its members. And what is the surest mark of their preservation and prosperity? Their numbers and
population. Seek then nowhere else this mark that is in dispute. The rest being equal, the government
under  which,  without  external  aids,  without  naturalisation  or  colonies,  the  citizens  increase  and
multiply  most,  is  beyond  question  the  best.  The  government  under  which  a  people  wanes  and
diminishes is the worst. Calculators, it is left for you to count, to measure, to compare.27
  10. THE ABUSE OF GOVERNMENT AND ITS TENDENCY TO DEGENERATE
  AS the particular will acts constantly in opposition to the general will, the government continually
exerts  itself  against  the  Sovereignty.  The  greater  this  exertion  becomes,  the  more  the  constitution
changes; and, as there is in this case no other corporate will to create an equilibrium by resisting the
will of the prince, sooner or later the prince must inevitably suppress the Sovereign and break the social
treaty. This is the unavoidable and inherent defect which, from the very birth of the body politic, tends
ceaselessly to destroy it, as age and death end by destroying the human body.
  There  are  two  general  courses  by  which  government  degenerates:  i.e.,  when  it  undergoes
contraction, or when the State is dissolved.
  Government  undergoes  contraction  when  it  passes  from  the  many  to  the  few,  that  is,  from
democracy to aristocracy, and from aristocracy to royalty. To do so is its natural propensity.28 If it took
the backward course from the few to the many, it could be said that it was relaxed; but this inverse
sequence is impossible.
  Indeed, governments never change their form except when their energy is exhausted and leaves
them too weak to keep what they have. If a government at once extended its sphere and relaxed its
stringency, its force would become absolutely nil, and it would persist still less. It is therefore necessary
to wind up the spring and tighten the hold as it gives way: or else the State it sustains will come to
grief.  The dissolution of the State may come about in either of two ways.
  First, when the prince ceases to administer the State in accordance with the laws, and usurps the
Sovereign power. A remarkable change then occurs: not the government, but the State, undergoes
contraction; I mean that the great State is dissolved, and another is formed within it, composed solely of
the members of the government, which becomes for the rest of the people merely master and tyrant. So
that the moment the government usurps the Sovereignty, the social compact is broken, and all private
citizens recover by right their natural liberty, and are forced, but not bound, to obey.
  The same thing happens when the members of the government severally usurp the power they
should exercise only as a body; this is as great an infraction of the laws, and results in even greater
disorders. There are then, so to speak, as many princes as there are magistrates, and the State, no less
divided than the government, either perishes or changes its form.
  When the State is dissolved, the abuse of government, whatever it is, bears the common name of
anarchy. To distinguish, democracy degenerates into ochlocracy, and aristocracy into oligarchy; and I
would add that royalty degenerates into tyranny; but this last word is ambiguous and needs explanation.
  In vulgar usage, a tyrant is a king who governs violently and without regard for justice and law. In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without having a
right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word "tyrant": they applied it indifferently to good
and  bad  princes  whose  authority  was  not  legitimate.29  Tyrant  and  usurper  are  thus  perfectly
synonymous terms.
  In order that I may give different things different names, I call him who usurps the royal authority a
tyrant, and him who usurps the sovereign power a despot. The tyrant is he who thrusts himself in
contrary to the laws to govern in accordance with the laws; the despot is he who sets himself above the
laws themselves. Thus the tyrant cannot be a despot, but the despot is always a tyrant.
  11. THE DEATH OF THE BODY POLITIC
  SUCH is the natural and inevitable tendency of the best constituted governments. If Sparta and
Rome perished, what State can hope to endure for ever? If we would set up a long-lived form of
government, let us not even dream of making it eternal. If we are to succeed, we must not attempt the
impossible, or flatter ourselves that we are endowing the work of man with a stability of which human
conditions do not permit.
  The body politic, as well as the human body, begins to die as soon as it is born, and carries in itself
the causes of its destruction. But both may have a constitution that is more or less robust and suited to
preserve them a longer or a shorter time. The constitution of man is the work of nature; that of the State
the work of art. It is not in men's power to prolong their own lives; but it is for them to prolong as much
as possible the life of the State, by giving it the best possible constitution. The best constituted State
will have an end; but it will end later than any other, unless some unforeseen accident brings about its
untimely destruction.
  The life-principle of the body politic lies in the sovereign authority. The legislative power is the
heart of the State; the executive power is its brain, which causes the movement of all the parts. The
brain may become paralysed and the individual still live. A man may remain an imbecile and live; but
as soon as the heart ceases to perform its functions, the animal is dead.
  The State subsists by means not of the laws, but of the legislative power. Yesterday's law is not
binding to-day; but silence is taken for tacit consent, and the Sovereign is held to confirm incessantly
the laws it does not abrogate as it might. All that it has once declared itself to will it wills always,
unless it revokes its declaration.
  Why then is so much respect paid to old laws? For this very reason. We must believe that nothing
but the excellence of old acts of will can have preserved them so long: if the Sovereign had not
recognised them as throughout salutary, it would have revoked them a thousand times. This is why, so
far  from  growing  weak,  the  laws  continually  gain  new  strength  in  any  well  constituted  State;  the
precedent of antiquity makes them daily more venerable: while wherever the laws grow weak as they
become old, this proves that there is no longer a legislative power, and that the State is dead.  12. HOW THE SOVEREIGN AUTHORITY MAINTAINS ITSELF
  THE Sovereign, having no force other than the legislative power, acts only by means of the laws;
and the laws being solely the authentic acts of the general will, the Sovereign cannot act save when the
people is assembled. The people in assembly, I shall be told, is a mere chimera. It is so to-day, but two
thousand years ago it was not so. Has man's nature changed?
  The bounds of possibility, in moral matters, are less narrow than we imagine: it is our weaknesses,
our vices and our prejudices that confine them. Base souls have no belief in great men; vile slaves smile
in mockery at the name of liberty.
  Let us judge of what can be done by what has been done. I shall say nothing of the Republics of
ancient Greece; but the Roman Republic was, to my mind, a great State, and the town of Rome a great
town. The last census showed that there were in Rome four hundred thousand citizens capable of
bearing arms, and the last computation of the population of the Empire showed over four million
citizens, excluding subjects, foreigners, women, children and slaves.
  What difficulties might not be supposed to stand in the way of the frequent assemblage of the vast
population of this capital and its neighbourhood. Yet few weeks passed without the Roman people
being in assembly, and even being so several times. It exercised not only the rights of Sovereignty, but
also a part of those of government. It dealt with certain matters, and judged certain cases, and this
whole people was found in the public meeting-place hardly less often as magistrates than as citizens.
  If we went back to the earliest history of nations, we should find that most ancient governments,
even those of monarchical form, such as the Macedonian and the Frankish, had similar councils. In any
case, the one incontestable fact I have given is an answer to all difficulties; it is good logic to reason
from the actual to the possible.
  13. THE SAME (continued)
  IT is not enough for the assembled people to have once fixed the constitution of the State by giving
its sanction to a body of law; it is not enough for it to have set up a perpetual government, or provided
once  for  all  for  the  election  of  magistrates.  Besides  the  extraordinary  assemblies  unforeseen
circumstances may demand, there must be fixed periodical assemblies which cannot be abrogated or
prorogued, so that on the proper day the people is legitimately called together by law, without need of
any formal summoning.
  But, apart from these assemblies authorised by their date alone, every assembly of the people not
summoned by the magistrates appointed for that purpose, and in accordance with the prescribed forms,
should be regarded as unlawful, and all its acts as null and void, because the command to assemble
should itself proceed from the law.
  The greater or less frequency with which lawful assemblies should occur depends on so many
considerations that no exact rules about them can be given. It can only be said generally that the
stronger the government the more often should the Sovereign show itself.
  This, I shall be told, may do for a single town; but what is to be done when the State includes
several? Is the sovereign authority to be divided? Or is it to be concentrated in a single town to which
all the rest are made subject?
  Neither the one nor the other, I reply. First, the sovereign authority is one and simple, and cannot be
divided without being destroyed. In the second place, one town cannot, any more than one nation,
legitimately  be  made  subject  to  another,  because  the  essence  of  the  body  politic  lies  in  the
reconciliation of obedience and liberty, and the words subject and Sovereign are identical correlatives
the idea of which meets in the single word "citizen."
I answer further that the union of several towns in a single city is always bad, and that, if we wish to
make such a union, we should not expect to avoid its natural disadvantages. It is useless to bring up
abuses that belong to great States against one who desires to see only small ones; but how can small
States be given the strength to resist great ones, as formerly the Greek towns resisted the Great King,
and more recently Holland and Switzerland have resisted the House of Austria?
  Nevertheless, if the State cannot be reduced to the right limits, there remains still one resource; thisis, to allow no capital, to make the seat of government move from town to town, and to assemble by
turn in each the Provincial Estates of the country.
  People the territory evenly, extend everywhere the same rights, bear to every place in it abundance
and life: by these means will the State become at once as strong and as well governed as possible.
Remember that the walls of towns are built of the ruins of the houses of the countryside. For every
palace I see raised in the capital, my mind's eye sees a whole country made desolate.
  14. THE SAME (continued)
  THE moment the people is legitimately assembled as a sovereign body, the jurisdiction of the
government wholly lapses, the executive power is suspended, and the person of the meanest citizen is
as sacred and inviolable as that of the first magistrate; for in the presence of the person represented,
representatives no longer exist. Most of the tumults that arose in the comitia at Rome were due to
ignorance or neglect of this rule. The consuls were in them merely the presidents of the people; the
tribunes were mere speakers;30 the senate was nothing at all.
  These intervals of suspension, during which the prince recognises or ought to recognise an actual
superior, have always been viewed by him with alarm; and these assemblies of the people, which are
the aegis of the body politic and the curb on the government, have at all times been the horror of rulers:
who therefore never spare pains, objections, difficulties, and promises, to stop the citizens from having
them. When the citizens are greedy, cowardly, and pusillanimous, and love ease more than liberty, they
do not long hold out against the redoubled efforts of the government; and thus, as the resisting force
incessantly grows, the sovereign authority ends by disappearing, and most cities fall and perish before
their time.
  But between the sovereign authority and arbitrary government there sometimes intervenes a mean
power of which something must be said.
  15. DEPUTIES OR REPRESENTATIVES
  AS soon as public service ceases to be the chief business of the citizens, and they would rather
serve with their money than with their persons, the State is not far from its fall. When it is necessary to
march out to war, they pay troops and stay at home: when it is necessary to meet in council, they name
deputies and stay at home. By reason of idleness and money, they end by having soldiers to enslave
their country and representatives to sell it.
  It is through the hustle of commerce and the arts, through the greedy self-interest of profit, and
through softness and love of amenities that personal services are replaced by money payments. Men
surrender a part of their profits in order to have time to increase them at leisure. Make gifts of money,
and you will not be long without chains. The word finance is a slavish word, unknown in the city-state.
In a country that is truly free, the citizens do everything with their own arms and nothing by means of
money; so far from paying to be exempted from their duties, they would even pay for the privilege of
fulfilling them themselves. I am far from taking the common view: I hold enforced labour to be less
opposed to liberty than taxes.
  The better the constitution of a State is, the more do public affairs encroach on private in the minds
of the citizens. Private affairs are even of much less importance, because the aggregate of the common
happiness furnishes a greater proportion of that of each individual, so that there is less for him to seek
in particular cares. In a well-ordered city every man flies to the assemblies: under a bad government no
one cares to stir a step to get to them, because no one is interested in what happens there, because it is
foreseen that the general will will not prevail, and lastly because domestic cares are all-absorbing. Good
laws lead to the making of better ones; bad ones bring about worse. As soon as any man says of the
affairs of the State What does it matter to me? the State may be given up for lost.
  The lukewarmness of patriotism, the activity of private interest, the vastness of States, conquest and
the abuse of government suggested the method of having deputies or representatives of the people in
the national assemblies. These are what, in some countries, men have presumed to call the Third Estate.
Thus the individual interest of two orders is put first and second; the public interest occupies only the
third place.  Sovereignty, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, cannot be represented; it lies essentially in
the general will, and will does not admit of representation: it is either the same, or other; there is no
intermediate possibility. The deputies of the people, therefore, are not and cannot be its representatives:
they are merely its stewards, and can carry through no definitive acts. Every law the people has not
ratified in person is null and void — is, in fact, not a law. The people of England regards itself as free;
but it is grossly mistaken; it is free only during the election of members of parliament. As soon as they
are elected, slavery overtakes it, and it is nothing. The use it makes of the short moments of liberty it
enjoys shows indeed that it deserves to lose them.
  The idea of representation is modern; it comes to us from feudal government, from that iniquitous
and absurd system which degrades humanity and dishonours the name of man. In ancient republics and
even in monarchies, the people never had representatives; the word itself was unknown. It is very
singular that in Rome, where the tribunes were so sacrosanct, it was never even imagined that they
could usurp the functions of the people, and that in the midst of so great a multitude they never
attempted to pass on their own authority a single plebiscitum. We can, however, form an idea of the
difficulties caused sometimes by the people being so numerous, from what happened in the time of the
Gracchi, when some of the citizens had to cast their votes from the roofs of buildings.
  Where right and liberty are everything, disadvantages count for nothing. Among this wise people
everything was given its just value, its lictors were allowed to do what its tribunes would never have
dared to attempt; for it had no fear that its lictors would try to represent it.
  To explain, however, in what way the tribunes did sometimes represent it, it is enough to conceive
how the government represents the Sovereign. Law being purely the declaration of the general will, it is
clear that, in the exercise of the legislative power, the people cannot be represented; but in that of the
executive power, which is only the force that is applied to give the law effect, it both can and should be
represented. We thus see that if we looked closely into the matter we should find that very few nations
have any laws. However that may be, it is certain that the tribunes, possessing no executive power,
could never represent the Roman people by right of the powers entrusted to them, but only by usurping
those of the senate.
  In Greece, all that the people had to do, it did for itself; it was constantly assembled in the public
square. The Greeks lived in a mild climate; they had no natural greed; slaves did their work for them;
their great concern was with liberty. Lacking the same advantages, how can you preserve the same
rights?  Your  severer  climates  add  to  your  needs;31  for  half  the  year  your  public  squares  are
uninhabitable; the flatness of your languages unfits them for being heard in the open air; you sacrifice
more for profit than for liberty, and fear slavery less than poverty.
  What  then?  Is  liberty  maintained  only  by  the  help  of  slavery?  It  may  be  so.  Extremes  meet.
Everything that is not in the course of nature has its disadvantages, civil society most of all. There are
some unhappy circumstances in which we can only keep our liberty at others' expense, and where the
citizen can be perfectly free only when the slave is most a slave. Such was the case with Sparta. As for
you, modern peoples, you have no slaves, but you are slaves yourselves; you pay for their liberty with
your own. It is in vain that you boast of this preference; I find in it more cowardice than humanity.
I do not mean by all this that it is necessary to have slaves, or that the right of slavery is legitimate: I
am  merely  giving  the  reasons  why  modern  peoples,  believing  themselves  to  be  free,  have
representatives, while ancient peoples had none. In any case, the moment a people allows itself to be
represented, it is no long free: it no longer exists.
  All things considered, I do not see that it is possible henceforth for the Sovereign to preserve among
us the exercise of its rights, unless the city is very small. But if it is very small, it will be conquered?
No. I will show later on how the external strength of a great people32 may be combined with the
convenient polity and good order of a small State.
  16. THAT THE INSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT IS NOT A CONTRACT
  THE legislative power once well established, the next thing is to establish similarly the executive
power; for this latter, which operates only by particular acts, not being of the essence of the former, isnaturally separate from it. Were it possible for the Sovereign, as such, to possess the executive power,
right and fact would be so confounded that no one could tell what was law and what was not; and the
body politic, thus disfigured, would soon fall a prey to the violence it was instituted to prevent.
  As the citizens, by the social contract, are all equal, all can prescribe what all should do, but no one
has a right to demand that another shall do what he does not do himself. It is strictly this right, which is
indispensable for giving the body politic life and movement, that the Sovereign, in instituting the
government, confers upon the prince.
  It has been held that this act of establishment was a contract between the people and the rulers it
sets over itself, — a contract in which conditions were laid down between the two parties binding the
one to command and the other to obey. It will be admitted, I am sure, that this is an odd kind of contract
to enter into. But let us see if this view can be upheld.
  First, the supreme authority can no more be modified than it can be alienated; to limit it is to
destroy it. It is absurd and contradictory for the Sovereign to set a superior over itself; to bind itself to
obey a master would be to return to absolute liberty.
  Moreover, it is clear that this contract between the people and such and such persons would be a
particular act; and from this is follows that it can be neither a law nor an act of Sovereignty, and that
consequently it would be illegitimate.
  It is plain too that the contracting parties in relation to each other would be under the law of nature
alone and wholly without guarantees of their mutual undertakings, a position wholly at variance with
the civil state. He who has force at his command being always in a position to control execution, it
would come to the same thing if the name "contract" were given to the act of one man who said to
another: "I give you all my goods, on condition that you give me back as much of them as you please."
  There is only one contract in the State, and that is the act of association, which in itself excludes the
existence of a second. It is impossible to conceive of any public contract that would not be a violation
of the first.
  17. THE INSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT
  UNDER what general idea then should the act by which government is instituted be conceived as
falling?  I  will  begin  by  stating  that  the  act  is  complex,  as  being  composed  of  two  others  —  the
establishment of the law and its execution.
  By the former, the Sovereign decrees that there shall be a governing body established in this or that
form; this act is clearly a law.
  By the latter, the people nominates the rulers who are to be entrusted with the government that has
been established. This nomination, being a particular act, is clearly not a second law, but merely a
consequence of the first and a function of government.
  The difficulty is to understand how there can be a governmental act before government exists, and
how the people, which is only Sovereign or subject, can, under certain circumstances, become a prince
or magistrate.
  It is at this point that there is revealed one of the astonishing properties of the body politic, by
means of which it reconciles apparently contradictory operations; for this is accomplished by a sudden
conversion of Sovereignty into democracy, so that, without sensible change, and merely by virtue of a
new relation of all to all, the citizens become magistrates and pass from general to particular acts, from
legislation to the execution of the law.
  This changed relation is no speculative subtlety without instances in practice: it happens every day
in the English Parliament, where, on certain occasions, the Lower House resolves itself into Grand
Committee, for the better discussion of affairs, and thus, from being at one moment a sovereign court,
becomes at the next a mere commission; so that subsequently it reports to itself, as House of Commons,
the result of its proceedings in Grand Committee, and debates over again under one name what it has
already settled under another.
  It is, indeed, the peculiar advantage of democratic government that it can be established in actuality
by a simple act of the general will. Subsequently, this provisional government remains in power, if thisform is adopted, or else establishes in the name of the Sovereign the government that is prescribed by
law; and thus the whole proceeding is regular. It is impossible to set up government in any other
manner legitimately and in accordance with the principles so far laid down.
  18. HOW TO CHECK THE USURPATIONS OF GOVERNMENT
  WHAT we have just said confirms Chapter 16, and makes it clear that the institution of government
is not a contract, but a law; that the depositaries of the executive power are not the people's masters, but
its officers; that it can set them up and pull them down when it likes; that for them there is no question
of contract, but of obedience and that in taking charge of the functions the State imposes on them they
are doing no more than fulfilling their duty as citizens, without having the remotest right to argue about
the conditions.
  When  therefore  the  people  sets  up  an  hereditary  government,  whether  it  be  monarchical  and
confined to one family, or aristocratic and confined to a class, what it enters into is not an undertaking;
the administration is given a provisional form, until the people chooses to order it otherwise.
  It is true that such changes are always dangerous, and that the established government should never
be touched except when it comes to be incompatible with the public good; but the circumspection this
involves is a maxim of policy and not a rule of right, and the State is no more bound to leave civil
authority in the hands of its rulers than military authority in the hands of its generals.
  It is also true that it is impossible to be too careful to observe, in such cases, all the formalities
necessary to distinguish a regular and legitimate act from a seditious tumult, and the will of a whole
people from the clamour of a faction. Here above all no further concession should be made to the
untoward possibility than cannot, in the strictest logic, be refused it. From this obligation the prince
derives a great advantage in preserving his power despite the people, without it being possible to say he
has usurped it; for, seeming to avail himself only of his rights, he finds it very easy to extend them, and
to prevent, under the pretext of keeping the peace, assemblies that are destined to the re-establishment
of order; with the result that he takes advantage of a silence he does not allow to be broken, or of
irregularities he causes to be committed, to assume that he has the support of those whom fear prevents
from speaking, and to punish those who dare to speak. Thus it was that the decemvirs, first elected for
one year and then kept on in office for a second, tried to perpetuate their power by forbidding the
comitia to assemble; and by this easy method every government in the world, once clothed with the
public power, sooner or later usurps the sovereign authority.
  The periodical assemblies of which I have already spoken are designed to prevent or postpone this
calamity, above all when they need no formal summoning; for in that case, the prince cannot stop them
without openly declaring himself a law-breaker and an enemy of the State.
  The opening of these assemblies, whose sole object is the maintenance of the social treaty, should
always take the form of putting two propositions that may not be suppressed, which should be voted on
separately.
  The first is: "Does it please the Sovereign to preserve the present form of government?"
  The second is: "Does it please the people to leave its administration in the hands of those who are
actually in charge of it?"
I am here assuming what I think I have shown; that there is in the State no fundamental law that
cannot be revoked, not excluding the social compact itself; for if all the citizens assembled of one
accord to break the compact, it is impossible to doubt that it would be very legitimately broken. Grotius
even thinks that each man can renounce his membership of his own State, and recover his natural
liberty and his goods on leaving the country.33 It would be indeed absurd if all the citizens in assembly
could not do what each can do by himself.
 
  BOOK IV
  1. THAT THE GENERAL WILL IS INDESTRUCTIBLE
  AS long as several men in assembly regard themselves as a single body, they have only a single
will which is concerned with their common preservation and general well-being. In this case, all thesprings of the State are vigorous and simple and its rules clear and luminous; there are no embroilments
or conflicts of interests; the common good is everywhere clearly apparent, and only good sense is
needed to perceive it. Peace, unity and equality are the enemies of political subtleties. Men who are
upright and simple are difficult to deceive because of their simplicity; lures and ingenious pretexts fail
to impose upon them, and they are not even subtle enough to be dupes. When, among the happiest
people in the world, bands of peasants are seen regulating affairs of State under an oak, and always
acting wisely, can we help scorning the ingenious methods of other nations, which make themselves
illustrious and wretched with so much art and mystery?
  A State so governed needs very few laws; and, as it becomes necessary to issue new ones, the
necessity is universally seen. The first man to propose them merely says what all have already felt, and
there is no question of factions or intrigues or eloquence in order to secure the passage into law of what
every one has already decided to do, as soon as he is sure that the rest will act with him.
  Theorists are led into error because, seeing only States that have been from the beginning wrongly
constituted, they are struck by the impossibility of applying such a policy to them. They make great
game of all the absurdities a clever rascal or an insinuating speaker might get the people of Paris or
London to believe. They do not know that Cromwell would have been put to "the bells" by the people
of Berne, and the Duc de Beaufort on the treadmill by the Genevese.
  But when the social bond begins to be relaxed and the State to grow weak, when particular interests
begin to make themselves felt and the smaller societies to exercise an influence over the larger, the
common interest changes and finds opponents: opinion is no longer unanimous; the general will ceases
to be the will of all; contradictory views and debates arise; and the best advice is not taken without
question.
  Finally, when the State, on the eve of ruin, maintains only a vain, illusory and formal existence,
when in every heart the social bond is broken, and the meanest interest brazenly lays hold of the sacred
name of "public good," the general will becomes mute: all men, guided by secret motives, no more give
their views as citizens than if the State had never been; and iniquitous decrees directed solely to private
interest get passed under the name of laws.
  Does it follow from this that the general will is exterminated or corrupted? Not at all: it is always
constant, unalterable and pure; but it is subordinated to other wills which encroach upon its sphere.
Each man, in detaching his interest from the common interest, sees clearly that he cannot entirely
separate them; but his share in the public mishaps seems to him negligible beside the exclusive good he
aims at making his own. Apart from this particular good, he wills the general good in his own interest,
as strongly as any one else. Even in selling his vote for money, he does not extinguish in himself the
general will, but only eludes it. The fault he commits is that of changing the state of the question, and
answering something different from what he is asked. Instead of saying, by his vote, "It is to the
advantage of the State," he says, "It is of advantage to this or that man or party that this or that view
should prevail." Thus the law of public order in assemblies is not so much to maintain in them the
general will as to secure that the question be always put to it, and the answer always given by it.
I could here set down many reflections on the simple right of voting in every act of Sovereignty —
a right which no one can take from the citizens — and also on the right of stating views, making
proposals, dividing and discussing, which the government is always most careful to leave solely to its
members,  but  this  important  subject  would  need  a  treatise  to  itself,  and  it  is  impossible  to  say
everything in a single work.
  2. VOTING
  IT may be seen, from the last chapter, that the way in which general business is managed may give
a clear enough indication of the actual state of morals and the health of the body politic. The more
concert reigns in the assemblies, that is, the nearer opinion approaches unanimity, the greater is the
dominance of the general will. On the other hand, long debates, dissensions and tumult proclaim the
ascendancy of particular interests and the decline of the State.
  This  seems  less  clear  when  two  or  more  orders  enter  into  the  constitution,  as  patricians  andplebeians did at Rome; for quarrels between these two orders often disturbed the comitia, even in the
best days of the Republic. But the exception is rather apparent than real; for then, through the defect
that is inherent in the body politic, there were, so to speak, two States in one, and what is not true of the
two together is true of either separately. Indeed, even in the most stormy times, the plebiscita of the
people,  when  the  Senate  did  not  interfere  with  them,  always  went  through  quietly  and  by  large
majorities. The citizens having but one interest, the people had but a single will.
  At the other extremity of the circle, unanimity recurs; this is the case when the citizens, having
fallen  into  servitude,  have  lost  both  liberty  and  will.  Fear  and  flattery  then  change  votes  into
acclamation; deliberation ceases, and only worship or malediction is left. Such was the vile manner in
which the senate expressed its views under the Emperors. It did so sometimes with absurd precautions.
Tacitus observes that, under Otho, the senators, while they heaped curses on Vitellius, contrived at the
same time to make a deafening noise, in order that, should he ever become their master, he might not
know what each of them had said.
  On these various considerations depend the rules by which the methods of counting votes and
comparing opinions should be regulated, according as the general will is more or less easy to discover,
and the State more or less in its decline.
  There is but one law which, from its nature, needs unanimous consent. This is the social compact;
for civil association is the most voluntary of all acts. Every man being born free and his own master, no
one, under any pretext whatsoever, can make any man subject without his consent. To decide that the
son of a slave is born a slave is to decide that he is not born a man.
  If then there are opponents when the social compact is made, their opposition does not invalidate
the contract, but merely prevents them from being included in it. They are foreigners among citizens.
When the State is instituted, residence constitutes consent; to dwell within its territory is to submit to
the Sovereign.34
  Apart from this primitive contract, the vote of the majority always binds all the rest. This follows
from the contract itself. But it is asked how a man can be both free and forced to conform to wills that
are not his own. How are the opponents at once free and subject to laws they have not agreed to?
I retort that the question is wrongly put. The citizen gives his consent to all the laws, including
those which are passed in spite of his opposition, and even those which punish him when he dares to
break any of them. The constant will of all the members of the State is the general will; by virtue of it
they are citizens and free.35 When in the popular assembly a law is proposed, what the people is asked
is not exactly whether it approves or rejects the proposal, but whether it is in conformity with the
general will, which is their will. Each man, in giving his vote, states his opinion on that point; and the
general will is found by counting votes. When therefore the opinion that is contrary to my own prevails,
this proves neither more nor less than that I was mistaken, and that what I thought to be the general will
was not so. If my particular opinion had carried the day I should have achieved the opposite of what
was my will; and it is in that case that I should not have been free.
  This presupposes, indeed, that all the qualities of the general will still reside in the majority: when
they cease to do so, whatever side a man may take, liberty is no longer possible.
  In my earlier demonstration of how particular wills are substituted for the general will in public
deliberation, I have adequately pointed out the practicable methods of avoiding this abuse; and I shall
have more to say of them later on. I have also given the principles for determining the proportional
number of votes for declaring that will. A difference of one vote destroys equality; a single opponent
destroys unanimity; but between equality and unanimity, there are several grades of unequal division, at
each of which this proportion may be fixed in accordance with the condition and the needs of the body
politic.
  There are two general rules that may serve to regulate this relation. First, the more grave and
important the questions discussed, the nearer should the opinion that is to prevail approach unanimity.
Secondly, the more the matter in hand calls for speed, the smaller the prescribed difference in the
numbers of votes may be allowed to become: where an instant decision has to be reached, a majority ofone vote should be enough. The first of these two rules seems more in harmony with the laws, and the
second with practical affairs. In any case, it is the combination of them that gives the best proportions
for determining the majority necessary.
  3. ELECTIONS
  IN the elections of the prince and the magistrates, which are, as I have said, complex acts, there are
two possible methods of procedure, choice and lot. Both have been employed in various republics, and
a highly complicated mixture of the two still survives in the election of the Doge at Venice.
  "Election by lot," says Montesquieu, "is democratic in nature."E3 I agree that it is so; but in what
sense? "The lot," he goes on, "is a way of making choice that is unfair to nobody; it leaves each citizen
a reasonable hope of serving his country." These are not reasons.
  If we bear in mind that the election of rulers is a function of government, and not of Sovereignty,
we shall see why the lot is the method more natural to democracy, in which the administration is better
in proportion as the number of its acts is small.
  In every real democracy, magistracy is not an advantage, but a burdensome charge which cannot
justly be imposed on one individual rather than another. The law alone can lay the charge on him on
whom the lot falls. For, the conditions being then the same for all, and the choice not depending on any
human will, there is no particular application to alter the universality of the law.
  In an aristocracy, the prince chooses the prince, the government is preserved by itself, and voting is
rightly ordered.
  The instance of the election of the Doge of Venice confirms, instead of destroying, this distinction;
the mixed form suits a mixed government. For it is an error to take the government of Venice for a real
aristocracy. If the people has no share in the government, the nobility is itself the people. A host of poor
Barnabotes  never  gets  near  any  magistracy,  and  its  nobility  consists  merely  in  the  empty  title  of
Excellency, and in the right to sit in the Great Council. As this Great Council is as numerous as our
General Council at Geneva, its illustrious members have no more privileges than our plain citizens. It is
indisputable  that,  apart  from  the  extreme  disparity  between  the  two  republics,  the  bourgeoisie  of
Geneva is exactly equivalent to the patriciate of Venice; our natives and inhabitants correspond to the
townsmen and the people of Venice; our peasants correspond to the subjects on the mainland; and,
however  that  republic  be  regarded,  if  its  size  be  left  out  of  account,  its  government  is  no  more
aristocratic than our own. The whole difference is that, having no life-ruler, we do not, like Venice,
need to use the lot.
  Election by lot would have few disadvantages in a real democracy, in which, as equality would
everywhere exist in morals and talents as well as in principles and fortunes, it would become almost a
matter of indifference who was chosen. But I have already said that a real democracy is only an ideal.
  When choice and lot are combined, positions that require special talents, such as military posts,
should be filled by the former; the latter does for cases, such as judicial offices, in which good sense,
justice, and integrity are enough, because in a State that is well constituted, these qualities are common
to all the citizens.
  Neither lot nor vote has any place in monarchical government. The monarch being by right sole
prince and only magistrate, the choice of his lieutenants belongs to none but him. When the Abbé de
Saint-Pierre proposed that the Councils of the King of France should be multiplied, and their members
elected by ballot, he did not see that he was proposing to change the form of government.
I should now speak of the methods of giving and counting opinions in the assembly of the people;
but perhaps an account of this aspect of the Roman constitution will more forcibly illustrate all the rules
I could lay down. It is worth the while of a judicious reader to follow in some detail the working of
public and private affairs in a Council consisting of two hundred thousand men.
  4. THE ROMAN COMITIA
  WE are without well-certified records of the first period of Rome's existence; it even appears very
probable  that  most  of  the  stories  told  about  it  are  fables;  indeed,  generally  speaking,  the  most
instructive part of the history of peoples, that which deals with their foundation, is what we have leastof. Experience teaches us every day what causes lead to the revolutions of empires; but, as no new
peoples are now formed, we have almost nothing beyond conjecture to go upon in explaining how they
were created.
  The customs we find established show at least that these customs had an origin. The traditions that
go back to those origins, that have the greatest authorities behind them, and that are confirmed by the
strongest proofs, should pass for the most certain. These are the rules I have tried to follow in inquiring
how the freest and most powerful people on earth exercised its supreme power.
  After the foundation of Rome, the new-born republic, that is, the army of its founder, composed of
Albans, Sabines and foreigners, was divided into three classes, which, from this division, took the name
of tribes. Each of these tribes was subdivided into ten curiæ, and each curia into decuriæ, headed by
leaders called curiones and decuriones.
  Besides this, out of each tribe was taken a body of one hundred Equites or Knights, called a
century, which shows that these divisions, being unnecessary in a town, were at first merely military.
But an instinct for greatness seems to have led the little township of Rome to provide itself in advance
with a political system suitable for the capital of the world.
  Out of this original division an awkward situation soon arose. The tribes of the Albans (Ramnenses)
and  the  Sabines  (Tatienses)  remained  always  in  the  same  condition,  while  that  of  the  foreigners
(Luceres) continually grew as more and more foreigners came to live at Rome, so that it soon surpassed
the others in strength. Servius remedied this dangerous fault by changing the principle of cleavage, and
substituting for the racial division, which he abolished, a new one based on the quarter of the town
inhabited by each tribe. Instead of three tribes he created four, each occupying and named after one of
the hills of Rome. Thus, while redressing the inequality of the moment, he also provided for the future;
and in order that the division might be one of persons as well as localities, he forbade the inhabitants of
one quarter to migrate to another, and so prevented the mingling of the races.
  He also doubled the three old centuries of Knights and added twelve more, still keeping the old
names, and by this simple and prudent method, succeeded in making a distinction between the body of
Knights, and the people, without a murmur from the latter.
  To the four urban tribes Servius added fifteen others called rural tribes, because they consisted of
those who lived in the country, divided into fifteen cantons. Subsequently, fifteen more were created,
and the Roman people finally found itself divided into thirty-five tribes, as it remained down to the end
of the Republic.
  The distinction between urban and rural tribes had one effect which is worth mention, both because
it is without parallel elsewhere, and because to it Rome owed the preservation of her morality and the
enlargement of her empire. We should have expected that the urban tribes would soon monopolise
power and honours, and lose no time in bringing the rural tribes into disrepute; but what happened was
exactly the reverse. The taste of the early Romans for country life is well known. This taste they owed
to their wise founder, who made rural and military labours go along with liberty, and, so to speak,
relegated to the town arts, crafts, intrigue, fortune and slavery.
  Since therefore all Rome's most illustrious citizens lived in the fields and tilled the earth, men grew
used  to  seeking  there  alone  the  mainstays  of  the  republic.  This  condition,  being  that  of  the  best
patricians, was honoured by all men; the simple and laborious life of the villager was preferred to the
slothful and idle life of the bourgeoisie of Rome; and he who, in the town, would have been but a
wretched proletarian, became, as a labourer in the fields, a respected citizen. Not without reason, says
Varro, did our great-souled ancestors establish in the village the nursery of the sturdy and valiant men
who defended them in time of war and provided for their sustenance in time of peace. Pliny states
positively that the country tribes were honoured because of the men of whom they were composed;
while cowards men wished to dishonour were transferred, as a public disgrace, to the town tribes. The
Sabine Appius Claudius, when he had come to settle in Rome, was loaded with honours and enrolled in
a rural tribe, which subsequently took his family name. Lastly, freedmen always entered the urban, arid
never the rural, tribes: nor is there a single example, throughout the Republic, of a freedman, though hehad become a citizen, reaching any magistracy.
  This was an excellent rule; but it was carried so far that in the end it led to a change and certainly to
an abuse in the political system.
  First the censors, after having for a long time claimed the right of transferring citizens arbitrarily
from one tribe to another, allowed most persons to enrol themselves in whatever tribe they pleased.
This  permission  certainly  did  no  good,  and  further  robbed  the  censorship  of  one  of  its  greatest
resources. Moreover, as the great and powerful all got themselves enrolled in the country tribes, while
the freedmen who had become citizens remained with the populace in the town tribes, both soon ceased
to have any local or territorial meaning, and all were so confused that the members of one could not be
told from those of another except by the registers; so that the idea of the word tribe became personal
instead of real, or rather came to be little more than a chimera.
  It happened in addition that the town tribes, being more on the spot, were often the stronger in the
comitia and sold the State to those who stooped to buy the votes of the rabble composing them.
  As  the  founder  had  set  up  ten  curiæ  in  each  tribe,  the  whole  Roman  people,  which  was  then
contained within the walls, consisted of thirty curiæ, each with its temples, its gods, its officers, its
priests and its festivals, which were called compitalia and corresponded to the paganalia, held in later
times by the rural tribes.
  When Servius made his new division, as the thirty curiæ could not be shared equally between his
four tribes, and as he was unwilling to interfere with them, they became a further division of the
inhabitants  of  Rome,  quite  independent  of  the  tribes:  but  in  the  case  of  the  rural  tribes  and  their
members there was no question of curiæ, as the tribes had then become a purely civil institution, and, a
new  system  of  levying  troops  having  been  introduced,  the  military  divisions  of  Romulus  were
superfluous. Thus, although every citizen was enrolled in a tribe, there were very many who were not
members of a curia.
  Servius made yet a third division, quite distinct from the two we have mentioned, which became, in
its  effects,  the  most  important  of  all.  He  distributed  the  whole  Roman  people  into  six  classes,
distinguished neither by place nor by person, but by wealth; the first classes included the rich, the last
the poor, and those between persons of moderate means. These six classes were subdivided into one
hundred and ninety-three other bodies, called centuries, which were so divided that the first class alone
comprised more than half of them, while the last comprised only one. Thus the class that had the
smallest number of members had the largest number of centuries, and the whole of the last class only
counted as a single subdivision, although it alone included more than half the inhabitants of Rome.
  In order that the people might have the less insight into the results of this arrangement, Servius tried
to give it a military tone: in the second class he inserted two centuries of armourers, and in the fourth
two of makers of instruments of war: in each class, except the last, he distinguished young and old, that
is, those who were under an obligation to bear arms and those whose age gave them legal exemption. It
was this distinction, rather than that of wealth, which required frequent repetition of the census or
counting. Lastly, he ordered that the assembly should be held in the Campus Martius, and that all who
were of age to serve should come there armed.
  The reason for his not making in the last class also the division of young and old was that the
populace, of whom it was composed, was not given the right to bear arms for its country: a man had to
possess a hearth to acquire the right to defend it, and of all the troops of beggars who to-day lend lustre
to the armies of kings, there is perhaps not one who would not have been driven with scorn out of a
Roman cohort, at a time when soldiers were the defenders of liberty.
  In this last class, however, proletarians were distinguished from capite censi. The former, not quite
reduced to nothing, at least gave the State citizens, and sometimes, when the need was pressing, even
soldiers. Those who had nothing at all, and could be numbered only by counting heads, were regarded
as of absolutely no account, and Marius was the first who stooped to enrol them.
  Without deciding now whether this third arrangement was good or bad in itself, I think I may assert
that it could have been made practicable only by the simple morals, the disinterestedness, the liking foragriculture and the scorn for commerce and for love of gain which characterised the early Romans.
Where is the modern people among whom consuming greed, unrest, intrigue, continual removals, and
perpetual changes of fortune, could let such a system last for twenty years without turning the State
upside  down?  We  must  indeed  observe  that  morality  and  the  censorship,  being  stronger  than  this
institution, corrected its defects at Rome, and that the rich man found himself degraded to the class of
the poor for making too much display of his riches.
  From all this it is easy to understand why only five classes are almost always mentioned, though
there were really six. The sixth, as it furnished neither soldiers to the army nor votes in the Campus
Martius,36 and was almost without function in the State, was seldom regarded as of any account.
  These were the various ways in which the Roman people was divided. Let us now see the effect on
the assemblies. When lawfully summoned, these were called comitia: they were usually held in the
public square at Rome or in the Campus Martius, and were distinguished as comitia curiata, comitia
centuriata, and comitia tributa, according to the form under which they were convoked. The comitia
curiata were founded by Romulus; the centuriata by Servius; and the tributa by the tribunes of the
people. No law received its sanction and no magistrate was elected, save in the comitia; and as every
citizen was enrolled in a curia, a century, or a tribe, it follows that no citizen was excluded from the
right of voting, and that the Roman people was truly sovereign both de jure and de facto.
  For  the  comitia  to  be  lawfully  assembled,  and  for  their  acts  to  have  the  force  of  law,  three
conditions were necessary. First, the body or magistrate convoking them had to possess the necessary
authority; secondly, the assembly had to be held on a day allowed by law; and thirdly, the auguries had
to be favourable.
  The reason for the first regulation needs no explanation; the second is a matter of policy. Thus, the
comitia might not be held on festivals or market-days, when the country-folk, coming to Rome on
business, had not time to spend the day in the public square. By means of the third, the senate held in
check  the  proud  and  restive  people,  and  meetly  restrained  the  ardour  of  seditious  tribunes,  who,
however, found more than one way of escaping this hindrance.
  Laws and the election of rulers were not the only questions submitted to the judgment of the
comitia: as the Roman people had taken on itself the most important functions of government, it may be
said that the lot of Europe was regulated in its assemblies. The variety of their objects gave rise to the
various forms these took, according to the matters on which they had to pronounce.
  In order to judge of these various forms, it is enough to compare them. Romulus, when he set up
curia, had in view the checking of the senate by the people, and of the people by the senate, while
maintaining his ascendancy over both alike. He therefore gave the people, by means of this assembly,
all the authority of numbers to balance that of power and riches, which he left to the patricians. But,
after the spirit of monarchy, he left all the same a greater advantage to the patricians in the influence of
their clients on the majority of votes. This excellent institution of patron and client was a masterpiece of
statesmanship  and  humanity  without  which  the  patriciate,  being  flagrantly  in  contradiction  to  the
republican spirit, could not have survived. Rome alone has the honour of having given to the world this
great example, which never led to any abuse, and yet has never been followed.
  As the assemblies by curiæ persisted under the kings till the time of Servius, and the reign of the
later Tarquin was not regarded as legitimate, royal laws were called generally leges curiatæ.
  Under  the  Republic,  the  curiæ,  still  confined  to  the  four  urban  tribes,  and  including  only  the
populace of Rome, suited neither the senate, which led the patricians, nor the tribunes, who, though
plebeians, were at the head of the well-to-do citizens. They therefore fell into disrepute, and their
degradation was such, that thirty lictors used to assemble and do what the comitia curiata should have
done.
  The division by centuries was so favourable to the aristocracy that it is hard to see at first how the
senate ever failed to carry the day in the comitia bearing their name, by which the consuls, the censors
and the other curule magistrates were elected. Indeed, of the hundred and ninety-three centuries into
which the six classes of the whole Roman people were divided, the first class contained ninety-eight;and, as voting went solely by centuries, this class alone had a majority over all the rest. When all these
centuries were in agreement, the rest of the votes were not even taken; the decision of the smallest
number passed for that of the multitude, and it may be said that, in the comitia centuriata, decisions
were regulated far more by depth of purses than by the number of votes.
  But this extreme authority was modified in two ways. First, the tribunes as a rule, and always a
great number of plebeians, belonged to the class of the rich, and so counterbalanced the influence of the
patricians in the first class.
  The second way was this. Instead of causing the centuries to vote throughout in order, which would
have meant beginning always with the first, the Romans always chose one by lot which proceeded
alone to the election; after this all the centuries were summoned another day according to their rank,
and the same election was repeated, and as a rule confirmed. Thus the authority of example was taken
away from rank, and given to the lot on a democratic principle.
  From this custom resulted a further advantage. The citizens from the country had time, between the
two  elections,  to  inform  themselves  of  the  merits  of  the  candidate  who  had  been  provisionally
nominated, and did not have to vote without knowledge of the case. But, under the pretext of hastening
matters, the abolition of this custom was achieved, and both elections were held on the same day.
  The comitia tributa were properly the council of the Roman people. They were convoked by the
tribunes alone; at them the tribunes were elected and passed their plebiscita. The senate not only had no
standing in them, but even no right to be present; and the senators, being forced to obey laws on which
they  could  not  vote,  were  in  this  respect  less  free  than  the  meanest  citizens.  This  injustice  was
altogether ill-conceived, and was alone enough to invalidate the decrees of a body to which all its
members were not admitted. Had all the patricians attended the comitia by virtue of the right they had
as citizens, they would not, as mere private individuals, have had any considerable influence on a vote
reckoned by counting heads, where the meanest proletarian was as good as the princeps senatus.
  It may be seen, therefore, that besides the order which was achieved by these various ways of
distributing so great a people and taking its votes, the various methods were not reducible to forms
indifferent in themselves, but the results of each were relative to the objects which caused it to be
preferred.
  Without going here into further details, we may gather from what has been said above that the
comitia  tributa  were  the  most  favourable  to  popular  government,  and  the  comitia  centuriata  to
aristocracy. The comitia curiata, in which the populace of Rome formed the majority, being fitted only
to further tyranny and evil designs, naturally fell into disrepute, and even seditious persons abstained
from using a method which too clearly revealed their projects. It is indisputable that the whole majesty
of the Roman people lay solely in the comitia centuriata, which alone included all; for the comitia
curiata excluded the rural tribes, and the comitia tributa the senate and the patricians.
  As for the method of taking the vote, it was among the ancient Romans as simple as their morals,
although not so simple as at Sparta. Each man declared his vote aloud, and a clerk duly wrote it down;
the majority in each tribe determined the vote of the tribe, the majority of the tribes that of the people,
and so with curiæ and centuries. This custom was good as long as honesty was triumphant among the
citizens, and each man was ashamed to vote publicly in favour of an unjust proposal or an unworthy
subject; but, when the people grew corrupt and votes were bought, it was fitting that voting should be
secret in order that purchasers might be restrained by mistrust, and rogues be given the means of not
being traitors.
I know that Cicero attacks this change, and attributes partly to it the ruin of the Republic. But
though I feel the weight Cicero's authority must carry on such a point, I cannot agree with him; I hold,
on the contrary, that, for want of enough such changes, the destruction of the State must be hastened.
Just as the regimen of health does not suit the sick, we should not wish to govern a people that has been
corrupted by the laws that a good people requires. There is no better proof of this rule than the long life
of the Republic of Venice, of which the shadow still exists, solely because its laws are suitable only for
men who are wicked.  The citizens were provided, therefore, with tablets by means of which each man could vote without
any  one  knowing  how  he  voted:  new  methods  were  also  introduced  for  collecting  the  tablets,  for
counting voices, for comparing numbers, etc.; but all these precautions did not prevent the good faith of
the officers charged with these functions37 from being often suspect. Finally, to prevent intrigues and
trafficking in votes, edicts were issued; but their very number proves how useless they were.
  Towards  the  close  of  the  Republic,  it  was  often  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  extraordinary
expedients in order to supplement the inadequacy of the laws. Sometimes miracles were supposed; but
this method, while it might impose on the people, could not impose on those who governed. Sometimes
an  assembly  was  hastily  called  together,  before  the  candidates  had  time  to  form  their  factions:
sometimes a whole sitting was occupied with talk, when it was seen that the people had been won over
and was on the point of taking up a wrong position. But in the end ambition eluded all attempts to
check it; and the most incredible fact of all is that, in the midst of all these abuses, the vast people,
thanks to its ancient regulations, never ceased to elect magistrates, to pass laws, to judge cases, and to
carry through business both public and private, almost as easily as the senate itself could have done.
  5. THE TRIBUNATE
  WHEN an exact proportion cannot be established between the constituent parts of the State, or
when causes that cannot be removed continually alter the relation of one part to another, recourse is had
to the institution of a peculiar magistracy that enters into no corporate unity with the rest. This restores
to each term its right relation to the others, and provides a link or middle term between either prince
and people, or prince and Sovereign, or, if necessary, both at once.
  This body, which I shall call the tribunate, is the preserver of the laws and of the legislative power.
It serves sometimes to protect the Sovereign against the government, as the tribunes of the people did at
Rome; sometimes to uphold the government against the people, as the Council of Ten now does at
Venice; and sometimes to maintain the balance between the two, as the Ephors did at Sparta.
  The tribunate is not a constituent part of the city, and should have no share in either legislative or
executive power; but this very fact makes its own power the greater: for, while it can do nothing, it can
prevent anything from being done. It is more sacred and more revered, as the defender of the laws, than
the prince who executes them, or than the Sovereign which ordains them. This was seen very clearly at
Rome, when the proud patricians, for all their scorn of the people, were forced to bow before one of its
officers, who had neither auspices nor jurisdiction.
  The tribunate, wisely tempered, is the strongest support a good constitution can have; but if its
strength is ever so little excessive, it upsets the whole State. Weakness, on the other hand, is not natural
to it: provided it is something, it is never less than it should be.
  It degenerates into tyranny when it usurps the executive power, which it should confine itself to
restraining, and when it tries to dispense with the laws, which it should confine itself to protecting. The
immense power of the Ephors, harmless as long as Sparta preserved its morality, hastened corruption
when once it had begun. The blood of Agis, slaughtered by these tyrants, was avenged by his successor;
the crime and the punishment of the Ephors alike hastened the destruction of the republic, and after
Cleomenes Sparta ceased to be of any account. Rome perished in the same way: the excessive power of
the tribunes, which they had usurped by degrees, finally served, with the help of laws made to secure
liberty, as a safeguard for the emperors who destroyed it. As for the Venetian Council of Ten, it is a
tribunal of blood, an object of horror to patricians and people alike; and, so far from giving a lofty
protection to the laws, it does nothing, now they have become degraded, but strike in the darkness
blows of which no one dare take note.
  The tribunate, like the government, grows weak as the number of its members increases. When the
tribunes of the Roman people, who first numbered only two, and then five, wished to double that
number, the senate let them do so, in the confidence that it could use one to check another, as indeed it
afterwards freely did.
  The best method of preventing usurpations by so formidable a body, though no government has yet
made use of it, would be not to make it permanent, but to regulate the periods during which it shouldremain in abeyance. These intervals, which should not be long enough to give abuses time to grow
strong, may be so fixed by law that they can easily be shortened at need by extraordinary commissions.
  This method seems to me to have no disadvantages, because, as I have said, the tribunate, which
forms no part of the constitution, can be removed without the constitution being affected. It seems to be
also  efficacious,  because  a  newly  restored  magistrate  starts  not  with  the  power  his  predecessor
exercised, but with that which the law allows him.
  6. THE DICTATORSHIP
  THE inflexibility of the laws, which prevents them from adapting themselves to circumstances,
may, in certain cases, render them disastrous, and make them bring about, at a time of crisis, the ruin of
the State. The order and slowness of the forms they enjoin require a space of time which circumstances
sometimes withhold. A thousand cases against which the legislator has made no provision may present
themselves, and it is a highly necessary part of foresight to be conscious that everything cannot be
foreseen.
  It is wrong therefore to wish to make political institutions so strong as to render it impossible to
suspend their operation. Even Sparta allowed its laws to lapse.
  However, none but the greatest dangers can counterbalance that of changing the public order, and
the sacred power of the laws should never be arrested save when the existence of the country is at stake.
In these rare and obvious cases, provision is made for the public security by a particular act entrusting it
to him who is most worthy. This commitment may be carried out in either of two ways, according to
the nature of the danger.
  If increasing the activity of the government is a sufficient remedy, power is concentrated in the
hands of one or two of its members: in this case the change is not in the authority of the laws, but only
in  the  form  of  administering  them.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  peril  is  of  such  a  kind  that  the
paraphernalia of the laws are an obstacle to their preservation, the method is to nominate a supreme
ruler, who shall silence all the laws and suspend for a moment the sovereign authority. In such a case,
there is no doubt about the general will, and it is clear that the people's first intention is that the State
shall  not  perish.  Thus  the  suspension  of  the  legislative  authority  is  in  no  sense  its  abolition;  the
magistrate who silences it cannot make it speak; he dominates it, but cannot represent it. He can do
anything, except make laws.
  The first method was used by the Roman senate when, in a consecrated formula, it charged the
consuls to provide for the safety of the Republic. The second was employed when one of the two
consuls nominated a dictator:38 a custom Rome borrowed from Alba.
  During the first period of the Republic, recourse was very often had to the dictatorship, because the
State had not yet a firm enough basis to be able to maintain itself by the strength of its constitution
alone. As the state of morality then made superfluous many of the precautions which would have been
necessary at other times, there was no fear that a dictator would abuse his authority, or try to keep it
beyond his term of office. On the contrary, so much power appeared to be burdensome to him who was
clothed with it, and he made all speed to lay it down, as if taking the place of the laws had been too
troublesome and too perilous a position to retain.
  It is therefore the danger not of its abuse, but of its cheapening, that makes me attack the indiscreet
use of this supreme magistracy in the earliest times. For as long as it was freely employed at elections,
dedications and purely formal functions, there was danger of its becoming less formidable in time of
need, and of men growing accustomed to regarding as empty a title that was used only on occasions of
empty ceremonial.
  Towards  the  end  of  the  Republic,  the  Romans,  having  grown  more  circumspect,  were  as
unreasonably sparing in the use of the dictatorship as they had formerly been lavish. It is easy to see
that  their  fears  were  without  foundation,  that  the  weakness  of  the  capital  secured  it  against  the
magistrates who were in its midst; that a dictator might, in certain cases, defend the public liberty, but
could never endanger it; and that the chains of Rome would be forged, not in Rome itself, but in her
armies. The weak resistance offered by Marius to Sulla, and by Pompey to Cæsar, clearly showed whatwas to be expected from authority at home against force from abroad.
  This misconception led the Romans to make great mistakes; such, for example, as the failure to
nominate  a  dictator  in  the  Catilinarian  conspiracy.  For,  as  only  the  city  itself,  with  at  most  some
province in Italy, was concerned, the unlimited authority the laws gave to the dictator would have
enabled him to make short work of the conspiracy, which was, in fact, stifled only by a combination of
lucky chances human prudence had no right to expect.
  Instead, the senate contented itself with entrusting its whole power to the consuls, so that Cicero, in
order to take effective action, was compelled on a capital point to exceed his powers; and if, in the first
transports of joy, his conduct was approved, he was justly called, later on, to account for the blood of
citizens spilt in violation of the laws. Such a reproach could never have been levelled at a dictator. But
the consul's eloquence carried the day; and he himself, Roman though he was, loved his own glory
better than his country, and sought, not so much the most lawful and secure means of saving the State,
as to get for himself the whole honour of having done so.39 He was therefore justly honoured as the
liberator of Rome, and also justly punished as a law-breaker. However brilliant his recall may have
been, it was undoubtedly an act of pardon.
  However this important trust be conferred, it is important that its duration should be fixed at a very
brief period, incapable of being ever prolonged. In the crises which lead to its adoption, the State is
either soon lost, or soon saved; and, the present need passed, the dictatorship becomes either tyrannical
or idle. At Rome, where dictators held office for six months only, most of them abdicated before their
time was up. If their term had been longer, they might well have tried to prolong it still further, as the
decemvirs did when chosen for a year. The dictator had only time to provide against the need that had
caused him to be chosen; he had none to think of further projects.
  7. THE CENSORSHIP
  AS the law is the declaration of the general will, the censorship is the declaration of the public
judgment: public opinion is the form of law which the censor administers, and, like the prince, only
applies to particular cases.
  The censorial tribunal, so far from being the arbiter of the people's opinion, only declares it, and, as
soon as the two part company, its decisions are null and void.
  It is useless to distinguish the morality of a nation from the objects of its esteem; both depend on
the same principle and are necessarily indistinguishable. There is no people on earth the choice of
whose pleasures is not decided by opinion rather than nature. Right men's opinions, and their morality
will purge itself. Men always love what is good or what they find good; it is in judging what is good
that they go wrong. This judgment, therefore, is what must be regulated. He who judges of morality
judges of honour; and he who judges of honour finds his law in opinion.
  The opinions of a people are derived from its constitution; although the law does not regulate
morality, it is legislation that gives it birth. When legislation grows weak, morality degenerates; but in
such cases the judgment of the censors will not do what the force of the laws has failed to effect.
  From this it follows that the censorship may be useful for the preservation of morality, but can
never be so for its restoration. Set up censors while the laws are vigorous; as soon as they have lost
their vigour, all hope is gone; no legitimate power can retain force when the laws have lost it.
  The censorship upholds morality by preventing opinion from growing corrupt, by preserving its
rectitude by means of wise applications, and sometimes even by fixing it when it is still uncertain. The
employment of seconds in duels, which had been carried to wild extremes in the kingdom of France,
was done away with merely by these words in a royal edict: "As for those who are cowards enough to
call upon seconds." This judgment, in anticipating that of the public, suddenly decided it. But when
edicts from the same source tried to pronounce duelling itself an act of cowardice, as indeed it is, then,
since common opinion does not regard it as such, the public took no notice of a decision on a point on
which its mind was already made up.
I have stated elsewhere40 that as public opinion is not subject to any constraint, there need be no
trace of it in the tribunal set up to represent it. It is impossible to admire too much the art with whichthis resource, which we moderns have wholly lost, was employed by the Romans, and still more by the
Lacedæmonians.
  A man of bad morals having made a good proposal in the Spartan Council, the Ephors neglected it,
and caused the same proposal to be made by a virtuous citizen. What an honour for the one, and what a
disgrace for the other, without praise or blame of either! Certain drunkards from Samos41 polluted the
tribunal of the Ephors: the next day, a public edict gave Samians permission to be filthy. An actual
punishment would not have been so severe as such an impunity. When Sparta has pronounced on what
is or is not right, Greece makes no appeal from her judgments.
  8. CIVIL RELIGION
  AT first men had no kings save the gods, and no government save theocracy. They reasoned like
Caligula, and, at that period, reasoned aright. It takes a long time for feeling so to change that men can
make up their minds to take their equals as masters, in the hope that they will profit by doing so.
  From the mere fact that God was set over every political society, it followed that there were as
many  gods  as  peoples.  Two  peoples  that  were  strangers  the  one  to  the  other,  and  almost  always
enemies, could not long recognise the same master: two armies giving battle could not obey the same
leader. National divisions thus led to polytheism, and this in turn gave rise to theological and civil
intolerance, which, as we shall see hereafter, are by nature the same.
  The fancy the Greeks had for rediscovering their gods among the barbarians arose from the way
they had of regarding themselves as the natural Sovereigns of such peoples. But there is nothing so
absurd as the erudition which in our days identifies and confuses gods of different nations. As if
Moloch, Saturn, and Chronos could be the same god! As if the Phoenician Baal, the Greek Zeus, and
the Latin Jupiter could be the same! As if there could still be anything common to imaginary beings
with different names!
  If it is asked how in pagan times, where each State had its cult and its gods, there were no wars of
religion, I answer that it was precisely because each State, having its own cult as well as its own
government, made no distinction between its gods and its laws. Political war was also theological; the
provinces of the gods were, so to speak, fixed by the boundaries of nations. The god of one people had
no right over another. The gods of the pagans were not jealous gods; they shared among themselves the
empire of the world: even Moses and the Hebrews sometimes lent themselves to this view by speaking
of the God of Israel. It is true, they regarded as powerless the gods of the Canaanites, a proscribed
people condemned to destruction, whose place they were to take; but remember how they spoke of the
divisions of the neighbouring peoples they were forbidden to attack! "Is not the possession of what
belongs to your god Chamos lawfully your due?" said Jephthah to the Ammonites. "We have the same
title to the lands our conquering God has made his own."42 Here, I think, there is a recognition that the
rights of Chamos and those of the God of Israel are of the same nature.
  But when the Jews, being subject to the Kings of Babylon, and, subsequently, to those of Syria, still
obstinately refused to recognise any god save their own, their refusal was regarded as rebellion against
their conqueror, and drew down on them the persecutions we read of in their history, which are without
parallel till the coming of Christianity.43
  Every religion, therefore, being attached solely to the laws of the State which prescribed it, there
was no way of converting a people except by enslaving it, and there could be no missionaries save
conquerors. The obligation to change cults being the law to which the vanquished yielded, it was
necessary to be victorious before suggesting such a change. So far from men fighting for the gods, the
gods, as in Homer, fought for men; each asked his god for victory, and repayed him with new altars.
The Romans, before taking a city, summoned its gods to quit it; and, in leaving the Tarentines their
outraged gods, they regarded them as subject to their own and compelled to do them homage. They left
the vanquished their gods as they left them their laws. A wreath to the Jupiter of the Capitol was often
the only tribute they imposed.
  Finally, when, along with their empire, the Romans had spread their cult and their gods, and had
themselves often adopted those of the vanquished, by granting to both alike the rights of the city, thepeoples of that vast empire insensibly found themselves with multitudes of gods and cults, everywhere
almost the same; and thus paganism throughout the known world finally came to be one and the same
religion.
  It was in these circumstances that Jesus came to set up on earth a spiritual kingdom, which, by
separating the theological from the political system, made the State no longer one, and brought about
the internal divisions which have never ceased to trouble Christian peoples. As the new idea of a
kingdom of the other world could never have occurred to pagans, they always looked on the Christians
as really rebels, who, while feigning to submit, were only waiting for the chance to make themselves
independent and their masters, and to usurp by guile the authority they pretended in their weakness to
respect. This was the cause of the persecutions.
  What the pagans had feared took place. Then everything changed its aspect: the humble Christians
changed their language, and soon this so-called kingdom of the other world turned, under a visible
leader, into the most violent of earthly despotisms.
  However, as there have always been a prince and civil laws, this double power and conflict of
jurisdiction have made all good polity impossible in Christian States; and men have never succeeded in
finding out whether they were bound to obey the master or the priest.
  Several peoples, however, even in Europe and its neighbourhood, have desired without success to
preserve or restore the old system: but the spirit of Christianity has everywhere prevailed. The sacred
cult  has  always  remained  or  again  become  independent  of  the  Sovereign,  and  there  has  been  no
necessary link between it and the body of the State. Mahomet held very sane views, and linked his
political system well together; and, as long as the form of his government continued under the caliphs
who succeeded him, that government was indeed one, and so far good. But the Arabs, having grown
prosperous, lettered, civilised, slack and cowardly, were conquered by barbarians: the division between
the two powers began again; and, although it is less apparent among the Mahometans than among the
Christians, it none the less exists, especially in the sect of Ali, and there are States, such as Persia,
where it is continually making itself felt.
  Among us, the Kings of England have made themselves heads of the Church, and the Czars have
done the same: but this title has made them less its masters than its ministers; they have gained not so
much the right to change it, as the power to maintain it: they are not its legislators, but only its princes.
Wherever the clergy is a corporate body,44 it is master and legislator in its own country. There are thus
two powers, two Sovereigns, in England and in Russia, as well as elsewhere.
  Of all Christian writers, the philosopher Hobbes alone has seen the evil and how to remedy it, and
has dared to propose the reunion of the two heads of the eagle, and the restoration throughout of
political unity, without which no State or government will ever be rightly constituted. But he should
have seen that the masterful spirit of Christianity is incompatible with his system, and that the priestly
interest would always be stronger than that of the State. It is not so much what is false and terrible in
his political theory, as what is just and true, that has drawn down hatred on it.45
I believe that if the study of history were developed from this point of view, it would be easy to
refute the contrary opinions of Bayle and Warburton, one of whom holds that religion can be of no use
to the body politic, while the other, on the contrary, maintains that Christianity is its strongest support.
We should demonstrate to the former that no State has ever been founded without a religious basis, and
to  the  latter,  that  the  law  of  Christianity  at  bottom  does  more  harm  by  weakening  than  good  by
strengthening the constitution of the State. To make myself understood, I have only to make a little
more exact the too vague ideas of religion as relating to this subject.
  Religion, considered in relation to society, which is either general or particular, may also be divided
into two kinds: the religion of man, and that of the citizen. The first, which has neither temples, nor
altars,  nor  rites,  and  is  confined  to  the  purely  internal  cult  of  the  supreme  God  and  the  eternal
obligations of morality, is the religion of the Gospel pure and simple, the true theism, what may be
called natural divine right or law. The other, which is codified in a single country, gives it its gods, its
own tutelary patrons; it has its dogmas, its rites, and its external cult prescribed by law; outside thesingle nation that follows it, all the world is in its sight infidel, foreign and barbarous; the duties and
rights of man extend for it only as far as its own altars. Of this kind were all the religions of early
peoples, which we may define as civil or positive divine right or law.
  There is a third sort of religion of a more singular kind, which gives men two codes of legislation,
two rulers, and two countries, renders them subject to contradictory duties, and makes it impossible for
them to be faithful both to religion and to citizenship. Such are the religions of the Lamas and of the
Japanese, and such is Roman Christianity, which may be called the religion of the priest. It leads to a
sort of mixed and anti-social code which has no name.
  In their political aspect, all these three kinds of religion have their defects. The third is so clearly
bad, that it is waste of time to stop to prove it such. All that destroys social unity is worthless; all
institutions that set man in contradiction to himself are worthless.
  The second is good in that it unites the divine cult with love of the laws, and, making country the
object of the citizens' adoration, teaches them that service done to the State is service done to its
tutelary god. It is a form of theocracy, in which there can be no pontiff save the prince, and no priests
save the magistrates. To die for one's country then becomes martyrdom; violation of its laws, impiety;
and to subject one who is guilty to public execration is to condemn him to the anger of the gods: Sacer
estod.
  On the other hand, it is bad in that, being founded on lies and error, it deceives men, makes them
credulous and superstitious, and drowns the true cult of the Divinity in empty ceremonial. It is bad,
again, when it becomes tyrannous and exclusive, and makes a people bloodthirsty and intolerant, so
that it breathes fire and slaughter, and regards as a sacred act the killing of every one who does not
believe in its gods. The result is to place such a people in a natural state of war with all others, so that
its security is deeply endangered.
  There remains therefore the religion of man or Christianity — not the Christianity of to-day, but
that of the Gospel, which is entirely different. By means of this holy, sublime, and real religion all men,
being children of one God, recognise one another as brothers, and the society that unites them is not
dissolved even at death.
  But this religion, having no particular relation to the body politic, leaves the laws in possession of
the force they have in themselves without making any addition to it; and thus one of the great bonds
that unite society considered in severally fails to operate. Nay, more, so far from binding the hearts of
the citizens to the State, it has the effect of taking them away from all earthly things. I know of nothing
more contrary to the social spirit.
  We are told that a people of true Christians would form the most perfect society imaginable. I see in
this supposition only one great difficulty: that a society of true Christians would not be a society of
men.
I say further that such a society, with all its perfection, would be neither the strongest nor the most
lasting: the very fact that it was perfect would rob it of its bond of union; the flaw that would destroy it
would lie in its very perfection.
  Every one would do his duty; the people would be law-abiding, the rulers just and temperate; the
magistrates upright and incorruptible; the soldiers would scorn death; there would be neither vanity nor
luxury. So far, so good; but let us hear more.
  Christianity as a religion is entirely spiritual, occupied solely with heavenly things; the country of
the Christian is not of this world. He does his duty, indeed, but does it with profound indifference to the
good or ill success of his cares. Provided he has nothing to reproach himself with, it matters little to him
whether things go well or ill here on earth. If the State is prosperous, he hardly dares to share in the
public happiness, for fear he may grow proud of his country's glory; if the State is languishing, he
blesses the hand of God that is hard upon His people.
  For the State to be peaceable and for harmony to be maintained, all the citizens without exception
would have to be good Christians; if by ill hap there should be a single self-seeker or hypocrite, a
Catiline  or  a  Cromwell,  for  instance,  he  would  certainly  get  the  better  of  his  pious  compatriots.Christian charity does not readily allow a man to think hardly of his neighbours. As soon as, by some
trick, he has discovered the art of imposing on them and getting hold of a share in the public authority,
you have a man established in dignity; it is the will of God that he be respected: very soon you have a
power; it is God's will that it be obeyed: and if the power is abused by him who wields it, it is the
scourge wherewith God punishes His children. There would be scruples about driving out the usurper:
public tranquillity would have to be disturbed, violence would have to be employed, and blood spilt; all
this accords ill with Christian meekness; and after all, in this vale of sorrows, what does it matter
whether we are free men or serfs? The essential thing is to get to heaven, and resignation is only an
additional means of doing so.
  If war breaks out with another State, the citizens march readily out to battle; not one of them thinks
of flight; they do their duty, but they have no passion for victory; they know better how to die than how
to conquer. What does it matter whether they win or lose? Does not Providence know better than they
what is meet for them? Only think to what account a proud, impetuous and passionate enemy could turn
their stoicism! Set over against them those generous peoples who were devoured by ardent love of
glory and of their country, imagine your Christian republic face to face with Sparta or Rome: the pious
Christians will be beaten, crushed and destroyed, before they know where they are, or will owe their
safety only to the contempt their enemy will conceive for them. It was to my mind a fine oath that was
taken by the soldiers of Fabius, who swore, not to conquer or die, but to come back victorious — and
kept their oath. Christians would never have taken such an oath; they would have looked on it as
tempting God.
  But  I  am  mistaken  in  speaking  of  a  Christian  republic;  the  terms  are  mutually  exclusive.
Christianity preaches only servitude and dependence. Its spirit is so favourable to tyranny that it always
profits by such a régime. True Christians are made to be slaves, and they know it and do not much
mind: this short life counts for too little in their eyes.
I shall be told that Christian troops are excellent. I deny it. Show me an instance. For my part, I
know of no Christian troops. I shall be told of the Crusades. Without disputing the valour of the
Crusaders, I answer that, so far from being Christians, they were the priests' soldiery, citizens of the
Church.  They  fought  for  their  spiritual  country,  which  the  Church  had,  somehow  or  other,  made
temporal. Well understood, this goes back to paganism: as the Gospel sets up no national religion, a
holy war is impossible among Christians.
  Under the pagan emperors, the Christian soldiers were brave; every Christian writer affirms it, and I
believe it: it was a case of honourable emulation of the pagan troops. As soon as the emperors were
Christian, this emulation no longer existed, and, when the Cross had driven out the eagle, Roman
valour wholly disappeared.
  But, setting aside political considerations, let us come back to what is right, and settle our principles
on this important point. The right which the social compact gives the Sovereign over the subjects does
not, we have seen, exceed the limits of public expediency.46 The subjects then owe the Sovereign an
account of their opinions only to such an extent as they matter to the community. Now, it matters very
much to the community that each citizen should have a religion. That will make him love his duty; but
the dogmas of that religion concern the State and its members only so far as they have reference to
morality and to the duties which he who professes them is bound to do to others. Each man may have,
over and above, what opinions he pleases, without it being the Sovereign's business to take cognisance
of them; for, as the Sovereign has no authority in the other world, whatever the lot of its subjects may
be in the life to come, that is not its business, provided they are good citizens in this life.
  There is therefore a purely civil profession of faith of which the Sovereign should fix the articles,
not exactly as religious dogmas, but as social sentiments without which a man cannot be a good citizen
or a faithful subject.47 While it can compel no one to believe them, it can banish from the State
whoever does not believe them — it can banish him, not for impiety, but as an anti-social being,
incapable of truly loving the laws and justice, and of sacrificing, at need, his life to his duty. If any one,
after publicly recognising these dogmas, behaves as if he does not believe them, let him be punished bydeath: he has committed the worst of all crimes, that of lying before the law.
  The dogmas of civil religion ought to be few, simple, and exactly worded, without explanation or
commentary. The existence of a mighty, intelligent and beneficent Divinity, possessed of foresight and
providence, the life to come, the happiness of the just, the punishment of the wicked, the sanctity of the
social contract and the laws: these are its positive dogmas. Its negative dogmas I confine to one,
intolerance, which is a part of the cults we have rejected.
  Those who distinguish civil from theological intolerance are, to my mind, mistaken. The two forms
are inseparable. It is impossible to live at peace with those we regard as damned; to love them would be
to  hate  God  who  punishes  them:  we  positively  must  either  reclaim  or  torment  them.  Wherever
theological intolerance is admitted, it must inevitably have some civil effect;48 and as soon as it has
such an effect, the Sovereign is no longer Sovereign even in the temporal sphere: thenceforce priests
are the real masters, and kings only their ministers.
  Now that there is and can be no longer an exclusive national religion, tolerance should be given to
all religions that tolerate others, so long as their dogmas contain nothing contrary to the duties of
citizenship. But whoever dares to say: Outside the Church is no salvation, ought to be driven from the
State, unless the State is the Church, and the prince the pontiff. Such a dogma is good only in a
theocratic government; in any other, it is fatal. The reason for which Henry IV is said to have embraced
the Roman religion ought to make every honest man leave it, and still more any prince who knows how
to reason.
  9. CONCLUSION
  Now that I have laid down the true principles of political right, and tried to give the State a basis of
its own to rest on, I ought next to strengthen it by its external relations, which would include the law of
nations, commerce, the right of war and conquest, public right, leagues, negotiations, treaties, etc. But
all this forms a new subject that is far too vast for my narrow scope. I ought throughout to have kept to
a more limited sphere.
  NOTES
  1. "Learned inquiries into public right are often only the history of past abuses; and troubling to
study them too deeply is a profitless infatuation" (Essay on the Interests of France in Relation to its
Neighbours, by the Marquis d'Argenson). This is exactly what Grotius has done.
  2. See a short treatise of Plutarch's entitled That Animals Reason.
  3. The Romans, who understood and respected the right of war more than any other nation on earth,
carried their scruples on this head so far that a citizen was not allowed to serve as a volunteer without
engaging himself expressly against the enemy, and against such and such an enemy by name. A legion
in which the younger Cato was seeing his first service under Popilius having been reconstructed, the
elder  Cato  wrote  to  Popilius  that,  if  he  wished  his  son  to  continue  serving  under  him,  he  must
administer to him a new military oath, because, the first having been annulled, he was no longer able to
bear arms against the enemy. The same Cato wrote to his son telling him to take great care not to go
into battle before taking this new oath. I know that the siege of Clusium and other isolated events can
be quoted against me; but I am citing laws and customs. The Romans are the people that least often
transgressed its laws; and no other people has had such good ones.
  4. The real meaning of this word has been almost wholly lost in modern times; most people mistake
a town for a city, and a townsman for a citizen. They do not know that houses make a town, but citizens
a city. The same mistake long ago cost the Carthaginians dear. I have never read of the title of citizens
being given to the subjects of any prince, not even the ancient Macedonians or the English of to-day,
though they are nearer liberty than any one else. The French alone everywhere familiarly adopt the
name of citizens, because, as can be seen from their dictionaries, they have no idea of its meaning;
otherwise they would be guilty in usurping it, of the crime of lèse-majesté: among them, the name
expresses a virtue, and not a right. When Bodin spoke of our citizens and townsmen, he fell into a bad
blunder in taking the one class for the other. M. d'Alembert has avoided the error, and, in his article on
Geneva, has clearly distinguished the four orders of men (or even five, counting mere foreigners) whodwell in our town, of which two only compose the Republic. No other French writer, to my knowledge,
has understood the real meaning of the word citizen.
  5. Under bad governments, this equality is only apparent and illusory: it serves only to-keep the
pauper in his poverty and the rich man in the position he has usurped. In fact, laws are always of use to
those who possess and harmful to those who have nothing: from which it follows that the social state is
advantageous to men only when all have something and none too much.
  6. To be general, a will need not always be unanimous; but every vote must be counted: any
exclusion is a breach of generality.
  7. "Every interest," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "has different principles. The agreement of two
particular interests is formed by opposition to a third." He might have added that the agreement of all
interests is formed by opposition to that of each. If there were no different interests, the common
interest would be barely felt, as it would encounter no obstacle; all would go on of its own accord, and
politics would cease to be an art.
  8. "In fact," says Machiavelli, "there are some divisions that are harmful to a Republic and some
that are advantageous. Those which stir up sects and parties are harmful; those attended by neither are
advantageous. Since, then, the founder of a Republic cannot help enmities arising, he ought at least to
prevent them from growing into sects" (History of Florence, Book vii).
  9. Attentive readers, do not, I pray, be in a hurry to charge me with contradicting myself. The
terminology made it unavoidable, considering the poverty of the language; but wait and see.
  10.  I  understand  by  this  word,  not  merely  an  aristocracy  or  a  democracy,  but  generally  any
government directed by the general will, which is the law. To be legitimate, the government must be,
not one with the Sovereign, but its minister. In such a case even a monarchy is a Republic. This will be
made clearer in the following book.
  11. A people becomes famous only when its legislation begins to decline. We do not know for how
many centuries the system of Lycurgus made the Spartans happy before the rest of Greece took any
notice of it.
  12. Montesquieu, The Greatness and Decadence of the Romans, ch. i.
  13. Those who know Calvin only as a theologian much under-estimate the extent of his genius. The
codification of our wise edicts, in which he played a large part, does him no less honour than his
Institute. Whatever revolution time may bring in our religion, so long as the spirit of patriotism and
liberty still lives among us, the memory of this great man will be for ever blessed.
  14. "In truth," says Machiavelli, "there has never been, in any country, an extraordinary legislator
who has not had recourse to God; for otherwise his laws would not have been accepted: there are, in
fact, many useful truths of which a wise man may have knowledge without their having in themselves
such clear reasons for their being so as to be able to convince others" (Discourses on Livy, Bk. v, ch.
xi).
  15. If there were two neighbouring peoples, one of which could not do without the other, it would
be very hard on the former, and very dangerous for the latter. Every wise nation, in such a case, would
make haste to free the other from dependence. The Republic of Thiascala, enclosed by the Mexican
Empire, preferred doing without salt to buying from the Mexicans, or even getting it from them as a
gift. The Thiascalans were wise enough to see the snare hidden under such liberality. They kept their
freedom, and that little State, shut up in that great Empire, was finally the instrument of its ruin.
  16. If the object is to give the State consistency, bring the two extremes as near to each other as
possible; allow neither rich men nor beggars. These two estates, which are naturally inseparable, are
equally fatal to the common good; from the one come the friends of tyranny, and from the other tyrants.
It is always between them that public liberty is put up to auction; the one buys, and the other sells.
  17. "Any branch of foreign commerce," says M. d'Argenson, "creates on the whole only apparent
advantage for the kingdom in general; it may enrich some individuals, or even some towns; but the
nation as a whole gains nothing by it, and the people is no better off."
  18. Thus at Venice the College, even in the absence of the Doge, is called "Most Serene Prince."  19. The Palatine of Posen, father of the King of Poland, Duke of Lorraine.
  20. I prefer liberty with danger to peace with slavery.
  21.  It  is  clear  that  the  word  optimales  meant,  among  the  ancients,  not  the  best,  but  the  most
powerful.
  22. It is of great importance that the form of the election of magistrates should be regulated by law;
for if it is left at the discretion of the prince, it is impossible to avoid falling into hereditary aristocracy,
as the Republics of Venice and Berne actually did. The first of these has therefore long been a State
dissolved; the second, however, is maintained by the extreme wisdom of the senate, and forms an
honourable and highly dangerous exception.
  23. Machiavelli was a proper man and a good citizen; but, being attached to the court of the Medici,
he could not help veiling his love of liberty in the midst of his country's oppression. The choice of his
detestable hero, Caesar Borgia, clearly enough shows his hidden aim; and the contradiction between the
teaching of the Prince and that of the Discourses on Livy and the History of Florence shows that this
profound political thinker has so far been studied only by superficial or corrupt readers. The Court of
Rome sternly prohibited his book. I can well believe it; for it is that Court it most clearly portrays.
  24. Tacitus, Histories, i. 16. "For the best, and also the shortest way of finding out what is good and
what is bad is to consider what you would have wished to happen or not to happen, had another than
you been Emperor."
  25. In the Statesman.
  26. This does not contradict what I said before (Book II, ch. 9) about the disadvantages of great
States; for we were then dealing with the authority of the government over the members, while here we
are dealing with its force against the subjects. Its scattered members serve it as rallying-points for
action against the people at a distance, but it has no rallying-point for direct action on its members
themselves. Thus the length of the lever is its weakness in the one case, and its strength in the other.
  27. On the same principle it should be judged what centuries deserve the preference for human
prosperity. Those in which letters and arts have flourished have been too much admired, because the
hidden object of their culture has not been fathomed, and their fatal effects not taken into account.
"ldque apud imperitos humanitas vocabatur, cum pars servitutis esset." (Fools called "humanity" what
was a part of slavery, Tacitus, Agricola, 31.) Shall we never see in the maxims books lay down the
vulgar interest that makes their writers speak? No, whatever they may say, when, despite its renown, a
country is depopulated, it is not true that all is well, and it is not enough that a poet should have an
income of 100,000 francs to make his age the best of all. Less attention should be paid to the apparent
repose and tranquillity of the rulers than to the well-being of their nations as wholes, and above all of
the  most  numerous  States.  A  hail-storm  lays  several  cantons  waste,  but  it  rarely  makes  a  famine.
Outbreaks and civil wars give rulers rude shocks, but they are not the real ills of peoples, who may
even get a respite, while there is a dispute as to who shall tyrannise over them. Their true prosperity and
calamities come from their permanent condition: it is when the whole remains crushed beneath the
yoke, that decay sets in, and that the rulers destroy them at will, and "ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem
appellant." (Where they create solitude, they call it peace, Tacitus, Agricola, 31.) When the bickerings
of the great disturbed the kingdom of France, and the Coadjutor of Paris took a dagger in his pocket to
the Parliament, these things did not prevent the people of France from prospering and multiplying in
dignity, ease and freedom. Long ago Greece flourished in the midst of the most savage wars; blood ran
in torrents, and yet the whole country was covered with inhabitants. It appeared, says Machiavelli, that
in the midst of murder, proscription and civil war, our republic only throve: the virtue, morality and
independence of the citizens did more to strengthen it than all their dissensions had done to enfeeble it.
A little disturbance gives the soul elasticity; what makes the race truly prosperous is not so much peace
as liberty.
  28. The slow formation and the progress of the Republic of Venice in its lagoons are a notable
instance  of  this  sequence;  and  it  is  most  astonishing  that,  after  more  than  twelve  hundred  years'
existence, the Venetians seem to be still at the second stage, which they reached with the Serrar diConsiglio in 1198. As for the ancient Dukes who are brought up against them, it is proved, whatever
the Squittinio della libertà veneta may say of them, that they were in no sense sovereigns.
  A case certain to be cited against my view is that of the Roman Republic, which, it will be said,
followed exactly the opposite course, and passed from monarchy to aristocracy and from aristocracy to
democracy. I by no means take this view of it.
  What Romulus first set up was a mixed government, which soon deteriorated into despotism. From
special  causes,  the  State  died  an  untimely  death,  as  new-born  children  sometimes  perish  without
reaching manhood. The expulsion of the Tarquins was the real period of the birth of the Republic. But
at first it took on no constant form, because, by not abolishing the patriciate, it left half its work undone.
For, by this means, hereditary aristocracy, the worst of all legitimate forms of administration, remained
in conflict with democracy, and the form of the government, as Machiavelli has proved, was only fixed
on the establishment of the tribunate: only then was there a true government and a veritable democracy.
In fact, the people was then not only Sovereign, but also magistrate and judge; the senate was only a
subordinate tribunal, to temper and concentrate the government, and the consuls themselves, though
they were patricians, first magistrates, and absolute generals in war, were in Rome itself no more than
presidents of the people.
  From that point, the government followed its natural tendency, and inclined strongly to aristocracy.
The patriciate, we may say, abolished itself, and the aristocracy was found no longer in the body of
patricians as at Venice and Genoa, but in the body of the senate, which was composed of patricians and
plebeians, and even in the body of tribunes when they began to usurp an active function: for names do
not affect facts, and, when the people has rulers who govern for it, whatever name they bear, the
government is an aristocracy.
  The abuse of aristocracy led to the civil wars and the triumvirate. Sulla, Julius Caesar and Augustus
became in fact real monarchs; and finally, under the despotism of Tiberius, the State was dissolved.
Roman history then confirms, instead of invalidating, the principle I have laid down.
  29. "Omnes enim et habentur et dicuntur tyranni, qui potestate utuntur perpetua in ea civitate quæ
libertate usa est" (Cornelius Nepos, Life of Miltiades). (For all those are called and considered tyrants,
who hold perpetual power in a State that has known liberty.) It is true that Aristotle (Ethics, Book viii,
chapter x) distinguishes the tyrant from the king by the fact that the former governs in his own interest,
and the latter only for the good of his subjects; but not only did all Greek authors in general use the
word tyrant in a different sense, as appears most clearly in Xenophon's Hiero, but also it would follow
from Aristotle's distinction that, from the very beginning of the world, there has not yet been a single
king.
  30. In nearly the same sense as this word has in the English Parliament. The similarity of these
functions would have brought the consuls and the tribunes into conflict, even had all jurisdiction been
suspended.
  31. To adopt in cold countries the luxury and effeminacy of the East is to desire to submit to its
chains; it is indeed to bow to them far more inevitably in our case than in theirs.
  32. I had intended to do this in the sequel to this work, when in dealing with external relations I
came to the subject of confederations. The subject is quite new, and its principles have still to be laid
down.
  33. Provided, of course, he does not leave to escape his obligations and avoid having to serve his
country in the hour of need. Flight in such a case would be criminal and punishable, and would be, not
withdrawal, but desertion.
  34. This should of course be understood as applying to a free State; for elsewhere family, goods,
lack of a refuge, necessity, or violence may detain a man in a country against his will; and then his
dwelling there no longer by itself implies his consent to the contract or to its violation.
  35. At Genoa, the word Liberty may be read over the front of the prisons and on the chains of the
galley-slaves. This application of the device is good and just. It is indeed only malefactors of all estates
who prevent the citizen from being free. In the country in which all such men were in the galleys, themost perfect liberty would be enjoyed.
  36. I say "in the Campus Martius" because it was there that the comitia assembled by centuries; in
its two other forms the people assembled in the forum or elsewhere; and then the capite censi had as
much influence and authority as the foremost citizens.
  37. Custodes, diribitores, rogatores suffragiorum.
  38. The nomination was made secretly by night, as if there were something shameful in setting a
man above the laws.
  39. That is what he could not be sure of, if he proposed a dictator; for he dared not nominate
himself, and could not be certain that his colleague would nominate him.
  40. I merely call attention in this chapter to a subject with which I have dealt at greater length in my
Letter to M. d'Alembert.
  41. They were from another island, which the delicacy of our language forbids me to name on this
occasion.
  42. Nonne ea quœ possidet Chamos deus tuus, tibi jure debentur? (Judges, 11:24.) Such is the text
in the Vulgate. Father de Carrières translates: "Do you not regard yourselves as having a right to what
your god possesses?" I do not know the force of the Hebrew text: but I perceive that, in the Vulgate,
Jephthah positively recognises the right of the god Chamos, and that the French translator weakened
this admission by inserting an "according to you," which is not in the Latin.
  43. It is quite clear that the Phocian War, which was called "the Sacred War," was not a war of
religion. Its object was the punishment of acts of sacrilege, and not the conquest of unbelievers.
  44. It should be noted that the clergy find their bond of union not so much in formal assemblies, as
in  the  communion  of  Churches.  Communion  and  excommunication  are  the  social  compact  of  the
clergy,  a  compact  which  will  always  make  them  masters  of  peoples  and  kings.  All  priests  who
communicate together are fellow-citizens, even if they come from opposite ends of the earth. This
invention is a masterpiece of statesmanship: there is nothing like it among pagan priests; who have
therefore never formed a clerical corporate body.
  45. See, for instance, in a letter from Grotius to his brother (April 11, 1643), what that learned man
found to praise and to blame in the De Cive. It is true that, with a bent for indulgence, he seems to
pardon the writer the good for the sake of the bad; but all men are not so forgiving.
  46. "In the republic," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "each man is perfectly free in what does not
harm others." This is the invariable limitation, which it is impossible to define more exactly. I have not
been  able  to  deny  myself  the  pleasure  of  occasionally  quoting  from  this  manuscript,  though  it  is
unknown to the public, in order to do honour to the memory of a good and illustrious man, who had
kept even in the Ministry the heart of a good citizen, and views on the government of his country that
were sane and right.
  47. Cæsar, pleading for Catiline, tried to establish the dogma that the soul is mortal: Cato and
Cicero, in refutation, did not waste time in philosophising. They were content to show that Cæsar spoke
like a bad citizen, and brought forward a doctrine that would have a bad effect on the State. This, in
fact, and not a problem of theology, was what the Roman senate had to judge.
  48. Marriage, for instance, being a civil contract, has civil effects without which society cannot
even subsist. Suppose a body of clergy should claim the sole right of permitting this act, a right which
every intolerant religion must of necessity claim, is it not clear that in establishing the authority of the
Church in this respect, it will be destroying that of the prince, who will have thenceforth only as many
subjects as the clergy choose to allow him? Being in a position to marry or not to marry people
according to their acceptance of such and such a doctrine, their admission or rejection of such and such
a formula, their greater or less piety, the Church alone, by the exercise of prudence and firmness, will
dispose of all inheritances, offices and citizens, and even of the State itself, which could not subsist if it
were composed entirely of bastards? But, I shall be told, there will be appeals on the ground of abuse,
summonses and decrees; the temporalities will be seized. How sad! The clergy, however little, I will
not say courage, but sense it has, will take no notice and go its way: it will quietly allow appeals,summonses, decrees and seizures, and, in the end, will remain the master. It is not, I think, a great
sacrifice to give up a part, when one is sure of securing all.




  THE CONFESSIONS OF JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU
 
  CONTENTS
  Introduction
  Book I
  Book II
  Book III
  Book IV
  Book V
  Book VI
  Book VII
  Book VIII
  Book IX
  Book X
  Book XI
  Book XII
 
    INTRODUCTION.
  Among the notable books of later times-we may say, without exaggeration, of all time--must be
reckoned The Confessions of Jean Jacques Rousseau. It deals with leading personages and transactions
of a momentous epoch, when absolutism and feudalism were rallying for their last struggle against the
modern spirit, chiefly represented by Voltaire, the Encyclopedists, and Rousseau himself--a struggle to
which, after many fierce intestine quarrels and sanguinary wars throughout Europe and America, has
succeeded the prevalence of those more tolerant and rational principles by which the statesmen of our
own day are actuated.
  On these matters, however, it is not our province to enlarge; nor is it necessary to furnish any
detailed account of our author's political, religious, and philosophic axioms and systems, his paradoxes
and his errors in logic: these have been so long and so exhaustively disputed over by contending
factions that little is left for even the most assiduous gleaner in the field. The inquirer will find, in Mr.
John  Money's  excellent  work,  the  opinions  of  Rousseau  reviewed  succinctly  and  impartially.  The
'Contrat  Social',  the  'Lattres  Ecrites  de  la  Montagne',  and  other  treatises  that  once  aroused  fierce
controversy, may therefore be left in the repose to which they have long been consigned, so far as the
mass of mankind is concerned, though they must always form part of the library of the politician and
the historian. One prefers to turn to the man Rousseau as he paints himself in the remarkable work
before us.
  That the task which he undertook in offering to show himself--as Persius puts it--'Intus et in cute', to
posterity, exceeded his powers, is a trite criticism; like all human enterprises, his purpose was only
imperfectly fulfilled; but this circumstance in no way lessens the attractive qualities of his book, not
only for the student of history or psychology, but for the intelligent man of the world. Its startling
frankness gives it a peculiar interest wanting in most other autobiographies.
  Many censors have elected to sit in judgment on the failings of this strangely constituted being, and
some have pronounced upon him very severe sentences. Let it be said once for all that his faults and
mistakes  were  generally  due  to  causes  over  which  he  had  but  little  control,  such  as  a  defective
education,  a  too  acute  sensitiveness,  which  engendered  suspicion  of  his  fellows,  irresolution,  anoverstrained sense of honour and independence, and an obstinate refusal to take advice from those who
really wished to befriend him; nor should it be forgotten that he was afflicted during the greater part of
his life with an incurable disease.
  Lord Byron had a soul near akin to Rousseau's, whose writings naturally made a deep impression
on the poet's mind, and probably had an influence on his conduct and modes of thought: In some
stanzas of 'Childe Harold' this sympathy is expressed with truth and power; especially is the weakness
of the Swiss philosopher's character summed up in the following admirable lines:
  "Here  the  self-torturing  sophist,  wild  Rousseau,  The  apostle  of  affliction,  he  who  threw
Enchantment over passion, and from woe Wrung overwhelming eloquence, first drew The breath which
made him wretched; yet he knew How to make madness beautiful, and cast O'er erring deeds and
thoughts a heavenly hue Of words, like sunbeams, dazzling as they passed The eyes, which o'er them
shed tears feelingly and fast.
  "His life was one long war with self-sought foes, Or friends by him self-banished; for his mind Had
grown Suspicion's sanctuary, and chose, For its own cruel sacrifice, the kind, 'Gainst whom he raged
with fury strange and blind. But he was frenzied,-wherefore, who may know? Since cause might be
which skill could never find; But he was frenzied by disease or woe To that worst pitch of all, which
wears a reasoning show."
  One would rather, however, dwell on the brighter hues of the picture than on its shadows and
blemishes; let us not, then, seek to "draw his frailties from their dread abode." His greatest fault was his
renunciation  of  a  father's  duty  to  his  offspring;  but  this  crime  he  expiated  by  a  long  and  bitter
repentance. We cannot, perhaps, very readily excuse the way in which he has occasionally treated the
memory of his mistress and benefactress. That he loved Madame de Warens--his 'Mamma'--deeply and
sincerely is undeniable, notwithstanding which he now and then dwells on her improvidence and her
feminine indiscretions with an unnecessary and unbecoming lack of delicacy that has an unpleasant
effect on the reader, almost seeming to justify the remark of one of his most lenient critics--that, after
all, Rousseau had the soul of a lackey. He possessed, however, many amiable and charming qualities,
both as a man and a writer, which were evident to those amidst whom he lived, and will be equally so
to the unprejudiced reader of the Confessions. He had a profound sense of justice and a real desire for
the improvement and advancement of the race. Owing to these excellences he was beloved to the last
even by persons whom he tried to repel, looking upon them as members of a band of conspirators, bent
upon destroying his domestic peace and depriving him of the means of subsistence.
  Those of his writings that are most nearly allied in tone and spirit to the 'Confessions' are the
'Reveries d'un Promeneur Solitaire' and 'La Nouvelle Heloise'. His correspondence throws much light
on his life and character, as do also parts of 'Emile'. It is not easy in our day to realize the effect
wrought upon the public mind by the advent of 'La Nouvelle Heloise'. Julie and Saint-Preux became
names to conjure with; their ill-starred amours were everywhere sighed and wept over by the tender-
hearted fair; indeed, in composing this work, Rousseau may be said to have done for Switzerland what
the author of the Waverly Novels did for Scotland, turning its mountains, lakes and islands, formerly
regarded  with  aversion,  into  a  fairyland  peopled  with  creatures  whose  joys  and  sorrows  appealed
irresistibly  to  every  breast.  Shortly  after  its  publication  began  to  flow  that  stream  of  tourists  and
travellers which tends to make Switzerland not only more celebrated but more opulent every year. It, is
one of the few romances written in the epistolary form that do not oppress the reader with a sense of
languor and unreality; for its creator poured into its pages a tide of passion unknown to his frigid and
stilted predecessors, and dared to depict Nature as she really is, not as she was misrepresented by the
modish authors and artists of the age. Some persons seem shy of owning an acquaintance with this
work; indeed, it has been made the butt of ridicule by the disciples of a decadent school. Its faults and
its beauties are on the surface; Rousseau's own estimate is freely expressed at the beginning of the
eleventh  book  of  the  Confessions  and  elsewhere.  It  might  be  wished  that  the  preface  had  been
differently conceived and worded; for the assertion made therein that the book may prove dangerous
has caused it to be inscribed on a sort of Index, and good folk who never read a line of it blush at itsname. Its "sensibility," too, is a little overdone, and has supplied the wits with opportunities for satire;
for example, Canning, in his 'New Morality':
  "Sweet Sensibility, who dwells enshrined In the fine foldins of the feeling mind.... Sweet child of
sickly Fancy!-her of yore From her loved France Rousseau to exile bore; And while 'midst lakes and
mountains wild he ran, Full of himself, and shunned the haunts of man, Taught her o'er each lone vale
and Alpine, steep To lisp the story of his wrongs and weep."
  As might be imagined, Voltaire had slight sympathy with our social reformer's notions and ways of
promulgating them, and accordingly took up his wonted weapons--sarcasm and ridicule--against poor
Jean-Jacques. The quarrels of these two great men cannot be described in this place; but they constitute
an important chapter in the literary and social history of the time. In the work with which we are
immediately concerned, the author seems to avoid frequent mention of Voltaire, even where we should
most expect it. However, the state of his mind when he penned this record of his life should be always
remembered in relation to this as well as other occurrences.
  Rousseau  had  intended  to  bring  his  autobiography  down  to  a  later  date,  but  obvious  causes
prevented this: hence it is believed that a summary of the chief events that marked his closing years will
not be out of place here.
  On quitting the Ile de Saint-Pierre he travelled to Strasbourg, where he was warmly received, and
thence to Paris, arriving in that city on December 16, 1765. The Prince de Conti provided him with a
lodging in the Hotel Saint-Simon, within the precincts of the Temple--a place of sanctuary for those
under the ban of authority. 'Every one was eager to see the illustrious proscript, who complained of
being made a daily show, "like Sancho Panza in his island of Barataria." During his short stay in the
capital there was circulated an ironical letter purporting to come from the Great Frederick, but really
written by Horace Walpole. This cruel, clumsy, and ill-timed joke angered Rousseau, who ascribed it
to, Voltaire. A few sentences may be quoted:
  "My Dear Jean-Jacques,--You have renounced Geneva, your native place. You have caused your
expulsion from Switzerland, a country so extolled in your writings; France has issued a warrant against
you: so do you come to me. My states offer you a peaceful retreat. I wish you well, and will treat you
well, if you will let me. But, if you persist in refusing my help, do not reckon upon my telling any one
that you did so. If you are bent on tormenting your spirit to find new misfortunes, choose whatever you
like best. I am a king, and can procure them for you at your pleasure; and, what will certainly never
happen to you in respect of your enemies, I will cease to persecute you as soon as you cease to take a
pride in being persecuted. Your good friend, "FREDERICK."
  Early in 1766 David Hume persuaded Rousseau to go with him to England, where the exile could
find  a  secure  shelter.  In  London  his  appearance  excited  general  attention.  Edmund  Burke  had  an
interview with him and held that inordinate vanity was the leading trait in his character. Mr. Davenport,
to  whom  he  was  introduced  by  Hume,  generously  offered  Rousseau  a  home  at  Wootton,  in
Staffordshire, near the, Peak Country; the latter, however, would only accept the offer on condition that
he should pay a rent of L 30 a year. He was accorded a pension of L 100 by George III., but declined to
draw after the first annual payment. The climate and scenery of Wootton being similar to those of his
native country, he was at first delighted with his new abode, where he lived with Therese, and devoted
his time to herborising and inditing the first six books of his Confessions. Soon, however, his old
hallucinations acquired strength, and Rousseau convinced himself that enemies were bent upon his
capture, if not his death. In June, 1766, he wrote a violent letter to Hume, calling him "one of the worst
of men." Literary Paris had combined with Hume and the English Government to surround him--as he
supposed --with guards and spies; he revolved in his troubled mind all the reports and rumours he had
heard for months and years; Walpole's forged letter rankled in his bosom; and in the spring of 1767 he
fled; first to Spalding, in Lincolnshire, and subsequently to Calais, where he landed in May.
  On his arrival in France his restless and wandering disposition forced him continually to change his
residence, and acquired for him the title of "Voyageur Perpetuel." While at Trye, in Gisors, in 1767--8,
he wrote the second part of the Confessions. He had assumed the surname of Renou, and about thistime he declared before two witnesses that Therese was his wife--a proceeding to which he attached the
sanctity of marriage. In 1770 he took up his abode in Paris, where he lived continuously for seven
years, in a street which now bears his name, and gained a living by copying music. Bernardin de Saint-
Pierre, the author of 'Paul and Virginia', who became acquainted with him in 1772, has left some
interesting particulars of Rousseau's daily mode of life at this period. Monsieur de Girardin having
offered him an asylum at Ermemonville in the spring of 1778, he and Therese went thither to reside, but
for no long time. On the 3d of July, in the same year, this perturbed spirit at last found rest, stricken by
apoplexy. A rumor that he had committed suicide was circulated, but the evidence of trustworthy
witnesses, including a physician, effectually contradicts this accusation. His remains, first interred in
the  Ile  des  Peupliers,  were,  after  the  Revolution,  removed  to  the  Pantheon.  In  later  times  the
Government of Geneva made some reparation for their harsh treatment of a famous citizen, and erected
his statue, modelled by his compatriot, Pradier, on an island in the Rhone.
  "See nations, slowly wise and meanly just, To buried merit raise the tardy bust."
  November, 1896. S. W. ORSON.
 
  THE CONFESSIONS
  OF
  J. J. ROUSSEAU
  BOOK I.
I have entered upon a performance which is without example, whose accomplishment will have no
imitator. I mean to present my fellow-mortals with a man in all the integrity of nature; and this man
shall be myself.
I know my heart, and have studied mankind; I am not made like any one I have been acquainted
with, perhaps like no one in existence; if not better, I at least claim originality, and whether Nature did
wisely in breaking the mould with which she formed me, can only be determined after having read this
work.
  Whenever the last trumpet shall sound, I will present myself before the sovereign judge with this
book in my hand, and loudly proclaim, thus have I acted; these were my thoughts; such was I. With
equal freedom and veracity have I related what was laudable or wicked, I have concealed no crimes,
added no virtues; and if I have sometimes introduced superfluous ornament, it was merely to occupy a
void occasioned by defect of memory: I may have supposed that certain, which I only knew to be
probable, but have never asserted as truth, a conscious falsehood. Such as I was, I have declared
myself; sometimes vile and despicable, at others, virtuous, generous and sublime; even as thou hast
read my inmost soul: Power eternal! assemble round thy throne an innumerable throng of my fellow-
mortals, let them listen to my confessions, let them blush at my depravity, let them tremble at my
sufferings; let each in his turn expose with equal sincerity the failings, the wanderings of his heart, and,
if he dare, aver, I was better than that man.
I was born at Geneva, in 1712, son of Isaac Rousseau and Susannah Bernard, citizens. My father's
share of a moderate competency, which was divided among fifteen children, being very trivial, his
business of a watchmaker (in which he had the reputation of great ingenuity) was his only dependence.
My mother's circumstances were more affluent; she was daughter of a Mons. Bernard, minister, and
possessed a considerable share of modesty and beauty; indeed, my father found some difficulty in
obtaining her hand.
  The affection they entertained for each other was almost as early as their existence; at eight or nine
years old they walked together every evening on the banks of the Treille, and before they were ten,
could not support the idea of separation. A natural sympathy of soul confined those sentiments of
predilection which habit at first produced; born with minds susceptible of the most exquisite sensibility
and  tenderness,  it  was  only  necessary  to  encounter  similar  dispositions;  that  moment  fortunately
presented itself, and each surrendered a willing heart.
  The obstacles that opposed served only to give a decree of vivacity to their affection, and the younglover, not being able to obtain his mistress, was overwhelmed with sorrow and despair. She advised
him to travel--to forget her. He consented--he travelled, but returned more passionate than ever, and
had the happiness to find her equally constant, equally tender. After this proof of mutual affection, what
could they resolve?--to dedicate their future lives to love! the resolution was ratified with a vow, on
which Heaven shed its benediction.
  Fortunately, my mother's brother, Gabriel Bernard, fell in love with one of my father's sisters; she
had no objection to the match, but made the marriage of his sister with her brother an indispensable
preliminary. Love soon removed every obstacle, and the two weddings were celebrated the same day:
thus my uncle became the husband of my aunt, and their children were doubly cousins german. Before
a year was expired, both had the happiness to become fathers, but were soon after obliged to submit to
a separation.
  My uncle Bernard, who was an engineer, went to serve in the empire and Hungary, under Prince
Eugene, and distinguished himself both at the siege and battle of Belgrade. My father, after the birth of
my only brother, set off, on recommendation, for Constantinople, and was appointed watchmaker to the
Seraglio. During his absence, the beauty, wit, and accomplishments of my mother attracted a number of
admirers,  among  whom  Mons.  de  la  Closure,  Resident  of  France,  was  the  most  assiduous  in  his
attentions.
  [They were too brilliant for her situation, the minister, her father, having bestowed great pains on
her education. She was aught drawing, singing, and to play on the theorbo; had learning, and wrote
very agreeable verses. The following is an extempore piece which she composed in the absence of her
husband and brother, in a conversation with some person relative to them, while walking with her
sister--in--law, and their two children:
  Ces deux messieurs, qui sont absens, Nous sont chers e bien des manieres; Ce sont nos amiss, nos
amans, Ce sont nos maris et nos freres, Et les peres de ces enfans.
  These absent ones, who just claim Our hearts, by every tender name, To whom each wish extends
Our husbands and our brothers are, The fathers of this blooming pair, Our lovers and our friends.]
  His passion must have been extremely violent, since after a period of thirty years I have seen him
affected at the very mention of her name. My mother had a defence more powerful even than her virtue;
she tenderly loved my father, and conjured him to return; his inclination seconding his request, he gave
up every prospect of emolument, and hastened to Geneva.
I was the unfortunate fruit of this return, being born ten months after, in a very weakly and infirm
state; my birth cost my mother her life, and was the first of my misfortunes. I am ignorant how my
father supported her loss at that time, but I know he was ever after inconsolable. In me he still thought
he saw her he so tenderly lamented, but could never forget I had been the innocent cause of his
misfortune, nor did he ever embrace me, but his sighs, the convulsive pressure of his arms, witnessed
that a bitter regret mingled itself with his caresses, though, as may be supposed, they were not on this
account less ardent. When he said to me, "Jean Jacques, let us talk of your mother," my usual reply
was, "Yes, father, but then, you know, we shall cry," and immediately the tears started from his eyes.
"Ah!" exclaimed he, with agitation, "Give me back my wife; at least console me for her loss; fill up,
dear boy, the void she has left in my soul. Could I love thee thus wert thou only my son?" Forty years
after this loss he expired in the arms of his second wife, but the name of the first still vibrated on his
lips, still was her image engraved on his heart.
  Such were the authors of my being: of all the gifts it had pleased Heaven to bestow on them, a
feeling heart was the only one that descended to me; this had been the source of their felicity, it was the
foundation of all my misfortunes.
I came into the world with so few signs of life, that they entertained but little hope of preserving
me, with the seeds of a disorder that has gathered strength with years, and from which I am now
relieved at intervals, only to suffer a different, though more intolerable evil. I owed my preservation to
one of my father's sisters, an amiable and virtuous girl, who took the most tender care of me; she is yet
living, nursing, at the age of four--score, a husband younger than herself, but worn out with excessivedrinking. Dear aunt! I freely forgive your having preserved my life, and only lament that it is not in my
power to bestow on the decline of your days the tender solicitude and care you lavished on the first
dawn of mine. My nurse, Jaqueline, is likewise living: and in good health--the hands that opened my
eyes to the light of this world may close them at my death. We suffer before we think; it is the common
lot of humanity. I experienced more than my proportion of it. I have no knowledge of what passed prior
to my fifth or sixth year; I recollect nothing of learning to read, I only remember what effect the first
considerable  exercise  of  it  produced  on  my  mind;  and  from  that  moment  I  date  an  uninterrupted
knowledge of myself.
  Every night, after supper, we read some part of a small collection of romances which had been my
mother's. My father's design was only to improve me in reading, and he thought these entertaining
works were calculated to give me a fondness for it; but we soon found ourselves so interested in the
adventures they contained, that we alternately read whole nights together, and could not bear to give
over until at the conclusion of a volume. Sometimes, in a morning, on hearing the swallows at our
window, my father, quite ashamed of this weakness, would cry, "Come, come, let us go to bed; I am
more a child than thou art."
I  soon  acquired,  by  this  dangerous  custom,  not  only  an  extreme  facility  in  reading  and
comprehending,  but,  for  my  age,  a  too  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  passions.  An  infinity  of
sensations were familiar to me, without possessing any precise idea of the objects to which they related-
-I had conceived nothing--I had felt the whole. This confused succession of emotions did not retard the
future efforts of my reason, though they added an extravagant, romantic notion of human life, which
experience and reflection have never been able to eradicate.
  My romance reading concluded with the summer of 1719, the following winter was differently
employed. My mother's library being quite exhausted, we had recourse to that part of her father's which
had devolved to us; here we happily found some valuable books, which was by no means extraordinary,
having been selected by a minister that truly deserved that title, in whom learning (which was the rage
of the times) was but a secondary commendation, his taste and good sense being most conspicuous. The
history of the Church and Empire by Le Sueur, Bossuett's Discourses on Universal History, Plutarch's
Lives, the history of Venice by Nani, Ovid's Metamorphoses, La Bruyere, Fontenelle's World, his
Dialogues of the Dead, and a few volumes of Moliere, were soon ranged in my father's closet, where,
during  the  hours  he  was  employed  in  his  business,  I  daily  read  them,  with  an  avidity  and  taste
uncommon, perhaps unprecedented at my age.
  Plutarch presently became my greatest favorite. The satisfaction I derived from repeated readings I
gave this author, extinguished my passion for romances, and I shortly preferred Agesilaus, Brutus, and
Aristides, to Orondates, Artemenes, and Juba. These interesting studies, seconded by the conversations
they frequently occasioned with my father, produced that republican spirit and love of liberty, that
haughty and invincible turn of mind, which rendered me impatient of restraint or servitude, and became
the torment of my life, as I continually found myself in situations incompatible with these sentiments.
Incessantly  occupied  with  Rome  and  Athens,  conversing,  if  I  may  so  express  myself  with  their
illustrious heroes; born the citizen of a republic, of a father whose ruling passion was a love of his
country, I was fired with these examples; could fancy myself a Greek or Roman, and readily give into
the character of the personage whose life I read; transported by the recital of any extraordinary instance
of fortitude or intrepidity, animation flashed from my eyes, and gave my voice additional strength and
energy. One day, at table, while relating the fortitude of Scoevola, they were terrified at seeing me start
from my seat and hold my hand over a hot chafing--dish, to represent more forcibly the action of that
determined Roman.
  My brother, who was seven years older than myself, was brought up to my father's profession. The
extraordinary affection they lavished on me might be the reason he was too much neglected: this
certainly was a fault which cannot be justified. His education and morals suffered by this neglect, and
he acquired the habits of a libertine before he arrived at an age to be really one. My father tried what
effect placing him with a master would produce, but he still persisted in the same ill conduct. Though Isaw him so seldom that it could hardly be said we were acquainted. I loved him tenderly, and believe
he had as strong an affection for me as a youth of his dissipated turn of mind could be supposed capable
of. One day, I remember, when my father was correcting him severely, I threw myself between them,
embracing  my  brother,  whom  I  covered  with  my  body,  receiving  the  strokes  designed  for  him;  I
persisted so obstinately in my protection, that either softened by my cries and tears, or fearing to hurt
me most, his anger subsided, and he pardoned his fault. In the end, my brother's conduct became so bad
that he suddenly disappeared, and we learned some time after that he was in Germany, but he never
wrote to us, and from that day we heard no news of him: thus I became an only son.
  If this poor lad was neglected, it was quite different with his brother, for the children of a king could
not be treated with more attention and tenderness than were bestowed on my infancy, being the darling
of the family; and what is rather uncommon, though treated as a beloved, never a spoiled child; was
never permitted, while under paternal inspection, to play in the street with other children; never had any
occasion to contradict or indulge those fantastical humors which are usually attributed to nature, but are
in reality the effects of an injudicious education. I had the faults common to my age, was talkative, a
glutton, and sometimes a liar, made no scruple of stealing sweetmeats, fruits, or, indeed, any kind of
eatables;  but  never  took  delight  in  mischievous  waste,  in  accusing  others,  or  tormenting  harmless
animals. I recollect, indeed, that one day, while Madam Clot, a neighbor of ours, was gone to church, I
made water in her kettle: the remembrance even now makes me smile, for Madame Clot (though, if you
please, a good sort of creature) was one of the most tedious grumbling old women I ever knew. Thus
have I given a brief, but faithful, history of my childish transgressions.
  How could I become cruel or vicious, when I had before my eyes only examples of mildness, and
was surrounded by some of the best people in the world? My father, my aunt, my nurse, my relations,
our friends, our neighbors, all I had any connection with, did not obey me, it is true, but loved me
tenderly, and I returned their affection. I found so little to excite my desires, and those I had were so
seldom contradicted, that I was hardly sensible of possessing any, and can solemnly aver I was an
absolute stranger to caprice until after I had experienced the authority of a master.
  Those hours that were not employed in reading or writing with my father, or walking with my
governess, Jaqueline, I spent with my aunt; and whether seeing her embroider, or hearing her sing,
whether sitting or standing by her side, I was ever happy. Her tenderness and unaffected gayety, the
charms  of  her  figure  and  countenance  have  left  such  indelible  impressions  on  my  mind,  that  her
manner, look, and attitude are still before my eyes; I recollect a thousand little caressing questions;
could describe her clothes, her head-dress, nor have the two curls of fine black hair which hung on her
temples, according to the mode of that time, escaped my memory.
  Though my taste, or rather passion, for music, did not show itself until a considerable time after, I
am fully persuaded it is to her I am indebted for it. She knew a great number of songs, which she sung
with great sweetness and melody. The serenity and cheerfulness which were conspicuous in this lovely
girl, banished melancholy, and made all round her happy.
  The charms of her voice had such an effect on me, that not only several of her songs have ever
since remained on my memory, but some I have not thought of from my infancy, as I grow old, return
upon my mind with a charm altogether inexpressible. Would any one believe that an old dotard like me,
worn out with care and infirmity, should sometime surprise himself weeping like a child, and in a voice
querulous, and broken by age, muttering out one of those airs which were the favorites of my infancy?
There is one song in particular, whose tune I perfectly recollect, but the words that compose the latter
half of it constantly refuse every effort to recall them, though I have a confused idea of the rhymes. The
beginning, with what I have been able to recollect of the remainder, is as follows:
  Tircis, je n'ose Ecouter ton Chalumeau Sous l'Ormeau; Car on en cause Deja dans notre hameau. ---
- ---- ------- ------ --- un Berger s'engager sans danger, Et toujours l'epine est sons la rose.
I have endeavored to account for the invincible charm my heart feels on the recollection of this
fragment, but it is altogether inexplicable. I only know, that before I get to the end of it, I always find
my voice interrupted by tenderness, and my eyes suffused with tears. I have a hundred times formed theresolution of writing to Paris for the remainder of these words, if any one should chance to know them:
but I am almost certain the pleasure I take in the recollection would be greatly diminished was I assured
any one but my poor aunt Susan had sung them.
  Such were my affections on entering this life. Thus began to form and demonstrate itself, a heart, at
once haughty and tender, a character effeminate, yet invincible; which, fluctuating between weakness
and courage, luxury and virtue, has ever set me in contradiction to myself; causing abstinence and
enjoyment, pleasure and prudence, equally to shun me.
  This course of education was interrupted by an accident, whose consequences influenced the rest of
my life. My father had a quarrel with M. G----, who had a captain's commission in France, and was
related to several of the Council. This G----, who was an insolent, ungenerous man, happening to bleed
at the nose, in order to be revenged, accused my father of having drawn his sword on him in the city,
and in consequence of this charge they were about to conduct him to prison. He insisted (according to
the law of this republic) that the accuser should be confined at the same time; and not being able to
obtain this, preferred a voluntary banishment for the remainder of his life, to giving up a point by which
he must sacrifice his honor and liberty.
I  remained  under  the  tuition  of  my  uncle  Bernard,  who  was  at  that  time  employed  in  the
fortifications of Geneva. He had lost his eldest daughter, but had a son about my own age, and we were
sent together to Bossey, to board with the Minister Lambercier. Here we were to learn Latin, with all
the insignificant trash that has obtained the name of education.
  Two years spent in this village softened, in some degree, my Roman fierceness, and again reduced
me to a state of childhood. At Geneva, where nothing was exacted, I loved reading, which was, indeed,
my principal amusement; but, at Bossey, where application was expected, I was fond of play as a
relaxation. The country was so new, so charming in my idea, that it seemed impossible to find satiety in
its enjoyments, and I conceived a passion for rural life, which time has not been able to extinguish; nor
have I ever ceased to regret the pure and tranquil pleasures I enjoyed at this place in my childhood; the
remembrance having followed me through every age, even to that in which I am hastening again
towards it.
  M. Lambercier was a worthy, sensible man, who, without neglecting our instruction, never made
our acquisitions burthensome, or tasks tedious. What convinces me of the rectitude of his method is,
that notwithstanding my extreme aversion to restraint, the recollection of my studies is never attended
with disgust; and, if my improvement was trivial, it was obtained with ease, and has never escaped
memory.
  The simplicity of this rural life was of infinite advantage in opening my heart to the reception of
true friendship. The sentiments I had hitherto formed on this subject were extremely elevated, but
altogether imaginary. The habit of living in this peaceful manner soon united me tenderly to my cousin
Bernard; my affection was more ardent than that I had felt for my brother, nor has time ever been able
to efface it. He was a tall, lank, weakly boy, with a mind as mild as his body was feeble, and who did
not wrong the good opinion they were disposed to entertain for the son of my guardian. Our studies,
amusements, and tasks, were the same; we were alone; each wanted a playmate; to separate would in
some measure, have been to annihilate us. Though we had not many opportunities of demonstrating our
attachment to each other, it was certainly extreme; and so far from enduring the thought of separation,
we could not even form an idea that we should ever be able to submit to it. Each of a disposition to be
won by kindness, and complaisant, when not soured by contradiction, we agreed in every particular. If,
by the favor of those who governed us he had the ascendant while in their presence, I was sure to
acquire it when we were alone, and this preserved the equilibrium so necessary in friendship. If he
hesitated in repeating his task, I prompted him; when my exercises were finished, I helped to write his;
and, in our amusements, my disposition being most active, ever had the lead. In a word, our characters
accorded so well, and the friendship that subsisted between us was so cordial, that during the five years
we were at Bossey and Geneva we were inseparable: we often fought, it is true, but there never was any
occasion to separate us. No one of our quarrels lasted more than a quarter of an hour, and never in ourlives did we make any complaint of each other. It may be said, these remarks are frivolous; but,
perhaps, a similiar example among children can hardly be produced.
  The manner in which I passed my time at Bossey was so agreeable to my disposition, that it only
required  a  longer  duration  absolutely  to  have  fixed  my  character,  which  would  have  had  only
peaceable, affectionate, benevolent sentiments for its basis. I believe no individual of our kind ever
possessed less natural vanity than myself. At intervals, by an extraordinary effort, I arrived at sublime
ideas, but presently sunk again into my original languor. To be loved by every one who knew me was
my most ardent wish. I was naturally mild, my cousin was equally so, and those who had the care of us
were of similiar dispositions. Everything contributed to strengthen those propensities which nature had
implanted in my breast, and during the two years I was neither the victim nor witness of any violent
emotions.
I knew nothing so delightful as to see every one content, not only with me, but all that concerned
them. When repeating our catechism at church, nothing could give me greater vexation, on being
obliged to hesitate, than to see Miss Lambercier's countenance express disapprobation and uneasiness.
This alone was more afflicting to me than the shame of faltering before so many witnesses, which,
notwithstanding, was sufficiently painful; for though not oversolicitous of praise, I was feelingly alive
to shame; yet I can truly affirm, the dread of being reprimanded by Miss Lambercier alarmed me less
than the thought of making her uneasy.
  Neither she nor her brother were deficient in a reasonable severity, but as this was scarce ever
exerted without just cause, I was more afflicted at their disapprobation than the punishment. Certainly
the method of treating youth would be altered if the distant effects, this indiscriminate, and frequently
indiscreet method produces, were more conspicuous. I would willingly excuse myself from a further
explanation, did not the lesson this example conveys (which points out an evil as frequent as it is
pernicious) forbid my silence.
  As Miss Lambercier felt a mother's affection, she sometimes exerted a mother's authority, even to
inflicting on us when we deserved it, the punishment of infants. She had often threatened it, and this
threat of a treatment entirely new, appeared to me extremely dreadful; but I found the reality much less
terrible than the idea, and what is still more unaccountable, this punishment increased my affection for
the person who had inflicted it. All this affection, aided by my natural mildness, was scarcely sufficient
to prevent my seeking, by fresh offences, a return of the same chastisement; for a degree of sensuality
had mingled with the smart and shame, which left more desire than fear of a repetition. I was well
convinced the same discipline from her brother would have produced a quite contrary effect; but from a
man of his disposition this was not probable, and if I abstained from meriting correction it was merely
from a fear of offending Miss Lambercier, for benevolence, aided by the passions, has ever maintained
an empire over me which has given law to my heart.
  This event, which, though desirable, I had not endeavored to accelerate, arrived without my fault; I
should say, without my seeking; and I profited by it with a safe conscience; but this second, was also
the last time, for Miss Lambercier, who doubtless had some reason to imagine this chastisement did not
produce the desired effect, declared it was too fatiguing, and that she renounced it for the future. Till
now we had slept in her chamber, and during the winter, even in her bed; but two days after another
room was prepared for us, and from that moment I had the honor (which I could very well have
dispensed with) of being treated by her as a great boy.
  Who would believe this childish discipline, received at eight years old, from the hands of a woman
of thirty, should influence my propensities, my desires, my passions, for the rest of my life, and that in
quite a contrary sense from what might naturally have been expected? The very incident that inflamed
my  senses,  gave  my  desires  such  an  extraordinary  turn,  that,  confined  to  what  I  had  already
experienced,  I  sought  no  further,  and,  with  blood  boiling  with  sensuality,  almost  from  my  birth,
preserved  my  purity  beyond  the  age  when  the  coldest  constitutions  lose  their  insensibility;  long
tormented, without knowing by what, I gazed on every handsome woman with delight; imagination
incessantly  brought  their  charms  to  my  remembrance,  only  to  transform  them  into  so  many  MissLamberciers.
  If ever education was perfectly chaste, it was certainly that I received; my three aunts were not only
of exemplary prudence, but maintained a degree of modest reserve which women have long since
thought unnecessary. My father, it is true, loved pleasure, but his gallantry was rather of the last than
the present century, and he never expressed his affection for any woman he regarded in terms a virgin
could have blushed at; indeed, it was impossible more attention should be paid to that regard we owe
the morals of children than was uniformly observed by every one I had any concern with. An equal
degree of reserve in this particular was observed at M. Lambercier's, where a good maid-servant was
discharged for having once made use of an expression before us which was thought to contain some
degree of indelicacy. I had no precise idea of the ultimate effect of the passions, but the conception I
had formed was extremely disgusting; I entertained a particular aversion for courtesans, nor could I
look on a rake without a degree of disdain mingled with terror.
  These prejudices of education, proper in themselves to retard the first explosions of a combustible
constitution, were strengthened, as I have already hinted, by the effect the first moments of sensuality
produced in me, for notwithstanding the troublesome ebullition of my blood, I was satisfied with the
species of voluptuousness I had already been acquainted with, and sought no further.
  Thus I passed the age of puberty, with a constitution extremely ardent, without knowing or even
wishing for any other gratification of the passions than what Miss Lambercier had innocently given me
an idea of; and when I became a man, that childish taste, instead of vanishing, only associated with the
other. This folly, joined to a natural timidity, has always prevented my being very enterprising with
women, so that I have passed my days in languishing in silence for those I most admired, without
daring to disclose my wishes.
  To fall at the feet of an imperious mistress, obey her mandates, or implore pardon, were for me the
most exquisite enjoyments, and the more my blood was inflamed by the efforts of a lively imagination
the more I acquired the appearance of a whining lover.
  It will be readily conceived that this mode of making love is not attended with a rapid progress or
imminent danger to the virtue of its object; yet, though I have few favors to boast of, I have not been
excluded from enjoyment, however imaginary. Thus the senses, in concurrence with a mind equally
timid and romantic, have preserved my moral chaste, and feelings uncorrupted, with precisely the same
inclinations, which, seconded with a moderate portion of effrontery, might have plunged me into the
most unwarrantable excesses.
I have made the first, most difficult step, in the obscure and painful maze of my Confessions. We
never feel so great a degree of repugnance in divulging what is really criminal, as what is merely
ridiculous. I am now assured of my resolution, for after what I have dared disclose, nothing can have
power to deter me. The difficulty attending these acknowledgments will be readily conceived, when I
declare, that during the whole of my life, though frequently laboring under the most violent agitation,
being hurried away with the impetuosity of a passion which (when in company with those I loved)
deprived me of the faculty of sight and hearing, I could never, in the course of the most unbounded
familiarity, acquire sufficient resolution to declare my folly, and implore the only favor that remained
to bestow.
  In  thus  investigating  the  first  traces  of  my  sensible  existence,  I  find  elements,  which,  though
seemingly incompatible, have united to produce a simple and uniform effect; while others, apparently
the same, have, by the concurrence of certain circumstances, formed such different combinations, that it
would never be imagined they had any affinity; who would believe, for example, that one of the most
vigorous springs of my soul was tempered in the identical source from whence luxury and ease mingled
with my constitution and circulated in my veins? Before I quit this subject, I will add a striking instance
of the different effects they produced.
  One day, while I was studying in a chamber contiguous to the kitchen, the maid set some of Miss
Lambercier's combs to dry by the fire, and on coming to fetch them some time after, was surprised to
find the teeth of one of them broken off. Who could be suspected of this mischief? No one but myselfhad  entered  the  room:  I  was  questioned,  but  denied  having  any  knowledge  of  it.  Mr.  and  Miss
Lambercier consult, exhort, threaten, but all to no purpose; I obstinately persist in the denial; and,
though this was the first time I had been detected in a confirmed falsehood, appearances were so strong
that they overthrew all my protestations. This affair was thought serious; the mischief, the lie, the
obstinacy, were considered equally deserving of punishment, which was not now to be administered by
Miss Lambercier. My uncle Bernard was written to; he arrived; and my poor cousin being charged with
a crime no less serious, we were conducted to the same execution, which was inflicted with great
severity. If finding a remedy in the evil itself, they had sought ever to allay my depraved desires, they
could not have chosen a shorter method to accomplish their designs, and, I can assure my readers, I was
for a long time freed from the dominion of them.
  As this severity could not draw from me the expected acknowledgment, which obstinacy brought
on several repetitions, and reduced me to a deplorable situation, yet I was immovable, and resolutely
determined to suffer death rather than submit. Force, at length, was obliged to yield to the diabolical
infatuation of a child, for no better name was bestowed on my constancy, and I came out of this
dreadful trial, torn, it is true, but triumphant. Fifty years have expired since this adventure--the fear of
punishment is no more. Well, then, I aver, in the face of Heaven, I was absolutely innocent: and, so far
from breaking, or even touching the comb, never came near the fire. It will be asked, how did this
mischief happen? I can form no conception of it, I only know my own innocence.
  Let  any  one  figure  to  himself  a  character  whose  leading  traits  were  docility  and  timidity,  but
haughty, ardent, and invincible, in its passions; a child, hitherto governed by the voice of reason,
treated with mildness, equity, and complaisance, who could not even support the idea of injustice,
experiencing, for the first time, so violent an instance of it, inflicted by those he most loved and
respected. What perversion of ideas! What confusion in the heart, the brain, in all my little being,
intelligent and moral!--let any one, I say, if possible, imagine all this, for I am incapable of giving the
least idea of what passed in my mind at that period.
  My reason was not sufficiently established to enable me to put myself in the place of others, and
judge  how  much  appearances  condemned  me,  I  only  beheld  the  rigor  of  a  dreadful  chastisement,
inflicted for a crime I had not committed; yet I can truly affirm, the smart I suffered, though violent,
was inconsiderable compared to what I felt from indignation, rage, and despair. My cousin, who was
almost  in  similar  circumstances,  having  been  punished  for  an  involuntary  fault  as  guilty  of  a
premediated crime, became furious by my example. Both in the same bed, we embraced each other
with convulsive transport; we were almost suffocated; and when our young hearts found sufficient
relief to breathe out our indigination, we sat up in the bed, and with all our force, repeated a hundred
times, Carnifex! Carnifex! Carnifex! executioner, tormentor.
  Even while I write this I feel my pulse quicken, and should I live a hundred thousand years, the
agitation  of  that  moment  would  still  be  fresh  in  my  memory.  The  first  instance  of  violence  and
oppression is so deeply engraved on my soul, that every relative idea renews my emotion: the sentiment
of indignation, which in its origin had reference only to myself, has acquired such strength, and is at
present so completely detached from personal motives, that my heart is as much inflamed at the sight or
relation of any act of injustice (whatever may be the object, or wheresoever it may be perpetrated) as if
I was the immediate sufferer. When I read the history of a merciless tyrant, or the dark and the subtle
machination of a knavish designing priest, I could on the instant set off to stab the miscreants, though I
was certain to perish in the attempt.
I have frequently fatigued myself by running after and stoning a cock, a cow, a dog, or any animal I
saw tormenting another, only because it was conscious of possessing superior strength. This may be
natural to me, and I am inclined to believe it is, though the lively impression of the first injustice I
became the victim of was too long and too powerfully remembered not to have added considerable
force to it.
  This  occurrence  terminated  my  infantine  serenity;  from  that  moment  I  ceased  to  enjoy  a  pure
unadulterated happiness, and on a retrospection of the pleasure of my childhood, I yet feel they endedhere. We continue at Bossey some months after this event, but were like our first parents in the Garden
of Eden after they had lost their innocence; in appearance our situation was the same, in effect it was
totally different.
  Affection, respect; intimacy, confidence, no longer attached the pupils to their guides; we beheld
them  no  longer  as  divinities,  who  could  read  the  secrets  of  our  hearts;  we  were  less  ashamed  of
committing faults, more afraid of being accused of them: we learned to dissemble, to rebel, to lie: all
the vices common to our years began to corrupt our happy innocence, mingle with our sports, and
embitter our amusements. The country itself, losing those sweet and simple charms which captivate the
heart, appeared a gloomy desert, or covered with a veil that concealed its beauties. We cultivated our
little gardens no more: our flowers were neglected. We no longer scratched away the mould, and broke
out into exclamations of delight, on discovering that the grain we had sown began to shoot. We were
disgusted with our situation; our preceptors were weary of us. In a word, my uncle wrote for our return,
and we left Mr. and Miss Lambercier without feeling any regret at the separation.
  Near thirty years passed away from my leaving Bossey, without once recalling the place to my
mind with any degree of satisfaction; but after having passed the prime of life, as I decline into old age
(while more recent occurrences are wearing out apace) I feel these remembrances revive and imprint
themselves on my heart, with a force and charm that every day acquires fresh strength; as if, feeling life
fleet from me, I endeavored to catch it again by its commencement. The most trifling incident of those
happy days delight me, for no other reason than being of those days. I recall every circumstance of
time, place, and persons; I see the maid or footman busy in the chamber, a swallow entering the
window,  a  fly  settling  on  my  hand  while  repeating  my  lessons.  I  see  the  whole  economy  of  the
apartment;  on  the  right  hand  Mr.  Lambercier's  closet,  with  a  print  representing  all  the  popes,  a
barometer, a large almanac, the windows of the house (which stood in a hollow at the bottom of the
garden) shaded by raspberry shrubs, whose shoots sometimes found entrance; I am sensible the reader
has no occasion to know all this, but I feel a kind of necessity for relating it. Why am I not permitted to
recount all the little anecdotes of that thrice happy age, at the recollection of whose joys I ever tremble
with delight? Five or six particularly--let us compromise the matter--I will give up five, but then I must
have one, and only one, provided I may draw it out to its utmost length, in order to prolong my
satisfaction.
  If I only sought yours, I should choose that of Miss Lambercier's backside, which by an unlucky fall
at the bottom of the meadow, was exposed to the view of the King of Sardinia, who happened to be
passing by; but that of the walnut tree on the terrace is more amusing to me, since here I was an actor,
whereas, in the abovementioned scene I was only a spectator; and I must confess I see nothing that
should occasion risibility in an accident, which, however laughable in itself, alarmed me for a person I
loved as a mother, or perhaps something more.
  Ye curious readers, whose expectations are already on the stretch for the noble history of the
terrace, listen to the tragedy, and abstain from trembling, if you can, at the horrible catastrophe!
  At the outside of the courtyard door, on the left hand, was a terrace; here they often sat after dinner;
but it was subject to one inconvenience, being too much exposed to the rays of the sun; to obviate this
defect, Mr. Lambercier had a walnut tree set there, the planting of which was attended with great
solemnity. The two boarders were godfathers, and while the earth was replacing round the root, each
held the tree with one hand, singing songs of triumph. In order to water it with more effect, they formed
a kind of luson around its foot: myself and cousin, who were every day ardent spectators of this
watering, confirmed each other in the very natural idea that it was nobler to plant trees on the terrace
than colors on a breach, and this glory we were resolved to procure without dividing it with any one.
  In pursuance of this resolution, we cut a slip off a willow, and planted it on the terrace, at about
eight or ten feet distance from the august walnut tree. We did not forget to make a hollow round it, but
the difficulty was how to procure a supply of water, which was brought from a considerable distance,
and we not permitted to fetch it: but water was absolutely necessary for our willow, and we made use of
every stratagem to obtain it.  For a few days everything succeeded so well that it began to bud, and throw out small leaves, which
we hourly measured convinced (tho' now scarce a foot from the ground) it would soon afford us a
refreshing shade. This unfortunate willow, by engrossing our whole time, rendered us incapable of
application to any other study, and the cause of our inattention not being known, we were kept closer
than before. The fatal moment approached when water must fail, and we were already afflicted with the
idea that our tree must perish with drought. At length necessity, the parent of industry, suggested an
invention, by which we might save our tree from death, and ourselves from despair; it was to make a
furrow underground, which would privately conduct a part of the water from the walnut tree to our
willow. This undertaking was executed with ardor, but did not immediately succeed--our descent was
not skilfully planned--the water did not run, the earth falling in and stopping up the furrow; yet, though
all went contrary, nothing discouraged us, 'omnia vincit labor improbus'. We made the bason deeper, to
give the water a more sensible descent; we cut the bottom of a box into narrow planks; increased the
channel from the walnut tree to our willow and laying a row flat at the bottom, set two others inclining
towards each other, so as to form a triangular channel; we formed a kind of grating with small sticks at
the end next the walnut tree, to prevent the earth and stones from stopping it up, and having carefully
covered  our  work  with  well--trodden  earth,  in  a  transport  of  hope  and  fear  attended  the  hour  of
watering. After an interval, which seemed an age of expectation, this hour arrived. Mr. Lambercier, as
usual, assisted at the operation; we contrived to get between him and our tree, towards which he
fortunately turned his back. They no sooner began to pour the first pail of water, than we perceived it
running to the willow; this sight was too much for our prudence, and we involuntarily expressed our
transport by a shout of joy. The sudden exclamation made Mr. Lambercier turn about, though at that
instant he was delighted to observe how greedily the earth, which surrounded the root of his walnut
tree, imbibed the water. Surprised at seeing two trenches partake of it, he shouted in his turn, examines,
perceives the roguery, and, sending instantly for a pick axe, at one fatal blow makes two or three of our
planks fly, crying out meantime with all his strength, an aqueduct! an aqueduct! His strokes redoubled,
every one of which made an impression on our hearts; in a moment the planks, the channel, the bason,
even our favorite willow, all were ploughed up, nor was one word pronounced during this terrible
transaction, except the above mentioned exclamation. An aqueduct! repeated he, while destroying all
our hopes, an aqueduct! an aqueduct!
  It maybe supposed this adventure had a still more melancholy end for the young architects; this,
however, was not the case; the affair ended here. Mr. Lambercier never reproached us on this account,
nor was his countenance clouded with a frown; we even heard him mention the circumstance to his
sister with loud bursts of laughter. The laugh of Mr. Lambercier might be heard to a considerable
distance. But what is still more surprising after the first transport of sorrow had subsided, we did not
find ourselves violently afflicted; we planted a tree in another spot, and frequently recollected the
catastrophe of the former, repeating with a significant emphasis, an aqueduct! an aqueduct! Till then, at
intervals, I had fits of ambition, and could fancy myself Brutus or Aristides, but this was the first visible
effect of my vanity. To have constructed an aqueduct with our own hands, to have set a slip of willow
in  competition  with  a  flourishing  tree,  appeared  to  me  a  supreme  degree  of  glory!  I  had  a  juster
conception of it at ten than Caesar entertained at thirty.
  The idea of this walnut tree, with the little anecdotes it gave rise to, have so well continued, or
returned to my memory, that the design which conveyed the most pleasing sensations, during my
journey  to  Geneva,  in  the  year  1754,  was  visiting  Bossey,  and  reviewing  the  monuments  of  my
infantine amusement, above all, the beloved walnut tree, whose age at that time must have been verging
on a third of a century, but I was so beset with company that I could not find a moment to accomplish
my design. There is little appearance now of the occasion being renewed; but should I ever return to
that charming spot, and find my favorite walnut tree still existing, I am convinced I should water it with
my tears.
  On my return to Geneva, I passed two or three years at my uncle's, expecting the determination of
my  friends  respecting  my  future  establishment.  His  own  son  being  devoted  to  genius,  was  taughtdrawing, and instructed by his father in the elements of Euclid; I partook of these instructions, but was
principally fond of drawing. Meantime, they were irresolute, whether to make me a watchmaker, a
lawyer, or a minister. I should have preferred being a minister, as I thought it must be a charming thing
to preach, but the trifling income which had been my mother's, and was to be divided between my
brother and myself, was too inconsiderable to defray the expense attending the prosecution of my
studies. As my age did not render the choice very pressing, I remained with my uncle, passing my time
with very little improvement, and paying pretty dear, though not unreasonably, for my board.
  My uncle, like my father, was a man of pleasure, but had not learned, like him, to abridge his
amusements for the sake of instructing his family, consequently our education was neglected. My aunt
was a devotee, who loved singing psalms better than thinking of our improvement, so that we were left
entirely to ourselves, which liberty we never abused.
  Ever inseparable, we were all the world to each other; and, feeling no inclination to frequent the
company of a number of disorderly lads of our own age, we learned none of those habits of libertinism
to which our idle life exposed us. Perhaps I am wrong in charging myself and cousin with idleness at
this time, for, in our lives, we were never less so; and what was extremely fortunate, so incessantly
occupied with our amusements, that we found no temptation to spend any part of our time in the streets.
We  made  cages,  pipes,  kites,  drums,  houses,  ships,  and  bows;  spoiled  the  tools  of  my  good  old
grandfather by endeavoring to make watches in imitation of him; but our favorite amusement was
wasting paper, in drawing, washing, coloring, etc. There came an Italian mountebank to Geneva, called
Gamber-Corta, who had an exhibition of puppets, that he made play a kind of comedy. We went once
to see them, but could not spare time to go again, being busily employed in making puppets of our own
and inventing comedies, which we immediately set about making them perform, mimicking to the best
of our abilities the uncouth voice of Punch; and, to complete the business, my good aunt and uncle
Bernard had the patience to see and listen to our imitations; but my uncle, having one day read an
elaborate discourse to his family, we instantly gave up our comedies, and began composing sermons.
  These details, I confess, are not very amusing, but they serve to demonstrate that the former part of
our education was well directed, since being, at such an early age, the absolute masters of our time, we
found no inclination to abuse it; and so little in want of other companions, that we constantly neglected
every occasion of seeking them. When taking our walks together, we observed their diversions without
feeling any inclination to partake of them. Friendship so entirely occupied our hearts, that, pleased with
each other's company the simplest pastimes were sufficient to delight us.
  We were soon remarked for being thus inseparable: and what rendered us more conspicuous, my
cousin was very tall, myself extremely short, so that we exhibited a very whimsical contrast. This
meagre  figure,  small,  sallow  countenance,  heavy  air,  and  supine  gait,  excited  the  ridicule  of  the
children, who, in the gibberish of the country, nicknamed him 'Barna Bredanna'; and we no sooner got
out of doors than our ears were assailed with a repetition of "Barna Bredanna." He bore this indignity
with tolerable patience, but I was instantly for fighting. This was what the young rogues aimed at. I
engaged accordingly, and was beat. My poor cousin did all in his power to assist me, but he was weak,
and a single stroke brought him to the ground. I then became furious, and received several smart blows,
some of which were aimed at 'Barna Bredanna'. This quarrel so far increased the evil, that, to avoid
their insults, we could only show ourselves in the streets while they were employed at school.
I had already become a redresser of grievances; there only wanted a lady in the way to be a knight-
errant in form. This defect was soon supplied; I presently had two. I frequently went to see my father at
Nion, a small city in the Vaudois country, where he was now settled. Being universally respected, the
affection entertained for him extended to me: and, during my visits, the question seemed to be, who
should show me most kindness. A Madame de Vulson, in particular, loaded me with caresses; and, to
complete all, her daughter made me her gallant. I need not explain what kind of gallant a boy of eleven
must be to a girl of two and twenty; the artful hussies know how to set these puppets up in front, to
conceal more serious engagements. On my part I saw no inequality between myself and Miss Vulson,
was flattered by the circumstance, and went into it with my whole heart, or rather my whole head, forthis passion certainly reached no further, though it transported me almost to madness, and frequently
produced scenes sufficient to make even a cynic expire with laughter.
I  have  experienced  two  kinds  of  love,  equally  real,  which  have  scarce  any  affinity,  yet  each
differing materially from tender friendship. My whole life has been divided between these affections,
and I have frequently felt the power of both at the same instant. For example, at the very time I so
publically  and  tyrannically  claimed  Miss  Vulson,  that  I  could  not  suffer  any  other  of  my  sex  to
approach her, I had short, but passionate, assignations with a Miss Goton, who thought proper to act the
schoolmistress with me. Our meetings, though absolutely childish, afforded me the height of happiness.
I felt the whole charm of mystery, and repaid Miss Vulson in kind, when she least expected it, the use
she made of me in concealing her amours. To my great mortification, this secret was soon discovered,
and I presently lost my young schoolmistress.
  Miss Goton was, in fact, a singular personage. She was not handsome, yet there was a certain
something in her figure which could not easily be forgotten, and this for an old fool, I am too often
convinced of. Her eyes, in particular, neither corresponded with her age, her height, nor her manner;
she had a lofty imposing air, which agreed extremely well with the character she assumed, but the most
extraordinary  part  of  her  composition  was  a  mixture  of  forwardness  and  reserve  difficult  to  be
conceived; and while she took the greatest liberties with me, would never permit any to be taken with
her in return, treating me precisely like a child. This makes me suppose she had either ceased herself to
be one, or was yet sufficiently so to behold us play the danger to which this folly exposed her.
I was so absolutely in the power of both these mistresses, that when in the presence of either, I
never thought of her who was absent; in other respects, the effects they produced on me bore no
affinity. I could have passed my whole life with Miss Vulson, without forming a wish to quit her; but
then,  my  satisfaction  was  attended  with  a  pleasing  serenity;  and,  in  numerous  companies,  I  was
particularly charmed with her. The sprightly sallies of her wit, the arch glance of her eye, even jealousy
itself, strengthened my attachment, and I triumphed in the preference she seemed to bestow on me,
while addressed by more powerful rivals; applause, encouragement, and smiles, gave animation to my
happiness.  Surrounded  by  a  throng  of  observers,  I  felt  the  whole  force  of  love--I  was  passionate,
transported; in a tete-a-tete, I should have been constrained, thoughtful, perhaps unhappy. If Miss
Vulson was ill, I suffered with her; would willingly have given up my own health to establish hers (and,
observe I knew the want of it from experience); if absent, she employed my thoughts, I felt the want of
her; when present, her caresses came with warmth and rapture to my heart, though my senses were
unaffected. The familiarities she bestowed on me I could not have supported the idea of her granting to
another; I loved her with a brother's affection only, but experienced all the jealousy of a lover.
  With Miss Goton this passion might have acquired a degree of fury; I should have been a Turk, a
tiger,  had  I  once  imagined  she  bestowed  her  favors  on  any  but  myself.  The  pleasure  I  felt  on
approaching Miss Vulson was sufficiently ardent, though unattended with uneasy sensations; but at
sight of Miss Goton, I felt myself bewildered--every sense was absorbed in ecstasy. I believe it would
have been impossible to have remained long with her; I must have been suffocated with the violence of
my palpitations. I equally dreaded giving either of them displeasure; with one I was more complaisant;
with the other, more submissive. I would not have offended Miss Vulson for the world; but if Miss
Goton had commanded me to throw myself into the flames, I think I should have instantly obeyed her.
Happily, both for her and myself, our amours; or rather rendezvous, were not of long duration: and
though my connection with Miss Vulson was less dangerous, after a continuance of some greater
length, that likewise had its catastrophe; indeed the termination of a love affair is good for nothing,
unless it partakes of the romantic, and can furnish out at least an exclamation.
  Though my correspondence with Miss Vulson was less animated, it was perhaps more endearing;
we never separated without tears, and it can hardly be conceived what a void I felt in my heart. I could
neither think nor speak of anything but her. These romantic sorrows were not affected, though I am
inclined to believe they did not absolutely centre in her, for I am persuaded (though I did not perceive it
at that time) being deprived of amusement bore a considerable share in them.  To  soften  the  rigor  of  absence,  we  agreed  to  correspond  with  each  other,  and  the  pathetic
expressions these letters contained were sufficient to have split a rock. In a word, I had the honor of her
not being able to endure the pain of separation. She came to see me at Geneva.
  My head was now completely turned; and during the two days she remained here, I was intoxicated
with delight. At her departure, I would have thrown myself into the water after her, and absolutely rent
the air with my cries. The week following she sent me sweetmeats, gloves, etc. This certainly would
have appeared extremely gallant, had I not been informed of her marriage at the same instant, and that
the journey I had thought proper to give myself the honor of, was only to buy her wedding suit.
  My indignation may easily be conceived; I shall not attempt to describe it. In this heroic fury, I
swore never more to see the perfidious girl, supposing it the greatest punishment that could be inflicted
on her. This, however, did not occasion her death, for twenty years after, while on a visit to my father,
being on the lake, I asked who those ladies were in a boat not far from ours. "What!" said my father
smiling, "does not your heart inform you? It is your former flame, it is Madame Christin, or, if you
please, Miss Vulson." I started at the almost forgotten name, and instantly ordered the waterman to turn
off,  not  judging  it  worth  while  to  be  perjured,  however  favorable  the  opportunity  for  revenge,  in
renewing a dispute of twenty years past, with a woman of forty.
  Thus, before my future destination was determined, did I fool away the most precious moments of
my youth. After deliberating a long time on the bent of my natural inclination, they resolved to dispose
of me in a manner the most repugnant to them. I was sent to Mr. Masseron, the City Register, to learn
(according to the expression of my uncle Bernard) the thriving occupation of a scraper. This nickname
was inconceivably displeasing to me, and I promised myself but little satisfaction in the prospect of
heaping  up  money  by  a  mean  employment.  The  assiduity  and  subjection  required,  completed  my
disgust, and I never set foot in the office without feeling a kind of horror, which every day gained fresh
strength.
  Mr. Masseron, who was not better pleased with my abilities than I was with the employment,
treated me with disdain, incessantly upbraiding me with being a fool and blockhead, not forgetting to
repeat, that my uncle had assured him I was a knowing one, though he could not find that I knew
anything. That he had promised to furnish him with a sprightly boy, but had, in truth, sent him an ass.
To conclude, I was turned out of the registry, with the additional ignominy of being pronounced a fool
by all Mr. Masseron's clerks, and fit only to handle a file.
  My vocation thus determined, I was bound apprentice; not, however, to a watchmaker, but to an
engraver, and I had been so completely humiliated by the contempt of the register, that I submitted
without a murmur. My master, whose name was M. Ducommon, was a young man of a very violent
and  boorish  character,  who  contrived  in  a  short  time  to  tarnish  all  the  amiable  qualities  of  my
childhood, to stupefy a disposition naturally sprightly, and reduce my feelings, as well as my condition,
to an absolute state of servitude. I forgot my Latin, history, and antiquities; I could hardly recollect
whether such people as Romans ever existed. When I visited my father, he no longer beheld his idol,
nor could the ladies recognize the gallant Jean Jacques; nay, I was so well convinced that Mr. and Miss
Lambercier would scarce receive me as their pupil, that I endeavored to avoid their company, and from
that time have never seen them. The vilest inclinations, the basest actions, succeeded my amiable
amusements and even obliterated the very remembrance of them. I must have had, in spite of my good
education, a great propensity to degenerate, else the declension could not have followed with such ease
and rapidity, for never did so promising a Caesar so quickly become a Laradon.
  The art itself did not displease me. I had a lively taste for drawing. There was nothing displeasing in
the exercise of the graver; and as it required no very extraordinary abilities to attain perfection as a
watchcase  engraver,  I  hoped  to  arrive  at  it.  Perhaps  I  should  have  accomplished  my  design,  if
unreasonable restraint, added to the brutality of my master, had not rendered my business disgusting. I
wasted his time, and employed myself in engraving medals, which served me and my companions as a
kind of insignia for a new invented order of chivalry, and though this differed very little from my usual
employ, I considered it as a relaxation. Unfortunately, my master caught me at this contraband labor,and a severe beating was the consequence. He reproached me at the same time with attempting to make
counterfeit money because our medals bore the arms of the Republic, though, I can truly aver, I had no
conception of false money, and very little of the true, knowing better how to make a Roman As than
one of our threepenny pieces.
  My master's tyranny rendered insupportable that labor I should otherwise have loved, and drove me
to vices I naturally despised, such as falsehood, idleness, and theft. Nothing ever gave me a clearer
demonstration of the difference between filial dependence and abject slavery, than the remembrance of
the  change  produced  in  me  at  that  period.  Hitherto  I  had  enjoyed  a  reasonable  liberty;  this  I  had
suddenly lost. I was enterprising at my father's, free at Mr. Lambercier's, discreet at my uncle's; but,
with my master, I became fearful, and from that moment my mind was vitiated. Accustomed to live on
terms of perfect equality, to be witness of no pleasures I could not command, to see no dish I was not to
partake of, or be sensible of a desire I might not express; to be able to bring every wish of my heart to
my lips--what a transition!--at my master's I was scarce allowed to speak, was forced to quit the table
without tasting what I most longed for, and the room when I had nothing particular to do there; was
incessantly confined to my work, while the liberty my master and his journeymen enjoyed, served only
to increase the weight of my subjection. When disputes happened to arise, though conscious that I
understood the subject better than any of them, I dared not offer my opinion; in a word, everything I
saw became an object of desire, for no other reason than because I was not permitted to enjoy anything.
Farewell gayety, ease, those happy turns of expressions, which formerly even made my faults escape
correction. I recollect, with pleasure, a circumstance that happened at my father's, which even now
makes me smile. Being for some fault ordered to bed without my supper, as I was passing through the
kitchen, with my poor morsel of bread in my hand, I saw the meat turning on the spit; my father and the
rest were round the fire; I must bow to every one as I passed. When I had gone through this ceremony,
leering with a wistful eye at the roast meat, which looked so inviting, and smelt so savory, I could not
abstain  from  making  that  a  bow  likewise,  adding  in  a  pitiful  tone,  good  bye,  roast  meal!  This
unpremeditated pleasantry put them in such good humor, that I was permitted to stay, and partake of it.
Perhaps the same thing might have produced a similar effect at my master's, but such a thought could
never have occurred to me, or, if it had, I should not have had courage to express it.
  Thus I learned to covet, dissemble, lie, and, at length, to steal, a propensity I never felt the least idea
of before, though since that time I have never been able entirely to divest myself of it. Desire and
inability united naturally led to this vice, which is the reason pilfering is so common among footmen
and apprentices, though the latter, as they grow up, and find themselves in a situation where everything
is at their command, lose this shameful propensity. As I never experienced the advantage, I never
enjoyed the benefit.
  Good sentiments, ill-directed, frequently lead children into vice. Notwithstanding my continual
wants and temptations, it was more than a year before I could resolve to take even eatables. My first
theft was occasioned by complaisance, but it was productive of others which had not so plausible an
excuse.
  My master had a journeyman named Verrat, whose mother lived in the neighborhood, and had a
garden at a considerable distance from the house, which produced excellent asparagus. This Verrat,
who had no great plenty of money, took it in his head to rob her of the most early production of her
garden, and by the sale of it procure those indulgences he could not otherwise afford himself; but not
being very nimble, he did not care to run the hazard of a surprise. After some preliminary flattery,
which I did not comprehend the meaning of, he proposed this expedition to me, as an idea which had
that moment struck him. At first I would not listen to the proposal; but he persisted in his solicitation,
and as I could never resist the attacks of flattery, at length prevailed. In pursuance of this virtuous
resolution, I every morning repaired to the garden, gathered the best of the asparagus, and took it to the
Holard where some good old women, who guessed how I came by it, wishing to diminish the price,
made no secret of their suspicions; this produced the desired effect, for, being alarmed, I took whatever
they offered, which being taken to Mr. Verrat, was presently metamorphosed into a breakfast, anddivided with a companion of his; for, though I procured it, I never partook of their good cheer, being
fully satisfied with an inconsiderable bribe.
I executed my roguery with the greatest fidelity, seeking only to please my employer; and several
days passed before it came into my head, to rob the robber, and tithe Mr. Verrat's harvest. I never
considered the hazard I run in these expeditions, not only of a torrent of abuse, but what I should have
been still more sensible of, a hearty beating; for the miscreant, who received the whole benefit, would
certainly have denied all knowledge of the fact, and I should only have received a double portion of
punishment for daring to accuse him, since being only an apprentice, I stood no chance of being
believed in opposition to a journeyman. Thus, in every situation, powerful rogues know how to save
themselves at the expense of the feeble.
  This practice taught me it was not so terrible to thieve as I had imagined: I took care to make this
discovery turn to some account, helping myself to everything within my reach, that I conceived an
inclination for. I was not absolutely ill-fed at my master's, and temperance was only painful to me by
comparing it with the luxury he enjoyed. The custom of sending young people from table precisely
when those things are served up which seem most tempting, is calculated to increase their longing, and
induces them to steal what they conceive to be so delicious. It may be supposed I was not backward in
this particular: in general my knavery succeeded pretty well, though quite the reverse when I happened
to be detected.
I recollect an attempt to procure some apples, which was attended with circumstances that make me
smile and shudder even at this instant. The fruit was standing in the pantry, which by a lattice at a
considerable height received light from the kitchen. One day, being alone in the house, I climbed up to
see  these  precious  apples,  which  being  out  of  my  reach,  made  this  pantry  appear  the  garden  of
Hesperides. I fetched the spit--tried if it would reach them--it was too short--I lengthened it with a small
one which was used for game,--my master being very fond of hunting, darted at them several times
without success; at length was more fortunate; being transported to find I was bringing up an apple, I
drew it gently to the lattice--was going to seize it when (who can express my grief and astonishment!) I
found it would not pass through--it was too large. I tried every expedient to accomplish my design,
sought supporters to keep the spits in the same position, a knife to divide the apple, and a lath to hold it
with; at length, I so far succeeded as to effect the division, and made no doubt of drawing the pieces
through; but it was scarcely separated, (compassionate reader, sympathize with my affliction) when
both pieces fell into the pantry.
  Though I lost time by this experiment, I did not lose courage, but, dreading a surprise, I put off the
attempt till next day, when I hoped to be more successful, and returned to my work as if nothing had
happened, without once thinking of what the two obvious witnesses I had left in the pantry deposed
against me.
  The next day (a fine opportunity offering) I renew the trial. I fasten the spits together; get on the
stool; take aim; am just going to dart at my prey--unfortunately the dragon did not sleep; the pantry
door opens, my master makes his appearance, and, looking up, exclaims, "Bravo!" --The horror of that
moment returns--the pen drops from my hand.
  A continual repetition of ill treatment rendered me callous; it seemed a kind of composition for my
crimes, which authorized me to continue them, and, instead of looking back at the punishment, I looked
forward to revenge. Being beat like a slave, I judged I had a right to all the vices of one. I was
convinced that to rob and be punished were inseparable, and constituted, if I may so express myself, a
kind of traffic, in which, if I perform my part of the bargain, my master would take care not to be
deficient  in  his;  that  preliminary  settled,  I  applied  myself  to  thieving  with  great  tranquility,  and
whenever this interrogatory occurred to my mind, "What will be the consequence?" the reply was
ready, "I know the worst, I shall be beat; no matter, I was made for it."
I love good eating; am sensual, but not greedy; I have such a variety of inclinations to gratify, that
this can never predominate; and unless my heart is unoccupied, which very rarely happens, I pay but
little  attention  to  my  appetite;  to  purloining  eatables,  but  extended  this  propensity  to  everything  Iwished to possess, and if I did not become a robber in form, it was only because money never tempted
me.
  My master had a closet in the workshop, which he kept locked; this I contrived to open and shut as
often as I pleased, and laid his best tools, fine drawings, impressions, in a word, everything he wished
to keep from me, under contribution.
  These  thefts  were  so  far  innocent,  that  they  were  always  employed  in  his  service,  but  I  was
transported at having the trifles in my possession, and imagined I stole the art with its productions.
Besides what I have mentioned, his boxes contained threads of gold and silver, a number of small
jewels, valuable medals, and money; yet, though I seldom had five sous in my pocket, I do not recollect
ever having cast a wishful look at them; on the contrary, I beheld these valuables rather with terror than
with delight.
I am convinced the dread of taking money was, in a great measure, the effect of education. There
was mingled with the idea of it the fear of infamy, a prison, punishment, and death: had I even felt the
temptation, these objects would have made me tremble; whereas my failings appeared a species of
waggery, and, in truth, they were little else; they could but occasion a good trimming, and this I was
already prepared for. A sheet of fine drawing paper was a greater temptation than money sufficient to
have  purchased  a  ream.  This  unreasonable  caprice  is  connected  with  one  of  the  most  striking
singularities  of  my  character,  and  has  so  far  influenced  my  conduct,  that  it  requires  a  particular
explanation.
  My passions are extremely violent; while under their influence, nothing can equal my impetuosity; I
am an absolute stranger to discretion, respect, fear, or decorum; rude, saucy, violent, and intrepid: no
shame can stop, no danger intimidate me. My mind is frequently so engrossed by a single object, that
beyond it the whole world is not worth a thought; this is the enthusiasm of a moment, the next, perhaps,
I am plunged in a state of annihilation. Take me in my moments of tranquility, I am indolence and
timidity itself; a word to speak, the least trifle to perform, appear an intolerable labor; everything
alarms and terrifies me; the very buzzing of a fly will make me shudder; I am so subdued by fear and
shame, that I would gladly shield myself from mortal view.
  When obliged to exert myself, I am ignorant what to do! when forced to speak, I am at a loss for
words; and if any one looks at me, I am instantly out of countenance. If animated with my subject, I
express my thoughts with ease, but, in ordinary conversations, I can say nothing --absolutely nothing;
and, being obliged to speak, renders them insupportable.
I may add, that none of my predominant inclinations centre in those pleasures which are to be
purchased: money empoisons my delight; I must have them unadulterated; I love those of the table, for
instance, but cannot endure the restraints of good company, or the intemperance of taverns; I can enjoy
them only with a friend, for alone it is equally impossible; my imagination is then so occupied with
other things, that I find no pleasure in eating. Women who are to be purchased have no charms for me;
my beating heart cannot be satisfied without affection; it is the same with every other enjoyment, if not
truly disinterested, they are absolutely insipid; in a word, I am fond of those things which are only
estimable to minds formed for the peculiar enjoyment of them.
I  never  thought  money  so  desirable  as  it  is  usually  imagined;  if  you  would  enjoy  you  must
transform it; and this transformation is frequently attended with inconvenience; you must bargain,
purchase, pay dear, be badly served, and often duped. I buy an egg, am assured it is new-laid --I find it
stale; fruit in its utmost perfection--'tis absolutely green. I love good wine, but where shall I get it? Not
at my wine merchant's --he will poison me to a certainty. I wish to be universally respected; how shall I
compass  my  design?  I  must  make  friends,  send  messages,  write  letters,  come,  go,  wait,  and  be
frequently deceived. Money is the perpetual source of uneasiness; I fear it more than I love good wine.
  A thousand times, both during and since my apprenticeship, have I gone out to purchase some
nicety,  I  approach  the  pastry-cook's,  perceive  some  women  at  the  counter,  and  imagine  they  are
laughing at me. I pass a fruit shop, see some fine pears, their appearance tempts me; but then two or
three young people are near, or a man I am acquainted with is standing at the door; I take all that passfor persons I have some knowledge of, and my near sight contributes to deceive me. I am everywhere
intimidated, restrained by some obstacle, and with money in my pocket return as I went, for want of
resolution to purchase what I long for.
I should enter into the most insipid details was I to relate the trouble, shame, repugnance, and
inconvenience of all kinds which I have experienced in parting with my money, whether in my own
person, or by the agency of others; as I proceed, the reader will get acquainted with my disposition, and
perceive all this without my troubling him with the recital.
  This once comprehended, one of my apparent contradictions will be easily accounted for, and the
most sordid avarice reconciled with the greatest contempt of money. It is a movable which I consider of
so little value, that, when destitute of it, I never wish to acquire any; and when I have a sum I keep it by
me, for want of knowing how to dispose of it to my satisfaction; but let an agreeable and convenient
opportunity present itself, and I empty my purse with the utmost freedom; not that I would have the
reader  imagine  I  am  extravagant  from  a  motive  of  ostentation,  quite  the  reverse;  it  was  ever  in
subservience to my pleasures, and, instead of glorying in expense, I endeavor to conceal it. I so well
perceive that money is not made to answer my purposes, that I am almost ashamed to have any, and,
still more, to make use of it.
  Had I ever possessed a moderate independence, I am convinced I should have had no propensity to
become avaricious. I should have required no more, and cheerfully lived up to my income; but my
precarious  situation  has  constantly  and  necessarily  kept  me  in  fear.  I  love  liberty,  and  I  loathe
constraint,  dependence,  and  all  their  kindred  annoyances.  As  long  as  my  purse  contains  money  it
secures my independence, and exempts me from the trouble of seeking other money, a trouble of which
I have always had a perfect horror; and the dread of seeing the end of my independence, makes me
proportionately unwilling to part with my money. The money that we possess is the instrument of
liberty, that which we lack and strive to obtain is the instrument of slavery. Thence it is that I hold fast
to aught that I have, and yet covet nothing more.
  My disinterestedness, then, is in reality only idleness, the pleasure of possessing is not in my
estimation worth the trouble of acquiring: and my dissipation is only another form of idleness; when we
have an opportunity of disbursing pleasantly we should make the best possible use of it.
I am less tempted by money than by other objects, because between the moment of possessing the
money and that of using it to obtain the desired object there is always an interval, however short;
whereas to possess the thing is to enjoy it. I see a thing and it tempts me; but if I see not the thing itself
but only the means of acquiring it, I am not tempted. Therefore it is that I have been a pilferer, and am
so even now, in the way of mere trifles to which I take a fancy, and which I find it easier to take than to
ask for; but I never in my life recollect having taken a farthing from any one, except about fifteen years
ago, when I stole seven francs and ten sous. The story is worth recounting, as it exhibits a concurrence
of ignorance and stupidity I should scarcely credit, did it relate to any but myself.
  It was in Paris: I was walking with M. de Franceul at the Palais Royal; he pulled out his watch, he
looked at it, and said to me, "Suppose we go to the opera?"--"With all my heart." We go: he takes two
box tickets, gives me one, and enters himself with the other; I follow, find the door crowded; and,
looking in, see every one standing; judging, therefore, that M. de Franceul might suppose me concealed
by the company, I go out, ask for my ticket, and, getting the money returned, leave the house, without
considering, that by then I had reached the door every one would be seated, and M. de Franceul might
readily perceive I was not there.
  As nothing could be more opposite to my natural inclination than this abominable meanness, I note
it, to show there are moments of delirium when men ought not to be judged by their actions: this was
not stealing the money, it was only stealing the use of it, and was the more infamous for wanting the
excuse of a temptation.
I should never end these accounts, was I to describe all the gradations through which I passed,
during my apprenticeship, from the sublimity of a hero to the baseness of a villain. Though I entered
into  most  of  the  vices  of  my  situation,  I  had  no  relish  for  its  pleasures;  the  amusements  of  mycompanions were displeasing, and when too much restraint had made my business wearisome, I had
nothing  to  amuse  me.  This  renewed  my  taste  for  reading  which  had  long  been  neglected.  I  thus
committed a fresh offence, books made me neglect my work, and brought on additional punishment,
while inclination, strengthened by constraint, became an unconquerable passion. La Tribu, a well-
known librarian, furnished me with all kinds; good or bad, I perused them with avidity, and without
discrimination.
  It will be said; "at length, then, money became necessary"--true; but this happened at a time when a
taste for study had deprived me both of resolution and activity; totally occupied by this new inclination,
I only wished to read, I robbed no longer. This is another of my peculiarities; a mere nothing frequently
calls me off from what I appear the most attached to; I give in to the new idea; it becomes a passion,
and immediately every former desire is forgotten.
  Reading was my new hobby; my heart beat with impatience to run over the new book I carried in
my pocket; the first moment I was alone, I seized the opportunity to draw it out, and thought no longer
of rummaging my master's closet. I was even ashamed to think that I had been guilty of such meanness;
and had my amusements been more expensive, I no longer felt an inclination to continue it. La Tribu
gave me credit, and when once I had the book in my possession, I thought no more of the trifle I was to
pay for it; as money came it naturally passed to this woman; and when she chanced to be pressing,
nothing was so conveniently at hand as my own effects; to steal in advance required foresight, and
robbing to pay was no temptation.
  The frequent blows I received from my master, with my private and ill-chosen studies, rendered me
reserved, unsociable, and almost deranged my reason. Though my taste had not preserved me from silly
unmeaning books, by good fortune I was a stranger to licentious or obscene ones; not that La Tribu
(who was very accommodating) had any scruple of lending these, on the contrary, to enhance their
worth she spoke of them with an air of mystery; this produced an effect she had not foreseen, for both
shame and disgust made me constantly refuse them. Chance so well seconded my bashful disposition,
that I was past the age of thirty before I saw any of those dangerous compositions.
  In less than a year I had exhausted La Tribu's scanty library, and was unhappy for want of further
amusement. My reading, though frequently bad, had worn off my childish follies, and brought back my
heart to nobler sentiments than my condition had inspired; meantime disgusted with all within my
reach, and thinking everything charming that was out of it, my present situation appeared extremely
miserable. My passions began to acquire strength, I felt their influence, without knowing whither they
would conduct me. I sometimes, indeed, thought of my former follies, but sought no further.
  At this time my imagination took a turn which helped to calm my increasing emotions; it was, to
contemplate those situations in the books I had read, which produced the most striking effect on my
mind;  to  recall,  combine,  and  apply  them  to  myself  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  become  one  of  the
personages my recollection presented, and be continually in those fancied circumstances which were
most agreeable to my inclinations; in a word, by contriving to place myself in these fictitious situations,
the idea of my real one was in a great measure obliterated.
  This fondness for imaginary objects, and the facility with which I could gain possession of them,
completed my disgust for everything around me, and fixed that inclination for solitude which has ever
since been predominant. We shall have more than once occasion to remark the effects of a disposition,
misanthropic and melancholy in appearance, but which proceed, in fact, from a heart too affectionate,
too ardent, which, for want of similar dispositions, is constrained to content itself with nonentities, and
be satisfied with fiction. It is sufficient, at present, to have traced the origin of a propensity which has
modified my passions, set bounds to each, and by giving too much ardor to my wishes, has ever
rendered me too indolent to obtain them.
  Thus I attained my sixteenth year, uneasy, discontented with myself and everything that surrounded
me;  displeased  with  my  occupation;  without  enjoying  the  pleasures  common  to  my  age,  weeping
without a cause, sighing I knew not why, and fond of my chimerical ideas for want of more valuable
realities.  Every Sunday, after sermon-time, my companions came to fetch me out, wishing me to partake of
their diversions. I would willingly have been excused, but when once engaged in amusement, I was
more animated and enterprising than any of them; it was equally difficult to engage or restrain me;
indeed, this was ever a leading trait in my character. In our country walks I was ever foremost, and
never thought of returning till reminded by some of my companions. I was twice obliged to be from my
master's the whole night, the city gates having been shut before I could reach them. The reader may
imagine what treatment this procured me the following mornings; but I was promised such a reception
for the third, that I made a firm resolution never to expose myself to the danger of it. Notwithstanding
my determination, I repeated this dreaded transgression, my vigilance having been rendered useless by
a cursed captain, named M. Minutoli, who, when on guard, always shut the gate he had charge of an
hour before the usual time. I was returning home with my two companions, and had got within half a
league of the city, when I heard them beat the tattoo; I redouble my pace, I run with my utmost speed, I
approach the bridge, see the soldiers already at their posts, I call out to them in a suffocated voice--it is
too late; I am twenty paces from the guard, the first bridge is already drawn up, and I tremble to see
those terrible horns advanced in the air which announce the fatal and inevitable destiny, which from
this moment began to pursue me.
I threw myself on the glacis in a transport of despair, while my companions, who only laughed at
the accident, immediately determined what to do. My resolution, though different from theirs, was
equally sudden; on the spot, I swore never to return to my master's, and the next morning, when my
companions entered the city, I bade them an eternal adieu, conjuring them at the same time to inform
my cousin Bernard of my resolution, and the place where he might see me for the last time.
  From the commencement of my apprenticeship I had seldom seen him; at first, indeed, we saw each
other on Sundays, but each acquiring different habits, our meetings were less frequent. I am persuaded
his  mother  contributed  greatly  towards  this  change;  he  was  to  consider  himself  as  a  person  of
consequence, I was a pitiful apprentice; notwithstanding our relationship, equality no longer subsisted
between us, and it was degrading himself to frequent my company. As he had a natural good heart his
mother's lessons did not take an immediate effect, and for some time he continued to visit me.
  Having learned my resolution, he hastened to the spot I had appointed, not, however, to dissuade
me from it, but to render my flight agreeable, by some trifling presents, as my own resources would not
have carried me far. He gave me among other things, a small sword, which I was very proud of, and
took with me as far as Turin, where absolute want constrained me to dispose of it. The more I reflect on
his behavior at this critical moment, the more I am persuaded he followed the instructions of his
mother, and perhaps his father likewise: for, had he been left to his own feelings, he would have
endeavored to retain, or have been tempted to accompany me; on the contrary, he encouraged the
design, and when he saw me resolutely determined to pursue it, without seeming much affected, left me
to my fate. We never saw or wrote to each other from that time; I cannot but regret this loss, for his
heart was essentially good, and we seemed formed for a more lasting friendship.
  Before I abandon myself to the fatality of my destiny, let me contemplate for a moment the prospect
that awaited me had I fallen into the hands of a better master. Nothing could have been more agreeable
to my disposition, or more likely to confer happiness, than the peaceful condition of a good artificer, in
so respectable a line as engravers are considered at Geneva. I could have obtained an easy subsistence,
if not a fortune; this would have bounded my ambition; I should have had means to indulge in moderate
pleasures, and should have continued in my natural sphere, without meeting with any temptation to go
beyond it. Having an imagination sufficiently fertile to embellish with its chimeras every situation, and
powerful enough to transport me from one to another, it was immaterial in which I was fixed: that was
best adapted to me, which, requiring the least care or exertion, left the mind most at liberty; and this
happiness I should have enjoyed. In my native country, in the bosom of my religion, family and friends,
I should have passed a calm and peaceful life, in the uniformity of a pleasing occupation, and among
connections dear to my heart. I should have been a good Christian, a good citizen, a good friend, a good
man. I should have relished my condition, perhaps have been an honor to it, and after having passed alife  of  happy  obscurity,  surrounded  by  my  family,  I  should  have  died  at  peace.  Soon  it  may  be
forgotten, but while remembered it would have been with tenderness and regret.
  Instead of this--what a picture am I about to draw!--Alas! why should I anticipate the miseries I
have endured? The reader will have but too much of the melancholy subject.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK II.
  The moment in which fear had instigated my flight, did not seem more terrible than that wherein I
put my design in execution appeared delightful. To leave my relations, my resources, while yet a child,
in the midst of my apprenticeship, before I had learned enough of my business to obtain a subsistence;
to run on inevitable misery and danger: to expose myself in that age of weakness and innocence to all
the temptations of vice and despair; to set out in search of errors, misfortunes, snares, slavery, and
death; to endure more intolerable evils than those I meant to shun, was the picture I should have drawn,
the natural consequence of my hazardous enterprise. How different was the idea I entertained of it!--
The independence I seemed to possess was the sole object of my contemplation; having obtained my
liberty, I thought everything attainable: I entered with confidence on the vast theatre of the world,
which  my  merit  was  to  captivate:  at  every  step  I  expected  to  find  amusements,  treasures,  and
adventures; friends ready to serve, and mistresses eager to please me; I had but to show myself, and the
whole universe would be interested in my concerns; not but I could have been content with something
less; a charming society, with sufficient means, might have satisfied me. My moderation was such, that
the sphere in which I proposed to shine was rather circumscribed, but then it was to possess the very
quintessence of enjoyment, and myself the principal object. A single castle, for instance, might have
bounded my ambition; could I have been the favorite of the lord and lady, the daughter's lover, the son's
friend, and protector of the neighbors, I might have been tolerably content, and sought no further.
  In expectation of this modest fortune, I passed a few days in the environs of the city, with some
country people of my acquaintance, who received me with more kindness than I should have met with
in town; they welcomed, lodged, and fed me cheerfully; I could be said to live on charity, these favors
were not conferred with a sufficient appearance of superiority to furnish out the idea.
I rambled about in this manner till I got to Confignon, in Savoy, at about two leagues distance from
Geneva. The vicar was called M. de Pontverre; this name, so famous in the history of the Republic,
caught my attention; I was curious to see what appearance the descendants of the gentlemen of the
spoon exhibited; I went, therefore, to visit this M. de Pontverre, and was received with great civility.
  He spoke of the heresy of Geneva, declaimed on the authority of holy mother church, and then
invited me to dinner. I had little to object to arguments which had so desirable a conclusion, and was
inclined to believe that priests, who gave such excellent dinners, might be as good as our ministers.
Notwithstanding M. de Pontverre's pedigree, I certainly possessed most learning; but I rather sought to
be a good companion than an expert theologian; and his Frangi wine, which I thought delicious, argued
so powerfully on his side, that I should have blushed at silencing so kind a host; I, therefore, yielded
him the victory, or rather declined the contest. Any one who had observed my precaution, would
certainly have pronounced me a dissembler, though, in fact, I was only courteous.
  Flattery, or rather condescension, is not always a vice in young people; 'tis oftener a virtue. When
treated with kindness, it is natural to feel an attachment for the person who confers the obligation; we
do not acquiesce because we wish to deceive, but from dread of giving uneasiness, or because we wish
to avoid the ingratitude of rendering evil for good. What interest had M. de Pontverre in entertaining,
treating with respect, and endeavoring to convince me? None but mine; my young heart told me this,
and  I  was  penetrated  with  gratitude  and  respect  for  the  generous  priest;  I  was  sensible  of  my
superiority, but scorned to repay his hospitality by taking advantage of it. I had no conception ofhypocrisy in this forbearance, or thought of changing my religion, nay, so far was the idea from being
familiar to me, that I looked on it with a degree of horror which seemed to exclude the possibility of
such an event; I only wished to avoid giving offence to those I was sensible caressed me from that
motive; I wished to cultivate their good opinion, and meantime leave them the hope of success by
seeming less on my guard than I really was. My conduct in this particular resembled the coquetry of
some  very  honest  women,  who,  to  obtain  their  wishes,  without  permitting  or  promising  anything,
sometimes encourage hopes they never mean to realize.
  Reason, piety, and love of order, certainly demanded that instead of being encouraged in my folly, I
should have been dissuaded from the ruin I was courting, and sent back to my family; and this conduct
any one that was actuated by genuine virtue would have pursued; but it should be observed that though
M. de Pontverre was a religious man, he was not a virtuous one, but a bigot, who knew no virtue except
worshipping images and telling his beads, in a word, a kind of missionary, who thought the height of
merit consisted in writing libels against the ministers of Geneva. Far from wishing to send me back, he
endeavored to favor my escape, and put it out of my power to return even had I been so disposed. It
was a thousand to one but he was sending me to perish with hunger, or become a villain; but all this
was foreign to his purpose; he saw a soul snatched from heresy, and restored to the bosom of the
church: whether I was an honest man or a knave was very immaterial, provided I went to mass.
  This ridiculous mode of thinking is not peculiar to Catholics; it is the voice of every dogmatical
persuasion where merit consists in belief, and not in virtue.
  "You are called by the Almighty," said M. de Pontverre; "go to Annecy, where you will find a good
and charitable lady, whom the bounty of the king enables to turn souls from those errors she has
happily renounced." He spoke of a Madam de Warrens, a new convert, to whom the priests contrived to
send  those  wretches  who  were  disposed  to  sell  their  faith,  and  with  these  she  was  in  a  manner
constrained to share a pension of two thousand francs bestowed on her by the King of Sardinia. I felt
myself extremely humiliated at being supposed to want the assistance of a good and charitable lady. I
had no objection to be accommodated with everything I stood in need of, but did not wish to receive it
on the footing of charity and to owe this obligation to a devotee was still worse; notwithstanding my
scruples  the  persuasions  of  M.  de  Pontverre,  the  dread  of  perishing  with  hunger,  the  pleasures  I
promised myself from the journey, and hope of obtaining some desirable situation, determined me; and
I set out though reluctantly, for Annecy. I could easily have reached it in a day, but being in no great
haste  to  arrive  there,  it  took  me  three.  My  head  was  filled  with  the  ideas  of  adventures,  and  I
approached every country-seat I saw in my way, in expectation of having them realized. I had too much
timidity to knock at the doors, or even enter if I saw them open, but I did what I dared--which was to
sing  under  those  windows  that  I  thought  had  the  most  favorable  appearance;  and  was  very  much
disconcerted to find I wasted my breath to no purpose, and that neither old nor young ladies were
attracted by the melody of my voice, or the wit of my poetry, though some songs my companions had
taught me I thought excellent and that I sung them incomparably. At length I arrived at Annecy, and
saw Madam de Warrens.
  As this period of my life, in a great measure, determined my character, I could not resolve to pass it
lightly over. I was in the middle of my sixteenth year, and though I could not be called handsome, was
well made for my height; I had a good foot, a well turned leg, and animated countenance; a well
proportioned mouth, black hair and eyebrows, and my eyes, though small and rather too far in my head,
sparkling with vivacity, darted that innate fire which inflamed my blood; unfortunately for me, I knew
nothing of all this, never having bestowed a single thought on my person till it was too late to be of any
service to me. The timidity common to my age was heightened by a natural benevolence, which made
me dread the idea of giving pain. Though my mind had received some cultivation, having seen nothing
of the world, I was an absolute stranger to polite address, and my mental acquisitions, so far from
supplying this defect, only served to increase my embarrassment, by making me sensible of every
deficiency.
  Depending little, therefore, on external appearances, I had recourse to other expedients: I wrote amost elaborate letter, where, mingling all the flowers of rhetoric which I had borrowed from books with
the phrases of an apprentice, I endeavored to strike the attention, and insure the good will of Madam de
Warrens. I enclosed M. de Pontverre's letter in my own and waited on the lady with a heart palpitating
with fear and expectation. It was Palm Sunday, of the year 1728; I was informed she was that moment
gone to church; I hasten after her, overtake, and speak to her.--The place is yet fresh in my memory--
how can it be otherwise? often have I moistened it with my tears and covered it with kisses.--Why
cannot I enclose with gold the happy spot, and render it the object of universal veneration? Whoever
wishes to honor monuments of human salvation would only approach it on their knees.
  It was a passage at the back of the house, bordered on the left hand by a little rivulet, which
separated it from the garden, and, on the right, by the court yard wall; at the end was a private door
which opened into the church of the Cordeliers. Madam de Warrens was just passing this door; but on
hearing my voice, instantly turned about. What an effect did the sight of her produce! I expected to see
a devout, forbidding old woman; M. de Pontverre's pious and worthy lady could be no other in my
conception; instead of which, I see a face beaming with charms, fine blue eyes full of sweetness, a
complexion whose whiteness dazzled the sight, the form of an enchanting neck, nothing escaped the
eager eye of the young proselyte; for that instant I was hers!--a religion preached by such missionaries
must lead to paradise!
  My letter was presented with a trembling hand; she took it with a smile --opened it, glanced an eye
over M. de Pontverre's and again returned to mine, which she read through and would have read again,
had not the footman that instant informed her that service was beginning--"Child," said she, in a tone of
voice which made every nerve vibrate, "you are wandering about at an early age--it is really a pity!"--
and  without  waiting  for  an  answer,  added--"Go  to  my  house,  bid  them  give  you  something  for
breakfast, after mass, I will speak to you."
  Louisa--Eleanora de Warrens was of the noble and ancient family of La Tour de Pit, of Vevay, a
city in the country of the Vaudois. She was married very young to a M. de Warrens, of the house of
Loys, eldest son of M. de Villardin, of Lausanne; there were no children by this marriage, which was
far from being a happy one. Some domestic uneasiness made Madam de Warrens take the resolution of
crossing the Lake, and throwing herself at the feet of Victor Amadeus, who was then at Evian; thus
abandoning her husband, family, and country by a giddiness similar to mine, which precipitation she,
too, has found sufficient time and reason to lament.
  The king, who was fond of appearing a zealous promoter of the Catholic faith, took her under his
protection, and complimented her with a pension of fifteen hundred livres of Piedmont, which was a
considerable appointment for a prince who never had the character of being generous; but finding his
liberality made some conjecture he had an affection for the lady, he sent her to Annecy escorted by a
detachment of his guards, where, under the direction of Michael Gabriel de Bernex, titular bishop of
Geneva, she abjured her former religion at the Convent of the Visitation.
I came to Annecy just six years after this event; Madam de Warrens was then eight--and--twenty,
being  born  with  the  century.  Her  beauty,  consisting  more  in  the  expressive  animation  of  the
countenance, than a set of features, was in its meridian; her manner soothing and tender; an angelic
smile played about her mouth, which was small and delicate; she wore her hair (which was of an ash
color, and uncommonly beautiful) with an air of negligence that made her appear still more interesting;
she was short, and rather thick for her height, though by no means disagreeably so; but there could not
be a more lovely face, a finer neck, or hands and arms more exquisitely formed.
  Her education had been derived from such a variety of sources, that it formed an extraordinary
assemblage. Like me, she had lost her mother at her birth, and had received instruction as it chanced to
present itself; she had learned something of her governess, something of her father, a little of her
masters, but copiously from her lovers; particularly a M. de Tavel, who, possessing both taste and
information, endeavored to adorn with them the mind of her he loved. These various instructions, not
being  properly  arranged,  tended  to  impede  each  other,  and  she  did  not  acquire  that  degree  of
improvement her natural good sense was capable of receiving; she knew something of philosophy andphysic, but not enough to eradicate the fondness she had imbibed from her father for empiricism and
alchemy;  she  made  elixirs,  tinctures,  balsams,  pretended  to  secrets,  and  prepared  magestry;  while
quacks and pretenders, profiting by her weakness, destroyed her property among furnaces, drugs and
minerals, diminishing those charms and accomplishments which might have been the delight of the
most elegant circles. But though these interested wretches took advantage of her ill-applied education to
obscure her natural good sense, her excellent heart retained its purity; her amiable mildness, sensibility
for the unfortunate, inexhaustible bounty, and open, cheerful frankness, knew no variation; even at the
approach of old age, when attacked by various calamities, rendered more cutting by indigence, the
serenity of her disposition preserved to the end of her life the pleasing gayety of her happiest days.
  Her  errors  proceeded  from  an  inexhaustible  fund  of  activity,  which  demanded  perpetual
employment. She found no satisfaction in the customary intrigues of her sex, but, being formed for vast
designs,  sought  the  direction  of  important  enterprises  and  discoveries.  In  her  place  Madam  de
Longueville would have been a mere trifler, in Madam de Longueville's situation she would have
governed the state. Her talents did not accord with her fortune; what would have gained her distinction
in a more elevated sphere, became her ruin. In enterprises which suited her disposition, she arranged the
plan in her imagination, which was ever carried of its utmost extent, and the means she employed being
proportioned rather to her ideas than abilities, she failed by the mismanagement of those upon whom
she depended, and was ruined where another would scarce have been a loser. This active disposition,
which involved her in so many difficulties, was at least productive of one benefit as it prevented her
from passing the remainder of her life in the monastic asylum she had chosen, which she had some
thought of. The simple and uniform life of a nun, and the little cabals and gossipings of their parlor,
were not adapted to a mind vigorous and active, which, every day forming new systems, had occasions
for liberty to attempt their completion.
  The good bishop of Bernex, with less wit than Francis of Sales, resembled him in many particulars,
and Madam de Warrens, whom he loved to call his daughter, and who was like Madam de Chantel in
several respects, might have increased the resemblance by retiring like her from the world, had she not
been disgusted with the idle trifling of a convent. It was not want of zeal prevented this amiable woman
from giving those proofs of devotion which might have been expected from a new convert, under the
immediate direction of a prelate. Whatever might have influenced her to change her religion, she was
certainly sincere in that she had embraced; she might find sufficient occasion to repent having abjured
her former faith, but no inclination to return to it. She not only died a good Catholic, but truly lived
one; nay, I dare affirm (and I think I have had the opportunity to read the secrets of her heart) that it
was only her aversion to singularity that prevented her acting the devotee in public; in a word, her piety
was too sincere to give way to any affectation of it. But this is not the place to enlarge on her principles:
I shall find other occasions to speak of them.
  Let those who deny the existence of a sympathy of souls, explain, if they know how, why the first
glance, the first word of Madam de Warrens inspired me, not only with a lively attachment, but with the
most unbounded confidence, which has since known no abatement. Say this was love (which will at
least  appear  doubtful  to  those  who  read  the  sequel  of  our  attachment)  how  could  this  passion  be
attended with sentiments which scarce ever accompany its commencement, such as peace, serenity,
security, and confidence. How, when making application to an amiable and polished woman, whose
situation in life was so superior to mine, so far above any I had yet approached, on whom, in a great
measure, depended my future fortune by the degree of interest she might take in it; how, I say with so
many reasons to depress me, did I feel myself as free, as much at my ease, as if I had been perfectly
secure of pleasing her! Why did I not experience a moment of embarrassment, timidity or restraint?
Naturally bashful, easily confused, having seen nothing of the world, could I, the first time, the first
moment I beheld her, adopt caressing language, and a familiar tone, as readily as after ten years'
intimacy had rendered these freedoms natural? Is it possible to possess love, I will not say without
desires, for I certainly had them, but without inquietude, without jealousy? Can we avoid feeling an
anxious wish at least to know whether our affection is returned? Yet such a question never entered myimagination; I should as soon have inquired, do I love myself; nor did she ever express a greater degree
of curiosity; there was, certainly, something extraordinary in my attachment to this charming woman
and it will be found in the sequel, that some extravagances, which cannot be foreseen, attended it.
  What could be done for me, was the present question, and in order to discuss the point with greater
freedom, she made me dine with her. This was the first meal in my life where I had experienced a want
of appetite, and her woman, who waited, observed it was the first time she had seen a traveller of my
age and appearance deficient in that particular: this remark, which did me no injury in the opinion of
her mistress, fell hard on an overgrown clown, who was my fellow guest, and devoured sufficient to
have served at least six moderate feeders. For me, I was too much charmed to think of eating; my heart
began to imbibe a delicious sensation, which engrossed my whole being, and left no room for other
objects.
  Madam de Warrens wished to hear the particulars of my little history--all the vivacity I had lost
during my servitude returned and assisted the recital. In proportion to the interest this excellent woman
took in my story, did she lament the fate to which I had exposed myself; compassion was painted on
her features, and expressed by every action. She could not exhort me to return to Geneva, being too
well aware that her words and actions were strictly scrutinized, and that such advice would be thought
high treason against Catholicism, but she spoke so feelingly of the affliction I must give her(my) father,
that it was easy to perceive she would have approved my returning to console him. Alas! she little
thought how powerfully this pleaded against herself; the more eloquently persuasive she appeared, the
less could I resolve to tear myself from her. I knew that returning to Geneva would be putting an
insuperable barrier between us, unless I repeated the expedient which had brought me here, and it was
certainly better to preserve than expose myself to the danger of a relapse; besides all this, my conduct
was predetermined, I was resolved not to return. Madam de Warrens, seeing her endeavors would be
fruitless, became less explicit, and only added, with an air of commiseration, "Poor child! thou must go
where Providence directs thee, but one day thou wilt think of me."--I believe she had no conception at
that time how fatally her prediction would be verified.
  The difficulty still remained how I was to gain a subsistence? I have already observed that I knew
too little of engraving for that to furnish my resource, and had I been more expert, Savoy was too poor
a country to give much encouragement to the arts. The above-mentioned glutton, who eat for us as well
as himself, being obliged to pause in order to gain some relaxation from the fatigue of it, imparted a
piece of advice, which, according to him, came express from Heaven; though to judge by its effects it
appeared to have been dictated from a direct contrary quarter: this was that I should go to Turin, where,
in  a  hospital  instituted  for  the  instruction  of  catechumens,  I  should  find  food,  both  spiritual  and
temporal, be reconciled to the bosom of the church, and meet with some charitable Christians, who
would make it a point to procure me a situation that would turn to my advantage. "In regard to the
expenses of the journey," continued our advisor, "his grace, my lord bishop, will not be backward,
when once madam has proposed this holy work, to offer his charitable donation, and madam, the
baroness, whose charity is so well known," once more addressing himself to the continuation of his
meal, "will certainly contribute."
I was by no means pleased with all these charities; I said nothing, but my heart was ready to burst
with vexation. Madam de Warrens, who did not seem to think so highly of this expedient as the
projector pretended to do, contented herself by saying, everyone should endeavor to promote good
actions, and that she would mention it to his lordship; but the meddling devil, who had some private
interest in this affair, and questioned whether she would urge it to his satisfaction, took care to acquaint
the almoners with my story, and so far influenced those good priests, that when Madam de Warrens,
who disliked the journey on my account, mentioned it to the bishop, she found it so far concluded on,
that he immediately put into her hands the money designed for my little viaticum. She dared not
advance anything against it; I was approaching an age when a woman like her could not, with any
propriety, appear anxious to retain me.
  My departure being thus determined by those who undertook the management of my concerns, Ihad only to submit; and I did it without much repugnance. Though Turin was at a greater distance from
Madam de Warrens than Geneva, yet being the capital of the country I was now in, it seemed to have
more connection with Annecy than a city under a different government and of a contrary religion;
besides,  as  I  undertook  this  journey  in  obedience  to  her,  I  considered  myself  as  living  under  her
direction, which was more flattering than barely to continue in the neighborhood; to sum up all, the
idea of a long journey coincided with my insurmountable passion for rambling, which already began to
demonstrate itself. To pass the mountains, to my eye appeared delightful; how charming the reflection
of elevating myself above my companions by the whole height of the Alps! To see the world is an
almost irresistible temptation to a Genevan, accordingly I gave my consent.
  He who suggested the journey was to set off in two days with his wife. I was recommended to their
care; they were likewise made my purse --bearers, which had been augmented by Madam de Warrens,
who, not contented with these kindnesses, added secretly a pecuniary reinforcement, attended with the
most ample instructions, and we departed on the Wednesday before Easter.
  The day following, my father arrived at Annecy, accompanied by his friend, a Mr. Rival, who was
likewise a watchmaker; he was a man of sense and letters, who wrote better verses than La Motte, and
spoke almost as well; what is still more to his praise, he was a man of the strictest integrity, but whose
taste for literature only served to make one of his sons a comedian. Having traced me to the house of
Madam de Warrens, they contented themselves with lamenting, like her, my fate, instead of overtaking
me, which, (as they were on horseback and I on foot) they might have accomplished with the greatest
ease.
  My uncle Bernard did the same thing, he arrived at Consignon, received information that I was
gone to Annecy, and immediately returned back to Geneva; thus my nearest relations seemed to have
conspired with my adverse stars to consign me to misery and ruin. By a similar negligence, my brother
was so entirely lost, that it was never known what was become of him.
  My  father  was  not  only  a  man  of  honor  but  of  the  strictest  probity,  and  endured  with  that
magnanimity which frequently produces the most shining virtues: I may add, he was a good father,
particularly to me whom he tenderly loved; but he likewise loved his pleasures, and since we had been
separated other connections had weakened his paternal affections. He had married again at Nion, and
though his second wife was too old to expect children, she had relations; my father was united to
another family, surrounded by other objects, and a variety of cares prevented my returning to his
remembrance. He was in the decline of life and had nothing to support the inconveniences of old age;
my mother's property devolved to me and my brother, but, during our absence, the interest of it was
enjoyed by my father: I do not mean to infer that this consideration had an immediate effect on his
conduct, but it had an imperceptible one, and prevented him making use of that exertion to regain me
which he would otherwise have employed; and this, I think, was the reason that having traced me as far
as Annecy, he stopped short, without proceeding to Chambery, where he was almost certain I should be
found; and likewise accounts why, on visiting him several times since my flight, he always received me
with great kindness, but never made any efforts to retain me.
  This conduct in a father, whose affection and virtue I was so well convinced of, has given birth to
reflections  on  the  regulation  of  my  own  conduct  which  have  greatly  contributed  to  preserve  the
integrity of my heart. It has taught me this great lesson of morality, perhaps the only one that can have
any conspicuous influence on our actions, that we should ever carefully avoid putting our interests in
competition with our duty, or promise ourselves felicity from the misfortunes of others; certain that in
such circumstances, however sincere our love of virtue may be, sooner or later it will give way and we
shall imperceptibly become unjust and wicked, in fact, however upright in our intentions.
  This maxim, strongly imprinted on my mind, and reduced, though rather too late, to practice, has
given my conduct an appearance of folly and whimsicality, not only in public, but still more among my
acquaintances: it has been said, I affected originality, and sought to act different from other people; the
truth  is,  I  neither  endeavor  to  conform  or  be  singular,  I  desire  only  to  act  virtuously  and  avoid
situations, which, by setting my interest in opposition to that of another person's, might inspire me witha secret, though involuntary wish to his disadvantage.
  Two years ago, My Lord Marshal would have put my name in his will, which I took every method
to prevent, assuring him I would not for the world know myself in the will of any one, much less in his;
he gave up the idea; but insisted in return, that I should accept an annuity on his life; this I consented to.
It will be said, I find my account in the alteration; perhaps I may; but oh, my benefactor! my father, I
am now sensible that, should I have the misfortune to survive thee, I should have everything to lose,
nothing to gain.
  This, in my idea, in true philosophy, the surest bulwark of human rectitude; every day do I receive
fresh conviction of its profound solidity. I have endeavored to recommend it in all my latter writings,
but the multitude read too superficially to have made the remark. If I survive my present undertaking,
and am able to begin another, I mean, in a continuation of Emilius, to give such a lively and marking
example of this maxim as cannot fail to strike attention. But I have made reflections enough for a
traveller, it is time to continue my journey.
  It turned out more agreeable than I expected: my clownish conductor was not so morose as he
appeared to be. He was a middle-aged man, wore his black, grizzly hair, in a queue, had a martial air, a
strong voice, was tolerably cheerful, and to make up for not having been taught any trade, could turn
his hand to every one. Having proposed to establish some kind of manufactory at Annecy, he had
consulted Madam de Warrens, who immediately gave into the project, and he was now going to Turin
to lay the plan before the minister and get his approbation, for which journey he took care to be well
rewarded.
  This drole had the art of ingratiating himself with the priests, whom he ever appeared eager to
serve; he adopted a certain jargon which he had learned by frequenting their company, and thought
himself a notable preacher; he could even repeat one passage from the Bible in Latin, and it answered
his purpose as well as if he had known a thousand, for he repeated it a thousand times a day. He was
seldom at a loss for money when he knew what purse contained it; yet, was rather artful than knavish,
and  when  dealing  out  in  an  affected  tone  his  unmeaning  discourses,  resembled  Peter  the  Hermit,
preaching up the crusade with a sabre at his side.
  Madam Sabran, his wife, was a tolerable, good sort of woman; more peaceable by day than by
night; as I slept in the same chamber I was frequently disturbed by her wakefulness, and should have
been more so had I comprehended the cause of it; but I was in the chapter of dullness, which left to
nature the whole care of my own instruction.
I went on gayly with my pious guide and his hopeful companion, no sinister accident impeding our
journey.  I  was  in  the  happiest  circumstances  both  of  mind  and  body  that  I  ever  recollect  having
experienced; young, full of health and security, placing unbounded confidence in myself and others; in
that short but charming moment of human life, whose expansive energy carries, if I may so express
myself, our being to the utmost extent of our sensations, embellishing all nature with an inexpressible
charm, flowing from the conscious and rising enjoyment of our existence.
  My pleasing inquietudes became less wandering: I had now an object on which imagination could
fix. I looked on myself as the work, the pupil, the friend, almost the lover of Madam de Warrens; the
obliging things she had said, the caresses she had bestowed on me; the tender interest she seemed to
take in everything that concerned me; those charming looks, which seemed replete with love, because
they so powerfully inspired it, every consideration flattered my ideas during this journey, and furnished
the most delicious reveries, which, no doubt, no fear of my future condition arose to embitter. In
sending me to Turin, I thought they engaged to find me an agreeable subsistence there; thus eased of
every care I passed lightly on, while young desires, enchanting hopes, and brilliant prospects employed
my mind; each object that presented itself seemed to insure my approaching felicity. I imagined that
every house was filled with joyous festivity, the meadows resounded with sports and revelry, the rivers
offered refreshing baths, delicious fish wantoned in these streams, and how delightful was it to ramble
along the flowery banks! The trees were loaded with the choicest fruits, while their shade afforded the
most charming and voluptuous retreats to happy lovers; the mountains abounded with milk and cream;peace  and  leisure,  simplicity  and  joy,  mingled  with  the  charm  of  going  I  knew  not  whither,  and
everything I saw carried to my heart some new cause for rapture. The grandeur, variety, and real beauty
of the scene, in some measure rendered the charm reasonable, in which vanity came in for its share; to
go so young to Italy, view such an extent of country, and pursue the route of Hannibal over the Alps,
appeared a glory beyond my age; add to all this our frequent and agreeable halts, with a good appetite
and plenty to satisfy it; for in truth it was not worth while to be sparing; at Mr. Sabran's table what I eat
could scarce be missed. In the whole course of my life I cannot recollect an interval more perfectly
exempt from care, than the seven or eight days I was passing from Annecy to Turin. As we were
obliged to walk Madam Sabran's pace, it rather appeared an agreeable jaunt than a fatiguing journey;
there  still  remains  the  most  pleasing  impressions  of  it  on  my  mind,  and  the  idea  of  a  pedestrian
excursion, particularly among the mountains, has from this time seemed delightful.
  It  was  only  in  my  happiest  days  that  I  travelled  on  foot,  and  ever  with  the  most  unbounded
satisfaction; afterwards, occupied with business and encumbered with baggage, I was forced to act the
gentleman  and  employ  a  carriage,  where  care,  embarrassment,  and  restraint,  were  sure  to  be  my
companions, and instead of being delighted with the journey, I only wished to arrive at the place of
destination.
I was a long time at Paris, wishing to meet with two companions of similar dispositions, who would
each agree to appropriate fifty guineas of his property and a year of his time to making the tour of Italy
on foot, with no other attendance than a young fellow to carry our necessaries; I have met with many
who seemed enchanted with the project, but considered it only as a visionary scheme, which served
well  enough  to  talk  of,  without  any  design  of  putting  it  in  execution.  One  day,  speaking  with
enthusiasm of this project to Diderot and Grimm, they gave into the proposal with such warmth that I
thought the matter concluded on; but it only turned out a journey on paper, in which Grimm thought
nothing  so  pleasing  as  making  Diderot  commit  a  number  of  impieties,  and  shutting  me  up  in  the
Inquisition for them, instead of him.
  My regret at arriving so soon at Turin was compensated by the pleasure of viewing a large city, and
the hope of figuring there in a conspicuous character, for my brain already began to be intoxicated with
the fumes of ambition; my present situation appeared infinitely above that of an apprentice, and I was
far from foreseeing how soon I should be much below it.
  Before I proceed, I ought to offer an excuse, or justification to the reader for the great number of
unentertaining particulars I am necessitated to repeat. In pursuance of the resolution I have formed to
enter on this public exhibition of myself, it is necessary that nothing should bear the appearance of
obscurity or concealment. I should be continually under the eye of the reader, he should be enabled to
follow me In all the wanderings of my heart, through every intricacy of my adventures; he must find no
void or chasm in my relation, nor lose sight of me an instant, lest he should find occasion to say, what
was he doing at this time; and suspect me of not having dared to reveal the whole. I give sufficient
scope to malignity in what I say; it is unnecessary I should furnish still more by my science.
  My money was all gone, even that I had secretly received from Madam de Warrens: I had been so
indiscreet as to divulge this secret, and my conductors had taken care to profit by it. Madam Sabran
found means to deprive me of everything I had, even to a ribbon embroidered with silver, with which
Madam de Warrens had adorned the hilt of my sword; this I regretted more than all the rest; indeed the
sword itself would have gone the same way, had I been less obstinately bent on retaining it. They had,
it is true, supported me during the journey, but left me nothing at the end of it, and I arrived at Turin,
without money, clothes, or linen, being precisely in the situation to owe to my merit alone the whole
honor of that fortune I was about to acquire.
I took care in the first place to deliver the letters I was charged with, and was presently conducted to
the hospital of the catechumens, to be instructed in that religion, for which, in return, I was to receive
subsistence. On entering, I passed an iron-barred gate, which was immediately double-locked on me;
this beginning was by no means calculated to give me a favorable opinion of my situation. I was then
conducted to a large apartment, whose furniture consisted of a wooden altar at the farther end, on whichwas a large crucifix, and round it several indifferent chairs, of the same materials. In this hall of
audience were assembled four or five ill-looking banditti, my comrades in instruction, who would
rather have been taken for trusty servants of the devil than candidates for the kingdom of heaven. Two
of these fellows were Sclavonians, but gave out they were African Jews, and (as they assured me) had
run through Spain and Italy, embracing the Christian faith, and being baptised wherever they thought it
worth their labor.
  Soon after they opened another iron gate, which divided a large balcony that overlooked a court
yard, and by this avenue entered our sister catechumens, who, like me, were going to be regenerated,
not by baptism but a solemn abjuration. A viler set of idle, dirty, abandoned harlots, never disgraced
any persuasion; one among them, however, appeared pretty and interesting; she might be about my own
age, perhaps a year or two older, and had a pair of roguish eyes, which frequently encountered mine;
this was enough to inspire me with the desire of becoming acquainted with her, but she had been so
strongly recommended to the care of the old governess of this respectable sisterhood, and was so
narrowly  watched  by  the  pious  missionary,  who  labored  for  her  conversion  with  more  zeal  than
diligence, that during the two months we remained together in this house (where she had already been
three) I found it absolutely impossible to exchange a word with her. She must have been extremely
stupid, though she had not the appearance of it, for never was a longer course of instruction; the holy
man could never bring her to a state of mind fit for abjuration; meantime she became weary of her
cloister, declaring that, Christian or not, she would stay there no longer; and they were obliged to take
her at her word, lest she should grow refractory, and insist on departing as great a sinner as she came.
  This hopeful community were assembled in honor of the new-comer; when our guides made us a
short exhortation: I was conjured to be obedient to the grace that Heaven had bestowed on me; the rest
were admonished to assist me with their prayers, and give me edification by their good example. Our
virgins then retired to another apartment, and I was left to contemplate, at leisure, that wherein I found
myself.
  The next morning we were again assembled for instruction: I now began to reflect, for the first time,
on the step I was about to take, and the circumstances which had led me to it.
I repeat, and shall perhaps repeat again, an assertion I have already advanced, and of whose truth I
every day receive fresh conviction, which is, that if ever child received a reasonable and virtuous
education, it was myself. Born in a family of unexceptionable morals, every lesson I received was
replete with maxims of prudence and virtue. My father (though fond of gallantry) not only possessed
distinguished probity, but much religion; in the world he appeared a man of pleasure, in his family he
was a Christian, and implanted early in my mind those sentiments he felt the force of. My three aunts
were women of virtue and piety; the two eldest were professed devotees, and the third, who united all
the graces of wit and good sense, was, perhaps, more truly religious than either, though with less
ostentation. From the bosom of this amiable family I was transplanted to M. Lambercier's, a man
dedicated to the ministry, who believed the doctrine he taught, and acted up to its precepts. He and his
sister matured by their instructions those principles of judicious piety I had already imbibed, and the
means employed by these worthy people were so well adapted to the effect they meant to produce, that
so far from being fatigued, I scarce ever listened to their admonitions without finding myself sensibly
affected, and forming resolutions to live virtuously, from which, except in moments of forgetfulness, I
seldom swerved. At my uncle's, religion was far more tiresome, because they made it an employment;
with  my  master  I  thought  no  more  of  it,  though  my  sentiments  continued  the  same:  I  had  no
companions to vitiate my morals: I became idle, careless, and obstinate, but my principles were not
impaired.
I possessed as much religion, therefore, as a child could be supposed capable of acquiring. Why
should I now disguise my thoughts? I am persuaded I had more. In my childhood, I was not a child; I
felt, I thought as a man: as I advanced in years, I mingled with the ordinary class; in my infancy I was
distinguished from it. I shall doubtless incur ridicule by thus modestly holding myself up for a prodigy-
-I am content. Let those who find themselves disposed to it, laugh their fill; afterward, let them find achild that at six years old is delighted, interested, affected with romances, even to the shedding floods
of tears; I shall then feel my ridiculous vanity, and acknowledge myself in an error.
  Thus when I said we should not converse with children on religion, if we wished them ever to
possess any; when I asserted they were incapable of communion with the Supreme Being, even in our
confined degree, I drew my conclusions from general observation; I knew they were not applicable to
particular instances: find J. J. Rousseau of six years old, converse with them on religious subjects at
seven, and I will be answerable that the experiment will be attended with no danger.
  It is understood, I believe, that a child, or even a man, is likely to be most sincere while persevering
in that religion in whose belief he was born and educated; we frequently detract from, seldom make any
additions to it: dogmatical faith is the effect of education. In addition to this general principle which
attached me to the religion of my forefathers, I had that particular aversion our city entertains for
Catholicism, which is represented there as the most monstrous idolatry, and whose clergy are painted in
the blackest colors. This sentiment was so firmly imprinted on my mind, that I never dared to look into
their churches--I could not bear to meet a priest in his surplice, and never did I hear the bells of a
procession sound without shuddering with horror; these sensations soon wore off in great cities, but
frequently returned in country parishes, which bore more similarity to the spot where I first experienced
them; meantime this dislike was singularly contrasted by the remembrance of those caresses which
priests in the neighborhood of Geneva are fond of bestowing on the children of that city. If the bells of
the viaticum alarmed me, the chiming for mass or vespers called me to a breakfast, a collation, to the
pleasure of regaling on fresh butter, fruits, or milk; the good cheer of M. de Pontverre had produced a
considerable effect on me; my former abhorrence began to diminish, and looking on popery through the
medium of amusement and good living, I easily reconciled myself to the idea of enduring, though I
never entertained but a very transient and distant idea of making a solemn profession of it.
  At this moment such a transaction appeared in all its horrors; I shuddered at the engagement I had
entered into, and its inevitable consequences. The future neophytes with which I was surrounded were
not calculated to sustain my courage by their example, and I could not help considering the holy work I
was about to perform as the action of a villain. Though young, I was sufficiently convinced, that
whatever religion might be the true one, I was about to sell mine; and even should I chance to chose the
best, I lied to the Holy Ghost, and merited the disdain of every good man. The more I considered, the
more I despised myself, and trembled at the fate which had led me into such a predicament, as if my
present situation had not been of my own seeking. There were moments when these compunctions were
so strong that had I found the door open but for an instant, I should certainly have made my escape; but
this was impossible, nor was the resolution of any long duration, being combated by too many secret
motives to stand any chance of gaining the victory.
  My fixed determination not to return to Geneva, the shame that would attend it, the difficulty of
repassing  the  mountains,  at  a  distance  from  my  country,  without  friends,  and  without  resources,
everything  concurred  to  make  me  consider  my  remorse  of  conscience,  as  a  too  late  repentance.  I
affected to reproach myself for what I had done, to seek excuses for that I intended to do, and by
aggravating the errors of the past, looked on the future as an inevitable consequence. I did not say,
nothing is yet done, and you may be innocent if you please; but I said, tremble at the crime thou hast
committed, which hath reduced thee to the necessity of filling up the measure of thine iniquities.
  It required more resolution than was natural to my age to revoke those expectations which I had
given them reason to entertain, break those chains with which I was enthralled, and resolutely declare I
would continue in the religion of my forefathers, whatever might be the consequence. The affair was
already too far advanced, and spite of all my efforts they would have made a point of bringing it to a
conclusion.
  The sophism which ruined me has had a similar affect on the greater part of mankind, who lament
the want of resolution when the opportunity for exercising it is over. The practice of virtue is only
difficult from our own negligence; were, we always discreet, we should seldom have occasion for any
painful exertion of it; we are captivated by desires we might readily surmount, give into temptationsthat might easily be resisted, and insensibly get into embarrassing, perilous situations, from which we
cannot extricate ourselves but with the utmost difficulty; intimidated by the effort, we fall into the
abyss, saying to the Almighty, why hast thou made us such weak creatures? But, notwithstanding our
vain pretexts, He replies, by our consciences, I formed ye too weak to get out of the gulf, because I
gave ye sufficient strength not to have fallen into it.
I was not absolutely resolved to become a Catholic, but, as it was not necessary to declare my
intentions  immediately,  I  gradually  accustomed  myself  to  the  idea;  hoping,  meantime,  that  some
unforeseen event would extricate me from my embarrassment. In order to gain time, I resolved to make
the  best  defence  I  possibly  could  in  favor  of  my  own  opinion;  but  my  vanity  soon  rendered  this
resolution  unnecessary,  for  on  finding  I  frequently  embarrassed  those  who  had  the  care  of  my
instruction, I wished to heighten my triumph by giving them a complete overthrow. I zealously pursued
my plan, not without the ridiculous hope of being able to convert my convertors; for I was simple
enough to believe, that could I convince them of their errors, they would become Protestants; they did
not find, therefore, that facility in the work which they had expected, as I differed both in regard to will
and knowledge from the opinion they had entertained of me.
  Protestants, in general, are better instructed in the principles of their religion than Catholics; the
reason is obvious; the doctrine of the former requires discussion, of the latter a blind submission; the
Catholic must content himself with the decisions of others, the Protestant must learn to decide for
himself; they were not ignorant of this, but neither my age nor appearance promised much difficulty to
men so accustomed to disputation. They knew, likewise, that I had not received my first communion,
nor the instructions which accompany it; but, on the other hand, they had no idea of the information I
received at M. Lambercier's, or that I had learned the history of the church and empire almost by heart
at  my  father's;  and  though  (since  that  time,  nearly  forgot,  when  warmed  by  the  dispute,  very
unfortunately for these gentlemen), it again returned to my memory.
  A little old priest, but tolerably venerable, held the first conference; at which we were all convened.
On the part of my comrades, it was rather a catechism than a controversy, and he found more pains in
giving them instruction than answering their objections; but when it came to my turn, it was a different
matter; I stopped him at every article, and did not spare a single remark that I thought would create a
difficulty: this rendered the conference long and extremely tiresome to the assistants. My old priest
talked a great deal, was very warm, frequently rambled from the subject, and extricated himself from
difficulties by saying he was not sufficiently versed in the French language.
  The  next  day,  lest  my  indiscreet  objections  should  injure  the  minds  of  those  who  were  better
disposed, I was led into a separate chamber and put under the care of a younger priest, a fine speaker;
that is, one who was fond of long perplexed sentences, and proud of his own abilities, if ever doctor
was. I did not, however, suffer myself to be intimidated by his overbearing looks: and being sensible
that I could maintain my ground, I combated his assertions, exposed his mistakes, and laid about me in
the best manner I was able. He thought to silence me at once with St. Augustine, St. Gregory, and the
rest of the fathers, but found, to his ineffable surprise, that I could handle these almost as dexterously as
himself; not that I had ever read them, or he either, perhaps, but I retained a number of passages taken
from my Le Sueur, and when he bore hard on me with one citation, without standing to dispute, I
parried it with another, which method embarrassed him extremely. At length, however, he got the better
of me for two very potent reasons; in the first place, he was of the strongest side; young as I was, I
thought it might be dangerous to drive him to extremities, for I plainly saw the old priest was neither
satisfied with me nor my erudition. In the next place, he had studied, I had not; this gave a degree of
method to his arguments which I could not follow; and whenever he found himself pressed by an
unforeseen objection he put it off to the next conference, pretending I rambled from the question in
dispute. Sometimes he even rejected all my quotations, maintaining they were false, and, offering to
fetch the book, defied me to find them. He knew he ran very little risk, and that, with all my borrowed
learning, I was not sufficiently accustomed to books, and too poor a Latinist to find a passage in a large
volume, had I been ever so well assured it was there. I even suspected him of having been guilty of aperfidy with which he accused our ministers, and that he fabricated passages sometimes in order to
evade an objection that incommoded him.
  Meanwhile the hospital became every day more disagreeable to me, and seeing but one way to get
out of it, I endeavored to hasten my abjuration with as much eagerness as I had hitherto sought to retard
it.
  The two Africans had been baptised with great ceremony, they were habited in white from head to
foot to signify the purity of their regenerated souls. My turn came a month after; for all this time was
thought necessary by my directors, that they might have the honor of a difficult conversion, and every
dogma of their faith was recapitulated, in order to triumph the more completely over my new docility.
  At length, sufficiently instructed and disposed to the will of my masters, I was led in procession to
the metropolitan church of St. John, to make a solemn abjuration, and undergo a ceremony made use of
on these occasions, which, though not baptism, is very similar, and serves to persuade the people that
Protestants are not Christians. I was clothed in a kind of gray robe, decorated with white Brandenburgs.
Two men, one behind, the other before me, carried copper basins which they kept striking with a key,
and in which those who were charitably disposed put their alms, according as they found themselves
influenced by religion or good will for the new convert; in a word, nothing of Catholic pageantry was
omitted that could render the solemnity edifying to the populace, or humiliating to me. The white dress
might have been serviceable, but as I had not the honor to be either Moor or Jew, they did not think fit
to compliment me with it.
  The affair did not end here, I must now go to the Inquisition to be absolved from the dreadful sin of
heresy, and return to the bosom of the church with the same ceremony to which Henry the Fourth was
subjected by his ambassador. The air and manner of the right reverend Father Inquisitor was by no
means calculated to dissipate the secret horror that seized my spirits on entering this holy mansion.
After several questions relative to my faith, situation, and family, he asked me bluntly if my mother
was damned? Terror repressed the first gust of indignation; this gave me time to recollect myself, and I
answered, I hope not, for God might have enlightened her last moments. The monk made no reply, but
his silence was attended with a look by no means expressive of approbation.
  All these ceremonies ended, the very moment I flattered myself I should be plentifully provided for,
they exhorted me to continue a good Christian, and live in obedience to the grace I had received; then
wishing me good fortune, with rather more than twenty francs of small money in my pocket, the
produce of the above--mentioned collection, turned me out, shut the door on me, and I saw no more of
them!
  Thus, in a moment, all my flattering expectations were at an end; and nothing remained from my
interested conversion but the remembrance of having been made both a dupe and an apostate. It is easy
to imagine what a sudden revolution was produced in my ideas, when every brilliant expectation of
making a fortune terminated by seeing myself plunged in the completest misery. In the morning I was
deliberating what palace I should inhabit, before night I was reduced to seek my lodging in the street. It
may be supposed that I gave myself up to the most violent transports of despair, rendered more bitter
by  a  consciousness  that  my  own  folly  had  reduced  me  to  these  extremities;  but  the  truth  is,  I
experienced none of these disagreeable sensations. I had passed two months in absolute confinement;
this was new to me; I was now emancipated, and the sentiment I felt most forcibly, was joy at my
recovered liberty. After a slavery which had appeared tedious, I was again master of my time and
actions, in a great city, abundant in resources, crowded with people of fortune, to whom my merit and
talents could not fail to recommend me. I had sufficient time before me to expect this good fortune, for
my twenty livres seemed an inexhaustible treasure, which I might dispose of without rendering an
account of to anyone. It was the first time I had found myself so rich, and far from giving way to
melancholy reflections, I only adopted other hopes, in which self-love was by no means a loser. Never
did I feel so great a degree of confidence and security; I looked on my fortune as already made and was
pleased to think I should have no one but myself to thank for the acquisition of it.
  The first thing I did was to satisfy my curiosity by rambling all over the city, and I seemed toconsider it as a confirmation of my liberty; I went to see the soldiers mount guard, and was delighted
with their military accouterment; I followed processions, and was pleased with the solemn music of the
priests; I next went to see the king's palace, which I approached with awe, but seeing others enter, I
followed their example, and no one prevented me; perhaps I owed this favor to the small parcel I
carried under my arm; be that as it may, I conceived a high opinion of my consequence from this
circumstance, and already thought myself an inhabitant there. The weather was hot; I had walked about
till I was both fatigued and hungry; wishing for some refreshment, I went into a milk-house; they
brought me some cream-cheese curds and whey, and two slices of that excellent Piedmont bread, which
I prefer to any other; and for five or six sous I had one of the most delicious meals I ever recollect to
have made.
  It was time to seek a lodging: as I already knew enough of the Piedmontese language to make
myself understood, this was a work of no great difficulty; and I had so much prudence, that I wished to
adapt it rather to the state of my purse than the bent of my inclinations. In the course of my inquiries, I
was informed that a soldier's wife, in Po-street, furnished lodgings to servants out of place at only one
sou a night, and finding one of her poor beds disengaged, I took possession of it. She was young and
newly married, though she already had five or six children. Mother, children and lodgers, all slept in
the same chamber, and it continued thus while I remained there. She was good-natured, swore like a
carman, and wore neither cap nor handkerchief; but she had a gentle heart, was officious; and to me
both kind and serviceable.
  For several days I gave myself up to the pleasures of independence and curiosity; I continued
wandering about the city and its environs, examining every object that seemed curious or new; and,
indeed, most things had that appearance to a young novice. I never omitted visiting the court, and
assisted regularly every morning at the king's mass. I thought it a great honor to be in the same chapel
with this prince and his retinue; but my passion for music, which now began to make its appearance,
was a greater incentive than the splendor of the court, which, soon seen and always the same, presently
lost its attraction. The King of Sardinia had at that time the best music in Europe; Somis, Desjardins,
and the Bezuzzi shone there alternately; all these were not necessary to fascinate a youth whom the
sound of the most simple instrument, provided it was just, transported with joy. Magnificence only
produced a stupid admiration, without any violent desire to partake of it, my thoughts were principally
employed in observing whether any young princess was present that merited my homage, and whom I
could make the heroine of a romance.
  Meantime, I was on the point of beginning one; in a less elevated sphere, it is true, but where could
I have brought it to a conclusion, I should have found pleasures a thousand times more delicious.
  Though I lived with the strictest economy, my purse insensibly grew lighter. This economy was,
however, less the effect of prudence than that love of simplicity, which, even to this day, the use of the
most expensive tables has not been able to vitiate. Nothing in my idea, either at that time or since, could
exceed a rustic repast; give me milk, vegetables, eggs, and brown bread, with tolerable wine and I shall
always think myself sumptuously regaled; a good appetite will furnish out the rest, if the maitre d'
hotel, with a number of unnecessary footmen, do not satiate me with their important attentions. Five or
six sous would then procure me a more agreeable meal than as many livres would have done since; I
was abstemious, therefore, for want of a temptation to be otherwise: though I do not know but I am
wrong to call this abstinence, for with my pears, new cheese, bread and some glasses of Montferrat
wine, which you might have cut with a knife, I was the greatest of epicures. Notwithstanding my
expenses were very moderate, it was possible to see the end of twenty livres; I was every day more
convinced of this, and, spite of the giddiness of youth, my apprehensions for the future amounted
almost to terror. All my castles in the air were vanished, and I became sensible of the necessity of
seeking some occupation that would procure me a subsistence.
  Even this was a work of difficulty; I thought of my engraving, but knew too little of it to be
employed as a journeyman, nor do masters abound in Turin; I resolved, therefore, till something better
presented itself, to go from shop to shop, offering to engrave ciphers, or coats of arms, on pieces ofplate, etc., and hoped to get employment by working at a low price; or taking what they chose to give
me. Even this expedient did not answer my expectations; almost all my applications were ineffectual,
the little I procured being hardly sufficient to produce a few scanty meals.
  Walking  one  morning  pretty  early  in  the  'Contra  nova',  I  saw  a  young  tradeswoman  behind  a
counter, whose looks were so charmingly attractive, that, notwithstanding my timidity with the ladies, I
entered the shop without hesitation, offered my services as usual: and had the happiness to have it
accepted. She made me sit down and recite my little history, pitied my forlorn situation; bade me be
cheerful, and endeavored to make me so by an assurance that every good Christian would give me
assistance; then (while she had occasion for) she went up stairs and fetched me something for breakfast.
This seemed a promising beginning, nor was what followed less flattering: she was satisfied with my
work, and, when I had a little recovered myself, still more with my discourse. She was rather elegantly
dressed and notwithstanding her gentle looks this appearance of gayety had disconcerted me; but her
good-nature, the compassionate tone of her voice, with her gentle and caressing manner, soon set me at
ease with myself; I saw my endeavors to please were crowned with success, and this assurance made
me succeed the more. Though an Italian, and too pretty to be entirely devoid of coquetry, she had so
much modesty, and I so great a share of timidity, that our adventure was not likely to be brought to a
very speedy conclusion, nor did they give us time to make any good of it. I cannot recall the few short
moments I passed with this lovely woman without being sensible of an inexpressible charm, and can
yet  say,  it  was  there  I  tasted  in  their  utmost  perfection  the  most  delightful,  as  well  as  the  purest
pleasures of love.
  She was a lively pleasing brunette, and the good nature that was painted on her lovely face rendered
her vivacity more interesting. She was called Madam Basile: her husband, who was considerably older
than herself, consigned her, during his absence, to the care of a clerk, too disagreeable to be thought
dangerous; but who, notwithstanding, had pretensions that he seldom showed any signs of, except of
ill--humors, a good share of which he bestowed on me; though I was pleased to hear him play the flute,
on which he was a tolerable musician. This second Egistus was sure to grumble whenever he saw me
go into his mistress' apartment, treating me with a degree of disdain which she took care to repay him
with interest; seeming pleased to caress me in his presence, on purpose to torment him. This kind of
revenge, though perfectly to my taste, would have been still more charming in a 'tete a tete', but she did
not proceed so far; at least, there was a difference in the expression of her kindness. Whether she
thought me too young, that it was my place to make advances, or that she was seriously resolved to be
virtuous, she had at such times a kind of reserve, which, though not absolutely discouraging, kept my
passion within bounds.
I did not feel the same real and tender respect for her as I did for Madam de Warrens: I was
embarrassed, agitated, feared to look, and hardly dared to breathe in her presence, yet to have left her
would have been worse than death: How fondly did my eyes devour whatever they could gaze on
without being perceived! the flowers on her gown, the point of her pretty foot, the interval of a round
white arm that appeared between her glove and ruffle, the least part of her neck, each object increased
the force of all the rest, and added to the infatuation. Gazing thus on what was to be seen, and even
more than was to be seen, my sight became confused, my chest seemed contracted, respiration was
every moment more painful. I had the utmost difficulty to hide my agitation, to prevent my sighs from
being heard, and this difficulty was increased by the silence in which we were frequently plunged.
Happily, Madam Basile, busy at her work, saw nothing of all this, or seemed not to see it: yet I
sometimes observed a kind of sympathy, especially at the frequent rising of her handkerchief, and this
dangerous sight almost mastered every effort, but when on the point of giving way to my transports,
she spoke a few words to me with an air of tranquility, and in an instant the agitation subsided.
I saw her several times in this manner without a word, a gesture, or even a look, too expressive,
making the least intelligence between us. The situation was both my torment and delight, for hardly in
the simplicity of my heart, could I imagine the cause of my uneasiness. I should suppose these 'tete a
tete' could not be displeasing to her, at least, she sought frequent occasions to renew them; this was avery disinterested labor, certainly, as appeared by the use she made, or ever suffered me to make of
them.
  Being, one day, wearied with the clerk's discourse, she had retired to her chamber; I made haste to
finish what I had to do in the back shop, and followed her; the door was half open, and I entered
without being perceived. She was embroidering near a window on the opposite side of the room; she
could not see me; and the carts in the streets made too much noise for me to be heard. She was always
well dressed, but this day her attire bordered on coquetry. Her attitude was graceful, her head leaning
gently forward, discovered a small circle of her neck; her hair, elegantly dressed was ornamented with
flowers; her figure was universally charming, and I had an uninterrupted opportunity to admire it. I was
absolutely in a state of ecstasy, and, involuntary, sinking on my knees, I passionately extended my arms
towards her, certain she could not hear, and having no conception that she could see me; but there was
a chimney glass at the end of the room that betrayed all my proceedings. I am ignorant what effect this
transport produced on her; she did not speak; she did not look on me; but, partly turning her head, with
the movement of her finger only, she pointed to the mat that was at her feet--To start up, with an
articulate cry of joy, and occupy the place she had indicated, was the work of a moment; but it will
hardly be believed I dared attempt no more, not even to speak, raise my eyes to hers, or rest an instant
on her knees, though in an attitude which seemed to render such a support necessary. I was dumb,
immovable, but far enough from a state of tranquility; agitation, joy, gratitude, ardent indefinite wishes,
restrained  by  the  fear  of  giving  displeasure,  which  my  unpractised  heart  too  much  dreaded,  were
sufficiently discernible. She neither appeared more tranquil, nor less intimidated than myself--uneasy at
my present situation; confounded at having brought me there, beginning to tremble for the effects of a
sign which she had made without reflecting on the consequences, neither giving encouragement, nor
expressing disapprobation, with her eyes fixed on her work, she endeavored to appear unconscious of
everything that passed; but all my stupidity could not hinder me from concluding that she partook of
my embarrassment, perhaps, my transports, and was only hindered by a bashfulness like mine, without
even that supposition giving me power to surmount it. Five or six years older than myself, every
advance, according to my idea, should have been made by her, and, since she did nothing to encourage
mine, I concluded they would offend her. Even at this time, I am inclined to believe I thought right; she
certainly had wit enough to perceive that a novice like me had occasion, not only for encouragement
but instruction.
I am ignorant how this animated, though dumb scene would have ended, or how long I should have
continued immovable in this ridiculous, though delicious, situation, had we not been interrupted--in the
height of my agitation, I heard the kitchen door open, which joined Madam Basile's chamber; who,
being alarmed, said, with a quick voice and action, "Get up! Here's Rosina!" Rising hastily I seized one
of her hands, which she held out to me, and gave it two eager kisses; at the second I felt this charming
hand press gently on my lips. Never in my life did I enjoy so sweet a moment; but the occasion I had
lost returned no more, this being the conclusion of our amours.
  This may be the reason why her image yet remains imprinted on my heart in such charming colors,
which have even acquired fresh lustre since I became acquainted with the world and women. Had she
been mistress of the least degree of experience, she would have taken other measures to animate so
youthful a lover; but if her heart was weak, it was virtuous; and only suffered itself to be borne away by
a  powerful  though  involuntary  inclination.  This  was,  apparently,  her  first  infidelity,  and  I  should,
perhaps, have found more difficulty in vanquishing her scruples than my own; but, without proceeding
so far, I experienced in her company the most inexpressible delights. Never did I taste with any other
woman pleasures equal to those two minutes which I passed at the feet of Madam Basile without even
daring to touch her gown. I am convinced no satisfaction can be compared to that we feel with a
virtuous woman we esteem; all is transport!--A sign with the finger, a hand lightly pressed against my
lips, were the only favors I ever received from Madam Basile, yet the bare remembrance of these
trifling condescensions continues to transport me.
  It was in vain I watched the two following days for another tete a tete; it was impossible to find anopportunity; nor could I perceive on her part any desire to forward it; her behavior was not colder, but
more distant than usual, and I believe she avoided my looks for fear of not being able sufficiently to
govern her own. The cursed clerk was more vexatious than ever; he even became a wit, telling me, with
a satirical sneer, that I should unquestionably make my way among the ladies. I trembled lest I should
have  been  guilty  of  some  indiscretion,  and  looking  at  myself  as  already  engaged  in  an  intrigue,
endeavored to cover with an air of mystery an inclination which hitherto certainly had no great need of
it; this made me more circumspect in my choice of opportunities, and by resolving only to seize such as
should be absolutely free from the danger of a surprise, I met none.
  Another romantic folly, which I could never overcome, and which, joined to my natural timidity,
tended directly to contradict the clerk's predictions, is, I always loved too sincerely, too perfectly, I may
say, to find happiness easily attainable. Never were passions at the same time more lively and pure than
mine; never was love more tender, more true, or more disinterested; freely would I have sacrificed my
own happiness to that of the object of my affection; her reputation was dearer than my life, and I could
promise myself no happiness for which I would have exposed her peace of mind for a moment. This
disposition has ever made me employ so much care, use so many precautions, such secrecy in my
adventures, that all of them have failed; in a word, my want of success with the women has ever
proceeded from having loved them too well.
  To return to our Egistus, the fluter; it was remarkable that in becoming more insupportable, the
traitor put on the appearance of complaisance. From the first day Madam Basile had taken me under her
protection, she had endeavored to make me serviceable in the warehouse; and finding I understood
arithmetic tolerably well, she proposed his teaching me to keep the books; a proposition that was but
indifferently received by this humorist, who might, perhaps, be fearful of being supplanted. As this
failed,  my  whole  employ,  besides  what  engraving  I  had  to  do,  was  to  transcribe  some  bills  and
accounts, to write several books over fair, and translate commercial letters from Italian into French. All
at once he thought fit to accept the before rejected proposal, saying, he would teach me bookkeeping,
by double--entry, and put me in a situation to offer my services to M. Basile on his return; but there was
something so false, malicious, and ironical, in his air and manner, that it was by no means calculated to
inspire me with confidence. Madam Basile, replied archly, that I was much obliged to him for his kind
offer, but she hoped fortune would be more favorable to my merits, for it would be a great misfortune,
with so much sense, that I should only be a pitiful clerk.
  She often said, she would procure me some acquaintance that might be useful; she doubtless felt the
necessity of parting with me, and had prudently resolved on it. Our mute declaration had been made on
Thursday, the Sunday following she gave a dinner. A Jacobin of good appearance was among the
guests,  to  whom  she  did  me  the  honor  to  present  me.  The  monk  treated  me  very  affectionately,
congratulated me on my late conversion, mentioned several particulars of my story, which plainly
showed he had been made acquainted with it, then, tapping me familiarly on the cheek, bade me be
good,  to  keep  up  my  spirits,  and  come  to  see  him  at  his  convent,  where  he  should  have  more
opportunity to talk with me. I judged him to be a person of some consequence by the deference that was
paid him; and by the paternal tone he assumed with Madam Basile, to be her confessor. I likewise
remember that his decent familiarity was attended with an appearance of esteem, and even respect for
his  fair  penitent,  which  then  made  less  impression  on  me  than  at  present.  Had  I  possessed  more
experience how should I have congratulated myself on having touched the heart of a young woman
respected by her confessor!
  The table not being large enough to accommodate all the company, a small one was prepared,
where  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  dining  with  our  agreeable  clerk;  but  I  lost  nothing  with  regard  to
attention  and  good  cheer,  for  several  plates  were  sent  to  the  side-table  which  were  certainly  not
intended for him.
  Thus far all went well; the ladies were in good spirits, and the gentlemen very gallant, while Madam
Basile did the honors of the table with peculiar grace. In the midst of the dinner we heard a chaise stop
at the door, and presently some one coming up stairs--it was M. Basile. Methinks I now see himentering, in his scarlet coat with gold buttons --from that day I have held the color in abhorrence. M.
Basile was a tall handsome man, of good address: he entered with a consequential look and an air of
taking his family unawares, though none but friends were present. His wife ran to meet him, threw her
arms about his neck, and gave him a thousand caresses, which he received with the utmost indifference;
and  without  making  any  return  saluted  the  company  and  took  his  place  at  table.  They  were  just
beginning to speak of his journey, when casting his eye on the small table he asked in a sharp tone,
what lad that was? Madam Basile answered ingenuously. He then inquired whether I lodged in the
house; and was answered in the negative. "Why not?" replied he, rudely, "since he stays here all day, he
might as well remain all night too." The monk now interfered, with a serious and true eulogium on
Madam Basile: in a few words he made mine also, adding, that so far from blaming, he ought to further
the pious charity of his wife, since it was evident she had not passed the bounds of discretion. The
husband  answered  with  an  air  of  petulance,  which  (restrained  by  the  presence  of  the  monk)  he
endeavored  to  stifle;  it  was,  however,  sufficient  to  let  me  understand  he  had  already  received
information of me, and that our worthy clerk had rendered me an ill office.
  We had hardly risen from table, when the latter came in triumph from his employer, to inform me, I
must leave the house that instant, and never more during my life dare to set foot there. He took care to
aggravate this commission by everything that could render it cruel and insulting. I departed without a
word, my heart overwhelmed with sorrow, less for being obliged to quit this amiable woman, than at
the thought of leaving her to the brutality of such a husband. He was certainly right to wish her faithful;
but though prudent and wellborn, she was an Italian, that is to say, tender and vindictive; which made
me think, he was extremely imprudent in using means the most likely in the world to draw on himself
the very evil he so much dreaded.
  Such was the success of my first adventure. I walked several times up and down the street, wishing
to get a sight of what my heart incessantly regretted; but I could only discover her husband, or the
vigilant clerk, who, perceiving me, made a sign with the ell they used in the shop, which was more
expressive than alluring: finding, therefore, that I was so completely watched, my courage failed, and I
went no more. I wished, at least, to find out the patron she had provided me, but, unfortunately, I did
not know his name. I ranged several times round the convent, endeavoring in vain to meet with him. At
length, other events banished the delightful remembrance of Madam Basile; and in a short time I so far
forgot her, that I remained as simple, as much a novice as ever, nor did my penchant for pretty women
even receive any sensible augmentation.
  Her liberality had, however, increased my little wardrobe, though she had done this with precaution
and  prudence,  regarding  neatness  more  than  decoration,  and  to  make  me  comfortable  rather  than
brilliant. The coat I had brought from Geneva was yet wearable, she only added a hat and some linen. I
had no ruffles, nor would she give me any, not but I felt a great inclination for them. She was satisfied
with having put it in my power to keep myself clean, though a charge to do this was unnecessary while
I was to appear before her.
  A few days after this catastrophe; my hostess, who, as I have already observed, was very friendly,
with great satisfaction informed me she had heard of a situation, and that a lady of rank desired to see
me. I immediately thought myself in the road to great adventures; that being the point to which all my
ideas tended: this, however, did not prove so brilliant as I had conceived it. I waited on the lady with
the servant; who had mentioned me: she asked a number of questions, and my answers not displeasing
her, I immediately entered into her service not, indeed, in the quality of favorite, but as a footman. I
was clothed like the rest of her people, the only difference being, they wore a shoulder--knot, which I
had not, and, as there was no lace on her livery, it appeared merely a tradesman's suit. This was the
unforeseen conclusion of all my great expectancies!
  The Countess of Vercellis, with whom I now lived, was a widow without children; her husband was
a Piedmontese, but I always believed her to be a Savoyard, as I could have no conception that a native
of Piedmont could speak such good French, and with so pure an accent. She was a middle-aged woman,
of a noble appearance and cultivated understanding, being fond of French literature, in which she waswell versed. Her letters had the expression, and almost the elegance of Madam de Savigne's; some of
them might have been taken for hers. My principal employ, which was by no means displeasing to me,
was  to  write  from  her  dictating;  a  cancer  in  the  breast,  from  which  she  suffered  extremely,  not
permitting her to write herself.
  Madam de Vercellis not only possessed a good understanding, but a strong and elevated soul. I was
with her during her last illness, and saw her suffer and die, without showing an instant of weakness, or
the least effort of constraint; still retaining her feminine manners, without entertaining an idea that such
fortitude gave her any claim to philosophy; a word which was not yet in fashion, nor comprehended by
her in the sense it is held at present. This strength of disposition sometimes extended almost to apathy,
ever appearing to feel as little for others as herself; and when she relieved the unfortunate, it was rather
for the sake of acting right, than from a principle of real commiseration. I have frequently experienced
this insensibility, in some measure, during the three months I remained with her. It would have been
natural to have had an esteem for a young man of some abilities, who was incessantly under her
observation, and that she should think, as she felt her dissolution approaching, that after her death he
would have occasion for assistance and support: but whether she judged me unworthy of particular
attention, or that those who narrowly watched all her motions, gave her no opportunity to think of any
but themselves, she did nothing for me.
I very well recollect that she showed some curiosity to know my story, frequently questioning me,
and appearing pleased when I showed her the letters I wrote to Madam de Warrens, or explained my
sentiments; but as she never discovered her own, she certainly did not take the right means to come at
them.  My  heart,  naturally  communicative,  loved  to  display  its  feelings,  whenever  I  encountered  a
similar disposition; but dry, cold interrogatories, without any sign of blame or approbation on my
answers, gave me no confidence. Not being able to determine whether my discourse was agreeable or
displeasing, I was ever in fear, and thought less of expressing my ideas, than of being careful not to say
anything  that  might  seem  to  my  disadvantage.  I  have  since  remarked  that  this  dry  method  of
questioning themselves into people's characters is a common trick among women who pride themselves
on superior understanding. These imagine, that by concealing their own sentiments, they shall the more
easily  penetrate  into  those  of  others;  being  ignorant  that  this  method  destroys  the  confidence  so
necessary to make us reveal them. A man, on being questioned, is immediately on his guard: and if
once he supposes that, without any interest in his concerns, you only wish to set him a-talking, either he
entertains you with lies, is silent, or, examining every word before he utters it, rather chooses to pass
for a fool, than to be the dupe of your curiosity. In short, it is ever a bad method to attempt to read the
hearts of others by endeavoring to conceal our own.
  Madam de Vercellis never addressed a word to me which seemed to express affection, pity, or
benevolence. She interrogated me coldly, and my answers were uttered with so much timidity, that she
doubtless  entertained  but  a  mean  opinion  of  my  intellects,  for  latterly  she  never  asked  me  any
questions, nor said anything but what was absolutely necessary for her service. She drew her judgment
less from what I really was, than from what she had made me, and by considering me as a footman
prevented my appearing otherwise.
I am inclined to think I suffered at that time by the same interested game of concealed manoeuvre,
which has counteracted me throughout my life, and given me a very natural aversion for everything that
has the least appearance of it. Madam de Vercellis having no children, her nephew, the Count de la
Roque, was her heir, and paid his court assiduously, as did her principal domestics, who, seeing her end
approaching, endeavored to take care of themselves; in short, so many were busy about her, that she
could hardly have found time to think of me. At the head of her household was a M. Lorenzy, an artful
genius, with a still more artful wife; who had so far insinuated herself into the good graces of her
mistress, that she was rather on the footing of a friend than a servant. She had introduced a niece of hers
as lady's maid: her name was Mademoiselle Pontal; a cunning gypsy, that gave herself all the airs of a
waiting-woman, and assisted her aunt so well in besetting the countess, that she only saw with their
eyes, and acted through their hands. I had not the happiness to please this worthy triumvirate; I obeyed,but did not wait on them, not conceiving that my duty to our general mistress required me to be a
servant to her servants. Besides this, I was a person that gave them some inquietude; they saw I was not
in my proper situation, and feared the countess would discover it likewise, and by placing me in it,
decrease their portions; for such sort of people, too greedy to be just, look on every legacy given to
others as a diminution of their own wealth; they endeavored, therefore, to keep me as much out of her
sight as possible. She loved to write letters, in her situation, but they contrived to give her a distaste to
it; persuading her, by the aid of the doctor, that it was too fatiguing; and, under pretence that I did not
understand how to wait on her, they employed two great lubberly chairmen for that purpose; in a word,
they managed the affair so well, that for eight days before she made her will, I had not been permitted
to enter the chamber. Afterwards I went in as usual, and was even more assiduous than any one, being
afflicted at the sufferings of the unhappy lady, whom I truly respected and beloved for the calmness and
fortitude with which she bore her illness, and often did I shed tears of real sorrow without being
perceived by any one.
  At length we lost her--I saw her expire. She had lived like a woman of sense and virtue, her death
was that of a philosopher. I can truly say, she rendered the Catholic religion amiable to me by the
serenity with which she fulfilled its dictates, without any mixture of negligence or affectation. She was
naturally serious, but towards the end of her illness she possessed a kind of gayety, too regular to be
assumed, which served as a counterpoise to the melancholy of her situation. She only kept her bed two
days, continuing to discourse cheerfully with those about her to the very last.
  She had bequeathed a year's wages to all the under servants, but, not being on the household list, I
had nothing: the Count de la Roque, however, ordered me thirty livres, and the new coat I had on,
which M. Lorenzy would certainly have taken from me. He even promised to procure me a place;
giving me permission to wait on him as often as I pleased. Accordingly, I went two or three times,
without being able to speak to him, and as I was easily repulsed, returned no more; whether I did wrong
will be seen hereafter.
  Would I had finished what I have to say of my living at Madam de Vercellis's. Though my situation
apparently remained the same, I did not leave her house as I had entered it: I carried with me the long
and painful remembrance of a crime; an insupportable weight of remorse which yet hangs on my
conscience, and whose bitter recollection, far from weakening, during a period of forty years, seems to
gather strength as I grow old. Who would believe, that a childish fault should be productive of such
melancholy  consequences?  But  it  is  for  the  more  than  probable  effects  that  my  heart  cannot  be
consoled. I have, perhaps, caused an amiable, honest, estimable girl, who surely merited a better fate
than myself, to perish with shame and misery.
  Though  it  is  very  difficult  to  break  up  housekeeping  without  confusion,  and  the  loss  of  some
property; yet such was the fidelity of the domestics, and the vigilance of M. and Madam Lorenzy, that
no article of the inventory was found wanting; in short, nothing was missing but a pink and silver
ribbon, which had been worn, and belonged to Mademoiselle Pontal. Though several things of more
value were in my reach, this ribbon alone tempted me, and accordingly I stole it. As I took no great
pains  to  conceal  the  bauble,  it  was  soon  discovered;  they  immediately  insisted  on  knowing  from
whence I had taken it; this perplexed me--I hesitated, and at length said, with confusion, that Marion
gave it me.
  Marion was a young Mauriennese, and had been cook to Madam de Vercellis ever since she left off
giving entertainments, for being sensible she had more need of good broths than fine ragouts, she had
discharged her former one. Marion was not only pretty, but had that freshness of color only to be found
among the mountains, and, above all, an air of modesty and sweetness, which made it impossible to see
her without affection; she was besides a good girl, virtuous, and of such strict fidelity, that everyone
was surprised at hearing her named. They had not less confidence in me, and judged it necessary to
certify which of us was the thief. Marion was sent for; a great number of people were present, among
whom was the Count de la Roque: she arrives; they show her the ribbon; I accuse her boldly: she
remains confused and speechless, casting a look on me that would have disarmed a demon, but whichmy barbarous heart resisted. At length, she denied it with firmness, but without anger, exhorting me to
return to myself, and not injure an innocent girl who had never wronged me. With infernal impudence,
I confirmed my accusation, and to her face maintained she had given me the ribbon: on which, the poor
girl, bursting into tears, said these words--"Ah, Rousseau! I thought you a good disposition--you render
me very unhappy, but I would not be in your situation." She continued to defend herself with as much
innocence as firmness, but without uttering the least invective against me. Her moderation, compared to
my positive tone, did her an injury; as it did not appear natural to suppose, on one side such diabolical
assurance; on the other, such angelic mildness. The affair could not be absolutely decided, but the
presumption was in my favor; and the Count de la Roque, in sending us both away, contented himself
with saying, "The conscience of the guilty would revenge the innocent." His prediction was true, and is
being daily verified.
I am ignorant what became of the victim of my calumny, but there is little probability of her having
been able to place herself agreeably after this, as she labored under an imputation cruel to her character
in every respect. The theft was a trifle, yet it was a theft, and, what was worse, employed to seduce a
boy; while the lie and obstinacy left nothing to hope from a person in whom so many vices were united.
I do not even look on the misery and disgrace in which I plunged her as the greatest evil: who knows, at
her age, whither contempt and disregarded innocence might have led her?--Alas! if remorse for having
made her unhappy is insupportable, what must I have suffered at the thought of rendering her even
worse than myself. The cruel remembrance of this transaction, sometimes so troubles and disorders me,
that, in my disturbed slumbers, I imagine I see this poor girl enter and reproach me with my crime, as
though I had committed it but yesterday. While in easy tranquil circumstances, I was less miserable on
this  account,  but,  during  a  troubled  agitated  life,  it  has  robbed  me  of  the  sweet  consolation  of
persecuted innocence, and made me wofully experience, what, I think, I have remarked in some of my
works, that remorse sleeps in the calm sunshine of prosperity, but wakes amid the storms of adversity. I
could never take on me to discharge my heart of this weight in the bosom of a friend; nor could the
closest intimacy ever encourage me to it, even with Madam de Warrens: all I could do, was to own I
had to accuse myself of an atrocious crime, but never said in what it consisted. The weight, therefore,
has remained heavy on my conscience to this day; and I can truly own the desire of relieving myself, in
some measure, from it, contributed greatly to the resolution of writing my Confessions.
I have proceeded truly in that I have just made, and it will certainly be thought I have not sought to
palliate the turpitude of my offence; but I should not fulfill the purpose of this undertaking, did I not, at
the same time, divulge my interior disposition, and excuse myself as far as is conformable with truth.
  Never was wickedness further from my thoughts, than in that cruel moment; and when I accused
the unhappy girl, it is strange, but strictly true, that my friendship for her was the immediate cause of it.
She was present to my thoughts; I formed my excuse from the first object that presented itself: I
accused her with doing what I meant to have done, and as I designed to have given her the ribbon,
asserted she had given it to me. When she appeared, my heart was agonized, but the presence of so
many people was more powerful than my compunction. I did not fear punishment, but I dreaded shame:
I dreaded it more than death, more than the crime, more than all the world. I would have buried, hid
myself in the centre of the earth: invincible shame bore down every other sentiment; shame alone
caused all my impudence, and in proportion as I became criminal, the fear of discovery rendered me
intrepid. I felt no dread but that of being detected, of being publicly, and to my face, declared a thief,
liar, and calumniator; an unconquerable fear of this overcame every other sensation. Had I been left to
myself, I should infallibly have declared the truth. Or if M. de la Rogue had taken me aside, and said--
"Do not injure this poor girl; if you are guilty own it,"--I am convinced I should instantly have thrown
myself at his feet; but they intimidated, instead of encouraging me. I was hardly out of my childhood,
or rather, was yet in it. It is also just to make some allowance for my age. In youth, dark, premeditated
villainy is more criminal than in a riper age, but weaknesses are much less so; my fault was truly
nothing more; and I am less afflicted at the deed itself than for its consequences. It had one good effect,
however, in preserving me through the rest of my life from any criminal action, from the terribleimpression that has remained from the only one I ever committed; and I think my aversion for lying
proceeds in a great measure from regret at having been guilty of so black a one. If it is a crime that can
be expiated, as I dare believe, forty years of uprightness and honor on various difficult occasions, with
the many misfortunes that have overwhelmed my latter years, may have completed it. Poor Marion has
found so many avengers in this world, that however great my offence towards her, I do not fear to bear
the guilt with me. Thus have I disclosed what I had to say on this painful subject; may I be permitted
never to mention it again.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK III.
  Leaving the service of Madam de Vercellis nearly as I had entered it, I returned to my former
hostess, and remained there five or six weeks; during which time health, youth, and laziness, frequently
rendered my temperament importunate. I was restless, absent, and thoughtful: I wept and sighed for a
happiness I had no idea of, though at the same time highly sensible of some deficiency. This situation is
indescribable, few men can even form any conception of it, because, in general, they have prevented
that plenitude of life, at once tormenting and delicious. My thoughts were incessantly occupied with
girls and women, but in a manner peculiar to myself: these ideas kept my senses in a perpetual and
disagreeable activity, though, fortunately, they did not point out the means of deliverance. I would have
given my life to have met with a Miss Goton, but the time was past in which the play of infancy
predominated;  increase  of  years  had  introduced  shame,  the  inseparable  companion  of  a  conscious
deviation from rectitude, which so confirmed my natural timidity as to render it invincible; and never,
either at that time or since, could I prevail on myself to offer a proposition favorable to my wishes
(unless in a manner constrained to it by previous advances) even with those whose scruples I had no
cause to dread.
  My stay at Madam de Vercellis's had procured me some acquaintance, which I thought might be
serviceable to me, and therefore wished to retain. Among others, I sometimes visited a Savoyard abbe,
M. Gaime, who was tutor to the Count of Melarede's children. He was young, and not much known, but
possessed an excellent cultivated understanding, with great probity, and was, altogether, one of the best
men I ever knew. He was incapable of doing me the service I then stood most in need of, not having
sufficient interest to procure me a situation, but from him I reaped advantages far more precious, which
have been useful to me through life, lessons of pure morality, and maxims of sound judgment.
  In the successive order of my inclinations and ideas, I had ever been too high or too low. Achilles
or  Thersites;  sometimes  a  hero,  at  others  a  villain.  M.  Gaime  took  pains  to  make  me  properly
acquainted  with  myself,  without  sparing  or  giving  me  too  much  discouragement.  He  spoke  in
advantageous  terms  of  my  disposition  and  talents,  adding,  that  he  foresaw  obstacles  which  would
prevent my profiting by them; thus, according to him, they were to serve less as steps by which I should
mount to fortune, than as resources which might enable me to exist without one. He gave me a true
picture of human life, of which, hitherto, I had formed but a very erroneous idea, teaching me, that a
man of understanding, though destined to experience adverse fortune, might, by skilful management,
arrive  at  happiness;  that  there  was  no  true  felicity  without  virtue,  which  was  practicable  in  every
situation.  He  greatly  diminished  my  admiration  of  grandeur,  by  proving  that  those  in  a  superior
situation are neither better nor happier than those they command. One of his maxims has frequently
returned to my memory: it was, that if we could truly read the hearts of others we should feel more
inclination to descend than rise: this reflection, the truth of which is striking without extravagance, I
have found of great utility, in the various exigences of my life, as it tended to make me satisfied with
my condition. He gave me the first just conception of relative duties, which my high-flown imagination
had ever pictured in extremes, making me sensible that the enthusiasm of sublime virtues is of little usein society; that while endeavoring to rise too high we are in danger of falling; and that a virtuous and
uniform discharge of little duties requires as great a degree of fortitude as actions which are called
heroic, and would at the same time procure more honor and happiness. That it was infinitely more
desirable to possess the lasting esteem of those about us, than at intervals to attract admiration.
  In properly arranging the various duties between man and man, it was necessary to ascend to
principles; the step I had recently taken, and of which my present situation was the consequence,
naturally led us to speak of religion. It will easily be conceived that the honest M. Gaime was, in a great
measure, the original of the Savoyard Vicar; prudence only obliging him to deliver his sentiments, on
certain points, with more caution and reserve, and explain himself with less freedom; but his sentiments
and councils were the same, not even excepting his advice to return to my country; all was precisely as
I have since given it to the pubic. Dwelling no longer, therefore, on conversations which everyone may
see the substance of, I shall only add, that these wise instructions (though they did not produce an
immediate effect) were as so many seeds of virtue and religion in my heart which were never rooted
out, and only required the fostering cares of friendship to bring to maturity.
  Though my conversation was not very sincere, I was affected by his discourses, and far from being
weary, was pleased with them on account of their clearness and simplicity, but above all because his
heart seemed interested in what he said. My disposition is naturally tender, I have ever been less
attached to people for the good they have really done me than for that they designed to do, and my
feelings in this particular have seldom misled me: thus I truly esteemed M. Gaime. I was in a manner
his second disciple, which even at that time was of inestimable service in turning me from a propensity
to vice into which my idleness was leading me.
  One day, when I least expected it, I was sent for by the Count de la Roque. Having frequently called
at his house, without being able to speak with him, I grew weary, and supposing he had either forgot
me or retained some unfavorable impression of me, returned no more: but I was mistaken in both these
conjectures. He had more than once witnessed the pleasure I took in fulfilling my duty to his aunt: he
had even mentioned it to her, and afterwards spoke of it, when I no longer thought of it myself.
  He received me graciously, saying that instead of amusing me with useless promises, he had sought
to place me to advantage; that he had succeeded, and would put me in a way to better my situation, but
the rest must depend on myself. That the family into which he should introduce me being both powerful
and esteemed, I should need no other patrons; and though at first on the footing of a servant, I might be
assured, that if my conduct and sentiments were found above that station, I should not long remain in it.
The end of this discourse cruelly disappointed the brilliant hopes the beginning had inspired. "What!
forever a footman?" said I to myself, with a bitterness which confidence presently effaced, for I felt
myself too superior to that situation to fear long remaining there.
  He took me to the Count de Gauvon, Master of the Horse to the Queen, and Chief of the illustrious
House of Solar. The air of dignity conspicuous in this respectable old man, rendered the affability with
which he received me yet more interesting. He questioned me with evident interest, and I replied with
sincerity. He then told the Count de la Roque, that my features were agreeable, and promised intellect,
which he believed I was not deficient in; but that was not enough, and time must show the rest; after
which,  turning  to  me,  he  said,  "Child,  almost  all  situations  are  attended  with  difficulties  in  the
beginning; yours, however, shall not have too great a portion of them; be prudent, and endeavor to
please everyone, that will be almost your only employment; for the rest fear nothing, you shall be taken
care of." Immediately after he went to the Marchioness de Breil, his daughter-in-law, to whom he
presented me, and then to the Abbe de Gauvon, his son. I was elated with this beginning, as I knew
enough of the world already to conclude, that so much ceremony is not generally used at the reception
of a footman. In fact, I was not treated like one. I dined at the steward's table; did not wear a livery; and
the Count de Favria (a giddy youth) having commanded me to get behind his coach, his grandfather
ordered that I should get behind no coach, nor follow any one out of the house. Meantime, I waited at
table, and did, within doors, the business of a footman; but I did it, as it were, of my own free will,
without being appointed to any particular service; and except writing some letters, which were dictatedto me, and cutting out some ornaments for the Count de Favria, I was almost the absolute master of my
time. This trial of my discretion, which I did not then perceive, was certainly very dangerous, and not
very humane; for in this state of idleness I might have contracted vices which I should not otherwise
have given into. Fortunately, it did not produce that effect; my memory retained the lessons of M.
Gaime, they had made an impression on my heart, and I sometimes escaped from the house of my
patron to obtain a repetition of them. I believe those who saw me going out, apparently by stealth, had
no conception of my business. Nothing could be more prudent than the advice he gave me respecting
my  conduct.  My  beginning  was  admirable;  so  much  attention,  assiduity,  and  zeal,  had  charmed
everyone.  The  Abby  Gaime  advised  me  to  moderate  this  first  ardor,  lest  I  should  relax,  and  that
relaxation should be considered as neglect. "Your setting out," said he, "is the rule of what will be
expected of you; endeavor gradually to increase your attentions, but be cautious how you diminish
them."
  As they paid but little attention to my trifling talents, and supposed I possessed no more than nature
had given me, there was no appearance (notwithstanding the promises of Count de Gauvon) of my
meeting with any particular consideration. Some objects of more consequence had intervened. The
Marquis de Breil, son of the Count de Gauvon, was then ambassador at Vienna; some circumstances
had occurred at that court which for some weeks kept the family in continual agitation, and left them no
time to think of me. Meantime I had relaxed but little in my attentions, though one object in the family
did me both good and harm, making me more secure from exterior dissipation, but less attentive to my
duty.
  Mademoiselle de Breil was about my own age, tolerably handsome, and very fair complexioned,
with black hair, which notwithstanding, gave her features that air of softness so natural to the flaxen,
and which my heart could never resist. The court dress, so favorable to youth, showed her fine neck and
shape to advantage, and the mourning, which was then worn, seemed to add to her beauty. It will be
said, a domestic should not take notice of these things; I was certainly to blame, yet I perceived all this,
nor was I the only one; the maitre d' hotel and valet de chambre spoke of her sometimes at table with a
vulgarity that pained me extremely. My head, however, was not sufficiently turned to allow of my
being entirely in love; I did not forget myself, or my situation. I loved to see Mademoiselle de Breil; to
hear her utter anything that marked wit, sense, or good humor: my ambition, confined to a desire of
waiting on her, never exceeded its just rights. At table I was ever attentive to make the most of them; if
her footman quitted her chair, I instantly supplied his place; in default of this, I stood facing her,
seeking in her eyes what she was about to ask for, and watching the moment to change her plate. What
would I not have given to hear her command, to have her look at, or speak the smallest word to me! but
no, I had the mortification to be beneath her regard; she did not even perceive I was there. Her brother,
who frequently spoke to me while at table, having one day said something which I did not consider
obliging, I made him so arch and well-turned an answer, that it drew her attention; she cast her eyes
upon me, and this glance was sufficient to fill me with transport. The next day, a second occasion
presented  itself,  which  I  fortunately  made  use  of.  A  great  dinner  was  given;  and  I  saw,  with
astonishment, for the first time, the maitre d' hotel waiting at table, with a sword by his side, and hat on
his head. By chance, the discourse turned on the motto of the house of Solar, which was, with the arms,
worked in the tapestry: 'Tel fiert qui ne fue pas'. As the Piedmontese are not in general very perfect in
the French language, they found fault with the orthography, saying, that in the word fiert there should
be no 't'. The old Count de Gauvon was going to reply, when happening to cast his eyes on me, he
perceived I smiled without daring to say anything; he immediately ordered me to speak my opinion. I
then said, I did not think the 't' superfluous, 'fiert' being an old French word, not derived from the noun
'ferus', proud, threatening; but from the verb 'ferit', he strikes, he wounds; the motto, therefore, did not
appear to mean, some threat, but, 'Some strike who do not kill'. The whole company fixed their eyes on
me, then on each other, without speaking a word; never was a greater degree of astonishment; but what
most flattered me, was an air of satisfaction which I perceived on the countenance of Mademoiselle de
Breil. This scornful lady deigned to cast on me a second look at least as valuable as the former, andturning to her grandfather, appeared to wait with impatience for the praise that was due to me, and
which he fully bestowed, with such apparent satisfaction, that it was eagerly chorused by the whole
table. This interval was short, but delightful in many respects; it was one of those moments so rarely
met with, which place things in their natural order, and revenge depressed merit for the injuries of
fortune. Some minutes after Mademoiselle de Breil again raised her eyes, desiring me with a voice of
timid affability to give her some drink. It will easily be supposed I did not let her wait, but advancing
towards her, I was seized with such a trembling, that having filled the glass too full, I spilled some of
the water on her plate, and even on herself. Her brother asked me, giddily, why I trembled thus? This
question increased my confusion, while the face of Mademoiselle de Breil was suffused with a crimson
blush.
  Here ended the romance; where it may be remarked (as with Madam Basile, and others in the
continuation of my life) that I was not fortunate in the conclusion of my amours. In vain I placed
myself in the antechamber of Madam de Breil, I could not obtain one mark of attention from her
daughter; she went in and out without looking at me, nor had I the confidence to raise my eyes to her; I
was even so foolishly stupid, that one day, on dropping her glove as she passed, instead of seizing and
covering it with kisses, as I would gladly have done, I did not dare to quit my place, but suffered it to
be  taken  up  by  a  great  booby  of  a  footman,  whom  I  could  willingly  have  knocked  down  for  his
officiousness. To complete my timidity, I perceived I had not the good fortune to please Madam de
Breil; she not only never ordered, but even rejected, my services; and having twice found me in her
antechamber, asked me, dryly, "If I had nothing to do?" I was obliged, therefore, to renounce this dear
antechamber; at first it caused me some uneasiness, but other things intervening, I presently thought no
more of it.
  The disdain of Madam de Breil was fully compensated by the kindness of her father-in-law, who at
length began to think of me. The evening after the entertainment, I have already mentioned, he had a
conversation with me that lasted half an hour, which appeared to satisfy him, and absolutely enchanted
me. This good man had less sense than Madam de Vercellis, but possessed more feeling; I therefore
succeeded much better with him. He bade me attach myself to his son, the Abbe Gauvon, who had an
esteem for me, which, if I took care to cultivate, might be serviceable in furnishing me with what was
necessary to complete their views for my future establishment. The next morning I flew to M. the
Abbe, who did not receive me as a servant, but made me sit by his fireside, and questioned me with
great affability. He soon found that my education, which had attempted many things, had completed
none;  but  observing  that  I  understood  something  of  Latin,  he  undertook  to  teach  me  more,  and
appointed me to attend him every morning. Thus, by one of the whimsicalities which have marked the
whole course of my life, at once above and below my natural situation, I was pupil and footman in the
same house: and though in servitude, had a preceptor whose birth entitled him to supply that place only
to the children of kings.
  The Abbe de Gauvon was a younger son, and designed by his family for a bishopric, for which
reason his studies had been pursued, further than is usual with people of quality. He had been sent to
the university of Sienna, where he had resided some years, and from whence he had brought a good
portion of cruscantism, designing to be that at Turin which the Abbe de Dangeau was formerly at Paris.
Being disgusted with theology, he gave in to the belle-lettres, which is very frequent in Italy, with those
who have entered the career of prelacy. He had studied the poets, and wrote tolerable Latin and Italian
verses;  in  a  word,  his  taste  was  calculated  to  form  mine,  and  give  some  order  to  that  chaos  of
insignificant trash with which my brain was encumbered; but whether my prating had misled him, or
that he could not support the trouble of teaching the elementary parts of Latin, he put me at first too
high; and I had scarcely translated a few fables of Phoedrus before he put me into Virgil, where I could
hardly understand anything. It will be seen hereafter that I was destined frequently to learn Latin, but
never  to  attain  it.  I  labored  with  assiduity,  and  the  abbe  bestowed  his  attention  with  a  degree  of
kindness, the remembrance of which, even at this time, both interests and softens me. I passed the
greater part of the morning with him as much for my own instruction as his service; not that he everpermitted  me  to  perform  any  menial  office,  but  to  copy,  or  write  from  his  dictating;  and  my
employment of secretary was more useful than that of scholar, and by this means I not only learned the
Italian  in  its  utmost  purity,  but  also  acquired  a  taste  for  literature,  and  some  discernment  of
composition, which could not have been at La Tribu's, and which was useful to me when I afterwards
wrote alone.
  At this period of my life, without being romantic, I might reasonably have indulged the hope of
preferment. The abbe, thoroughly pleased with me, expressed his satisfaction to everyone, while his
father had such a singular affection for me, that I was assured by the Count de Favria, that he had
spoken of me to the king; even Madam de Breil had laid aside her disdainful looks; in short I was a
general  favorite,  which  gave  great  jealousy  to  the  other  servants,  who  seeing  me  honored  by  the
instructions of their master's son, were persuaded I should not remain their equal.
  As far as I could judge by some words dropped at random, and which I reflected on afterwards, it
appeared to me, that the House of Solar, wishing to run the career of embassies, and hoping perhaps in
time to arrive at the ministry, wished to provide themselves with a person of merit and talents, who
depending entirely on them, might obtain their confidence, and be of essential service. This project of
the Count de Gauvon was judicious, magnanimous, and truly worthy of a powerful nobleman, equally
provident and generous; but besides my not seeing, at that time, its full extent, it was far too rational for
my brain, and required too much confinement.
  My ridiculous ambition sought for fortune in the midst of brilliant adventures, and not finding one
woman in all this scheme, it appeared tedious, painful and melancholy; though I should rather have
thought it more honorable on this account, as the species of merit generally patronized by women is
certainly less worthy that I was supposed to possess.
  Everything succeeded to my wish: I had obtained, almost forced, the esteem of all; the trial was
over, and I was universally considered as a young man with flattering prospects, who was not at present
in his proper sphere, but was expected soon to reach it; but my place was not assigned me by man, and
I was to reach it by very difficult paths. I now come to one of those characteristic traits, which are so
natural to me, and which, indeed, the reader might have observed without this reflection.
  There were at Turin several new converts of my own stamp, whom I neither liked nor wish to see;
but I had met with some Genevese who were not of this description, and among others a M. Mussard,
nicknamed Wryneck, a miniature painter, and a distant relation. This M. Mussard, having learned my
situation at the Count de Gauvon's, came to see me, with another Genevese, named Bacle, who had
been my comrade during my apprenticeship. This Bacle was a very sprightly, amusing young fellow,
full of lively sallies, which at his time of life appeared extremely agreeable. At once, then, behold me
delighted with M. Bacle; charmed to such a degree that I found it impossible to quit him. He was
shortly to depart for Geneva; what a loss had I to sustain! I felt the whole force of it, and resolving to
make the best use of this precious interval, I determined not to leave him, or, rather, he never quitted
me, for my head was not yet sufficiently turned to think of quitting the house without leave, but it was
soon perceived that he engrossed my whole time, and he was accordingly forbid the house. This so
incensed me, that forgetting everything but my friend Bacle, I went neither to the abbe nor the count,
and was no longer to be found at home. I paid no attention to repeated reprimands, and at length was
threatened with dismissal. This threat was my ruin, as it suggested the idea that it was not absolutely
necessary that Bacle should depart alone. From that moment I could think of no other pleasure, no other
situation or happiness than taking this journey. To render the felicity still more complete, at the end of
it (though at an immense distance) I pictured to myself Madam de Warrens; for as to returning to
Geneva,  it  never  entered  into  my  imagination.  The  hills,  fields,  brooks  and  villages,  incessantly
succeeded each other with new charms, and this delightful jaunt seemed worthy to absorb my whole
existence. Memory recalled, with inexpressible pleasure, how charming the country had appeared in
coming to Turin; what then must it be, when, to the pleasure of independence, should be added the
company  of  a  good-humored  comrade  of  my  own  age  and  disposition,  without  any  constraint  or
obligation, but free to go or stay as we pleased? Would it not be madness to sacrifice the prospect of somuch felicity to projects of ambition, slow and difficult in their execution, and uncertain in their event?
But even supposing them realized, and in their utmost splendor, they were not worth one quarter of an
hour of the sweet pleasure and liberty of youth.
  Full of these wise conclusions, I conducted myself so improperly, that (not indeed without some
trouble) I got myself dismissed; for on my return one night the maitre de hotel gave me warning on the
part of the count. This was exactly what I wanted; for feeling, spite of myself, the extravagance of my
conduct, I wished to excuse it by the addition of injustice and ingratitude, by throwing the blame on
others, and sheltering myself under the idea of necessity.
I was told the Count de Favria wished to speak with me the next morning before my departure; but,
being sensible that my head was so far turned as to render it possible for me to disobey the injunction,
the maitre de hotel declined paying the money designed me, and which certainly I had very ill earned,
till after this visit; for my kind patrons being unwilling to place me in the situation of a footman, I had
not any fixed wages.
  The Count de Favria, though young and giddy, talked to me on this occasion in the most sensible
and serious manner: I might add, if it would not be thought vain, with the utmost tenderness. He
reminded me, in the most flattering terms, of the cares of his uncle, and intentions of his grandfather;
after having drawn in lively colors what I was sacrificing to ruin, he offered to make my peace, without
stipulating any conditions, but that I should no more see the worthless fellow who had seduced me.
  It was so apparent that he did not say all this of himself, that notwithstanding my blind stupidity, I
powerfully felt the kindness of my good old master, but the dear journey was too firmly printed on my
imagination for any consideration to balance the charm. Bereft of understanding, firm to my purpose, I
hardened myself against conviction, and arrogantly answered, that as they had thought fit to give me
warning, I had resolved to take it, and conceived it was now too late to retract, since, whatever might
happen to me, I was fully resolved not to be driven a second time from the same house. The count,
justly irritated, bestowed on me some names which I deserved, and putting me out of his apartment by
the shoulders, shut the door on me. I departed triumphant, as if I had gained the greatest victory, and
fearful of sustaining a second combat even had the ingratitude to leave the house without thanking the
abbe for his kindness.
  To form a just conception of my delirium at that moment, the excess to which my heart is subject to
be heated by the most trifling incidents, and the ardor with which my imagination seizes on the most
attractive objects should be conceived. At these times, plans the most ridiculous, childish, and void of
sense, flatter my favorite idea, and persuade me that it is reasonable to sacrifice everything to the
possession of it. Would it be believed, that when near nineteen, any one could be so stupid as to build
his hopes of future subsistence on an empty phial? For example:
  The Abbe de Gauvon had made me a present, some weeks before, of a very pretty heron fountain,
with which I was highly delighted. Playing with this toy, and speaking of our departure, the sage Bacle
and myself thought it might be of infinite advantage, and enable us to lengthen our journey. What in the
world was so curious as a heron fountain? This idea was the foundation on which we built our future
fortune: we were to assemble the country people in every village we might pass through, and delight
them with the sight of it, when feasting and good cheer would be sure to pour on us abundantly; for we
were both firmly persuaded, that provisions could cost nothing to those who grew and gathered them,
and if they did not stuff travellers, it was downright ill-nature.
  We pictured in all parts entertainments and weddings, reckoning that without any expense but wind
from our lungs, and the water of our fountain, we should be maintained through Piedmont, Savoy,
France, and indeed, all the world over. There was no end to our projected travels, and we immediately
directed our course northward, rather for the pleasure of crossing the Alps, than from a supposed
necessity of being obliged to stop at any place.
  Such was the plan on which I set out, abandoning without regret, my preceptors, studies, and hopes,
with the almost certain attainment of a fortune, to lead the life of a real vagabond. Farewell to the
capital; adieu to the court, ambition, love, the fair, and all the great adventures into which hope had ledme  during  the  preceding  year!  I  departed  with  my  fountain  and  my  friend  Bacle,  a  purse  lightly
furnished, but a heart over-flowing with pleasure, and only thinking how to enjoy the extensive felicity
which I supposed my project encircled.
  This extravagant journey was performed almost as agreeably as I had expected, though not exactly
on the same plan; not but our fountain highly amused the hostess and servants for some minutes at all
the ale-houses where we halted, yet we found it equally necessary to pay on our departure; but that
gave  us  no  concern,  as  we  never  thought  of  depending  on  it  entirely  until  our  money  should  be
expended. An accident spared us that trouble, our fountain was broken near Bramant, and in good time,
for we both felt (though without daring to own it to each other) that we began to be weary of it. This
misfortune rendered us gayer than ever; we laughed heartily at our giddiness in having forgotten that
our clothes and shoes would wear out, or trusting to renew them by the play of our fountain. We
continued our journey as merrily as we had begun it, only drawing faster towards that termination
where our drained purses made it necessary for us to arrive.
  At Chambery I became pensive; not for the folly I had committed, for never did any one think less
of the past, but on account of the reception I should meet with from Madam de Warrens; for I looked
on her house as my paternal home. I had written her an account of my reception at the Count de
Gauvon's; she knew my expectancies, and, in congratulating me on my good fortune, had added some
wise lessons on the return I ought to make for the kindness with which they treated me. She looked on
my fortune as already made, if not destroyed by my own negligence; what then would she say on my
arrival? for it never entered my mind that she might shut the door against me, but I dreaded the
uneasiness I might give her; I dreaded her reproaches, to me more wounding than want; I resolved to
bear all in silence, and, if possible to appease her. I now saw nothing but Madam de Warrens in the
whole universe, and to live in disgrace with her was impossible.
I was most concerned about my companion, whom I did not wish to offend, and feared I should not
easily get rid of. I prefaced this separation by an affected coldness during the last day's journey. The
drole understood me perfectly; in fact, he was rather giddy than deficient in point of sense--I expected
he would have been hurt at my inconstancy, but I was quite mistaken; nothing affected my friend
Bacle, for hardly had we set foot in town, on our arrival in Annecy, before he said, "You are now at
home,"--embraced--bade me adieu--turned on his heel, and disappeared; nor have I ever heard of him
since.
  How did my heart beat as I approached the habitation of Madam de Warrens! my legs trembled
under me, my eyes were clouded with a mist, I neither saw, heard, nor recollected any one, and was
obliged frequently to stop that I might draw breath, and recall my bewildered senses. Was it fear of not
obtaining that succor I stood in need of, which agitated me to this degree? At the age I then was, does
the fear of perishing with hunger give such alarms? No: I declare with as much truth as pride, that it
was not in the power of interest or indigence, at any period of my life, to expand or contract my heart.
In the course of a painful life, memorable for its vicissitudes, frequently destitute of an asylum, and
without bread, I have contemplated, with equal indifference, both opulence and misery. In want I might
have begged or stolen, as others have done, but never could feel distress at being reduced to such
necessities. Few men have grieved more than myself, few have shed so many tears; yet never did
poverty, or the fear of falling into it, make me heave a sigh or moisten my eyelids. My soul, in despite
of fortune, has only been sensible of real good and evil, which did not depend on her; and frequently,
when in possession of everything that could make life pleasing, I have been the most miserable of
mortals.
  The first glance of Madam de Warrens banished all my fears--my heart leaped at the sound of her
voice; I threw myself at her feet, and in transports of the most lively joy, pressed my lips upon her
hand. I am ignorant whether she had received any recent information of me. I discovered but little
surprise on her countenance, and no sorrow. "Poor child!" said she, in an affectionate tone, "art thou
here again? I knew you were too young for this journey; I am very glad, however, that it did not turn
out so bad as I apprehended." She then made me recount my history; it was not long, and I did itfaithfully: suppressing only some trifling circumstances, but on the whole neither sparing nor excusing
myself.
  The question was, where I could lodge: she consulted her maid on this point--I hardly dared to
breathe during the deliberation; but when I heard I was to sleep in the house, I could scarce contain my
joy; and saw the little bundle I brought with me carried into my destined apartment with much the same
sensations as St. Preux saw his chaise put up at Madam de Wolmar's. To complete all, I had the
satisfaction to find that this favor was not to be transitory; for at a moment when they thought me
attentive to something else, I heard Madam de Warrens say, "They may talk as they please, but since
Providence has sent him back, I am determined not to abandon him."
  Behold me, then, established at her house; not, however, that I date the happiest days of my life
from this period, but this served to prepare me for them. Though that sensibility of heart, which enables
us truly to enjoy our being, is the work of Nature, and perhaps a mere effect of organization, yet it
requires situations to unfold itself, and without a certain concurrence of favorable circumstances, a man
born with the most acute sensibility may go out of the world without ever having been acquainted with
his own temperament. This was my case till that time, and such perhaps it might have remained had I
never known Madam de Warrens, or even having known her, had I not remained with her long enough
to contract that pleasing habit of affectionate sentiments with which she inspired me. I dare affirm, that
those who only love, do not feel the most charming sensations we are capable of: I am acquainted with
another sentiment, less impetuous, but a thousand times more delightful; sometimes joined with love,
but frequently separated from it. This feeling is not simply friendship; it is more enchanting, more
tender; nor do I imagine it can exist between persons of the same sex; at least I have been truly a friend,
if ever a man was, and yet never experienced it in that kind. This distinction is not sufficiently clear, but
will become so hereafter: sentiments are only distinguishable by their effects.
  Madam de Warrens inhabited an old house, but large enough to have a handsome spare apartment,
which she made her drawing-room. I now occupied this chamber, which was in the passage I have
before mentioned as the place of our first meeting. Beyond the brook and gardens was a prospect of the
country, which was by no means uninteresting to the young inhabitant, being the first time, since my
residence at Bossey, that I had seen anything before my windows but walls, roofs, or the dirty street.
How pleasing then was this novelty! it helped to increase the tenderness of my disposition, for I looked
on this charming landscape as the gift of my dear patroness, who I could almost fancy had placed it
there on purpose for me. Peaceably seated, my eyes pursued her amidst the flowers and the verdure; her
charms seemed to me confounded with those of the spring; my heart, till now contracted, here found
means to expand itself, and my sighs exhaled freely in this charming retreat.
  The magnificence I had been accustomed to at Turin was not to be found at Madam de Warrens, but
in lieu of it there was neatness, regularity, and a patriarchal abundance, which is seldom attached to
pompous ostentation. She had very little plate, no china, no game in her kitchen, or foreign wines in her
cellar, but both were well furnished, and at every one's service; and her coffee, though served in
earthenware cups, was excellent. Whoever came to her house was invited to dine there, and never did
laborer,  messenger,  or  traveller,  depart  without  refreshment.  Her  family  consisted  of  a  pretty
chambermaid from Fribourg, named Merceret; a valet from her own country called Claude Anet (of
whom  I  shall  speak  hereafter),  a  cook,  and  two  hired  chairmen  when  she  visited,  which  seldom
happened.  This  was  a  great  deal  to  be  done  out  of  two  thousand  livres  a  year;  yet,  with  good
management, it might have been sufficient in a country where land is extremely good, and money very
scarce. Unfortunately, economy was never her favorite virtue; she contracted debts--paid them--thus
her money passed from hand to hand like a weaver's shuttle, and quickly disappeared.
  The arrangement of her housekeeping was exactly what I should have chosen, and I shared it with
satisfaction. I was least pleased with the necessity of remaining too long at table. Madam de Warrens
was so much incommoded with the first smell of soup or meat, as almost to occasion fainting; from this
she slowly recovered, talking meantime, and never attempting to eat for the first half hour. I could have
dined thrice in the time, and had ever finished my meal long before she began; I then ate again forcompany; and though by this means I usually dined twice, felt no inconvenience from it. In short, I was
perfectly at my ease, and the happier as my situation required no care. Not being at this time instructed
in  the  state  of  her  finances,  I  supposed  her  means  were  adequate  to  her  expense;  and  though  I
afterwards found the same abundance, yet when instructed in her real situation, finding her pension
ever  anticipated,  prevented  me  from  enjoying  the  same  tranquility.  Foresight  with  me  has  always
embittered enjoyment; in vain I saw the approach of misfortunes, I was never the more likely to avoid
them.
  From the first moment of our meeting, the softest familiarity was established between us: and in the
same degree it continued during the rest of her life. Child was my name, Mamma was hers, and child
and mamma we have ever continued, even after a number of years had almost effaced the apparent
difference of age between us. I think those names convey an exact idea of our behavior, the simplicity
of our manners, and above all, the similarity of our dispositions. To me she was the tenderest of
mothers, ever preferring my welfare to her own pleasure; and if my own satisfaction found some
interest in my attachment to her, it was not to change its nature, but only to render it more exquisite,
and infatuate me with the charm of having a mother young and handsome, whom I was delighted to
caress: I say literally, to caress, for never did it enter into her imagination to deny me the tenderest
maternal  kisses  and  endearments,  or  into  my  heart  to  abuse  them.  It  will  be  said,  at  length  our
connection was of a different kind: I confess it; but have patience, that will come in its turn.
  The sudden sight of her, on our first interview, was the only truly passionate moment she ever
inspired me with; and even that was principally the work of surprise. With her I had neither transports
nor desires, but remained in a ravishing calm, sensible of a happiness I could not define, and thus could
I have passed my whole life, or even eternity, without feeling an instant of uneasiness.
  She was the only person with whom I never experienced that want of conversation, which to me is
so painful to endure. Our tete-a-tetes were rather an inexhaustible chat than conversation, which could
only conclude from interruption. So far from finding discourse difficult, I rather thought it a hardship to
be silent; unless, when contemplating her projects, she sunk into a reverie; when I silently let her
meditate, and gazing on her, was the happiest of men. I had another singular fancy, which was that
without pretending to the favor of a tete-a-tete, I was perpetually seeking occasion to form them,
enjoying such opportunities with rapture; and when importunate visitors broke in upon us, no matter
whether it was man or woman, I went out murmuring, not being able to remain a secondary object in
her company; then, counting the minutes in her antechamber, I used to curse these eternal visitors,
thinking it inconceivable how they could find so much to say, because I had still more.
  If ever I felt the full force of my attachment, it was when I did not see her. When in her presence, I
was only content; when absent, my uneasiness reached almost to melancholy, and a wish to live with
her gave me emotions of tenderness even to tears. Never shall I forget one great holiday, while she was
at vespers, when I took a walk out of the city, my heart full of her image, and the ardent wish to pass
my life with her. I could easily enough see that at present this was impossible; that the happiness I
enjoyed would be of short duration, and this idea gave to my contemplations a tincture of melancholy,
which, however, was not gloomy, but tempered with a flattering hope. The ringing of bells, which ever
particularly affects me, the singing of birds, the fineness of the day, the beauty of the landscape, the
scattered country houses, among which in idea I placed our future dwelling, altogether struck me with
an impression so lively, tender, melancholy, and powerful, that I saw myself in ecstasy transported into
that happy time and abode, where my heart, possessing all the felicity it could desire, might taste it with
raptures inexpressible.
I never recollect to have enjoyed the future with such force of illusions as at that time; and what has
particularly struck me in the recollection of this reverie, is that when realized, I found my situation
exactly as I had imagined it. If ever waking dream had an appearance of a prophetic vision, it was
assuredly this; I was only deceived in its imaginary duration, for days, years, and life itself, passed
ideally in perfect tranquility, while the reality lasted but a moment. Alas! my most durable happiness
was but as a dream, which I had no sooner had a glimpse of, than I instantly awoke.I know not when I should have done, if I was to enter into a detail of all the follies that affection for
my dear Madam de Warrens made me commit. When absent from her, how often have I kissed the bed
on  a  supposition  that  she  had  slept  there;  the  curtains  and  all  the  furniture  of  my  chamber,  on
recollecting they were hers, and that her charming hands had touched them; nay, the floor itself, when I
considered she had walked there. Sometimes even in her presence, extravagancies escaped me, which
only the most violent passions seemed capable of inspiring; in a word, there was but one essential
difference to distinguish me from an absolute lover, and that particular renders my situation almost
inconceivable.
I had returned from Italy, not absolutely as I went there, but as no one of my age, perhaps, ever did
before, being equally unacquainted with women. My ardent constitution had found resources in those
means by which youth of my disposition sometimes preserve their purity at the expense of health,
vigor, and frequently of life itself. My local situation should likewise be considered--living with a
pretty woman, cherishing her image in the bottom of my heart, seeing her during the whole day, at
night surrounded with objects that recalled her incessantly to my remembrance, and sleeping in the bed
where I knew she had slept. What a situation! Who can read this without supposing me on the brink of
the grave? But quite the contrary; that which might have ruined me, acted as a preservative, at least for
a time. Intoxicated with the charm of living with her, with the ardent desire of passing my life there,
absent or present I saw in her a tender mother, an amiable sister, a respected friend, but nothing more;
meantime, her image filled my heart, and left room far no other object. The extreme tenderness with
which she inspired me excluded every other woman from my consideration, and preserved me from the
whole sex: in a word, I was virtuous, because I loved her. Let these particulars, which I recount but
indifferently, be considered, and then let any one judge what kind of attachment I had for her: for my
part, all I can say, is, that if it hitherto appears extraordinary, it will appear much more so in the sequel.
  My time passed in the most agreeable manner, though occupied in a way which was by no means
calculated to please me; such as having projects to digest, bills to write fair, receipts to transcribe, herbs
to pick, drugs to pound, or distillations to attend; and in the midst of all this, came crowds of travellers,
beggars, and visitors of all denominations. Some times it was necessary to converse at the same time
with a soldier, an apothecary, a prebendary, a fine lady, and a lay brother. I grumbled, swore, and
wished all this troublesome medley at the devil, while she seemed to enjoy it, laughing at my chagrin
till the tears ran down her cheeks. What excited her mirth still more, was to see that my anger was
increased by not being able myself to refrain from laughter. These little intervals, in which I enjoyed
the  pleasure  of  grumbling,  were  charming;  and  if,  during  the  dispute,  another  importunate  visitor
arrived, she would add to her amusement by maliciously prolonging the visit, meantime casting glances
at me for which I could almost have beat her; nor could she without difficulty refrain from laughter on
seeing my constrained politeness, though every moment glancing at her the look of a fury, while, even
in spite of myself, I thought the scene truly diverting.
  All this, without being pleasing in itself, contributed to amuse, because it made up a part of a life
which I thought delightful. Nothing that was performed around me, nothing that I was obliged to do,
suited my taste, but everything suited my heart; and I believe, at length, I should have liked the study of
medicine, had not my natural distaste to it perpetually engaged us in whimsical scenes, that prevented
my  thinking  of  it  in  a  serious  light.  It  was,  perhaps,  the  first  time  that  this  art  produced  mirth.  I
pretended  to  distinguish  a  physical  book  by  its  smell,  and  what  was  more  diverting,  was  seldom
mistaken. Madam de Warrens made me taste the most nauseous drugs; in vain I ran, or endeavored to
defend myself; spite of resistance or wry faces, spite of my struggles, or even of my teeth, when I saw
her charming fingers approach my lips, I was obliged to give up the contest.
  When shut up in an apartment with all her medical apparatus, any one who had heard us running
and shouting amidst peals of laughter would rather have imagined we had been acting a farce than
preparing opiates or elixirs.
  My time, however, was not entirely passed in these fooleries; in the apartment which I occupied I
found a few books: there was the Spectator, Puffendorf, St. Everemond, and the Henriade. Though Ihad not my old passion for books, yet I amused myself with reading a part of them. The Spectator was
particularly pleasing and serviceable to me. The Abbe de Gauvon had taught me to read less eagerly,
and with a greater degree of attention, which rendered my studies more serviceable. I accustomed
myself to reflect on elocution and the elegance of composition; exercising myself in discerning pure
French from my provincial idiom. For example, I corrected an orthographical fault (which I had in
common with all Genevese) by these two lines of the Henriade:
  Soit qu' un ancient respect pour le sang de leurs maitres, Parlat encore pour lui dans le coeur de ces
traitres
I was struck with the word 'parlat', and found a 't' was necessary to form the third person of the
subjunctive, whereas I had always written and pronounced it parla, as in the present of the indicative.
  Sometimes my studies were the subject of conversation with Madam de Warrens; sometimes I read
to  her,  in  which  I  found  great  satisfaction;  and  as  I  endeavored  to  read  well,  it  was  extremely
serviceable to me. I have already observed that her mind was cultivated; her understanding was at this
time in its meridian. Several people of learning having been assiduous to ingratiate themselves, had
taught her to distinguish works of merit; but her taste (if I may so express myself) was rather Protestant;
ever  speaking  warmly  of  Bayle,  and  highly  esteeming  St.  Evremond,  though  long  since  almost
forgotten in France: but this did not prevent her having a taste for literature, or expressing her thoughts
with  elegance.  She  had  been  brought  up  with  polite  company,  and  coming  young  to  Savoy,  by
associating with people of the best fashion, had lost the affected manners of her own country, where the
ladies mistake wit for sense, and only speak in epigram.
  Though she had seen the court but superficially, that glance was sufficient to give her a competent
idea of it; and notwithstanding secret jealousies and the murmurs excited by her conduct and running in
debt, she ever preserved friends there, and never lost her pension. She knew the world, and was useful.
This was her favorite theme in our conversations, and was directly opposite to my chimerical ideas,
though the kind of instruction I particularly had occasion for. We read Bruyere together; he pleased her
more than Rochefoucault, who is a dull, melancholy author, particularly to youth, who are not fond of
contemplating man as he really is. In moralizing she sometimes bewildered herself by the length of her
discourse; but by kissing her lips or hand from time to time I was easily consoled, and never found
them wearisome.
  This life was too delightful to be lasting; I felt this, and the uneasiness that thought gave me was the
only thing that disturbed my enjoyment. Even in playfulness she studied my disposition, observed and
interrogated me, forming projects for my future fortune, which I could readily have dispensed with.
Happily it was not sufficient to know my disposition, inclinations and talents; it was likewise necessary
to find a situation in which they would be useful, and this was not the work of a day. Even the
prejudices this good woman had conceived in favor of my merit put off the time of calling it into
action, by rendering her more difficult in the choice of means; thus (thanks to the good opinion she
entertained of me), everything answered to my wish; but a change soon happened which put a period to
my tranquility.
  A  relation  of  Madam  de  Warrens,  named  M.  d'Aubonne,  came  to  see  her;  a  man  of  great
understanding and intrigue, being, like her, fond of projects, though careful not to ruin himself by them.
He  had  offered  Cardinal  Fleury  a  very  compact  plan  for  a  lottery,  which,  however,  had  not  been
approved of, and he was now going to propose it to the court of Turin, where it was accepted and put
into execution. He remained some time at Annecy, where he fell in love with the Intendant's lady, who
was very amiable, much to my taste and the only person I saw with pleasure at the house of Madam de
Warrens. M. d'Aubonne saw me, I was strongly recommended by his relation; he promised, therefore,
to question and see what I was fit for, and, if he found me capable to seek me a situation. Madam de
Warrens sent me to him two or three mornings, under pretense of messages, without acquainting me
with  her  real  intention.  He  spoke  to  me  gayly,  on  various  subjects,  without  any  appearance  of
observation; his familiarity presently set me talking, which by his cheerful and jesting manner he
encouraged without restraint--I was absolutely charmed with him. The result of his observations was,that notwithstanding the animation of my countenance, and promising exterior, if not absolutely silly, I
was a lad of very little sense, and without ideas of learning; in fine, very ignorant in all respects, and if I
could arrive at being curate of some village, it was the utmost honor I ought ever to aspire to. Such was
the account he gave of me to Madam de Warrens. This was not the first time such an opinion had been
formed of me, neither was it the last; the judgment of M. Masseron having been repeatedly confirmed.
  The cause of these opinions is too much connected with my character not to need a particular
explanation; for it will not be supposed that I can in conscience subscribe to them; and with all possible
impartiality, whatever M. Masseron, M. d'Aubonne and many others may have said, I cannot help
thinking them mistaken.
  Two things very opposite, unite in me, and in a manner which I cannot myself conceive. My
disposition is extremely ardent, my passions lively and impetuous, yet my ideas are produced slowly,
with great embarrassment and after much afterthought. It might be said my heart and understanding do
not  belong  to  the  same  individual.  A  sentiment  takes  possession  of  my  soul  with  the  rapidity  of
lightning, but instead of illuminating, it dazzles and confounds me; I feel all, but see nothing; I am
warm, but stupid; to think I must be cool. What is astonishing, my conception is clear and penetrating,
if not hurried: I can make excellent impromptus at leisure, but on the instant, could never say or do
anything worth notice. I could hold a tolerable conversation by the post, as they say the Spaniards play
at chess, and when I read that anecdote of a duke of Savoy, who turned himself round, while on a
journey, to cry out 'a votre gorge, marchand de Paris!' I said, "Here is a trait of my character!"
  This slowness of thought, joined to vivacity of feeling, I am not only sensible of in conversation,
but even alone. When I write, my ideas are arranged with the utmost difficulty. They glance on my
imagination and ferment till they discompose, heat, and bring on a palpitation; during this state of
agitation, I see nothing properly, cannot write a single word, and must wait till it is over. Insensibly the
agitation subsides, the chaos acquires form, and each circumstance takes its proper place. Have you
never  seen  an  opera  in  Italy?  where  during  the  change  of  scene  everything  is  in  confusion,  the
decorations are intermingled, and any one would suppose that all would be overthrown; yet by little and
little,  everything  is  arranged,  nothing  appears  wanting,  and  we  feel  surprised  to  see  the  tumult
succeeded by the most delightful spectacle. This is a resemblance of what passes in my brain when I
attempt to write; had I always waited till that confusion was past, and then pointed, in their natural
beauties, the objects that had presented themselves, few authors would have surpassed me.
  Thence  arises  the  extreme  difficulty  I  find  in  writing;  my  manuscripts,  blotted,  scratched,  and
scarcely legible, attest the trouble they cost me; nor is there one of them but I have been obliged to
transcribe four or five times before it went to press. Never could I do anything when placed at a table,
pen in hand; it must be walking among the rocks, or in the woods; it is at night in my bed, during my
wakeful hours, that I compose; it may be judged how slowly, particularly for a man who has not the
advantage of verbal memory, and never in his life could retain by heart six verses. Some of my periods
I have turned and returned in my head five or six nights before they were fit to be put to paper: thus it is
that I succeed better in works that require laborious attention, than those that appear more trivial, such
as letters, in which I could never succeed, and being obliged to write one is to me a serious punishment;
nor can I express my thoughts on the most trivial subjects without it costing me hours of fatigue. If I
write immediately what strikes me, my letter is a long, confused, unconnected string of expressions,
which, when read, can hardly be understood.
  It is not only painful to me to give language to my ideas but even to receive them. I have studied
mankind, and think myself a tolerable observer, yet I know nothing from what I see, but all from what I
remember, nor have I understanding except in my recollections. From all that is said, from all that
passes in my presence, I feel nothing, conceive nothing, the exterior sign being all that strikes me;
afterwards it returns to my remembrance; I recollect the place, the time, the manner, the look, and
gesture, not a circumstance escapes me; it is then, from what has been done or said, that I imagine what
has been thought, and I have rarely found myself mistaken.
  So little master of my understanding when alone, let any one judge what I must be in conversation,where to speak with any degree of ease you must think of a thousand things at the same time: the bare
idea  that  I  should  forget  something  material  would  be  sufficient  to  intimidate  me.  Nor  can  I
comprehend how people can have the confidence to converse in large companies, where each word
must pass in review before so many, and where it would be requisite to know their several characters
and histories to avoid saying what might give offence. In this particular, those who frequent the world
would have a great advantage, as they know better where to be silent, and can speak with greater
confidence; yet even they sometimes let fall absurdities; in what predicament then must he be who
drops as it were from the clouds? it is almost impossible he should speak ten minutes with impunity.
  In a tete-a-tete there is a still worse inconvenience; that is; the necessity of talking perpetually, at
least, the necessity of answering when spoken to, and keeping up the conversation when the other is
silent. This insupportable constraint is alone sufficient to disgust me with variety, for I cannot form an
idea of a greater torment than being obliged to speak continually without time for recollection. I know
not whether it proceeds from my mortal hatred of all constraint; but if I am obliged to speak, I infallibly
talk nonsense. What is still worse, instead of learning how to be silent when I have absolutely nothing
to say, it is generally at such times that I have a violent inclination: and endeavoring to pay my debt of
conversation as speedily as possible, I hastily gabble a number of words without ideas, happy when
they only chance to mean nothing; thus endeavoring to conquer or hide my incapacity, I rarely fail to
show it.
I think I have said enough to show that, though not a fool, I have frequently passed for one, even
among people capable of judging; this was the more vexatious, as my physiognomy and eyes promised
otherwise, and expectation being frustrated, my stupidity appeared the more shocking. This detail,
which a particular occasion gave birth to, will not be useless in the sequel, being a key to many of my
actions which might otherwise appear unaccountable; and have been attributed to a savage humor I do
not possess. I love society as much as any man, was I not certain to exhibit myself in it, not only
disadvantageously, but totally different from what I really am. The plan I have adopted of writing and
retirement, is what exactly suits me. Had I been present, my worth would never have been known, no
one would even have suspected it; thus it was with Madam Dupin, a woman of sense, in whose house I
lived for several years; indeed, she has often since owned it to me: though on the whole this rule may
be subject to some exceptions. I shall now return to my history.
  The estimate of my talents thus fixed, the situation I was capable of promised, the question only
remained how to render her capable of fulfilling my destined vocation. The principle difficulty was, I
did not know Latin enough for a priest. Madam de Warrens determined to have me taught for some
time at the seminary, and accordingly spoke of it to the Superior, who was a Lazarist, called M. Gras, a
good-natured little fellow, half blind, meagre, gray-haired, insensible, and the least pedantic of any
Lazarist I ever knew; which, in fact, is saying no great matter.
  He  frequently  visited  Madam  de  Warrens,  who  entertained,  caressed,  and  made  much  of  him,
letting him sometimes lace her stays, an office he was willing enough to perform. While thus employed,
she would run about the room, this way or that, as occasion happened to call her. Drawn by the lace,
Monsieur the Superior followed, grumbling, repeating at every moment, "Pray, madam, do stand still;"
the whole forming a scene truly diverting.
  M. Gras willingly assented to the project of Madam de Warrens, and, for a very moderate pension,
charged himself with the care of instructing me. The consent of the bishop was all that remained
necessary, who not only granted it, but offered to pay the pension, permitting me to retain the secular
habit till they could judge by a trial what success they might have in my improvement.
  What a change! but I was obliged to submit; though I went to the seminary with about the same
spirits as if they had been taking me to execution. What a melancholy abode! especially for one who
left the house of a pretty woman. I carried one book with me, that I had borrowed of Madam de
Warrens, and found it a capital resource! it will not be easily conjectured what kind of book this was--it
was a music book. Among the talents she had cultivated, music was not forgotten; she had a tolerable
good voice, sang agreeably, and played on the harpsichord. She had taken the pains to give me somelessons in singing, though before I was very uninformed in that respect, hardly knowing the music of
our psalms. Eight or ten interrupted lessons, far from putting me in a condition to improve myself, did
not teach me half the notes; notwithstanding, I had such a passion for the art, that I determined to
exercise  myself  alone.  The  book  I  took  was  not  of  the  most  easy  kind;  it  was  the  cantatas  of
Clerambault. It may be conceived with what attention and perseverance I studied, when I inform my
reader, that without knowing anything of transposition or quantity, I contrived to sing with tolerable
correctness, the first recitative and air in the cantata of Alpheus and Arethusa; it is true this air is, so
justly set, that it is only necessary to recite the verses in their just measure to catch the music.
  There was at the seminary a curst Lazarist, who by undertaking to teach me Latin made me detest it.
His hair was coarse, black and greasy, his face like those formed in gingerbread, he had the voice of a
buffalo, the countenance of an owl, and the bristles of a boar in lieu of a beard; his smile was sardonic,
and his limbs played like those of a puppet moved by wires. I have forgotten his odious name, but the
remembrance of his frightful precise countenance remains with me, though hardly can I recollect it
without trembling; especially when I call to mind our meeting in the gallery, when he graciously
advanced his filthy square cap as a sign for me to enter his apartment, which appeared more dismal in
my apprehension than a dungeon. Let any one judge the contrast between my present master and the
elegant Abbe de Gauvon.
  Had I remained two months at the mercy of this monster, I am certain my head could not have
sustained it; but the good M. Gras, perceiving I was melancholy, grew thin, and did not eat my victuals,
guessed the cause of my uneasiness (which indeed was not very difficult) and taking me from the claws
of this beast, by another yet more striking contrast, placed me with the gentlest of men, a young
Faucigneran abbe, named M. Gatier, who studied at the seminary, and out of complaisance for M. Gras,
and humanity to myself, spared some time from the prosecution of his own studies in order to direct
mine. Never did I see a more pleasing countenance than that of M. Gatier. He was fair complexioned,
his beard rather inclined to red; his behavior like that of the generality of his countrymen (who under a
coarseness  of  countenance  conceal  much  understanding),  marked  in  him  a  truly  sensible  and
affectionate soul. In his large blue eyes there was a mixture of softness, tenderness, and melancholy,
which made it impossible to see him without feeling one's self interested. From the looks and manner of
this young abbe he might have been supposed to have foreseen his destiny, and that he was born to be
unhappy.
  His  disposition  did  not  belie  his  physiognomy:  full  of  patience  and  complaisance,  he  rather
appeared to study with than to instruct me. So much was not necessary to make me love him, his
predecessor having rendered that very easy; yet, notwithstanding all the time he bestowed on me,
notwithstanding our mutual good inclinations, and that his plan of teaching was excellent, with much
labor, I made little progress. It is very singular, that with a clear conception I could never learn much
from masters except my father and M. Lambercier; the little I know besides I have learned alone, as
will be seen hereafter. My spirit, impatient of every species of constraint, cannot submit to the law of
the moment; even the fear of not learning prevents my being attentive, and a dread of wearying those
who teach, makes me feign to understand them; thus they proceed faster than I can comprehend, and
the conclusion is I learn nothing. My understanding must take its own time and cannot submit to that of
another.
  The time of ordination being arrived, M. Gatier returned to his province as deacon, leaving me with
gratitude, attachment, and sorrow for his loss. The vows I made for him were no more answered than
those I offered for myself. Some years after, I learned, that being vicar of a parish, a young girl was
with child by him, being the only one (though he possessed a very tender heart) with whom he was ever
in love. This was a dreadful scandal in a diocese severely governed, where the priests (being under
good regulation) ought never to have children--except by married women. Having infringed this politic
law, he was put in prison, defamed, and driven from his benefice. I know not whether it was ever after
in his power to reestablish his affairs; but the remembrance of his misfortunes, which were deeply
engraven on my heart, struck me when I wrote Emilius, and uniting M. Gatier with M. Gaime, I formedfrom these two worthy priests the character of the Savoyard Vicar, and flatter myself the imitation has
not dishonored the originals.
  While I was at the seminary, M. d'Aubonne was obliged to quit Annecy, Moultou being displeased
that he made love to his wife, which was acting like a dog in the manger, for though Madam Moultou
was extremely amiable, he lived very ill with her, treating her with such brutality that a separation was
talked of. Moultou, by repeated oppressions, at length procured a dismissal from his employment: he
was a disagreeable man; a mole could not be blacker, nor an owl more knavish. It is said the provincials
revenge themselves on their enemies by songs; M. d'Aubonne revenged himself on his by a comedy,
which he sent to Madam de Warrens, who showed it to me. I was pleased with it, and immediately
conceived the idea of writing one, to try whether I was so silly as the author had pronounced me. This
project was not executed till I went to Chambery, where I wrote 'The Lover of Himself'. Thus when I
said in the preface to that piece, "it was written at eighteen," I cut off a few years.
  Nearly about this time an event happened, not very important in itself, but whose consequence
affected me, and made a noise in the world when I had forgotten it. Once a week I was permitted to go
out; it is not necessary to say what use I made of this liberty. Being one Sunday at Madam de Warrens,
a building belonging to the Cordeliers, which joined her house, took fire; this building which contained
their oven, being full of dry fagots, blazed violently and greatly endangered the house; for the wind
happening to drive the flames that way, it was covered with them. The furniture, therefore, was hastily
got out and carried into the garden which fronted the windows, on the other side the before-mentioned
brook. I was so alarmed that I threw indiscriminately everything that came to hand out of the window,
even to a large stone mortar, which at another time I should have found it difficult to remove, and
should have thrown a handsome looking-glass after it had not some one prevented me. The good
bishop, who that day was visiting Madam de Warrens, did not remain idle; he took her into the garden,
where they went to prayers with the rest that were assembled there, and where sometime afterwards, I
found them on their knees, and presently joined them. While the good man was at his devotions, the
wind changed, so suddenly and critically, that the flames which had covered the house and began to
enter the windows, were carried to the other side of the court, and the house received no damage. Two
years  after,  Monsieur  de  Berner  being  dead,  the  Antoines,  his  former  brethren,  began  to  collect
anecdotes which might serve as arguments of his beatification; at the desire of Father Baudet, I joined
to these an attestation of what I have just related, in doing which, though I attested no more than the
truth, I certainly acted ill, as it tended to make an indifferent occurrence pass for a miracle. I had seen
the bishop in prayer, and had likewise seen the wind change during the prayer, and even much to the
purpose, all this I could certify truly; but that one of these facts was the cause of the other, I ought not
to have attested, because it is what I could not possibly be assured of. Thus much I may say, that as far
as I can recollect what my ideas were at that time, I was sincerely, and in good earnest a Catholic. Love
of the marvellous is natural to the human heart; my veneration for the virtuous prelate, and secret pride
in having, perhaps, contributed to the event in question, all helped to seduce me; and certainly, if this
miracle was the effect of ardent prayer, I had a right to claim a share of the merits.
  More than thirty years after, when I published the 'Lettres de la Montagne', M. Feron (I know not by
what means) discovered this attestation, and made use of it in his paper. I must confess the discovery
was very critically timed, and appeared very diverting, even to me.
I was destined to be the outcast of every condition; for notwithstanding M. Gatier gave the most
favorable account he possibly could of my studies, they plainly saw the improvement I received bore
no proportion to the pains taken to instruct me, which was no encouragement to continue them: the
bishop and superior, therefore, were disheartened, and I was sent back to Madam de Warrens, as a
subject not even fit to make a priest of; but as they allowed, at the same time, that I was a tolerably
good lad, and far from being vicious, this account counterbalanced the former, and determined her not
to abandon me.
I carried back in triumph the dear music book, which had been so useful to me, the air of Alpheus
and Arethusa being almost all I had learned at the seminary. My predilection for this art started the ideaof making a musician of, me. A convenient opportunity offered; once a week, at least, she had a concert
at her house, and the music-master from the cathedral, who directed this little band, came frequently to
see her. This was a Parisian, named M. le Maitre, a good composer, very lively, gay, young, well made,
of  little  understanding,  but,  upon  the  whole,  a  good  sort  of  man.  Madam  de  Warrens  made  us
acquainted; I attached myself to him, and he seemed not displeased with me. A pension was talked of,
and  agreed  on;  in  short,  I  went  home  with  him,  and  passed  the  winter  the  more  agreeably  at  his
chambers, as they were not above twenty paces distant from Madam de Warrens', where we frequently
supped together. It may easily be supposed that this situation, ever gay, and singing with the musicians
and children of the choir, was more pleasing to me than the seminary and fathers of St. Lazarus. This
life, though free, was regular; here I learned to prize independence, but never to abuse it. For six whole
months I never once went out except to see Madam de Warrens, or to church, nor had I any inclination
to it. This interval is one of those in which I enjoyed the greatest satisfaction, and which I have ever
recollected with pleasure. Among the various situations I have been placed in, some were marked with
such an idea of virtuous satisfaction, that the bare remembrance affects me as if they were yet present. I
vividly recollect the time, the place, the persons, and even the temperature of the air, while the lively
idea of a certain local impression peculiar to those times, transports me back again to the very spot; for
example, all that was repeated at our meetings, all that was sung in the choir, everything that passed
there; the beautiful and noble habits of the canons, the chasubles of the priests, the mitres of the singers,
the persons of the musicians; an old lame carpenter who played the counter-bass, a little fair abbe who
performed on the violin, the ragged cassock which M. le Maitre, after taking off his sword, used to put
over his secular habit, and the fine surplice with which he covered the rags of the former, when he went
to the choir; the pride with which I held my little flute to my lips, and seated myself in the orchestra, to
assist  in  a  recitative  which  M.  le  Maitre  had  composed  on  purpose  for  me;  the  good  dinner  that
afterwards awaited us, and the good appetites we carried to it. This concourse of objects, strongly
retraced in my memory, has charmed me a hundred time as much, or perhaps more, than ever the reality
had done. I have always preserved an affection for a certain air of the 'Conditor alme Syderum', because
one Sunday in Advent I heard that hymn sung on the steps of the cathedral, (according to the custom of
that place) as I lay in bed before daybreak. Mademoiselle Merceret, Madam de Warrens' chambermaid,
knew something of music; I shall never forget a little piece that M. le Maitre made me sing with her,
and which her mistress listened to with great satisfaction. In a word, every particular, even down to the
servant Perrine, whom the boys of the choir took such delight in teasing. The remembrance of these
times of happiness and innocence frequently returning to my mind, both ravish and affect me.
I lived at Annecy during a year without the least reproach, giving universal satisfaction. Since my
departure from Turin I had been guilty of no folly, committed none while under the eye of Madam de
Warrens.  She  was  my  conductor,  and  ever  led  me  right;  my  attachment  for  her  became  my  only
passion, and what proves it was not a giddy one, my heart and understanding were in unison. It is true
that a single sentiment, absorbing all my faculties, put me out of a capacity of learning even music: but
this was not my fault, since to the strongest inclination, I added the utmost assiduity. I was attentive and
thoughtful;  what  could  I  do?  Nothing  was  wanting  towards  my  progress  that  depended  on  me;
meantime, it only required a subject that might inspire me to occasion the commission of new follies:
that subject presented itself, chance arranged it, and (as will be seen hereafter) my inconsiderate head
gave in to it.
  One evening, in the month of February, when it was very cold, being all sat round the fire, we heard
some  one  knock  at  the  street  door.  Perrine  took  a  light,  went  down  and  opened  it:  a  young  man
entering, came upstairs, presented himself with an easy air, and making M. Maitre a short, but well-
turned compliment, announced himself as a French musician, constrained by the state of his finances to
take this liberty. The hart of the good Le Maitre leaped at the name of a French musician, for he
passionately loved both his country and profession; he therefore offered the young traveller his service-
-and use of his apartment, which he appeared to stand much in need of, and which he accepted without
much ceremony. I observed him while he was chatting and warming himself before supper; he wasshort and thick, having some fault in his shape, though without any particular deformity; he had (if I
may  so  express  myself)  an  appearance  of  being  hunchbacked,  with  flat  shoulders,  and  I  think  he
limped. He wore a black coat, rather worn than old, which hung in tatters, a very fine but dirty shirt,
frayed ruffles; a pair of splatterdashes so large that he could have put both legs into either of them, and,
to secure himself from the snow, a little hat, only fit to be carried under his arm. With this whimsical
equipage, he had, however, something elegant in his manners and conversation; his countenance was
expressive and agreeable, and he spoke with facility if not with modesty; in short, everything about him
bore the mark of a young debauchee, who did not crave assistance like a beggar, but as a thoughtless
madcap. He told us his name was Venture de Villeneuve, that he came from Paris, had lost his way, and
seeming to forget that he had announced himself for a musician, added that he was going to Grenoble
to see a relation that was a member of Parliament.
  During supper we talked of music, on which subject he spoke well: he knew all the great virtuosi,
all the celebrated works, all the actors, actresses, pretty women, and powerful lords; in short nothing
was mentioned but what he seemed thoroughly acquainted with. Though no sooner was any topic
started, than by some drollery, which set every one a-laughing, he made them forget what had been
said. This was on a Saturday; the next day there was to be music at the cathedral: M. le Maitre asked if
he  would  sing  there--"Very  willingly."--"What  part  would  he  chose?"--"The  counter-tenor:"  and
immediately began speaking of other things. Before he went to church they offered him his part to
peruse, but he did not even look at it. This Gasconade surprised Le Maitre --"You'll see," said he,
whispering to me, "that he does not know a single note."--I replied: "I am very much afraid of him." I
followed  them  into  the  church;  but  was  extremely  uneasy,  and  when  they  began,  my  heart  beat
violently, so much was I interested in his behalf.
I was presently out of pain: he sung his two recitatives with all imaginable taste and judgment; and
what was yet more, with a very agreeable voice. I never enjoyed a more pleasing surprise. After mass,
M. Venture received the highest compliments from the canons and musicians, which he answered
jokingly, though with great grace. M. le Maitre embraced him heartily; I did the same; he saw I was
rejoiced at his success, and appeared pleased at my satisfaction.
  It will easily be surmised, that after having been delighted with M. Bacle, who had little to attract
my  admiration,  I  should  be  infatuated  with  M.  Venture,  who  had  education,  wit,  talents,  and  a
knowledge of the world, and might be called an agreeable rake. This was exactly what happened, and
would,  I  believe,  have  happened  to  any  other  young  man  in  my  place;  especially  supposing  him
possessed of better judgment to distinguish merit, and more propensity to be engaged by it; for Venture
doubtless possessed a considerable share, and one in particular, very rare at his age, namely, that of
never being in haste to display his talents. It is true, he boasted of many things he did not understand,
but of those he knew (which were very numerous) he said nothing, patiently waiting some occasion to
display them, which he then did with ease, though without forwardness, and thus gave them more
effect.  As  there  was  ever  some  intermission  between  the  proofs  of  his  various  abilities,  it  was
impossible to conjecture whether he had ever discovered all his talents. Playful, giddy, inexhaustible,
seducing in conversation, ever smiling, but never laughing, and repeating the rudest things in the most
elegant manner--even the most modest women were astonished at what they endured from him: it was
in  vain  for  them  to  determine  to  be  angry;  they  could  not  assume  the  appearance  of  it.  It  was
extraordinary that with so many agreeable talents, in a country where they are so well understood, and
so much admired, he so long remained only a musician.
  My attachment to M. Venture, more reasonable in its cause, was also less extravagant in its effects,
though more lively and durable than that I had conceived for M. Bacle. I loved to see him, to hear him,
all his actions appeared charming, everything he said was an oracle to me, but the enchantment did not
extend  far  enough  to  disable  me  from  quitting  him.  I  spoke  of  him  with  transport  to  Madam  de
Warrens, Le Maitre likewise spoke in his praise, and she consented we should bring him to her house.
This interview did not succeed; he thought her affected, she found him a libertine, and, alarmed that I
had  formed  such  an  ill  acquaintance,  not  only  forbade  me  bringing  him  there  again,  but  likewisepainted so strongly the danger I ran with this young man, that I became a little more circumspect in
giving in to the attachment; and very happily, both for my manners and wits, we were soon separated.
  M. le Maitre, like most of his profession, loved good wine; at table he was moderate, but when busy
in his closet he must drink. His maid was so well acquainted with this humor that no sooner had he
prepared his paper to compose, and taken his violoncello, than the bottle and glass arrived, and was
replenished from time to time: thus, without being ever absolutely intoxicated, he was usually in a state
of elevation. This was really unfortunate, for he had a good heart, and was so playful that Madam de
Warrens used to call him the kitten. Unhappily, he loved his profession, labored much and drank
proportionately, which injured his health, and at length soured his temper. Sometimes he was gloomy
and easily offended, though incapable of rudeness, or giving offence to any one, for never did he utter a
harsh word, even to the boys of the choir: on the other hand, he would not suffer another to offend him,
which was but just: the misfortune was, having little understanding, he did not properly discriminate,
and was often angry without cause.
  The Chapter of Geneva, where so many princes and bishops formerly thought it an honor to be
seated, though in exile it lost its ancient splendor, retained (without any diminution) its pride. To be
admitted, you must either be a gentleman or Doctor of Sorbonne. If there is a pardonable pride, after
that derived from personal merit, it is doubtless that arising from birth, though, in general, priests
having laymen in their service treat them with sufficient haughtiness, and thus the canons behaved to
poor Le Maitre. The chanter, in particular, who was called the Abbe de Vidonne, in other respects a
well-behaved  man,  but  too  full  of  his  nobility,  did  not  always  show  him  the  attention  his  talents
merited. M. le Maitre could not bear these indignities patiently; and this year, during passion week,
they had a more serious dispute than ordinary. At an institution dinner that the bishop gave the canons,
and to which M. Maitre was always invited, the abbe failed in some formality, adding, at the same time,
some harsh words, which the other could not digest; he instantly formed the resolution to quit them the
following night; nor could any consideration make him give up his design, though Madam de Warrens
(whom he went to take leave of) spared no pains to appease him. He could not relinquish the pleasure
of leaving his tyrants embarrassed for the Easter feast, at which time he knew they stood in greatest
need of him. He was most concerned about his music, which he wished to take with him; but this could
not easily be accomplished, as it filled a large case, and was very heavy, and could not be carried under
the arm.
  Madam de Warrens did what I should have done in her situation; and indeed, what I should yet do:
after many useless efforts to retain him, seeing he was resolved to depart, whatever might be the event,
she formed the resolution to give him every possible assistance. I must confess Le Maitre deserved it of
her, for he was (if I may use the expression) dedicated to her service, in whatever appertained to either
his art or knowledge, and the readiness with which he obliged gave a double value to his complaisance:
thus she only paid back, on an essential occasion, the many favors he had been long conferring on her;
though  I  should  observe,  she  possessed  a  soul  that,  to  fulfill  such  duties,  had  no  occasion  to  be
reminded of previous obligations. Accordingly she ordered me to follow Le Maitre to Lyons, and to
continue with him as long as he might have occasion for my services. She has since avowed, that a
desire of detaching me from Venture had a great hand in this arrangement. She consulted Claude Anet
about  the  conveyance  of  the  above-mentioned  case.  He  advised,  that  instead  of  hiring  a  beast  at
Annecy, which would infallibly discover us, it would be better, at night, to take it to some neighboring
village, and there hire an ass to carry it to Seyssel, which being in the French dominions, we should
have nothing to fear. This plan was adopted; we departed the same night at seven, and Madam de
Warrens, under pretense of paying my expenses, increased the purse of poor Le Maitre by an addition
that was very acceptable. Claude Anet, the gardiner, and myself, carried the case to the first village,
then hired an ass, and the same night reached Seyssel.
I think I have already remarked that there are times in which I am so unlike myself that I might be
taken for a man of a direct opposite disposition; I shall now give an example of this. M. Reydelet,
curate of Seyssel, was canon of St. Peter's, consequently known to M. le Maitre, and one of the peoplefrom whom he should have taken most pains to conceal himself; my advice, on the contrary, was to
present ourselves to him, and, under some pretext, entreat entertainment as if we visited him by consent
of the chapter. Le Maitre adopted the idea, which seemed to give his revenge the appearance of satire
and waggery; in short, we went boldly to Reydelet, who received us very kindly. Le Maitre told him he
was going to Bellay by desire of the bishop, that he might superintend the music during the Easter
holidays, and that he proposed returning that way in a few days. To support this tale, I told a hundred
others, so naturally that M. Reydelet thought me a very agreeable youth, and treated me with great
friendship and civility. We were well regaled and well lodged: M. Reydelet scarcely knew how to make
enough of us; and we parted the best friends in the world, with a promise to stop longer on our return.
We found it difficult to refrain from laughter, or wait till we were alone to give free vent to our mirth:
indeed, even now, the bare recollection of it forces a smile, for never was waggery better or more
fortunately maintained. This would have made us merry during the remainder of our journey, if M. le
Maitre (who did not cease drinking) had not been two or three times attacked with a complaint that he
afterwards became very subject to, and which resembled an epilepsy. These fits threw me into the most
fearful embarrassments, from which I resolved to extricate myself with the first opportunity.
  According to the information given to M. Reydelet, we passed our Easter holidays at Bellay, and
though not expected there, were received by the music--master, and welcomed by every one with great
pleasure. M. le Maitre was of considerable note in his profession, and, indeed, merited that distinction.
The music-master of Bellay (who was fond of his own works) endeavored to obtain the approbation of
so good a judge; for besides being a connoisseur, M. le Maitre was equitable, neither a jealous, ill-
natured critic, nor a servile flatterer. He was so superior to the generality of country music-masters and
they were so sensible of it, that they treated him rather as their chief than a brother musician.
  Having passed four or five days very agreeably at Bellay, we departed, and continuing our journey
without meeting with any accidents, except those I have just spoken of, arrived at Lyons, and were
lodged at Notre Dame de Pitie. While we waited for the arrival of the before-mentioned case (which by
the assistance of another lie, and the care of our good patron, M. Reydelet, we had embarked on the
Rhone) M. le Maitre went to visit his acquaintance, and among others Father Cato, a Cordelier, who
will be spoken of hereafter, and the Abbe Dortan, Count of Lyons, both of whom received him well,
but afterwards betrayed him, as will be seen presently; indeed, his good fortune terminated with M.
Reydelet.
  Two days after our arrival at Lyons, as we passed a little street not far from our inn, Le Maitre was
attacked by one of his fits; but it was now so violent as to give me the utmost alarm. I screamed with
terror, called for help, and naming our inn, entreated some one to bear him to it, then (while the people
were assembled, and busy round a man that had fallen senseless in the street) he was abandoned by the
only friend on whom he could have any reasonable dependence; I seized the instant when no one
heeded me, turned the corner of the street and disappeared. Thanks to Heaven, I have made my third
painful confession; if many such remained, I should certainly abandon the work I have undertaken.
  Of all the incidents I have yet related, a few traces are remaining in the places where I have lived;
but what I have to relate in the following book is almost entirely unknown; these are the greatest
extravagancies of my life, and it is happy they had not worse conclusions. My head, (if I may use the
simile) screwed up to the pitch of an instrument it did not naturally accord with, had lost its diapason;
in  time  it  returned  to  it  again,  when  I  discontinued  my  follies,  or  at  least  gave  in  to  those  more
consonant to my disposition. This epoch of my youth I am least able to recollect, nothing having passed
sufficiently interesting to influence my heart, to make me clearly retrace the remembrance. In so many
successive changes, it is difficult not to make some transpositions of time or place. I write absolutely
from memory, without notes or materials to help my recollection. Some events are as fresh in my idea
as if they had recently happened, but there are certain chasms which I cannot fill up but by the aid of
recital, as confused as the remaining traces of those to which they refer. It is possible, therefore, that I
may have erred in trifles, and perhaps shall again, but in every matter of importance I can answer that
the account is faithfully exact, and with the same veracity the reader may depend I shall be careful tocontinue it.
  My resolution was soon taken after quitting Le Maitre; I set out immediately for Annecy. The cause
and mystery of our departure had interested me for the security of our retreat: this interest, which
entirely employed my thoughts for some days, had banished every other idea; but no sooner was I
secure and in tranquility, than my predominant sentiment regained its place. Nothing flattered, nothing
tempted  me,  I  had  no  wish  but  to  return  to  Madam  de  Warrens;  the  tenderness  and  truth  of  my
attachment to her had rooted from my heart every imaginable project, and all the follies of ambition, I
conceived no happiness but living near her, nor could I take a step without feeling that the distance
between us was increased. I returned, therefore, as soon as possible, with such speed, and with my
spirits in such a state of agitation, that though I recall with pleasure all my other travels, I have not the
least recollection of this, only remembering my leaving Lyons and reaching Annecy. Let anyone judge
whether this last event can have slipped my memory, when informed that on my arrival I found Madam
de Warrens was not there, having set out for Paris.
I was never well informed of the motives of this journey. I am certain she would have told me had I
asked her, but never was man less curious to learn the secrets of his friend. My heart is ever so entirely
filled with the present, or with past pleasures, which become a principal part of my enjoyment, that
there is not a chink or corner for curiosity to enter. All that I conceive from what I heard of it, is, that in
the revolution caused at Turin by the abdication of the King of Sardinia, she feared being forgotten, and
was willing by favor of the intrigues of M. d' Aubonne to seek the same advantage in the court of
France, where she has often told me she should, have preferred it, as the multiplicity of business there
prevents your conduct from being so closely inspected. If this was her business, it is astonishing that on
her return she was not ill received; be that as it will, she continued to enjoy her allowance without any
interruption.  Many  people  imagined  she  was  charged  with  some  secret  commission,  either  by  the
bishop, who then had business at the court of France, where he himself was soon after obliged to go, or
some one yet more powerful, who knew how to insure her a gracious reception at her return. If this was
the case, it is certain the ambassadress was not ill chosen, since being young and handsome, she had all
the necessary qualifications to succeed in a negotiation.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK IV.
  Let any one judge my surprise and grief at not finding her on my arrival. I now felt regret at having
abandoned M. le Maitre, and my uneasiness increased when I learned the misfortunes that had befallen
him. His box of music, containing all his fortune, that precious box, preserved with so much care and
fatigue, had been seized on at Lyons by means of Count Dortan, who had received information from
the Chapter of our having absconded with it. In vain did Le Maitre reclaim his property, his means of
existence, the labor of his life; his right to the music in question was at least subject to litigation, but
even that liberty was not allowed him, the affair being instantly decided on the principal of superior
strength.  Thus  poor  Le  Maitre  lost  the  fruit  of  his  talents,  the  labor  of  his  youth,  and  principal
dependence for the support of old age.
  Nothing was wanting to render the news I had received truly afflicting, but I was at an age when
even  the  greatest  calamities  are  to  be  sustained;  accordingly  I  soon  found  consolation.  I  expected
shortly to hear news of Madam de Warrens, though I was ignorant of the address, and she knew nothing
of my return. As to my desertion of Le Maitre (all things considered) I did not find it so very culpable. I
had been serviceable to him at his retreat; it was not in my power to give him any further assistance.
Had I remained with him in France it would not have cured his complaint. I could not have saved his
music, and should only have doubled his expense: in this point of view I then saw my conduct; I see it
otherwise now. It frequently happens that a villainous action does not torment us at the instant wecommit it, but on recollection, and sometimes even after a number of years have elapsed, for the
remembrance of crimes is not to be extinguished.
  The only means I had to obtain news of Madam de Warrens was to remain at Annecy. Where
should I seek her in Paris? or how bear the expense of such a journey? Sooner or later there was no
place where I could be so certain to hear of her as that I was now at; this consideration determined me
to remain there, though my conduct was very indifferent. I did not go to the bishop, who had already
befriended me, and might continue to do so; my patroness was not present, and I feared his reprimands
on the subject of our flight; neither did I go to the seminary, M. Graswas no longer there; in short, I
went to none of my acquaintances. I should gladly have visited the intendant's lady, but did not dare; I
did worse, I sought out M. Venture, whom (notwithstanding my enthusiasm) I had never thought of
since my departure. I found him quite gay, in high spirits, and the universal favorite of the ladies of
Annecy.
  This success completed my infatuation; I saw nothing but M. Venture; he almost made me forget
even Madam de Warrens. That I might profit more at ease by his instructions and example, I proposed
to share his lodgings, to which he readily consented. It was at a shoemaker's; a pleasant, jovial fellow,
who, in his county dialect, called his wife nothing but trollop; an appellation which she certainly
merited. Venture took care to augment their differences, though under an appearance of doing the direct
contrary, throwing out in a distant manner, and provincial accents, hints that produced the utmost
effect,  and  furnished  such  scenes  as  were  sufficient  to  make  any  one  die  with  laughter.  Thus  the
mornings passed without our thinking of them; at two or three o'clock we took some refreshment.
Venture then went to his various engagements, where he supped, while I walked alone, meditating on
his great merit, coveting and admiring his rare talents, and cursing my own unlucky stars, that did not
call me to so happy a life. How little did I then know of myself! mine had been a thousand times more
delightful, had I not been such a fool, or known better how to enjoy it.
  Madam de Warrens had taken no one with her but Anet: Merceret, the chambermaid, whom I have
before mentioned, still remained in the house. Merceret was something older than myself, not pretty,
but tolerably agreeable; good-natured, free from malice, having no fault to my knowledge but being a
little refractory with her mistress. I often went to see her; she was an old acquaintance, who recalled to
my remembrance one more beloved, and this made her dear to me. She had several friends, and among
others one Mademoiselle Giraud, a Genevese, who, for the punishment of my sins, took it in her head
to have an inclination for me, always pressing Merceret, when she returned her visits, to bring me with
her. As I liked Merceret, I felt no disinclination to accompany her; besides I met there with some young
people whose company pleased me. For Mademoiselle Giraud, who offered every kind of enticement,
nothing could increase the aversion I had for her. When she drew near me, with her dried black snout,
smeared with Spanish snuff, it was with the utmost difficulty that I could refrain from expressing my
distaste; but, being pleased with her visitors, I took patience. Among these were two girls who (either to
pay their court to Mademoiselle Giraud or myself) paid me every possible attention. I conceived this to
be only friendship; but have since thought it depended only on myself to have discovered something
more, though I did not even think of it at the time.
  There  was  another  reason  for  my  stupidity.  Seamstresses,  chambermaids,  or  milliners,  never
tempted me; I sighed for ladies! Every one has his peculiar taste, this has ever been mine; being in this
particular of a different opinion from Horace. Yet it is not vanity of riches or rank that attracts me; it is
a  well-preserved  complexion,  fine  hands,  elegance  of  ornaments,  an  air  of  delicacy  and  neatness
throughout the whole person; more in taste, in the manner of expressing themselves, a finer or better
made gown, a well-turned ankle, small foot, ribbons, lace, and well-dressed hair; I even prefer those
who have less natural beauty, provided they are elegantly decorated. I freely confess this preference is
very  ridiculous;  yet  my  heart  gives  in  to  it  spite  of  my  understanding.  Well,  even  this  advantage
presented itself, and it only depended on my own resolution to have seized the opportunity.
  How  do  I  love,  from  time  to  time,  to  return  to  those  moments  of  my  youth,  which  were  so
charmingly delightful; so short, so scarce, and enjoyed at so cheap a rate!--how fondly do I wish todwell on them! Even yet the remembrance of these scenes warms my heart with a chaste rapture, which
appears necessary to reanimate my drooping courage, and enable me to sustain the weariness of my
latter days.
  The appearance of Aurora seemed so delightful one morning that, putting on my clothes, I hastened
into the country, to see the rising of the sun. I enjoyed that pleasure in its utmost extent; it was one
week after midsummer; the earth was covered with verdure and flowers, the nightingales, whose soft
warblings were almost concluded, seemed to vie with each other, and in concert with birds of various
kinds to bid adieu to spring, and hail the approach of a beautiful summer's day: one of those lovely days
that are no longer to be enjoyed at my age, and which have never been seen on the melancholy soil I
now inhabit.
I had rambled insensibly, to a considerable distance from the town--the heat augmented--I was
walking in the shade along a valley, by the side of a brook, I heard behind me the steps of horses, and
the voice of some females who, though they seemed embarrassed, did not laugh the less heartily on that
account. I turn round, hear myself called by name, and approaching, find two young people of my
acquaintance,  Mademoiselle  de  G----  and  Mademoiselle  Galley,  who,  not  being  very  excellent
horsewomen, could not make their horses cross the rivulet.
  Mademoiselle de G---- was a young lady of Berne, very amiable; who, having been sent from that
country for some youthful folly, had imitated Madam de Warrens, at whose house I had sometimes
seen her; but not having, like her, a pension, she had been fortunate in this attachment to Mademoiselle
Galley, who had prevailed on her mother to engage her young friend as a companion, till she could be
otherwise provided for. Mademoiselle Galley was one year younger than her friend, handsomer, more
delicate, more ingenious, and to complete all, extremely well made. They loved each other tenderly,
and the good disposition of both could not fail to render their union durable, if some lover did not
derange it. They informed me they were going to Toune, an old castle belonging to Madam Galley, and
implored my assistance to make their horses cross the stream, not being able to compass it themselves. I
would have given each a cut or two with the whip, but they feared I might be kicked, and themselves
thrown; I therefore had recourse to another expedient, I took hold of Mademoiselle Galley's horse and
led him through the brook, the water reaching half-way up my legs. The other followed without any
difficulty. This done, I would have paid my compliments to the ladies, and walked off like a great
booby as I was, but after whispering each other, Mademoiselle de G---- said, "No, no, you must not
think to escape thus; you have got wet in our service, and we ought in conscience to take care and dry
you. If you please you must go with us, you are now our prisoner." My heart began to beat--I looked at
Mademoiselle Galley --"Yes, yes," added she, laughing at my fearful look; "our prisoner of war; come,
get up behind her, we shall give a good account of you."--"But, mademoiselle," continued I, "I have not
the honor to be acquainted with your mother; what will she say on my arrival?"--"Her mother," replied
Mademoiselle de G---- is not at Toune, we are alone, we shall return at night, and you shall come back
with us."
  The stroke of electricity has not a more instantaneous effect than these words produced on me.
Leaping behind Mademoiselle de G----, I trembled with joy, and when it became necessary to clasp her
in order to hold myself on, my heart beat so violently that she perceived it, and told me hers beat also
from a fear of falling. In my present posture, I might naturally have considered this an invitation to
satisfy myself of the truth of her assertion, yet I did not dare, and during the whole way my arm served
as a girdle (a very close one, I must confess), without being a moment displaced. Some women that
may read this would be for giving me a box on the ear, and, truly, I deserved it.
  The gayety of the journey, and the chat of these girls, so enlivened me, that during the whole time
we passed together we never ceased talking a moment. They had set me so thoroughly at ease, that my
tongue spoke as fast as my eyes, though not exactly the same things. Some minutes, indeed, when I was
left alone with either, the conversation became a little embarrassed, but neither of them was absent long
enough to allow time for explaining the cause.
  Arrived at Toune, and myself well dried, we breakfasted together; after which it was necessary tosettle the important business of preparing dinner. The young ladies cooked, kissing from time to time
the farmer's children, while the poor scullion looked on grumbling. Provisions had been sent for from
town, and there was everything necessary for a good dinner, but unhappily they had forgotten wine; this
forgetfulness was by no means astonishing to girls who seldom drank any, but I was sorry for the
omission, as I had reckoned on its help, thinking it might add to my confidence. They were sorry
likewise, and perhaps from the same motive; though I have no reason to say this, for their lively and
charming gayety was innocence itself; besides, there were two of them, what could they expect from
me? they went everywhere about the neighborhood to seek for wine, but none could be procured, so
pure and sober are the peasants in those parts. As they were expressing their concern, I begged them not
to give themselves any uneasiness on my account, for while with them I had no occasion for wine to
intoxicate me. This was the only gallantry I ventured at during the whole of the day, and I believe the
sly rogues saw well enough that I said nothing but the truth.
  We dined in the kitchen; the two friends were seated on the benches, one on each side the long
table, and their guest at the end, between them, on a three--legged stool. What a dinner! how charming
the remembrance! While we can enjoy, at so small an expense, such pure, such true delights, why
should we be solicitous for others? Never did those 'petite soupes', so celebrated in Paris, equal this; I
do not only say for real pleasure and gayety, but even for sensuality.
  After dinner, we were economical; instead of drinking the coffee we had reserved at breakfast, we
kept it for an afternoon collation, with cream, and some cake they had brought with them. To keep our
appetites in play, we went into the orchard, meaning to finish our dessert with cherries. I got into a tree,
throwing them down bunches, from which they returned the stones through the branches. One time,
Mademoiselle Galley, holding out her apron, and drawing back her head, stood so fair, and I took such
good aim, that I dropped a bunch into her bosom. On her laughing, I said to myself, "Why are not my
lips cherries? How gladly would I throw them there likewise."
  Thus the day passed with the greatest freedom, yet with the utmost decency; not a single equivocal
word,  not  one  attempt  at  double-meaning  pleasantry;  yet  this  delicacy  was  not  affected,  we  only
performed the parts our hearts dictated; in short, my modesty, some will say my folly, was such that the
greatest familiarity that escaped me was once kissing the hand of Mademoiselle Galley; it is true, the
attending  circumstances  helped  to  stamp  a  value  on  this  trifling  favor;  we  were  alone,  I  was
embarrassed, her eyes were fixed on the ground, and my lips, instead of uttering words, were pressed
on her hand, which she drew gently back after the salute, without any appearance of displeasure. I
know not what I should have said to her; but her friend entered, and at that moment I thought her ugly.
  At length, they bethought themselves, that they must return to town before night; even now we had
but just time to reach it by daylight; and we hastened our departure in the same order we came. Had I
pleased myself, I should certainly have reversed this order, for the glance of Mademoiselle Galley had
reached my heart, but I dared not mention it, and the proposal could not reasonably come from her. On
the way, we expressed our sorrow that the day was over, but far from complaining of the shortness of
its duration, we were conscious of having prolonged it by every possible amusement.
I quitted them in nearly the same spot where I had taken them up. With what regret did we part!
With what pleasure did we form projects to renew our meeting! Delightful hours, which we passed
innocently together, yet were worth ages of familiarity! The sweet remembrance of those days cost
those amiable girls nothing; the tender union which reigned among us equalled more lively pleasures,
with which it could not have existed. We loved each other without shame or mystery, and wished to
continue our reciprocal affection. There is a species of enjoyment connected with innocence of manners
which is superior to any other, because it has no interval; for myself, the remembrance of such a day
touches me nearer, delights me more, and returns with greater rapture to my heart than any other
pleasure I ever tasted. I hardly knew what I wished with those charming girls. I do not say: that had the
arrangement been in my power, I should have divided my heart between them; I certainly felt some
degree of preference: though I should have been happy to have had Mademoiselle de G----, for a
mistress, I think, by choice, I should have liked her, better as a confidante; be that as it may, I felt onleaving them as though I could not live without either. Who would have thought that I should never see
them more; and that here our ephemeral amours must end?
  Those who read this will not fail to laugh at my gallantries, and remark, that after very promising
preliminaries, my most forward adventures concluded by a kiss of the hand: yet be not mistaken,
reader, in your estimate of my enjoyments; I have, perhaps, tasted more real pleasure in my amours,
which concluded by a kiss of the hand, than you will ever have in yours, which, at least, begin there.
  Venture, who had gone to bed late the night before, came in soon after me. I did not now see him
with my usual satisfaction, and took care not to inform him how I had passed the day. The ladies had
spoken of him slightingly, and appeared discontented at finding me in such bad hands; this hurt him in
my esteem; besides, whatever diverted my ideas from them was at this time disagreeable. However, he
soon brought me back to him and myself, by speaking of the situation of my affairs, which was too
critical to last; for, though I spent very little, my slender finances were almost exhausted. I was without
resource; no news of Madam de Warrens; not knowing what would become of me, and feeling a cruel
pang at heart to see the friend of Mademoiselle Galley reduced to beggary.
I now learned from Venture that he had spoken of me to the Judge Major, and would take me next
day to dine with him; that he was a man who by means of his friends might render me essential service.
In  other  respects  he  was  a  desirable  acquaintance,  being  a  man  of  wit  and  letters,  of  agreeable
conversation, one who possessed talents and loved them in others. After this discourse (mingling the
most serious concerns with the most trifling frivolity) he showed me a pretty couplet, which came from
Paris, on an air in one of Mouret's operas, which was then playing. Monsieur Simon (the judge major)
was so pleased with this couplet, that he determined to make another in answer to it, on the same air.
He had desired Venture to write one, and he wished me to make a third, that, as he expressed it, they
might see couplets start up next day like incidents in a comic romance.
  In the night (not being able to sleep) I composed a couplet, as my first essay in poetry. It was
passable; better, or at least composed with more taste than it would have been the preceding night, the
subject being tenderness, to which my heart was now entirely disposed. In the morning I showed my
performance to Venture, who, being pleased with the couplet, put it in his pocket, without informing
me whether he had made his. We dined with M. Simon, who treated us very politely. The conversation
was agreeable; indeed it could not be otherwise between two men of natural good sense, improved by
reading.  For  me,  I  acted  my  proper  part,  which  was  to  listen  without  attempting  to  join  in  the
conversation. Neither of them mentioned the couplet nor do I know that it ever passed for mine. M.
Simon appeared satisfied with my behavior; indeed, it was almost all he saw of me at this interview.
We had often met at Madam de Warrens, but he had never paid much attention to me; it is from this
dinner, therefore, that I date our acquaintance, which, though of no use in regard to the object I then
had in view, was afterwards productive of advantages which make me recollect it with pleasure. I
should be wrong not to give some account of this person, since from his office of magistrate, and the
reputation of wit on which he piqued himself, no idea could be formed of it. The judge major, Simon,
certainly  was  not  two  feet  high;  his  legs  spare,  straight,  and  tolerably  long,  would  have  added
something to his stature had they been vertical, but they stood in the direction of an open pair of
compasses.  His  body  was  not  only  short,  but  thin,  being  in  every  respect  of  most  inconceivable
smallness--when naked he must have appeared like a grasshopper. His head was of the common size, to
which appertained a well-formed face, a noble look, and tolerably fine eyes; in short, it appeared a
borrowed head, stuck on a miserable stump. He might very well have dispensed with dress, for his large
wig alone covered him from head to foot.
  He had two voices, perfectly different, which intermingled perpetually in his conversation, forming
at first a diverting, but afterwards a very disagreeable contrast. One grave and sonorous, was, if I may
hazard the expression, the voice of his head: the other, clear, sharp, and piercing, the voice of his body.
When he paid particular attention, and spoke leisurely, so as to preserve his breath, he could continue
his deep tone; but if he was the least animated, or attempted a lively accent, his voice sounded like the
whistling of a key, and it was with the utmost difficulty that he could return to the bass.  With the figure I have just described, and which is by no means overcharged, M. Simon was
gallant, ever entertaining the ladies with soft tales, and carrying the decoration of his person even to
foppery. Willing to make use of every advantage he, during the morning, gave audience in bed, for
when a handsome head was discovered on the pillow no one could have imagined what belonged to it.
This circumstance gave birth to scenes, which I am certain are yet remembered by all Annecy.
  One  morning,  when  he  expected  to  give  audience  in  bed,  or  rather  on  the  bed,  having  on  a
handsome night-cap ornamented with rose-colored ribbon, a countryman arriving knocked at the door;
the maid happened to be out; the judge, therefore, hearing the knock repeated, cried "Come in," and, as
he spoke rather loud, it was in his shrill tone. The man entered, looked about, endeavoring to discover
whence the female voice proceeded and at length seeing a handsome head-dress set off with ribbons,
was about to leave the room, making the supposed lady a hundred apologies. M. Simon, in a rage,
screamed the more; and the countryman, yet more confirmed in his opinion, conceiving himself to be
insulted, began railing in his turn, saying that, "Apparently, she was nothing better than a common
streetwalker, and that the judge major should be ashamed of setting such ill examples." The enraged
magistrate, having no other weapon than the jordan under his bed, was just going to throw it at the poor
fellow's head as his servant returned.
  This dwarf, ill-used by nature as to his person, was recompensed by possessing an understanding
naturally agreeable, and which he had been careful to cultivate. Though he was esteemed a good
lawyer, he did not like his profession, delighting more in the finer parts of literature, which he studied
with success: above all, he possessed that superficial brilliancy, the art of pleasing in conversation, even
with the ladies. He knew by heart a number of little stories, which he perfectly well knew how to make
the most of; relating with an air of secrecy, and as an anecdote of yesterday, what happened sixty years
before. He understood music, and could sing agreeably; in short, for a magistrate, he had many pleasing
talents. By flattering the ladies of Annecy, he became fashionable among them, appearing continually
in their train. He even pretended to favors, at which they were much amused. A Madam D'Epigny used
to say "The greatest favor he could aspire to, was to kiss a lady on her knees."
  As he was well read, and spoke fluently, his conversation was both amusing and instructive. When I
afterwards took a taste for study, I cultivated his acquaintance, and found my account in it: when at
Chambery, I frequently went from thence to see him. His praises increased my emulation, to which he
added some good advice respecting the prosecution of my studies, which I found useful. Unhappily,
this weakly body contained a very feeling soul. Some years after, he was chagrined by I know not what
unlucky affair, but it cost him his life. This was really unfortunate, for he was a good little man, whom
at a first acquaintance one laughed at, but afterwards loved. Though our situations in life were very
little  connected  with  each  other,  as  I  received  some  useful  lessons  from  him,  I  thought  gratitude
demanded that I should dedicate a few sentences to his memory.
  As  soon  as  I  found  myself  at  liberty,  I  ran  into  the  street  where  Mademoiselle  Galley  lived,
flattering myself that I should see someone go in or out, or at least open a window, but I was mistaken,
not even a cat appeared, the house remaining as close all the time as if it had been uninhabited. The
street was small and lonely, any one loitering about was, consequently, more likely to be noticed; from
time to time people passed in and out of the neighborhood; I was much embarrassed, thinking my
person might be known, and the cause that brought me there conjectured; this idea tortured me, for I
have ever preferred the honor and happiness of those I love to my own pleasures.
  At length, weary of playing the Spanish lover, and having no guitar, I determined to write to
Mademoiselle de G----. I should have preferred writing to her friend, but did not dare take that liberty,
as it appeared more proper to begin with her to whom I owed the acquaintance, and with whom I was
most familiar. Having written my letter, I took it to Mademoiselle Giraud, as the young ladies had
agreed at parting, they having furnished me with this expedient. Mademoiselle Giraud was a quilter,
and sometimes worked at Madam Galley's, which procured her free admission to the house. I must
confess, I was not thoroughly satisfied with this messenger, but was cautious of starting difficulties,
fearing that if I objected to her no other might be named, and it was impossible to intimate that she hadan inclination to me herself. I even felt humiliated that she should think I could imagine her of the same
sex as those young ladies: in a word, I accepted her agency rather than none, and availed myself of it at
all events.
  At the very first word, Giraud discovered me. I must own this was not a difficult matter, for if
sending a letter to young girls had not spoken sufficiently plain, my foolish embarrassed air would have
betrayed me. It will easily be supposed that the employment gave her little satisfaction, she undertook
it, however, and performed it faithfully. The next morning I ran to her house and found an answer ready
for me. How did I hurry away that I might have an opportunity to read and kiss it alone! though this
need not been told, but the plan adopted by Mademoiselle Giraud (and in which I found more delicacy
and moderation than I had expected) should. She had sense enough to conclude that her thirty--seven
years, hare's eyes, daubed nose, shrill voice, and black skin, stood no chance against two elegant young
girls, in all the height and bloom of beauty; she resolved, therefore, nether to betray nor assist them,
choosing rather to lose me entirely than entertain me for them.
  As Merceret had not heard from her mistress for some time, she thought of returning to Fribourg,
and the persuasions of Giraud determined her; nay more, she intimated it was proper someone should
conduct her to her father's and proposed me. As I happened to be agreeable to little Merceret, she
approved  the  idea,  and  the  same  day  they  mentioned  it  to  me  as  a  fixed  point.  Finding  nothing
displeasing in the manner they had disposed of me, I consented, thinking it could not be above a week's
journey at most; but Giraud, who had arranged the whole affair, thought otherwise. It was necessary to
avow the state of my finances, and the conclusion was, that Merceret should defray my expenses; but to
retrench on one hand what was expended on the other, I advised that her little baggage should be sent
on before, and that we should proceed by easy journeys on foot.
I am sorry to have so many girls in love with me, but as there is nothing to be very vain of in the
success of these amours, I think I may tell the truth without scruple. Merceret, younger and less artful
than Giraud, never made me so many advances, but she imitated my manners, my actions, repeated my
words, and showed me all those little attentions I ought to have had for her. Being very timorous, she
took great care that we should both sleep in the same chamber; a circumstance that usually produces
some consequences between a lad of twenty and a girl of twenty --five.
  For once, however, it went no further; my simplicity being such, that though Merceret was by no
means a disagreeable girl, an idea of gallantry never entered my head, and even if it had, I was too great
a novice to have profited by it. I could not imagine how two young persons could bring themselves to
sleep together, thinking that such familiarity must require an age of preparation. If poor Merceret paid
my expenses in hopes of any return, she was terribly cheated, for we arrived at Fribourg exactly as we
had quitted Annecy.
I passed through Geneva without visiting any one. While going over the bridges, I found myself so
affected that I could scarcely proceed. Never could I see the walls of that city, never could I enter it,
without feeling my heart sink from excess of tenderness, at the same time that the image of liberty
elevated my soul. The ideas of equality, union, and gentleness of manners, touched me even to tears,
and inspired me with a lively regret at having forfeited all these advantages. What an error was I in! but
yet how natural! I imagined I saw all this in my native country, because I bore it in my heart.
  It was necessary to pass through Nion: could I do this without seeing my good father? Had I
resolved on doing so, I must afterwards have died with regret. I left Merceret at the inn, and ventured to
his house. How wrong was I to fear him! On seeing me, his soul gave way to the parental tenderness
with which it was filled. What tears were mingled with our embraces! He thought I was returned to
him: I related my history, and informed him of my resolution. He opposed it feebly, mentioning the
dangers to which I exposed myself, and telling me the shortest follies were best, but did not attempt to
keep me by force, in which particular I think he acted right; but it is certain he did not do everything in
his power to detain me, even by fair means. Whether after the step I had taken, he thought I ought not
to return, or was puzzled at my age to know what to do with me--I have since found that he conceived a
very unjust opinion of my travelling companion. My step --mother, a good woman, a little coaxinglyput on an appearance of wishing me to stay to supper; I did not, however, comply, but told them I
proposed remaining longer with them on my return; leaving as a deposit my little packet, that had come
by water, and would have been an incumbrance, had I taken it with me. I continued my journey the next
morning, well satisfied that I had seen my father, and had taken courage to do my duty.
  We arrived without any accident at Fribourg. Towards the conclusion of the journey, the politeness
of Mademoiselle Merceret rather diminished, and, after our arrival, she treated me even with coldness.
Her father, who was not in the best circumstances, did not show me much attention, and I was obliged
to lodge at an alehouse. I went to see them the next morning, and received an invitation to dine there,
which I accepted. We separated without tears at night; I returned to my paltry lodging, and departed the
second day after my arrival, almost without knowing whither to go to.
  This was a circumstance of my life in which Providence offered me precisely what was necessary to
make my days pass happily. Merceret was a good girl, neither witty, handsome, nor ugly; not very
lively, but tolerably rational, except while under the influence of some little humors, which usually
evaporated in tears, without any violent outbreak of temper. She had a real inclination for me; I might
have married her without difficulty, and followed her father's business. My taste for music would have
made me love her; I should have settled at Fribourg, a small town, not pretty, but inhabited by very
worthy people--I should certainly have missed great pleasures, but should have lived in peace to my
last hour, and I must know best what I should have gained by such a step.
I did not return to Nion, but to Lausanne, wishing to gratify myself with a view of that beautiful
lake which is seen there in its utmost extent. The greater part of my secret motives have not been so
reasonable. Distant expectation has rarely strength enough to influence my actions; the uncertainty of
the future ever making me regard projects whose execution requires a length of time as deceitful lures. I
give in to visionary scenes of hope as well as others, provided they cost nothing, but if attended with
any trouble, I have done with them. The smallest, the most trifling pleasure that is conveniently within
my reach, tempts me more than all the joys of paradise. I must except, however, those pleasures which
are necessarily followed by pain; I only love those enjoyments which are unadulterated, which can
never be the case where we are conscious they must be followed by repentance.
  It was necessary I should arrive at some place, and the nearest was best; for having lost my way on
the road, I found myself in the evening at Moudon, where I spent all that remained of my little stock
except  ten  creuzers,  which  served  to  purchase  my  next  day's  dinner.  Arriving  in  the  evening  at
Lausanne, I went into an ale-house, without a penny in my pocket to pay for my lodging, or knowing
what would become of me. I found myself extremely hungry--setting, therefore, a good face on the
matter, I ordered supper, made my meal, went to bed without thought and slept with great composure.
In the morning, having breakfasted and reckoned with my host, I offered to leave my waistcoat in
pledge for seven batz, which was the amount of my expenses. The honest man refused this, saying,
thank Heaven, he had never stripped any one, and would not now begin for seven batz, adding I should
keep my waistcoat and pay him when I could. I was affected with this unexpected kindness, but felt it
less than I ought to have done, or have since experienced on the remembrance of it. I did not fail
sending him his money, with thanks, by one I could depend on. Fifteen years after, passing Lausanne,
on my return from Italy, I felt a sensible regret at having forgotten the name of the landlord and house. I
wished to see him, and should have felt real pleasure in recalling to his memory that worthy action.
Services which doubtless have been much more important, but rendered with ostentation, have not
appeared to me so worthy of gratitude as the simple unaffected humanity of this honest man.
  As I approached Lausanne, I thought of my distress, and the means of extricating myself, without
appearing in want to my step-mother. I compared myself, in this walking pilgrimage, to my friend
Venture, on his arrival at Annecy, and was so warmed with the idea, that without recollecting that I had
neither his gentility nor his talents, I determined to act the part of little Venture at Lausanne, to teach
music, which I did not understand, and say I came from Paris, where I had never been.
  In consequence of this noble project (as there was no company where I could introduce myself
without expense, and not choosing to venture among professional people), I inquired for some little inn,where  I  could  lodge  cheap,  and  was  directed  to  one  named  Perrotet,  who  took  in  boarders.  This
Perrotet, who was one of the best men in the world, received me very kindly, and after having heard my
feigned story and profession, promised to speak of me, and endeavored to procure me scholars, saying
he should not expect any money till I had earned it. His price for board, though moderate in itself, was
a great deal to me; he advised me, therefore, to begin with half board, which consisted of good soup
only for dinner, but a plentiful supper at night. I closed with this proposition, and the poor Perrotet
trusted me with great cheerfulness, sparing, meantime, no trouble to be useful to me.
  Having found so many good people in my youth, why do I find so few in my age? Is their race
extinct? No; but I do not seek them in the same situation I did formerly, among the commonality, where
violent passions predominate only at intervals, and where nature speaks her genuine sentiments. In
more elevated stations they are entirely smothered, and under the mask of sentiment, only interest or
vanity is heard.
  Having written to my father from Lausanne, he sent my packet and some excellent advice, of which
I should have profited better. I have already observed that I have moments of inconceivable delirium, in
which  I  am  entirely  out  of  myself.  The  adventure  I  am  about  to  relate  is  an  instance  of  this:  to
comprehend how completely my brain was turned, and to what degree I had 'Venturised' (if I may be
allowed the expression), the many extravagances I ran into at the same time should be considered.
Behold me, then, a singing master, without knowing how to note a common song; for if the five or six
months passed with Le Maitre had improved me, they could not be supposed sufficient to qualify me
for such an undertaking; besides, being taught by a master was enough (as I have before observed) to
make me learn ill. Being a Parisian from Geneva, and a Catholic in a Protestant country, I thought I
should change my name with my religion and country, still approaching as near as possible to the great
model I had in view. He called himself Venture de Villeneuve. I changed, by anagram, the name
Rousseau into that of Vaussore, calling myself Monsieur Vaussore de Villeneuve. Venture was a good
composer, though he had not said so; without knowing anything of the art, I boasted of my skill to
every one. This was not all: being presented to Monsieur de Freytorens, professor of law, who loved
music, and who gave concerts at his house, nothing would do but I must give him a proof of my talents,
and accordingly I set about composing a piece for his concerts, as boldly as if I had really understood
the science. I had the constancy to labor a fortnight at this curious business, to copy it fair, write out the
different  parts,  and  distribute  them  with  as  much  assurance  as  if  they  had  been  masterpieces  of
harmony; in short (what will hardly be believed, though strictly true), I tacked a very pretty minuet to
the end of it, that was commonly played about the streets, and which many may remember from these
words, so well known at that time:
  Quel caprice! Quel injustice! Quio, tu Clarice Trahiriot tes feux? &'c.
  Venture had taught me this air with the bass, set to other words, by the help of which I had retained
it: thus at the end of my composition, I put this minuet and bass, suppressing the words, and uttering it
for my own as confidently as if I had been speaking to the inhabitants of the moon. They assembled to
perform my piece; I explain to each the movement, taste of execution, and references to his part--I was
fully occupied. They were five or six minutes preparing, which were for me so many ages: at length,
everything is adjusted, myself in a conspicuous situation, a fine roll of paper in my hand, gravely
preparing to beat time. I gave four or five strokes with my paper, attending with "take care!" they begin
--No, never since French operas existed was there such a confused discord! The minuet, however,
presently put all the company in good humor; hardly was it begun, before I heard bursts of laughter
from all parts, every one congratulated me on my pretty taste for music, declaring this minuet would
make me spoken of, and that I merited the loudest praise. It is not necessary to describe my uneasiness,
or to own how much I deserved it.
  Next day, one of the musicians, named Lutold, came to see me and was kind enough to congratulate
me on my success. The profound conviction of my folly, shame, regret, and the state of despair to
which I was reduced, with the impossibility of concealing the cruel agitation of my heart, made me
open it to him; giving, therefore, a loose to my tears, not content with owning my ignorance, I told all,conjuring him to secrecy; he kept his word, as every one will suppose. The same evening, all Lausanne
knew who I was, but what is remarkable, no one seemed to know, not even the good Perrotet, who
(notwithstanding what had happened) continued to lodge and board me.
I led a melancholy life here; the consequences of such an essay had not rendered Lausanne a very
agreeable residence. Scholars did not present themselves in crowds, not a single female, and not a
person of the city. I had only two or three great dunces, as stupid as I was ignorant, who fatigued me to
death, and in my hands were not likely to edify much.
  At length, I was sent for to a house, where a little serpent of a girl amused herself by showing me a
parcel of music that I could not read a note of, and which she had the malice to sing before her master,
to teach him how it should be executed; for I was so unable to read an air at first sight, that in the
charming concert I have just described, I could not possibly follow the execution a moment, or know
whether they played truly what lay before them, and I myself had composed.
  In the midst of so many humiliating circumstances, I had the pleasing consolation, from time to
time, of receiving letters from my two charming friends. I have ever found the utmost consolatory
virtue in the fair; when in disgrace, nothing softens my affliction more than to be sensible that an
amiable woman is interested for me. This correspondence ceased soon after, and was never renewed:
indeed it was my own fault, for in changing situations I neglected sending my address, and forced by
necessity to think perpetually of myself, I soon forgot them.
  It  is  a  long  time  since  I  mentioned  Madam  de  Warrens,  but  it  should  not  be  supposed  I  had
forgotten her; never was she a moment absent from my thoughts. I anxiously wished to find her, not
merely because she was necessary to my subsistence, but because she was infinitely more necessary to
my heart. My attachment to her (though lively and tender, as it really was) did not prevent my loving
others, but then it was not in the same manner. All equally claimed my tenderness for their charms, but
it was those charms alone I loved, my passion would not have survived them, while Madam de Warrens
might  have  become  old  or  ugly  without  my  loving  her  the  less  tenderly.  My  heart  had  entirely
transmitted to herself the homage it first paid to her beauty, and whatever change she might experience,
while she remained herself, my sentiments could not change. I was sensible how much gratitude I owed
to her, but in truth, I never thought of it, and whether she served me or not, it would ever have been the
same thing. I loved her neither from duty, interest, nor convenience; I loved her because I was born to
love her. During my attachment to another, I own this affection was in some measure deranged; I did
not think so frequently of her, but still with the same pleasure, and never, in love or otherwise, did I
think of her without feeling that I could expect no true happiness in life while in a state of separation.
  Though in so long a time I had received no news from Madam de Warrens, I never imagined I had
entirely lost her, or that she could have forgotten me. I said to myself, she will know sooner or later that
I am wandering about, and will find some means to inform me of her situation: I am certain I shall find
her. In the meantime, it was a pleasure to live in her native country, to walk in the streets where she had
walked, and before the houses that she had lived in; yet all this was the work of conjecture, for one of
my foolish peculiarities was, not daring to inquire after her, or even pronounce her name without the
most absolute necessity. It seemed in speaking of her that I declared all I felt, that my lips revealed the
secrets of my heart, and in some degree injured the object of my affection. I believe fear was likewise
mingled with this idea; I dreaded to hear ill of her. Her management had been much spoken of, and
some little of her conduct in other respects; fearing, therefore, that something might be said which I did
not wish to hear, I preferred being silent on the subject.
  As my scholars did not take up much of my time, and the town where she was born was not above
four leagues from Lausanne, I made it a walk of three or four days; during which time a most pleasant
emotion never left me. A view of the lake of Geneva and its admirable banks, had ever, in my idea, a
particular attraction which I cannot describe; not arising merely from the beauty of the prospect, but
something else, I know not why, more interesting, which affects and softens me. Every time I have
approached the Vaudois country I have experienced an impression composed of the remembrance of
Madam de Warrens, who was born there; of my father, who lived there; of Miss Vulson, who had beenmy first love, and of several pleasant journeys I had made there in my childhood, mingled with some
nameless charm, more powerfully attractive than all the rest. When that ardent desire for a life of
happiness and tranquility (which ever follows me, and for which I was born) inflames my mind, 'tis
ever to the country of Vaud, near the lake, in those charming plains, that imagination leads me. An
orchard on the banks of that lake, and no other, is absolutely necessary; a firm friend, an amiable
woman,  a  cow,  and  a  little  boat;  nor  could  I  enjoy  perfect  happiness  on  earth  without  these
concomitants. I laugh at the simplicity with which I have several times gone into that country for the
sole purpose of seeking this imaginary happiness when I was ever surprised to find the inhabitants,
particularly the women, of a quite different disposition to what I sought. How strange did this appear to
me! The country and people who inhabit it, were never, in my idea, formed for each other.
  Walking along these beautiful banks, on my way to Vevay, I gave myself up to the soft melancholy;
my heart rushed with ardor into a thousand innocent felicities; melting to tenderness, I sighed and wept
like a child. How often, stopping to weep more at my ease, and seated on a large stone, did I amuse
myself with seeing my tears drop into the water.
  On my arrival at Vevay, I lodged at the Key, and during the two days I remained there, without any
acquaintance, conceived a love for that city, which has followed me through all my travels, and was
finally the cause that I fixed on this spot, in the novel I afterwards wrote, for the residence of my hero
and heroines. I would say to any one who has taste and feeling, go to Vevay, visit the surrounding
country, examine the prospects, go on the lake and then say, whether nature has not designed this
country for a Julia, a Clara, and a St. Preux; but do not seek them there. I now return to my story.
  Giving  myself  out  for  a  Catholic,  I  followed  without  mystery  or  scruple  the  religion  I  had
embraced. On a Sunday, if the weather was fine, I went to hear mass at Assans, a place two leagues
distant  from  Lausanne,  and  generally  in  company  with  other  Catholics,  particularly  a  Parisian
embroiderer, whose name I have forgotten. Not such a Parisian as myself, but a real native of Paris, an
arch-Parisian from his maker, yet honest as a peasant. He loved his country so well, that he would not
doubt my being his countryman, for fear he should not have so much occasion to speak of it. The
lieutenant-governor,  M.  de  Crouzas,  had  a  gardener,  who  was  likewise  from  Paris,  but  not  so
complaisant; he thought the glory of his country concerned, when any one claimed that honor who was
not really entitled to it; he put questions to me, therefore, with an air and tone, as if certain to detect me
in a falsehood, and once, smiling malignantly, asked what was remarkable in the 'Marcheneuf'? It may
be supposed I asked the question; but I have since passed twenty years at Paris, and certainly know that
city, yet was the same question repeated at this day, I should be equally embarrassed to answer it, and
from this embarrassment it might be concluded I had never been there: thus, even when we meet with
truths, we are subject to build our opinions on circumstances, which may easily deceive us.
I formed no ideas, while at Lausanne, that were worth recollecting, nor can I say exactly how long I
remained there; I only know that not finding sufficient to subsist on, I went from thence to Neutchatel,
where I passed the winter. Here I succeeded better, I got some scholars, and saved enough to pay my
good friend Perrotet, who had faithfully sent my baggage, though at that time I was considerably in his
debt.
  By  continuing  to  teach  music,  I  insensibly  gained  some  knowledge  of  it.  The  life  I  led  was
sufficiently  agreeable,  and  any  reasonable  man  might  have  been  satisfied,  but  my  unsettled  heart
demanded  something  more.  On  Sundays,  or  whenever  I  had  leisure,  I  wandered,  sighing  and
thoughtful, about the adjoining woods, and when once out of the city never returned before night. One
day, being at Boudry, I went to dine at a public-house, where I saw a man with a long beard, dressed in
a violet-colored Grecian habit, with a fur cap, and whose air and manner were rather noble. This person
found some difficulty in making himself understood, speaking only an unintelligible jargon, which bore
more resemblance to Italian than any other language. I understood almost all he said, and I was the only
person present who could do so, for he was obliged to make his request known to the landlord and
others about him by signs. On my speaking a few words in Italian, which he perfectly understood, he
got up and embraced me with rapture; a connection was soon formed, and from that moment, I becamehis interpreter. His dinner was excellent, mine rather worse than indifferent, he gave me an invitation to
dine with him, which I accepted without much ceremony. Drinking and chatting soon rendered us
familiar, and by the end of the repast we had all the disposition in the world to become inseparable
companions. He informed me he was a Greek prelate, and 'Archimandrite' of Jerusalem; that he had
undertaken to make a gathering in Europe for the reestablishment of the Holy Sepulchre, and showed
me  some  very  fine  patents  from  the  czarina,  the  emperor,  and  several  other  sovereigns.  He  was
tolerably  content  with  what  he  had  collected  hitherto,  though  he  had  experienced  inconceivable
difficulties in Germany; for not understanding a word of German, Latin, or French, he had been obliged
to have recourse to his Greek, Turkish Lingua Franca, which did not procure him much in the country
he was travelling through; his proposal, therefore, to me was, that I should accompany him in the
quality of secretary and interpreter. In spite of my violet-colored coat, which accorded well enough
with the proposed employment, he guessed from my meagre appearance, that I should easily be gained;
and he was not mistaken. The bargain was soon made, I demanded nothing, and he promised liberally;
thus, without any security or knowledge of the person I was about to serve, I gave myself up entirely to
his conduct, and the next day behold me on an expedition to Jerusalem.
  We began our expedition unsuccessfully by the canton of Fribourg. Episcopal dignity would not
suffer him to play the beggar, or solicit help from private individuals; but we presented his commission
to the Senate, who gave him a trifling sum. From thence we went to Berne, where we lodged at the
Falcon, then a good inn, and frequented by respectable company; the public table being well supplied
and numerously attended. I had fared indifferently so long, that I was glad to make myself amends,
therefore took care to profit by the present occasion. My lord, the Archimandrite, was himself an
excellent companion, loved good cheer, was gay, spoke well for those who understood him, and knew
perfectly well how to make the most of his Grecian erudition. One day, at dessert while cracking nuts,
he cut his finger pretty deeply, and as it bled freely showed it to the company, saying with a laugh,
"Mirate, signori; questo a sangue Pelasgo."
  At Berne, I was not useless to him, nor was my performance so bad as I had feared: I certainly
spoke better and with more confidence than I could have done for myself. Matters were not conducted
here with the same simplicity as at Fribourg; long and frequent conferences were necessary with the
Premiers of the State, and the examination of his titles was not the work of a day; at length, everything
being adjusted, he was admitted to an audience by the Senate; I entered with him as interpreter, and was
ordered  to  speak.  I  expected  nothing  less,  for  it  never  entered  my  mind,  that  after  such  long  and
frequent conferences with the members, it was necessary to address the assembly collectively, as if
nothing had been said. Judge my embarrassment!--a man so bashful to speak, not only in public, but
before the whole of the Senate of Berne! to speak impromptu, without a single moment for recollection;
it  was  enough  to  annihilate  me--I  was  not  even  intimidated.  I  described  distinctly  and  clearly  the
commission of the Archimandrite; extolled the piety of those princes who had contributed, and to
heighten that of their excellencies by emulation, added that less could not be expected from their well--
known munificence; then, endeavoring to prove that this good work was equally interesting to all
Christians, without distinction of sect; and concluded by promising the benediction of Heaven to all
those who took part in it. I will not say that my discourse was the cause of our success, but it was
certainly well received; and on our quitting the Archimandrite was gratified by a very genteel present,
to which some very handsome compliments were added on the understanding of his secretary; these I
had the agreeable office of interpreting; but could not take courage to render them literally.
  This was the only time in my life that I spoke in public, and before a sovereign; and the only time,
perhaps, that I spoke boldly and well. What difference in the disposition of the same person. Three
years ago, having been to see my old friend, M. Roguin, at Yverdon, I received a deputation to thank
me for some books I had presented to the library of that city; the Swiss are great speakers; these
gentlemen, accordingly, made me a long harangue, which I thought myself obliged in honor to answer,
but so embarrassed myself in the attempt, that my head became confused, I stopped short, and was
laughed at. Though naturally timid, I have sometimes acted with confidence in my youth, but never inmy advanced age: the more I have seen of the world the less I have been able to adapt its manners.
  On leaving Berne, we went to Soleurre: the Archimandrite designing to re-enter Germany, and
return through Hungary or Poland to his own country. This would have been a prodigious tour; but as
the contents of his purse rather increased than diminished during his journey, he was in no haste to
return. For me, who was almost as much pleased on horseback as on foot, I would have desired no
better than to have travelled thus during my whole life; but it was pre-ordained that my journey should
soon end.
  The first thing we did after our arrival at Soleurre, was to pay our respects to the French ambassador
there.  Unfortunately  for  my  bishop,  this  chanced  to  be  the  Marquis  de  Bonac,  who  had  been
ambassador at the Porte, and was acquainted with every particular relative to the Holy Sepulchre. The
Archimandrite had an audience that lasted about a quarter of an hour, to which I was not admitted, as
the ambassador spoke French and Italian at least as well as myself. On my Grecian's retiring, I was
prepared to follow him, but was detained: it was now my turn. Having called myself a Parisian, as such,
I was under the jurisdiction of his excellency: he therefore asked me who I was? exhorting me to tell
the truth; this I promised to do, but entreated a private audience, which was immediately granted. The
ambassador took me to his closet, and shut the door; there, throwing myself at his feet, I kept my word,
nor should I have said less, had I promised nothing, for a continual wish to unbosom myself, puts my
heart perpetually upon my lips. After having disclosed myself without reserve to the musician Lutold,
there was no occasion to attempt acting the mysterious with the Marquis de Bonac, who was so well
pleased with my little history, and the ingenuousness with which I had related it, that he led me to the
ambassadress, and presented me, with an abridgment of my recital. Madam de Bonac received me
kindly, saying, I must not be suffered to follow that Greek monk. It was accordingly resolved that I
should remain at their hotel till something better could be done for me. I wished to bid adieu to my poor
Archimandrite, for whom I had conceived an attachment, but was not permitted; they sent him word
that I was to be detained there, and in quarter of an hour after, I saw my little bundle arrive. M. de la
Martiniere, secretary of the embassy, had in a manner the care of me; while following him to the
chamber appropriated to my use, he said, "This apartment was occupied under the Count de Luc, by a
celebrated man of the same name as yourself; it is in your power to succeed him in every respect, and
cause it to be said hereafter, Rousseau the First, Rousseau the Second." This similarity which I did not
then expect, would have been less flattering to my wishes could I have foreseen at what price I should
one day purchase the distinction.
  What M. de la Martiniere had said excited my curiosity; I read the works of the person whose
chamber I occupied, and on the strength of the compliment that had been paid me (imagining I had a
taste for poetry) made my first essay in a cantata in praise of Madam de Bonac. This inclination was not
permanent, though from time to time I have composed tolerable verses. I think it is a good exercise to
teach elegant turns of expression, and to write well in prose, but could never find attractions enough in
French poetry to give entirely in to it.
  M. de la Martiniere wished to see my style, and asked me to write the detail I had before made the
ambassador; accordingly I wrote him a long letter, which I have since been informed was preserved by
M. de Marianne, who had long been attached to the Marquis de Bonac, and has since succeeded M. de
Martiniere as secretary to the embassy of M. de Courtellies.
  The experience I began to acquire tended to moderate my romantic projects; for example, I did not
fall in love with Madam de Bonac, but also felt I did not stand much chance of succeeding in the
service of her husband. M. de la Martiniere was already in the only place that could have satisfied my
ambition, and M. de Marianne in expectancy: thus my utmost hopes could only aspire to the office of
under secretary, which did not infinitely tempt me: this was the reason that when consulted on the
situation I should like to be placed in, I expressed a great desire to go to Paris. The ambassador readily
gave in to the idea, which at least tended to disembarrass him of me. M. de Mervilleux interpreting
secretary to the embassy, said, that his friend, M. Godard, a Swiss colonel, in the service of France,
wanted a person to be with his nephew, who had entered very young into the service, and made nodoubt that I should suit him. On this idea, so lightly formed, my departure was determined; and I, who
saw a long journey to perform with Paris at the end of it, was enraptured with the project. They gave
me several letters, a hundred livres to defray the expenses of my journey, accompanied with some good
advice, and thus equipped I departed.
I was a fortnight making the journey, which I may reckon among the happiest days of my life. I was
young, in perfect health, with plenty of money, and the most brilliant hopes, add to this, I was on foot,
and alone. It may appear strange, I should mention the latter circumstance as advantageous, if my
peculiarity of temper is not already familiar to the reader. I was continually occupied with a variety of
pleasing chimeras, and never did the warmth of my imagination produce more magnificent ones. When
offered an empty place in a carriage, or any person accosted me on the road, how vexed was I to see
that fortune overthrown, whose edifice, while walking, I had taken such pains to rear.
  For once my ideas were all martial: I was going to live with a military man; nay, to become one, for
it was concluded I should begin with being a cadet. I already fancied myself in regimentals, with a fine
white feather nodding on my hat, and my heart was inflamed by the noble idea. I had some smattering
of geometry and fortification; my uncle was an engineer; I was in a manner a soldier by inheritance. My
short  sight,  indeed,  presented  some  little  obstacle,  but  did  not  by  any  means  discourage  me,  as  I
reckoned to supply that defect by coolness and intrepidity. I had read, too, that Marshal Schomberg was
remarkably shortsighted, and why might not Marshal Rousseau be the same? My imagination was so
warm by these follies, that it presented nothing but troops, ramparts, gabions, batteries, and myself in
the  midst  of  fire  and  smoke,  an  eyeglass  in  hand,  commanding  with  the  utmost  tranquility.
Notwithstanding, when the country presented a delightful prospect, when I saw charming groves and
rivulets, the pleasing sight made me sigh with regret, and feel, in the midst of all this glory, that my
heart was not formed for such havoc; and soon without knowing how, I found my thoughts wandering
among my dear sheep-folds, renouncing forever the labor of Mars.
  How much did Paris disappoint the idea I had formed of it! The exterior decorations I had seen at
Turin,  the  beauty  of  the  streets,  the  symmetry  and  regularity  of  the  houses,  contributed  to  this
disappointment, since I concluded that Paris must be infinitely superior. I had figured to myself a
splendid  city,  beautiful  as  large,  of  the  most  commanding  aspect,  whose  streets  were  ranges  of
magnificent  palaces,  composed  of  marble  and  gold.  On  entering  the  faubourg  St.  Marceau,  I  saw
nothing but dirty stinking streets, filthy black houses, an air of slovenliness and poverty, beggars,
carters, butchers, cries of diet-drink and old hats. This struck me so forcibly, that all I have since seen
of  real  magnificence  in  Paris  could  never  erase  this  first  impression,  which  has  ever  given  me  a
particular disgust to residing in that capital; and I may say, the whole time I remained there afterwards,
was employed in seeking resources which might enable me to live at a distance from it. This is the
consequence of too lively imagination, which exaggerates even beyond the voice of fame, and ever
expects more than is told. I have heard Paris so flatteringly described, that I pictured it like the ancient
Babylon, which, perhaps, had I seen, I might have found equally faulty, and unlike that idea the account
had conveyed. The same thing happened at the Opera-house, to which I hastened the day after my
arrival! I was sensible of the same deficiency at Versailles! and some time after on viewing the sea. I
am convinced this would ever be the consequence of a too flattering description of any object; for it is
impossible for man, and difficult even for nature herself, to surpass the riches of my imagination.
  By the reception I met with from all those to whom my letters were addressed, I thought my fortune
was certainly made. The person who received me the least kindly was M. de Surbeck, to whom I had
the warmest recommendation. He had retired from the service, and lived philosophically at Bagneux,
where I waited on him several times without his offering me even a glass of water. I was better received
by Madam de Merveilleux, sister-in-law to the interpreter, and by his nephew, who was an officer in
the guards. The mother and son not only received me kindly, but offered me the use of their table,
which favor I frequently accepted during my stay at Paris.
  Madam de Merveilleux appeared to have been handsome; her hair was of a fine black, which,
according to the old mode, she wore curled on the temples. She still retained (what do not perish with aset of features) the beauties of an amiable mind. She appeared satisfied with mine, and did all she could
to render me service; but no one seconded her endeavors, and I was presently undeceived in the great
interest they had seemed to take in my affairs. I must, however, do the French nation the justice to say,
they do not so exhaust themselves with protestations, as some have represented, and that those they
make are usually sincere; but they have a manner of appearing interested in your affairs, which is more
deceiving than words. The gross compliments of the Swiss can only impose upon fools; the manners of
the French are more seducing, and at the same time so simple, that you are persuaded they do not
express all they mean to do for you, in order that you may be the more agreeably surprised. I will say
more; they are not false in their protestations, being naturally zealous to oblige, humane, benevolent,
and even (whatever may be said to the contrary) more sincere than any other nation; but they are too
flighty:  in  effect  they  feel  the  sentiments  they  profess  for  you,  but  that  sentiment  flies  off  as
instantaneously as it was formed. In speaking to you, their whole attention is employed on you alone,
when absent you are forgotten. Nothing is permanent in their hearts, all is the work of the moment.
  Thus I was greatly flattered, but received little service. Colonel Godard for whose nephew I was
recommended, proved to be an avaricious old wretch, who, on seeing my distress (though he was
immensely rich), wished to have my services for nothing, meaning to place me with his nephew, rather
as a valet without wages than a tutor. He represented that as I was to be continually engaged with him, I
should be excused from duty, and might live on my cadet's allowance; that is to say, on the pay of a
soldier: hardly would he consent to give me a uniform, thinking the clothing of the army might serve.
Madam de Merveilleux, provoked at his proposals, persuaded me not to accept them; her son was of the
same opinion; something else was to be thought on, but no situation was procured. Meantime, I began
to be necessitated; for the hundred livres with which I had commenced my journey could not last much
longer; happily, I received a small remittance from the ambassador, which was very serviceable, nor do
I  think  he  would  have  abandoned  me  had  I  possessed  more  patience;  but  languishing,  waiting,
soliciting, are to me impossible: I was disheartened, displeased, and thus all my brilliant expectations
came once more to nothing. I had not all this time forgotten my dear Madam de Warrens, but how was I
to find her? Where should I seek her? Madam de Merveilleux, who knew my story, assisted me in the
search, but for a long time unavailingly; at length, she informed me that Madam de Warrens had set out
from Paris about two months before, but it was not known whether for Savoy or Turin, and that some
conjectured she was gone to Switzerland. Nothing further was necessary to fix my determination to
follow her, certain that wherever she might be, I stood more chance of finding her at those places than I
could possibly do at Paris.
  Before my departure, I exercised my new poetical talent in an epistle to Colonel Godard, whom I
ridiculed to the utmost of my abilities. I showed this scribble to Madam de Merveilleux, who, instead of
discouraging me, as she ought to have done, laughed heartily at my sarcasms, as well as her son, who, I
believe, did not like M. Godard; indeed, it must be confessed, he was a man not calculated to obtain
affection. I was tempted to send him my verses, and they encouraged me in it; accordingly I made them
up in a parcel directed to him, and there being no post then at Paris by which I could conveniently send
this, I put it in my pocket, and sent it to him from Auxerre, as I passed through that place. I laugh, even
yet, sometimes, at the grimaces I fancy he made on reading this panegyric, where he was certainly
drawn to the life; it began thus:
  Tu croyois, vieux Penard, qu' une folle manie D' elever ton neveu m'inspireroit l'envie.
  This little piece, which, it is true, was but indifferently written; did not want for salt, and announced
a turn for satire; it is, notwithstanding, the only satirical writing that ever came from my pen. I have too
little hatred in my heart to take advantage of such a talent; but I believe it may be judged from those
controversies, in which from time to time I have been engaged in my own defence, that had I been of a
vindictive disposition, my adversaries would rarely have had the laughter on their side.
  What I most regret, is not having kept a journal of my travels, being conscious that a number of
interesting  details  have  slipped  my  memory;  for  never  did  I  exist  so  completely,  never  live  so
thoroughly, never was so much myself, if I dare use the expression, as in those journeys made on foot.Walking animates and enlivens my spirits; I can hardly think when in a state of inactivity; my body
must be exercised to make my judgmemt active. The view of a fine country, a succession of agreeable
prospects, a free air, a good appetite, and the health I gained by walking; the freedom of inns, and the
distance from everything that can make me recollect the dependence of my situation, conspire to free
my soul, and give boldness to my thoughts, throwing me, in a manner, into the immensity of beings,
where I combine, choose and appropriate them to my fancy, without constraint or fear. I dispose of all
nature as I please; my heart wandering from object to object, approximates and unites with those that
please it, is surrounded by charming images, and becomes intoxicated with delicious sensations. If,
attempting to render these permanent, I am amused in describing to myself, what glow of coloring,
what energy of expression, do I give them!--It has been said, that all these are to be found in my works,
though written in the decline of life. Oh! had those of my early youth been seen, those made during my
travels, composed, but never written!--Why did I not write them? will be asked; and why should I have
written them? I may answer. Why deprive myself of the actual charm of my enjoyments to inform
others what I enjoyed? What to me were readers, the public, or all the world, while I was mounting the
empyrean. Besides, did I carry pens, paper and ink with me? Had I recollected all these, not a thought
would have occurred worth preserving. I do not foresee when I shall have ideas; they come when they
please, and not when I call for them; either they avoid me altogether, or rushing in crowds, overwhelm
me  with  their  force  and  number.  Ten  volumes  a  day  would  not  suffice  barely  to  enumerate  my
thoughts; how then should I find time to write them? In stopping, I thought of nothing but a hearty
dinner; on departing, of nothing but a charming walk; I felt that a new paradise awaited me at the door,
and eagerly leaped forward to enjoy it.
  Never did I experience this so feelingly as in the perambulation I am now describing. On coming to
Paris, I had confined myself to ideas which related to the situation I expected to occupy there. I had
rushed into the career I was about to run, and should have completed it with tolerable eclat, but it was
not that my heart adhered to. Some real beings obscured my imagined ones--Colonel Godard and his
nephew could not keep pace with a hero of my disposition. Thank Heaven, I was soon delivered from
all these obstacles, and could enter at pleasure into the wilderness of chimeras, for that alone remained
before me, and I wandered in it so completely that I several times lost my way; but this was no
misfortune, I would not have shortened it, for, feeling with regret, as I approached Lyons, that I must
again return to the material world, I should have been glad never to have arrived there.
  One day, among others, having purposely gone out of my way to take a nearer view of a spot that
appeared  delightful,  I  was  so  charmed  with  it,  and  wandered  round  it  so  often,  that  at  length  I
completely lost myself, and after several hours' useless walking, weary, fainting with hunger and thirst,
I entered a peasant's hut, which had not indeed a very promising appearance, but was the only one I
could discover near me. I thought it was here, as at Geneva, or in Switzerland, where the inhabitants,
living at ease, have it in their power to exercise hospitality. I entreated the countryman to give me some
dinner, offering to pay for it: on which he presented me with some skimmed milk and coarse barley--
bread, saying it was all he had. I drank the milk with pleasure, and ate the bread, chaff and all; but it
was not very restorative to a man sinking with fatigue. The countryman, who watched me narrowly,
judged the truth of my story by my appetite, and presently (after having said that he plainly saw I was
an honest, good--natured young man, and did not come to betray him) opened a little trap door by the
side of his kitchen, went down, and returned a moment after with a good brown loaf of pure wheat, the
remains of a well-flavored ham, and a bottle of wine, the sight of which rejoiced my heart more than all
the rest: he then prepared a good thick omelet, and I made such a dinner as none but a walking traveller
ever enjoyed.
  When I again offered to pay, his inquietude and fears returned; he not only would have no money,
but refused it with the most evident emotion; and what made this scene more amusing, I could not
imagine  the  motive  of  his  fear.  At  length,  he  pronounced  tremblingly  those  terrible  words,
"Commissioners," and "Cellar-rats," which he explained by giving me to understand that he concealed
his wine because of the excise, and his bread on account of the tax imposed on it; adding, he should bean undone man, if it was suspected he was not almost perishing with want. What he said to me on this
subject (of which I had not the smallest idea) made an impression on my mind that can never be
effaced, sowing seeds of that inextinguishable hatred which has since grow up in my heart against the
vexations  these  unhappy  people  suffer,  and  against  their  oppressors.  This  man,  though  in  easy
circumstances,  dare  not  eat  the  bread  gained  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  and  could  only  escape
destruction by exhibiting an outward appearance of misery!--I left his cottage with as much indignation
as concern, deploring the fate of those beautiful countries, where nature has been prodigal of her gifts,
only that they may become the prey of barbarous exactors.
  The incident which I have just related, is the only one I have a distinct remembrance of during this
journey: I recollect, indeed, that on approaching Lyons, I wished to prolong it by going to see the banks
of  the  Lignon;  for  among  the  romances  I  had  read  with  my  father,  Astrea  was  not  forgotten  and
returned more frequently to my thoughts than any other. Stopping for some refreshment (while chatting
with my hostess), I inquired the way to Forez, and was informed that country was an excellent place for
mechanics, as there were many forges, and much iron work done there. This eulogium instantly calmed
my romantic curiosity, for I felt no inclination to seek Dianas and Sylvanders among a generation of
blacksmiths. The good woman who encouraged me with this piece of information certainly thought I
was a journeyman locksmith.
I had some view in going to Lyons: on my arrival, I went to the Chasattes, to see Mademoiselle du
Chatelet, a friend of Madam de Warrens, for whom I had brought a letter when I came there with M. le
Maitre, so that it was an acquaintance already formed. Mademoiselle du Chatelet informed me her
friend had passed through Lyons, but could not tell whether she had gone on to Piedmont, being
uncertain at her departure whether it would not be necessary to stop in Savoy; but if I choose, she
would immediately write for information, and thought my best plan would be to remain at Lyons till
she received it. I accepted this offer; but did not tell Mademoiselle du Chatelet how much I was pressed
for an answer, and that my exhausted purse would not permit me to wait long. It was not an appearance
of coolness that withheld me, on the contrary, I was very kindly received, treated on the footing of
equality, and this took from me the resolution of explaining my circumstances, for I could not bear to
descend from a companion to a miserable beggar.
I seem to have retained a very connecting remembrance of that part of my life contained in this
book; yet I think I remember, about the same period, another journey to Lyons, (the particulars of
which I cannot recollect) where I found myself much straitened, and a confused remembrance of the
extremities to which I was reduced does not contribute to recall the idea agreeably. Had I been like
many others, had I possessed the talent of borrowing and running in debt at every ale-house I came to, I
might have fared better; but in that my incapacity equalled my repugnance, and to demonstrate the
prevalence of both, it will be sufficient to say, that though I have passed almost my whole life in
indifferent circumstances, and frequently have been near wanting bread, I was never once asked for
money by a creditor without having it in my power to pay it instantly; I could never bear to contract
clamorous debts, and have ever preferred suffering to owing.
  Being reduced to pass my nights in the streets, may certainly be called suffering, and this was
several times the case at Lyons, having preferred buying bread with the few pence I had remaining, to
bestowing them on a lodging; as I was convinced there was less danger of dying for want of sleep than
of hunger. What is astonishing, while in this unhappy situation, I took no care for the future, was
neither uneasy nor melancholy, but patiently waited an answer to Mademoiselle du Chatelet's letter, and
lying in the open air, stretched on the earth, or on a bench, slept as soundly as if reposing on a bed of
roses. I remember, particularly, to have passed a most delightful night at some distance from the city, in
a road which had the Rhone, or Soane, I cannot recollect which, on the one side, and a range of raised
gardens, with terraces, on the other. It had been a very hot day, the evening was delightful, the dew
moistened the fading grass, no wind was stirring, the air was fresh without chillness, the setting sun had
tinged the clouds with a beautiful crimson, which was again reflected by the water, and the trees that
bordered the terrace were filled with nightingales who were continually answering each other's songs. Iwalked along in a kind of ecstasy, giving up my heart and senses to the enjoyment of so many delights,
and sighing only from a regret of enjoying them alone. Absorbed in this pleasing reverie, I lengthened
my walk till it grew very late, without perceiving I was tired; at length, however, I discovered it, and
threw myself on the step of a kind of niche, or false door, in the terrace wall. How charming was the
couch! the trees formed a stately canopy, a nightingale sat directly over me, and with his soft notes
lulled me to rest: how pleasing my repose; my awaking more so. It was broad day; on opening my eyes
I saw the water, the verdure, and the admirable landscape before me. I arose, shook off the remains of
drowsiness, and finding I was hungry, retook the way to the city, resolving, with inexpressible gayety,
to spend the two pieces of six francs I had yet remaining in a good breakfast. I found myself so cheerful
that I went all the way singing; I even remember I sang a cantata of Batistin's called the Baths of
Thomery, which I knew by heart. May a blessing light on the good Batistin and his good cantata, which
procured me a better breakfast than I had expected, and a still better dinner which I did not expect at
all! In the midst of my singing, I heard some one behind me, and turning round perceived an Antonine,
who followed after and seemed to listen with pleasure to my song. At length accosting me, he asked, If
I understood music. I answered, "A little," but in a manner to have it understood I knew a great deal,
and as he continued questioning of me, related a part of my story. He asked me, If I had ever copied
music? I replied, "Often," which was true: I had learned most by copying. "Well," continued he, "come
with me, I can employ you for a few days, during which time you shall want for nothing; provided you
consent not to quit my room." I acquiesced very willingly, and followed him.
  This Antonine was called M. Rotichon; he loved music, understood it, and sang in some little
concerts with his friends; thus far all was innocent and right, but apparently this taste had become a
furor, part of which he was obliged to conceal. He conducted me into a chamber, where I found a great
quantity of music: he gave me some to copy, particularly the cantata he had heard me singing, and
which he was shortly to sing himself.
I remained here three or four days, copying all the time I did not eat, for never in my life was I so
hungry, or better fed. M. Rolichon brought my provisions himself from the kitchen, and it appeared that
these good priests lived well, at least if every one fared as I did. In my life, I never took such pleasure
in eating, and it must be owned this good cheer came very opportunely, for I was almost exhausted. I
worked as heartily as I ate, which is saying a great deal; 'tis true I was not as correct as diligent, for
some days after, meeting M. Rolichon in the street, he informed me there were so many omissions,
repetitions, and transpositions, in the parts I had copied, that they could not be performed. It must be
owned, that in choosing the profession of music, I hit on that I was least calculated for; yet my voice
was good and I copied neatly; but the fatigue of long works bewilders me so much, that I spend more
time in altering and scratching out than in pricking down, and if I do not employ the strictest attention
in comparing the several parts, they are sure to fail in the execution. Thus, through endeavoring to do
well, my performance was very faulty; for aiming at expedition, I did all amiss. This did not prevent M.
Rolichon from treating me well to the last, and giving me half-a-crown at my departure, which I
certainly did not deserve, and which completely set me up, for a few days after I received news from
Madam de Warrens, who was at Chambery, with money to defray the expenses of my journey to her,
which I performed with rapture. Since then my finances have frequently been very low, but never at
such an ebb as to reduce me to fasting, and I mark this period with a heart fully alive to the bounty of
Providence, as the last of my life in which I sustained poverty and hunger.
I remained at Lyons seven or eight days to wait for some little commissions with which Madam de
Warrens had charged Mademoiselle du Chatelet, who during this interval I visited more assiduously
than before, having the pleasure of talking with her of her friend, and being no longer disturbed by the
cruel remembrance of my situation, or painful endeavors to conceal it. Mademoiselle du Chatelet was
neither young nor handsome, but did not want for elegance; she was easy and obliging while her
understanding gave price to her familiarity. She had a taste for that kind of moral observation which
leads to the knowledge of mankind, and from her originated that study in myself. She was fond of the
works of Le Sage, particularly Gil Blas, which she lent me, and recommended to my perusal. I read thisperformance with pleasure, but my judgment was not yet ripe enough to relish that sort of reading. I
liked romances which abounded with high-flown sentiments.
  Thus did I pass my time at the grate of Mademoiselle du Chatelet, with as much profit as pleasure.
It is certain that the interesting and sensible conversation of a deserving woman is more proper to form
the understanding of a young man than all the pedantic philosophy of books. I got acquainted at the
Chasattes with some other boarders and their friends, and among the rest, with a young person of
fourteen, called Mademoiselle Serre, whom I did not much notice at that time, though I was in love
with her eight or nine years afterwards, and with great reason, for she was a most charming girl.
I was fully occupied with the idea of seeing Madam de Warrens, and this gave some respite to my
chimeras, for finding happiness in real objects I was the less inclined to seek it in nonentities. I had not
only found her, but also by her means, and near her, an agreeable situation, having sent me word that
she had procured one that would suit me, and by which I should not be obliged to quit her. I exhausted
all my conjectures in guessing what this occupation could be, but I must have possessed the art of
divination  to  have  hit  it  on  the  right.  I  had  money  sufficient  to  make  my  journey  agreeable:
Mademoiselle du Chatelet persuaded me to hire a horse, but this I could not consent to, and I was
certainly right, for by so doing I should have lost the pleasure of the last pedestrian expedition I ever
made;  for  I  cannot  give  that  name  to  those  excursions  I  have  frequently  taken  about  my  own
neighborhood, while I lived at Motiers.
  It is very singular that my imagination never rises so high as when my situation is least agreeable or
cheerful. When everything smiles around me, I am least amused; my heart cannot confine itself to
realities, cannot embellish, but must create. Real objects strike me as they really are, my imagination
can only decorate ideal ones. If I would paint the spring, it must be in winter; if describe a beautiful
landscape,  it  must  be  while  surrounded  with  walls;  and  I  have  said  a  hundred  times,  that  were  I
confined in the Bastile, I could draw the most enchanting picture of liberty. On my departure from
Lyons, I saw nothing but an agreeable future, the content I now with reason enjoyed was as great as my
discontent  had  been  at  leaving  Paris,  notwithstanding,  I  had  not  during  this  journey  any  of  those
delightful reveries I then enjoyed. My mind was serene, and that was all; I drew near the excellent
friend I was going to see, my heart overflowing with tenderness, enjoying in advance, but without
intoxication, the pleasure of living near her; I had always expected this, and it was as if nothing new
had happened. Meantime, I was anxious about the employment Madam de Warrens had procured me,
as if that alone had been material. My ideas were calm and peaceable, not ravishing and celestial; every
object struck my sight in its natural form; I observed the surrounding landscape, remarked the trees, the
houses, the springs, deliberated on the cross-roads, was fearful of losing myself, yet did not do so; in a
word, I was no longer in the empyrean, but precisely where I found myself, or sometimes perhaps at the
end of my journey, never farther.
I am in recounting my travels, as I was in making them, loath to arrive at the conclusion. My heart
beat with joy as I approached my dear Madam de Warrens, but I went no faster on that account. I love
to walk at my ease, and stop at leisure; a strolling life is necessary to me: travelling on foot, in a fine
country, with fine weather and having an agreeable object to terminate my journey, is the manner of
living of all others most suited to my taste.
  It  is  already  understood  what  I  mean  by  a  fine  country;  never  can  a  flat  one,  though  ever  so
beautiful, appear such in my eyes: I must have torrents, fir trees, black woods, mountains to climb or
descend, and rugged roads with precipices on either side to alarm me. I experienced this pleasure in its
utmost extent as I approached Chambery, not far from a mountain which is called Pas de l'Echelle.
Above the main road, which is hewn through the rock, a small river runs and rushes into fearful
chasms, which it appears to have been millions of ages in forming. The road has been hedged by a
parapet to prevent accidents, which enabled me to contemplate the whole descent, and gain vertigoes at
pleasure;  for  a  great  part  of  my  amusement  in  these  steep  rocks,  is,  they  cause  a  giddiness  and
swimming in my head, which I am particularly fond of, provided I am in safety; leaning, therefore, over
the parapet, I remained whole hours, catching, from time to time, a glance of the froth and blue water,whose rushing caught my ear, mingled with the cries of ravens, and other birds of prep that flew from
rock to rock, and bush to bush, at six hundred feet below me. In places where the slope was tolerably
regular, and clear enough from bushes to let stones roll freely, I went a considerable way to gather
them, bringing those I could but just carry, which I piled on the parapet, and then threw down one after
the other, being transported at seeing them roll, rebound, and fly into a thousand pieces, before they
reached the bottom of the precipice.
  Near Chambery I enjoyed an equal pleasing spectacle, though of a different kind; the road passing
near the foot of the most charming cascade I ever saw. The water, which is very rapid, shoots from the
top of an excessively steep mountain, falling at such a distance from its base that you may walk
between the cascade and the rock without any inconvenience; but if not particularly careful it is easy to
be deceived as I was, for the water, falling from such an immense height, separates, and descends in a
rain as fine as dust, and on approaching too near this cloud, without perceiving it, you may be wet
through in an instant.
  At length I arrived at Madam de Warrens; she was not alone, the intendant-general was with her.
Without speaking a word to me, she caught my hand, and presenting me to him with that natural grace
which charmed all hearts, said: "This, sir, is the poor young man I mentioned; deign to protect him as
long as he deserves it, and I shall feel no concern for the remainder of his life." Then added, addressing
herself to me, "Child, you now belong to the king, thank Monsieur the Intendant, who furnishes you
with the means of existence." I stared without answering, without knowing what to think of all this;
rising ambition almost turned my head; I was already prepared to act the intendant myself. My fortune,
however, was not so brilliant as I had imagined, but it was sufficient to maintain me, which, as I was
situated, was a capital acquisition. I shall now explain the nature of my employment.
  King Victor Amadeus, judging by the event of preceding wars, and the situation of the ancient
patrimony of his fathers, that he should not long be able to maintain it, wished to drain it beforehand.
Resolving, therefore, to tax the nobility, he ordered a general survey of the whole country, in order that
it might be rendered more equal and productive. This scheme, which was begun under the father, was
completed by the son: two or three hundred men, part surveyors, who were called geometricians, and
part  writers,  who  were  called  secretaries,  were  employed  in  this  work:  among  those  of  the  latter
description  Madam  de  Warrens  had  got  me  appointed.  This  post,  without  being  very  lucrative,
furnished the means of living eligibly in that country; the misfortune was, this employment could not
be of any great duration, but it put me in train to procure something better, as by this means she hoped
to insure the particular protection of the intendant, who might find me some more settled occupation
before this was concluded.
I entered on my new employment a few days after my arrival, and as there was no great difficulty in
the business, soon understood it; thus, after four or five years of unsettled life, folly, and suffering,
since my departure from Geneva, I began, for the first time, to gain my bread with credit.
  These long details of my early youth must have appeared trifling, and I am sorry for it: though born
a man, in a variety of instances, I was long a child, and am so yet in many particulars. I did not promise
the public a great personage: I promised to describe myself as I am, and to know me in my advanced
age it was necessary to have known me in my youth. As, in general, objects that are present make less
impression on me than the bare remembrance of them (my ideas being all from recollection), the first
traits  which  were  engraven  on  my  mind  have  distinctly  remained:  those  which  have  since  been
imprinted there, have rather combined with the former than effaced them. There is a certain, yet varied
succession  of  affections  and  ideas,  which  continue  to  regulate  those  that  follow  them,  and  this
progression must be known in order to judge rightly of those they have influenced. I have studied to
develop the first causes, the better to show the concatenation of effects. I would be able by some means
to render my soul transparent to the eyes of the reader, and for this purpose endeavor to show it in
every possible point of view, to give him every insight, and act in such a manner, that not a motion
should escape him, as by this means he may form a judgment of the principles that produce them.
  Did I take upon myself to decide, and say to the reader, "Such is my character," he might think thatif I did not endeavor to deceive him, I at least deceived myself; but in, recounting simply all that has
happened to me, all my actions, thoughts, and feelings, I cannot lead him into an error, unless I do it
wilfully, which by this means I could not easily effect, since it is his province to compare the elements,
and judge of the being they compose: thus the result must be his work, and if he is then deceived the
error will be his own. It is not sufficient for this purpose that my recitals should be merely faithful, they
must also be minute; it is not for me to judge of the importance of facts, I ought to declare them simply
as they are, and leave the estimate that is to be formed of them to him. I have adhered to this principle
hitherto, with the most scrupulous exactitude, and shall not depart from it in the continuation; but the
impressions of age are less lively than those of youth; I began by delineating the latter: should I
recollect the rest with the same precision, the reader, may, perhaps, become weary and impatient, but I
shall not be dissatisfied with my labor. I have but one thing to apprehend in this undertaking: I do not
dread saying too much, or advancing falsities, but I am fearful of not saying enough, or concealing
truths.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK V.
  It was, I believe, in 1732, that I arrived at Chambery, as already related, and began my employment
of registering land for the king. I was almost twenty-one, my mind well enough formed for my age,
with respect to sense, but very deficient in point of judgment, and needing every instruction from those
into whose hands I fell, to make me conduct myself with propriety; for a few years' experience had not
been able to cure me radically of my romantic ideas; and notwithstanding the ills I had sustained, I
knew as little of the world, or mankind, as if I had never purchased instruction. I slept at home, that is,
at the house of Madam de Warrens; but it was not as at Annecy: here were no gardens, no brook, no
landscape; the house was dark and dismal, and my apartment the most gloomy of the whole. The
prospect a dead wall, an alley instead of a street, confined air, bad light, small rooms, iron bars, rats,
and a rotten floor; an assemblage of circumstances that do not constitute a very agreeable habitation;
but I was in the same house with my best friend, incessantly near her, at my desk, or in chamber, so that
I could not perceive the gloominess of my own, or have time to think of it. It may appear whimsical
that she should reside at Chambery on purpose to live in this disagreeable house; but it was a trait of
contrivance which I ought not to pass over in silence. She had no great inclination for a journey to
Turin, fearing that after the recent revolutions, and the agitation in which the court yet was, she should
not be very favorably received there; but her affairs seemed to demand her presence, as she feared
being  forgotten  or  ill-treated,  particularly  as  the  Count  de  Saint-Laurent,  Intendent-general  of  the
Finances, was not in her interest. He had an old house in Chambery, ill-built, and standing in so
disagreeable a situation that it was always untenanted; she hired, and settled in this house, a plan that
succeeded much better than a journey to Turin would have done, for her pension was not suppressed,
and the Count de Saint-Laurent was ever after one of her best friends.
  Her household was much on the old footing; her faithful Claude Anet still remained with her. He
was, as I have before mentioned, a peasant of Moutru, who in his childhood had gathered herbs in Jura
for the purpose of making Swiss tea; she had taken him into her service for his knowledge of drugs,
finding it convenient to have a herbalist among her domestics. Passionately fond of the study of plants,
he became a real botanist, and had he not died young, might have acquired as much fame in that
science as he deserved for being an honest man. Serious even to gravity, and older than myself, he was
to me a kind of tutor, commanding respect, and preserving me from a number of follies, for I dared not
forget myself before him. He commanded it likewise from his mistress, who knew his understanding,
uprightness, and inviolable attachment to herself, and returned it. Claude Anet was of an uncommon
temper. I never encountered a similar disposition: he was slow, deliberate, and circumspect in hisconduct; cold in his manner; laconic and sententious in his discourse; yet of an impetuosity in his
passions, which (though careful to conceal) preyed upon him inwardly, and urged him to the only folly
he ever committed; that folly, indeed was terrible, it was poisoning himself. This tragic scene passed
soon after my arrival, and opened my eyes to the intimacy that subsisted between Claude Anet and his
mistress, for had not the information come from her, I should never have suspected it; yet, surely, if
attachment, fidelity, and zeal, could merit such a recompense, it was due to him, and what further
proves him worthy such a distinction, he never once abused her confidence. They seldom disputed, and
their disagreements ever ended amicably; one, indeed, was not so fortunate; his mistress, in a passion,
said something affronting, which not being able to digest, he consulted only with despair, and finding a
bottle of laudanum at hand, drank it off; then went peaceably to bed, expecting to awake no more.
Madam de Warrens herself was uneasy, agitated, wandering about the house and happily--finding the
phial empty--guessed the rest. Her screams, while flying to his assistance, alarmed me; she confessed
all, implored my help, and was fortunate enough, after repeated efforts, to make him throw up the
laudanum. Witness of this scene, I could not but wonder at my stupidity in never having suspected the
connection;  but  Claude  Anet  was  so  discreet,  that  a  more  penetrating  observer  might  have  been
deceived. Their reconciliation affected me, and added respect to the esteem I before felt for him. From
this time I became, in some measure, his pupil, nor did I find myself the worse for his instruction.
I could not learn, without pain, that she lived in greater intimacy with another than with myself: it
was a situation I had not even thought of, but (which was very natural) it hurt me to see another in
possession of it. Nevertheless, instead of feeling any aversion to the person who had this advantage
over me, I found the attachment I felt for her actually extend to him. I desired her happiness above all
things, and since he was concerned in her plan of felicity, I was content he should be happy likewise.
Meantime he perfectly entered into the views of his mistress; conceived a sincere friendship for me, and
without affecting the authority his situation might have entitled him to, he naturally possessed that
which his superior judgment gave him over mine. I dared do nothing he disproved of, but he was sure
to disapprove only what merited disapprobation: thus we lived in an union which rendered us mutually
happy, and which death alone could dissolve.
  One proof of the excellence of this amiable woman's character, is, that all those who loved her,
loved each other; even jealousy and rivalship submitting to the more powerful sentiment with which
she inspired them, and I never saw any of those who surrounded her entertain the least ill will among
themselves. Let the reader pause a moment on this encomium, and if he can recollect any other woman
who deserves it, let him attach himself to her, if he would obtain happiness.
  From my arrival at Chambery to my departure for Paris, 1741, included an interval of eight or nine
years, during which time I have few adventures to relate; my life being as simple as it was agreeable.
This uniformity was precisely what was most wanting to complete the formation of my character,
which  continual  troubles  had  prevented  from  acquiring  any  degree  of  stability.  It  was  during  this
pleasing interval, that my unconnected, unfinished education, gained consistence, and made me what I
have unalterably remained amid the storms with which I have since been surrounded.
  The progress was slow, almost imperceptible, and attended by few memorable circumstances; yet it
deserves to be followed and investigated.
  At first, I was wholly occupied with my business, the constraint of a desk left little opportunity for
other thoughts, the small portion of time I was at liberty was passed with my dear Madam de Warrens,
and not having leisure to read, I felt no inclination for it; but when my business (by daily repetition)
became familiar, and my mind was less occupied, study again became necessary, and (as my desires
were  ever  irritated  by  any  difficulty  that  opposed  the  indulgence  of  them)  might  once  more  have
become a passion, as at my master's, had not other inclinations interposed and diverted it.
  Though our occupation did not demand a very profound skill in arithmetic, it sometimes required
enough to puzzle me. To conquer this difficulty, I purchased books which treated on that science, and
learned well, for I now studied alone. Practical arithmetic extends further than is usually supposed if
you would attain exact precision. There are operations of extreme length in which I have sometimesseen  good  geometricians  lose  themselves.  Reflection,  assisted  by  practice,  gives  clear  ideas,  and
enables  you  to  devise  shorter  methods,  these  inventions  flatter  our  self-complacency,  while  their
exactitude satisfies our understanding, and renders a study pleasant, which is, of itself, heavy and
unentertaining. At length I became so expert as not to be puzzled by any question that was solvable by
arithmetical calculation; and even now, while everything I formerly knew fades daily on my memory,
this acquirement, in a great measure remains, through an interval of thirty years. A few days ago, in a
journey I made to Davenport, being with my host at an arithmetical lesson given his children, I did
(with  pleasure,  and  without  errors)  a  most  complicated  work.  While  setting  down  my  figures,
methought I was still at Chambery, still in my days of happiness--how far had I to look back for them!
  The colored plans of our geometricians had given me a taste for drawing: accordingly I bought
colors, and began by attempting flowers and landscapes. It was unfortunate that I had not talents for this
art, for my inclination was much disposed to it, and while surrounded with crayons, pencils, and colors,
I could have passed whole months without wishing to leave them. This amusement engaged me so
much that they were obliged to force me from it; and thus it is with every inclination I give into, it
continues to augment, till at length it becomes so powerful, that I lose sight of everything except the
favorite amusement. Years have not been able to cure me of that fault, nay, have not even diminished it;
for while I am writing this, behold me, like an old dotard, infatuated with another, to me useless study,
which  I  do  not  understand,  and  which  even  those  who  have  devoted  their  youthful  days  to  the
acquisition of, are constrained to abandon, at the age I am beginning with it.
  At that time, the study I am now speaking of would have been well placed, the opportunity was
good, and I had some temptation to profit by it; for the satisfaction I saw in the eyes of Anet, when he
came home loaded with new discovered plants, set me two or three times on the point of going to
herbalize with him, and I am almost certain that had I gone once, I should have been caught, and
perhaps at this day might have been an excellent botanist, for I know no study more congenial to my
natural inclination, than that of plants; the life I have led for these ten years past, in the country, being
little  more  than  a  continual  herbalizing,  though  I  must  confess,  without  object,  and  without
improvement;  but  at  the  time  I  am  now  speaking  of  I  had  no  inclination  for  botany,  nay,  I  even
despised, and was disgusted at the idea, considering it only as a fit study for an apothecary. Madam de
Warrens was fond of it merely for this purpose, seeking none but common plants to use in her medical
preparations; thus botany, chemistry, and anatomy were confounded in my idea under the general
denomination of medicine, and served to furnish me with pleasant sarcasms the whole day, which
procured me, from time to time, a box on the ear, applied by Madam de Warrens. Besides this, a very
contrary taste grew up with me, and by degrees absorbed all others; this was music. I was certainly born
for that science, I loved it from my infancy, and it was the only inclination I have constantly adhered to;
but it is astonishing that what nature seemed to have designed me for should have cost so much pains to
learn, and that I should acquire it so slowly, that after a whole life spent in the practice of this art, I
could never attain to sing with any certainty at sight. What rendered the study of music more agreeable
to me at that time, was, being able to practise it with Madam de Warrens. In other respects our tastes
were widely different: this was a point of coincidence, which I loved to avail myself of. She had no
more objection to this than myself. I knew at that time almost as much of it as she did, and after two or
three efforts, we could make shift to decipher an air. Sometimes, when I saw her busy at her furnace, I
have said, "Here now is a charming duet, which seems made for the very purpose of spoiling your
drugs;" her answer would be, "If you make me burn them, I'll make you eat them:" thus disputing, I
drew her to the harpsichord; the furnace was presently forgotten, the extract of juniper or wormwood
calcined (which I cannot recollect without transport), and these scenes usually ended by her smearing
my face with the remains of them.
  It may easily be conjectured that I had plenty of employment to fill up my leisure hours; one
amusement, however, found room, that was well worth all the rest.
  We lived in such a confined dungeon, that it was necessary sometimes to breathe the open air; Anet,
therefore, engaged Madam de Warrens to hire a garden in the suburbs, both for this purpose and theconvenience of rearing plants, etc.; to this garden was added a summer--house, which was furnished in
the customary manner; we sometimes dined, and I frequently slept, there. Insensibly I became attached
to this little retreat, decorated it with books and prints, spending part of my time in ornamenting it
during the absence of Madam de Warrens, that I might surprise her the more agreeably on her return.
Sometimes I quitted this dear friend, that I might enjoy the uninterrupted pleasure of thinking on her;
this was a caprice I can neither excuse nor fully explain, I only know this really was the case, and
therefore I avow it. I remember Madam de Luxembourg told me one day in raillery, of a man who used
to leave his mistress that he might enjoy the satisfaction of writing to her; I answered, I could have been
this man; I might have added, That I had done the very same.
I did not, however, find it necessary to leave Madam de Warrens that I might love her the more
ardently, for I was ever as perfectly free with her as when alone; an advantage I never enjoyed with any
other person, man or woman, however I might be attached to them; but she was so often surrounded by
company who were far from pleasing me, that spite and weariness drove me to this asylum, where I
could indulge the idea, without danger of being interrupted by impertinence. Thus, my time being
divided  between  business,  pleasure,  and  instruction,  my  life  passed  in  the  most  absolute  serenity.
Europe was not equally tranquil: France and the emperor had mutually declared war, the King of
Sardinia  had  entered  into  the  quarrel,  and  a  French  army  had  filed  off  into  Piedmont  to  awe  the
Milanese. Our division passed through Chambery, and, among others, the regiment of Champaigne,
whose colonel was the Duke de la Trimouille, to whom I was presented. He promised many things, but
doubtless never more thought of me. Our little garden was exactly at the end of the suburb by which the
troops entered, so that I could fully satisfy my curiosity in seeing them pass, and I became as anxious
for the success of the war as if it had nearly concerned me. Till now I had never troubled myself about
politics, for the first time I began reading the gazettes, but with so much partiality on the side of France,
that my heart beat with rapture on its most trifling advantages, and I was as much afflicted on a reverse
of fortune, as if I had been particularly concerned.
  Had this folly been transient, I should not, perhaps, have mentioned it, but it took such root in my
heart (without any reasonable cause) that when I afterwards acted the anti-despot and proud republican
at Paris, in spite of myself, I felt a secret predilection for the nation I declared servile, and for that
government I affected to oppose. The pleasantest of all was that, ashamed of an inclination so contrary
to my professed maxims, I dared not own it to any one, but rallied the French on their defeats, while my
heart was more wounded than their own. I am certainly the first man, that, living with a people who
treated him well, and whom he almost adored, put on, even in their own country, a borrowed air of
despising them; yet my original inclination is so powerful, constant, disinterested, and invincible, that
even since my quitting that kingdom, since its government, magistrates, and authors, have outvied each
other in rancor against me, since it has become fashionable to load me with injustice and abuse, I have
not been able to get rid of this folly, but notwithstanding their ill-treatment, love them in spite of
myself.
I long sought the cause of this partiality, but was never able to find any, except in the occasion that
gave it birth. A rising taste for literature attached me to French books, to their authors, and their
country: at the very moment the French troops were passing Chambery, I was reading Brantome's
'Celebrated Captains'; my head was full of the Clissons, Bayards, Lautrecs Colignys, Monlmoreneys,
and Trimouille, and I loved their descendants as the heirs of their merit and courage. In each regiment
that passed by methought I saw those famous black bands who had formerly done so many noble
exploits in Piedmont; in fine, I applied to these all the ideas I had gathered from books; my reading
continued, which, still drawn from the same nation, nourished my affection for that country, till, at
length,  it  became  a  blind  passion,  which  nothing  could  overcome.  I  have  had  occasion  to  remark
several times in the course of my travels, that this impression was not peculiar to me for France, but
was more or less active in every country, for that part of the nation who were fond of literature, and
cultivated learning; and it was this consideration that balanced in my mind the general hatred which the
conceited air of the French is so apt to inspire. Their romances, more than their men, attract the womenof all countries, and the celebrated dramatic pieces of France create a fondness in youth for their
theaters; the reputation which that of Paris in particular has acquired, draws to it crowds of strangers,
who return enthusiasts to their own country: in short, the excellence of their literature captivates the
senses, and in the unfortunate war just ended, I have seen their authors and philosophers maintain the
glory of France, so tarnished by its warriors.
I was, therefore, an ardent Frenchman; this rendered me a politician, and I attended in the public
square, amid a throng of news-mongers, the arrival of the post, and, sillier than the ass in the fable, was
very uneasy to know whose packsaddle I should next have the honor to carry, for it was then supposed
we should belong to France, and that Savoy would be exchanged for Milan. I must confess, however,
that I experienced some uneasiness, for had this war terminated unfortunately for the allies, the pension
of Madam de Warrens would have been in a dangerous situation; nevertheless, I had great confidence
in my good friends, the French, and for once (in spite of the surprise of M. de Broglio) my confidence
was not ill-founded--thanks to the King of Sardinia, whom I had never thought of.
  While we were fighting in Italy, they were singing in France: the operas of Rameau began to make
a noise there, and once more raise the credit of his theoretic works, which, from their obscurity, were
within the compass of very few understandings. By chance I heard of his 'Treatise on Harmony', and
had no rest till I purchased it. By another chance I fell sick; my illness was inflammatory, short and
violent, but my convalescence was tedious, for I was unable to go abroad for a whole month. During
this time I eagerly ran over my Treatise on Harmony, but it was so long, so diffuse, and so badly
disposed, that I found it would require a considerable time to unravel it: accordingly I suspended my
inclination, and recreated my sight with music.
  The cantatas of Bernier were what I principally exercised myself with. These were never out of my
mind; I learned four or five by heart, and among the rest, 'The Sleeping Cupids', which I have never
seen since that time, though I still retain it almost entirely; as well as 'Cupid Stung by a Bee', a very
pretty cantata by Clerambault, which I learned about the same time.
  To complete me, there arrived a young organist from Valdoste, called the Abbe Palais, a good
musician and an agreeable companion, who performed very well on the harpsichord; I got acquainted
with him, and we soon became inseparable. He had been brought up by an Italian monk, who was a
capital organist. He explained to me his principles of music, which I compared with Rameau; my head
was filled with accompaniments, concords and harmony, but as it was necessary to accustom the ear to
all this, I proposed to Madam de Warrens having a little concert once a month, to which she consented.
  Behold me then so full of this concert, that night or day I could think of nothing else, and it actually
employed a great part of my time to select the music, assemble the musicians, look to the instruments,
and write out the several parts. Madam de Warrens sang; Father Cato (whom I have before mentioned,
and shall have occasion to speak of again) sang likewise; a dancing--master named Roche, and his son,
played on the violin; Canavas, a Piedmontese musician (who was employed like myself in the survey,
and  has  since  married  at  Paris),  played  on  the  violoncello;  the  Abbe  Palais  performed  on  the
harpsichord, and I had the honor to conduct the whole. It may be supposed all this was charming; I
cannot say it equalled my concert at Monsieur de Tretoren's, but certainly it was not far behind it.
  This little concert, given by Madam de Warrens, the new convert, who lived (it was expressed) on
the king's charity, made the whole tribe of devotees murmur, but was a very agreeable amusement to
several worthy people, at the head of whom it would not be easily surmised that I should place a monk;
yet, though a monk, a man of considerable merit, and even of a very amiable disposition, whose
subsequent misfortunes gave me the most lively concern, and whose idea, attached to that of my happy
days, is yet dear to my memory. I speak of Father Cato, a Cordelier, who, in conjunction with the Count
d'Ortan, had caused the music of poor Le Maitre to be seized at Lyons; which action was far from being
the brightest trait in his history. He was a Bachelor of Sorbonne, had lived long in Paris among the
great  world,  and  was  particularly  caressed  by  the  Marquis  d'Antremont,  then  Ambassador  from
Sardinia. He was tall and well made; full faced, with very fine eyes, and black hair, which formed
natural  curls  on  each  side  of  his  forehead.  His  manner  was  at  once  noble,  open,  and  modest;  hepresented himself with ease and good manners, having neither the hypocritical nor impudent behavior
of a monk, or the forward assurance of a fashionable coxcomb, but the manners of a well-bred man,
who, without blushing for his habit, set a value on himself, and ever felt in his proper situation when in
good company. Though Father Cato was not deeply studied for a doctor, he was much so for a man of
the world, and not being compelled to show his talents, he brought them forward so advantageously
that they appeared greater than they really were. Having lived much in the world, he had rather attached
himself to agreeable acquirements than to solid learning; had sense, made verses, spoke well, sang
better, and aided his good voice by playing on the organ and harpsichord. So many pleasing qualities
were not necessary to make his company sought after, and, accordingly, it was very much so, but this
did not make him neglect the duties of his function: he was chosen (in spite of his jealous competitors)
Definitor of his Province, or, according to them, one of the greatest pillars of their order.
  Father Cato became acquainted with Madam de Warrens at the Marquis of Antremont's; he had
heard  of  her  concerts,  wished  to  assist  at  them,  and  by  his  company  rendered  our  meetings  truly
agreeable. We were soon attached to each other by our mutual taste for music, which in both was a
most  lively  passion,  with  this  difference,  that  he  was  really  a  musician,  and  myself  a  bungler.
Sometimes assisted by Canavas and the Abbe Palais, we had music in his apartment; or on holidays at
his organ, and frequently dined with him; for, what was very astonishing in a monk, he was generous,
profuse, and loved good cheer, without the least tincture of greediness. After our concerts, he always
used  to  stay  to  supper,  and  these  evenings  passed  with  the  greatest  gayety  and  good-humor;  we
conversed with the utmost freedom, and sang duets; I was perfectly at my ease, had sallies of wit and
merriment; Father Cato was charming, Madam de Warrens adorable, and the Abbe Palais, with his
rough voice, was the butt of the company. Pleasing moments of sportive youth, how long since have ye
fled!
  As I shall have no more occasion to speak of poor Father Cato, I will here conclude in a few words
his melancholy history. His brother monks, jealous, or rather exasperated to discover in him a merit and
elegance of manners which favored nothing of monastic stupidity, conceived the most violent hatred to
him, because he was not as despicable as themselves; the chiefs, therefore, combined against this
worthy man, and set on the envious rabble of monks, who otherwise would not have dared to hazard the
attack. He received a thousand indignities; they degraded him from his office, took away the apartment
which he had furnished with elegant simplicity, and, at length, banished him, I know not whither: in
short, these wretches overwhelmed him with so many evils, that his honest and proud soul sank under
the pressure, and, after having been the delight of the most amiable societies, he died of grief, on a
wretched bed, hid in some cell or dungeon, lamented by all worthy people of his acquaintance, who
could find no fault in him, except his being a monk.
  Accustomed to this manner of life for some time, I became so entirely attached to music that I could
think of nothing else. I went to my business with disgust, the necessary confinement and assiduity
appeared an insupportable punishment, which I at length wished to relinquish, that I might give myself
up without reserve to my favorite amusement. It will be readily believed that this folly met with some
opposition; to give up a creditable employment and fixed salary to run after uncertain scholars was too
giddy a plan to be approved of by Madam de Warrens, and even supposing my future success should
prove  as  great  as  I  flattered  myself,  it  was  fixing  very  humble  limits  to  my  ambition  to  think  of
reducing myself for life to the condition of a music-master. She, who formed for me the brightest
projects, and no longer trusted implicitly to the judgment of M. d'Aubonne, seeing with concern that I
was so seriously occupied with a talent which she thought frivolous, frequently repeated to me that
provincial proverb, which does not hold quite so good in Paris,
  "Qui biens chante et biens dance, fait un metier qui peu avance."
  [He who can sweetly sing and featly dance. His interests right little shall advance.]
  On the other hand, she saw me hurried away by this irresistible passion, my taste for music having
become a furor, and it was much to be feared that my employment, suffering by my distraction, might
draw on me a discharge, which would be worse than a voluntary resignation. I represented to her; thatthis employment could not last long, that it was necessary I should have some permanent means of
subsistence, and that it would be much better to complete by practice the acquisition of that art to which
my inclination led me than to make fresh essays, which possibly might not succeed, since by this
means, having passed the age most proper for improvement, I might be left without a single resource
for gaining a livelihood: in short, I extorted her consent more by importunity and caresses than by any
satisfactory reasons. Proud of my success, I immediately ran to thank M. Coccelli, Director-General of
the Survey, as though I had performed the most heroic action, and quitted my employment without
cause, reason, or pretext, with as much pleasure as I had accepted it two years before.
  This  step,  ridiculous  as  it  may  appear,  procured  me  a  kind  of  consideration,  which  I  found
extremely useful. Some supposed I had resources which I did not possess; others, seeing me totally
given up to music, judged of my abilities by the sacrifice I had made, and concluded that with such a
passion for the art, I must possess it in a superior degree. In a nation of blind men, those with one eye
are kings. I passed here for an excellent master, because all the rest were very bad ones. Possessing
taste in singing, and being favored by my age and figure, I soon procured more scholars than were
sufficient to compensate for the losses of my secretary's pay. It is certain, that had it been reasonable to
consider the pleasure of my situation only, it was impossible to pass more speedily from one extreme to
the  other.  At  our  measuring,  I  was  confined  eight  hours  in  the  day  to  the  most  unentertaining
employment,  with  yet  more  disagreeable  company.  Shut  up  in  a  melancholy  counting-house,
empoisoned by the smell and respiration of a number of clowns, the major part of whom were ill-
combed and very dirty, what with attention, bad air, constraint and weariness, I was sometimes so far
overcome as to occasion a vertigo. Instead of this, behold me admitted into the fashionable world,
sought after in the first houses, and everywhere received with an air of satisfaction; amiable and gay
young ladies awaiting my arrival, and welcoming me with pleasure; I see nothing but charming objects,
smell nothing but roses and orange flowers; singing, chatting, laughter, and amusements, perpetually
succeed each other. It must be allowed, that reckoning all these advantages, no hesitation was necessary
in the choice; in fact, I was so content with mine, that I never once repented it; nor do I even now,
when, free from the irrational motives that influenced me at that time, I weigh in the scale of reason
every action of my life.
  This is, perhaps, the only time that, listening to inclination, I was not deceived in my expectations.
The easy access, obliging temper, and free humor of this country, rendered a commerce with the world
agreeable, and the inclination I then felt for it, proves to me, that if I have a dislike for society, it is
more their fault than mine. It is a pity the Savoyards are not rich: though, perhaps, it would be a still
greater pity if they were so, for altogether they are the best, the most sociable people that I know, and if
there is a little city in the world where the pleasures of life are experienced in an agreeable and friendly
commerce, it is at Chambery. The gentry of the province who assemble there have only sufficient
wealth to live and not enough to spoil them; they cannot give way to ambition, but follow, through
necessity, the counsel of Cyneas, devoting their youth to a military employment, and returning home to
grow old in peace; an arrangement over which honor and reason equally preside. The women are
handsome, yet do not stand in need of beauty, since they possess all those qualifications which enhance
its value and even supply the want of it. It is remarkable, that being obliged by my profession to see a
number of young girls, I do not recollect one at Chambery but what was charming: it will be said I was
disposed to find them so, and perhaps there maybe some truth in the surmise. I cannot remember my
young scholars without pleasure. Why, in naming the most amiable, cannot I recall them and myself
also to that happy age in which our moments, pleasing as innocent, were passed with such happiness
together? The first was Mademoiselle de Mallarede, my neighbor, and sister to a pupil of Monsieur
Gaime. She was a fine clear brunette, lively and graceful, without giddiness; thin as girls of that age
usually are; but her bright eyes, fine shape, and easy air, rendered her sufficiently pleasing with that
degree of plumpness which would have given a heightening to her charms. I went there of mornings,
when she was usually in her dishabille, her hair carelessly turned up, and, on my arrival, ornamented
with a flower, which was taken off at my departure for her hair to be dressed. There is nothing I fear somuch as a pretty woman in an elegant dishabille; I should dread them a hundred times less in full dress.
Mademoiselle  de  Menthon,  whom  I  attended  in  the  afternoon,  was  ever  so.  She  made  an  equally
pleasing, but quite different impression on me. Her hair was flaxen, her person delicate, she was very
timid and extremely fair, had a clear voice, capable of just modulation, but which she had not courage
to employ to its full extent. She had the mark of a scald on her bosom, which a scanty piece of blue
chenille did not entirely cover, this scar sometimes drew my attention, though not absolutely on its own
account. Mademoiselle des Challes, another of my neighbors, was a woman grown, tall, well-formed,
jolly, very pleasing though not a beauty, and might be quoted for her gracefulness, equal temper, and
good humor. Her sister, Madam de Charly, the handsomest woman of Chambery, did not learn music,
but  I  taught  her  daughter,  who  was  yet  young,  but  whose  growing  beauty  promised  to  equal  her
mother's, if she had not unfortunately been a little red-haired. I had likewise among my scholars a little
French lady, whose name I have forgotten, but who merits a place in my list of preferences. She had
adopted the slow drawling tone of the nuns, in which voice she would utter some very keen things,
which did not in the least appear to correspond with her manner; but she was indolent, and could not
generally take pains to show her wit, that being a favor she did not grant to every one. After a month or
two of negligent attendance, this was an expedient she devised to make me more assiduous, for I could
not easily persuade myself to be so. When with my scholars, I was fond enough of teaching, but could
not bear the idea of being obliged to attend at a particular hour; constraint and subjection in every shape
are to me insupportable, and alone sufficient to make me hate even pleasure itself.
I had some scholars likewise among the tradespeople, and, among others, one who was the indirect
cause of a change of relationship, which (as I have promised to declare all) I must relate in its place.
She was the daughter of a grocer, and was called Mademoiselle de Larnage, a perfect model for a
Grecian statue, and whom I should quote for the handsomest girl I have ever seen, if true beauty could
exist without life or soul. Her indolence, reserve, and insensibility were inconceivable; it was equally
impossible to please or make her angry, and I am convinced that had any one formed a design upon her
virtue, he might have succeeded, not through her inclination, but from her stupidity. Her mother, who
would run no risk of this, did not leave her a single moment. In having her taught to sing and providing
a young master, she had hoped to enliven her, but it all proved ineffectual. While the master was
admiring the daughter, the mother was admiring the master, but this was equally lost labor. Madam de
Larnage added to her natural vivacity that portion of sprightliness which should have belonged to the
daughter.  She  was  a  little,  ugly,  lively  trollop,  with  small  twinkling  ferret  eyes,  and  marked  with
smallpox. On my arrival in the morning, I always found my coffee and cream ready, and the mother
never failed to welcome me with a kiss on the lips, which I would willingly have returned the daughter,
to  see  how  she  would  have  received  it.  All  this  was  done  with  such  an  air  of  carelessness  and
simplicity, that even when M. de Larnage was present; her kisses and caresses were not omitted. He
was a good quiet fellow, the true original of his daughter; nor did his wife endeavor to deceive him,
because there was absolutely no occasion for it.
I received all these caresses with my usual stupidity, taking them only for marks of pure friendship,
though they were sometimes troublesome; for the lively Madam Lard was displeased, if, during the
day, I passed the shop without calling; it became necessary, therefore (when I had no time to spare), to
go out of my way through another street, well knowing it was not so easy to quit her house as to enter
it.
  Madam  Lard  thought  so  much  of  me,  that  I  could  not  avoid  thinking  something  of  her.  Her
attentions affected me greatly; and I spoke of them to Madam de Warrens, without supposing any
mystery in the matter, but had there been one I should equally have divulged it, for to have kept a secret
of any kind from her would have been impossible. My heart lay as open to Madam de Warrens as to
Heaven. She did not understand the matter quite so simply as I had done, but saw advances where I
only discovered friendship. She concluded that Madam Lard would make a point of not leaving me as
great  a  fool  as  she  found  me,  and,  some  way  or  other,  contrive  to  make  herself  understood;  but
exclusive of the consideration that it was not just, that another should undertake the instruction of herpupil, she had motives more worthy of her, wishing to guard me against the snares to which my youth
and  inexperience  exposed  me.  Meantime,  a  more  dangerous  temptation  offered  which  I  likewise
escaped, but which proved to her that such a succession of dangers required every preservative she
could possibly apply.
  The Countess of Menthon, mother to one of my scholars, was a woman of great wit, and reckoned
to possess, at least, an equal share of mischief, having (as was reported) caused a number of quarrels,
and, among others, one that terminated fatally for the house of D' Antremont. Madam de Warrens had
seen enough of her to know her character: for having (very innocently) pleased some person to whom
Madam de Menthon had pretensions, she found her guilty of the crime of this preference, though
Madam de Warrens had neither sought after nor accepted it, and from that moment endeavored to play
her rival a number of ill turns, none of which succeeded. I shall relate one of the most whimsical, by
way of specimen.
  They were together in the country, with several gentlemen of the neighborhood, and among the rest
the lover in question. Madam de Menthon took an opportunity to say to one of these gentlemen, that
Madam de Warrens was a prude, that she dressed ill, and particularly that she covered her neck like a
tradeswoman. "O, for that matter," replied the person she was speaking to (who was fond of a joke),
"she has good reason, for I know she is marked with a great ugly rat on her bosom, so naturally, that it
even appears to be running." Hatred, as well as love, renders its votaries credulous. Madam de Menthon
resolved to make use of this discovery, and one day, while Madam de Warrens was at cards with this
lady's ungrateful favorite, she contrived, in passing behind her rival, almost to overset the chair she sat
on, and at the same instant, very dexterously displaced her handkerchief; but instead of this hideous rat,
the gentleman beheld a far different object, which it was not more easy to forget than to obtain a sight
of, and which by no means answered the intentions of the lady.
I was not calculated to engross the attention of Madam de Menthon, who loved to be surrounded by
brilliant company; notwithstanding she bestowed some attention on me, not for the sake of my person,
which she certainly did not regard, but for the reputation of wit which I had acquired, and which might
have rendered me convenient to her predominant inclination. She had a very lively passion for ridicule,
and loved to write songs and lampoons on those who displeased her: had she found me possessed of
sufficient talents to aid the fabrication of her verses, and complaisance enough to do so, we should
presently have turned Chambery upside down; these libels would have been traced to their source,
Madam de Menthon would have saved herself by sacrificing me, and I should have been cooped up in
prison, perhaps, for the rest of my life, as a recompense for having figured away as the Apollo of the
ladies. Fortunately, nothing of this kind happened; Madam de Menthon made me stay for dinner two or
three days, to chat with me, and soon found I was too dull for her purpose. I felt this myself, and was
humiliated at the discovery, envying the talents of my friend Venture; though I should rather have been
obliged to my stupidity for keeping me out of the reach of danger. I remained, therefore, Madam de
Menthon's daughter's singing-master, and nothing more! but I lived happily, and was ever well received
at Chambery, which was a thousand times more desirable than passing for a wit with her, and for a
serpent with everybody else.
  However this might be, Madam de Warrens conceived it necessary to guard me from the perils of
youth by treating me as a man: this she immediately set about, but in the most extraordinary manner
that any woman, in similar circumstances, ever devised. I all at once observed that her manner was
graver,  and  her  discourse  more  moral  than  usual.  To  the  playful  gayety  with  which  she  used  to
intermingle her instructions suddenly succeeded an uniformity of manner, neither familiar nor severe,
but which seemed to prepare me for some explanation. After having vainly racked my brain for the
reason of this change, I mentioned it to her; this she had expected and immediately proposed a walk to
our garden the next day. Accordingly we went there the next morning; she had contrived that we should
remain alone the whole day, which she employed in preparing me for those favors she meant to bestow;
not as another woman would have done, by toying and folly, but by discourses full of sentiment and
reason, rather tending to instruct than seduce, and which spoke more to my heart than to my senses.Meantime, however excellent and to the purpose these discourses might be, and though far enough
from coldness or melancholy, I did not listen to them with all the attention they merited, nor fix them in
my memory as I should have done at any other time. That air of preparation which she had adopted
gave me a degree of inquietude; while she spoke (in spite of myself) I was thoughtful and absent,
attending  less  to  what  she  said  than  curious  to  know  what  she  aimed  at;  and  no  sooner  had  I
comprehended her design (which I could not easily do) than the novelty of the idea, which, during all
the years I had passed with her, had never once entered my imagination, took such entire possession of
me that I was no longer capable of minding what she said! I only thought of her; I heard her no longer.
  Thinking to render young minds attentive to reason by proposing some highly interesting object as
the result of it, is an error instructors frequently run into, and one which I have not avoided in my
Umilius. The young pupil, struck with the object presented to him, is occupied only with that, and
leaping lightly over your preliminary discourses, lights at once on the point, to which, in his idea, you
lead him too tediously. To render him attentive, he must be prevented from seeing the whole of your
design; and, in this particular, Madam de Warrens did not act with sufficient precaution.
  By  a  singularity  which  adhered  to  her  systematic  disposition,  she  took  the  vain  precaution  of
proposing  conditions;  but  the  moment  I  knew  the  purchase,  I  no  longer  even  heard  them,  but
immediately consented to everything; and I doubt whether there is a man on the whole earth who would
have  been  sincere  or  courageous  enough  to  dispute  terms,  or  one  single  woman  who  would  have
pardoned such a dispute. By a continuation of the same whimsicality, she attached a number of the
gravest formalities to the acquisition of her favors, and gave me eight days to think of them, which I
assured  her  I  had  no  need  of,  though  that  assurance  was  far  from  a  truth:  for  to  complete  this
assemblage of singularities, I was very glad to have this intermission; so much had the novelty of these
ideas struck me, and such disorder did I feel in mine, that it required time to arrange them.
  It will be supposed, that these eight days appeared to me as many ages; on the contrary, I should
have been very glad had the time been lengthened. I find it difficult to describe the state I found myself
in; it was a strange chaos of fear and impatience, dreading what I desired, and studying some civil
pretext to evade my happiness.
  Let the warmth of my constitution be remembered, my age, and my heart intoxicated with love; let
my  tender  attachment  to  her  be  supposed,  which,  far  from  having  diminished,  had  daily  gained
additional strength; let it be considered that I was only happy when with her, that my heart was full, not
only of her bounty, of her amiable disposition, but of her shape, of her person, of herself; in a word,
conceive me united to her by every affinity that could possibly render her dear; nor let it be supposed,
that, being ten or twelve years older than myself, she began to grow an old woman, or was so in my
opinion. From the time the first sight of her had made such an impression on me, she had really altered
very little, and, in my mind, not at all. To me she was ever charming, and was still thought so by
everyone. She had got something jollier, but had the same fine eyes, the same clear complexion, the
same features, the same beautiful light hair, the sane gayety, and even the same voice, whose youthful
and silvery sound made so lively an impression on my heart, that, even to this day, I cannot hear a
young  woman's  voice,  that  is  at  all  harmonious,  without  emotion.  It  will  be  seen,  that  in  a  more
advanced age, the bare idea of some trifling favors I had to expect from the person I loved, inflamed me
so far, that I could not support, with any degree of patience, the time necessary to traverse the short
space that separated us; how then, by what miracle, when in the flower of my youth, had I so little
impatience for a happiness I had never tasted but in idea? How could I see the moment advancing with
more  pain  than  pleasure?  Why,  instead  of  transports  that  should  have  intoxicated  me  with  their
deliciousness, did I experience only fears and repugnance? I have no doubt that if I could have avoided
this happiness with any degree of decency, I should have relinquished it with all my heart. I have
promised a number of extravagancies in the history of my attachment to her; this certainly is one that
no idea could be formed of.
  The reader (already disgusted) supposes, that being in the situation I have before described with
Claude Anet, she was already degraded in my opinion by this participation of her favors, and that asentiment of disesteem weakened those she had before inspired me with; but he is mistaken. 'Tis true
that this participation gave me a cruel uneasiness, as well from a very natural sentiment of delicacy, as
because it appeared unworthy both of her and myself; but as to my sentiments for her, they were still
the same, and I can solemnly aver, that I never loved her more tenderly than when I felt so little
propensity to avail myself of her condescension. I was too well acquainted with the chastity of her heart
and the iciness of her constitution, to suppose a moment that the gratification of the senses had any
influence over her; I was well convinced that her only motive was to guard me from dangers, which
appeared otherwise inevitable, by this extraordinary favor, which she did not consider in the same light
that women usually do; as will presently be explained.
  The habit of living a long time innocently together, far from weakening the first sentiments I felt for
her, had contributed to strengthen them, giving a more lively, a more tender, but at the same time a less
sensual, turn to my affection. Having ever accustomed myself to call her Mama (as formerly observed)
and enjoying the familiarity of a son, it became natural to consider myself as such, and I am inclined to
think this was the true reason of that insensibility with a person I so tenderly loved; for I can perfectly
recollect that my emotions on first seeing her, though not more lively, were more voluptuous: At
Annecy I was intoxicated, at Chambery I possessed my reason. I always loved her as passionately as
possible, but I now loved her more for herself and less on my own account; or, at least, I rather sought
for happiness than pleasure in her company. She was more to me than a sister, a mother, a friend, or
even than a mistress, and for this very reason she was not a mistress; in a word, I loved her too much to
desire her.
  This day, more dreaded than hoped for, at length arrived. I have before observed, that I promised
everything that was required of me, and I kept my word: my heart confirmed my engagements without
desiring the fruits, though at length I obtained them. Was I happy? No: I felt I know not what invincible
sadness which empoisoned my happiness, it seemed that I had committed an incest, and two or three
times, pressing her eagerly in my arms, I deluged her bosom with my tears. On her part, as she had
never sought pleasure, she had not the stings of remorse.
I repeat it, all her failings were the effect of her errors, never of her passions. She was well born, her
heart was pure, her manners noble, her desires regular and virtuous, her taste delicate; she seemed
formed for that elegant purity of manners which she ever loved, but never practised, because instead of
listening to the dictates of her heart, she followed those of her reason, which led her astray: for when
once corrupted by false principles it will ever run counter to its natural sentiments. Unhappily, she
piqued herself on philosophy, and the morals she drew from thence clouded the genuine purity of her
heart.
  M. Tavel, her first lover, was also her instructor in this philosophy, and the principles he instilled
into her mind were such as tended to seduce her. Finding her cold and impregnable on the side of her
passions, and firmly attached to her husband and her duty, he attacked her by sophisms, endeavoring to
prove that the list of duties she thought so sacred, was but a sort of catechism, fit only for children. That
the kind of infidelity she thought so terrible, was, in itself, absolutely indifferent; that all the morality of
conjugal faith consisted in opinion, the contentment of husbands being the only reasonable rule of duty
in wives; consequently that concealed infidelities, doing no injury, could be no crime; in a word, he
persuaded her that the sin consisted only in the scandal, that woman being really virtuous who took care
to appear so. Thus the deceiver obtained his end in the subverting the reason of a girl; whose heart he
found it impossible to corrupt, and received his punishment in a devouring jealousy, being persuaded
she would treat him as he had prevailed on her to treat her husband.
I don't know whether he was mistaken in this respect: the Minister Perret passed for his successor;
all I know, is, that the coldness of temperament which it might have been supposed would have kept
her from embracing this system, in the end prevented her from renouncing it. She could not conceive
how so much importance should be given to what seemed to have none for her; nor could she honor
with the name of virtue, an abstinence which would have cost her little.
  She did not, therefore, give in to this false principle on her own account, but for the sake of others;and that from another maxim almost as false as the former, but more consonant to the generosity of her
disposition.
  She  was  persuaded  that  nothing  could  attach  a  man  so  truly  to  any  woman  as  an  unbounded
freedom, and though she was only susceptible of friendship, this friendship was so tender, that she
made  use  of  every  means  which  depended  on  her  to  secure  the  objects  of  it,  and,  which  is  very
extraordinary, almost always succeeded: for she was so truly amiable, that an increase of intimacy was
sure to discover additional reasons to love and respect her. Another thing worthy of remark is, that after
her first folly, she only favored the unfortunate. Lovers in a more brilliant station lost their labor with
her, but the man who at first attracted her pity, must have possessed very few good qualities if in the
end he did not obtain her affection. Even when she made an unworthy choice, far from proceeding from
base  inclinations  (which  were  strangers  to  her  noble  heart)  it  was  the  effect  of  a  disposition  too
generous,  humane,  compassionate,  and  sensible,  which  she  did  not  always  govern  with  sufficient
discernment.
  If some false principles misled her, how many admirable ones did she not possess, which never
forsook her! By how many virtues did she atone for her failings! if we can call by that name errors in
which the senses had so little share. The man who in one particular deceived her so completely, had
given  her  excellent  instructions  in  a  thousand  others;  and  her  passions,  being  far  from  turbulent,
permitted her to follow the dictates. She ever acted wisely when her sophisms did not intervene, and her
designs were laudable even in her failings. False principles might lead her to do ill, but she never did
anything which she conceived to be wrong. She abhorred lying and duplicity, was just, equitable,
humane, disinterested, true to her word, her friends, and those duties which she conceived to be such;
incapable of hatred or revenge, and not even conceiving there was a merit in pardoning; in fine (to
return to those qualities which were less excusable), though she did not properly value, she never made
a  vile  commerce  of  her  favors;  she  lavished,  but  never  sold  them,  though  continually  reduced  to
expedients for a subsistence: and I dare assert, that if Socrates could esteem Aspasia, he would have
respected Madam de Warrens.
I am well aware that ascribing sensibility of heart with coldness of temperament to the same person,
I shall generally, and with great appearance of reason, be accused of a contradiction. Perhaps Nature
sported or blundered, and this combination ought not to have existed; I only know it did exist. All those
who know Madam de Warrens (a great number of whom are yet living) have had opportunities of
knowing this was a fact; I dare even aver she had but one pleasure in the world, which was serving
those she loved. Let every one argue on the point as he pleases, and gravely prove that this cannot be;
my business is to declare the truth, and not to enforce a belief of it.
I became acquainted with the particulars I have just related, in those conversations which succeeded
our union, and alone rendered it delicious. She was right when she concluded her complaisance would
be useful to me; I derived great advantages from it in point of useful instruction. Hitherto she had used
me  as  a  child,  she  now  began  to  treat  me  as  a  man,  and  entertain  me  with  accounts  of  herself.
Everything she said was so interesting, and I was so sensibly touched with it, that, reasoning with
myself, I applied these confidential relations to my own improvement and received more instruction
from them than from her teaching. When we truly feel that the heart speaks, our own opens to receive
its instructions, nor can all the pompous morality of a pedagogue have half the effect that is produced
by the tender, affectionate, and artless conversation of a sensible woman on him who loves her.
  The intimacy in which I lived with Madam de Warrens, having placed me more advantageously in
her opinion than formerly, she began to think (notwithstanding my awkward manner) that I deserved
cultivation for the polite world, and that if I could one day show myself there in an eligible situation, I
should soon be able to make my way. In consequence of this idea, she set about forming not only my
judgment, but my address, endeavoring to render me amiable, as well as estimable; and if it is true that
success in this world is consistent with strict virtue (which, for my part, I do not believe), I am certain
there is no other road than that she had taken, and wished to point out to me. For Madam de Warrens
knew mankind, and understood exquisitely well the art of treating all ranks, without falsehood, andwithout imprudence, neither deceiving nor provoking them; but this art was rather in her disposition
than her precepts, she knew better how to practise than explain it, and I was of all the world the least
calculated to become master of such an attainment; accordingly, the means employed for this purpose
were nearly lost labor, as well as the pains she took to procure me a fencing and a dancing master.
  Though very well made, I could never learn to dance a minuet; for being plagued with corns, I had
acquired a habit of walking on my heels, which Roche, the dancing master, could never break me of. It
was  still  worse  at  the  fencing-school,  where,  after  three  months'  practice,  I  made  but  very  little
progress, and could never attempt fencing with any but my master. My wrist was not supple enough,
nor my arm sufficiently firm to retain the foil, whenever he chose to make it fly out of my hand. Add to
this, I had a mortal aversion both to the art itself and to the person who undertook to teach it to me, nor
should I ever have imagined, that anyone could have been so proud of the science of sending men out
of the world. To bring this vast genius within the compass of my comprehension, he explained himself
by  comparisons  drawn  from  music,  which  he  understood  nothing  of.  He  found  striking  analogies
between a hit in 'quarte' or 'tierce' with the intervals of music which bears those names: when he made a
feint he cried out, "take care of this 'diesis'," because anciently they called the 'diesis' a feint: and when
he had made the foil fly from my hand, he would add, with a sneer, that this was a pause: in a word, I
never in my life saw a more insupportable pedant.
I made, therefore, but little progress in my exercises, which I presently quitted from pure disgust;
but I succeeded better in an art of a thousand times more value, namely, that of being content with my
situation, and not desiring one more brilliant, for which I began to be persuaded that Nature had not
designed me. Given up to the endeavor of rendering Madam de Warrens happy, I was ever best pleased
when  in  her  company,  and,  notwithstanding  my  fondness  for  music,  began  to  grudge  the  time  I
employed in giving lessons to my scholars.
I am ignorant whether Anet perceived the full extent of our union; but I am inclined to think he was
no stranger to it. He was a young man of great penetration, and still greater discretion; who never belied
his sentiments, but did not always speak them: without giving me the least hint that he was acquainted
with our intimacy, he appeared by his conduct to be so; nor did this moderation proceed from baseness
of  soul,  but,  having  entered  entirely  into  the  principles  of  his  mistress,  he  could  not  reasonably
disapprove of the natural consequences of them. Though as young as herself, he was so grave and
thoughtful, that he looked on us as two children who required indulgence, and we regarded him as a
respectable man, whose esteem we had to preserve. It was not until after she was unfaithful to Anet,
that I learned the strength of her attachment to him. She was fully sensible that I only thought, felt, or
lived for her; she let me see, therefore, how much she loved Anet, that I might love him likewise, and
dwell less on her friendship, than on her esteem, for him, because this was the sentiment that I could
most fully partake of. How often has she affected our hearts and made us embrace with tears, by
assuring us that we were both necessary to her happiness! Let not women read this with an ill-natured
smile; with the temperament she possessed, this necessity was not equivocal, it was only that of the
heart.
  Thus there was established, among us three, a union without example, perhaps, on the face of the
earth. All our wishes, our cares, our very hearts, were for each other, and absolutely confined to this
little circle. The habit of living together, and living exclusively from the rest of the world, became so
strong, that if at our repasts one of the three was wanting, or a fourth person came in, everything
seemed  deranged;  and,  notwithstanding  our  particular  attachments,  even  our  tete-a-tete  were  less
agreeable than our reunion. What banished every species of constraint from our little community, was a
lively reciprocal confidence, and dulness or insipidity could find no place among us, because we were
always  fully  employed.  Madam  de  Warrens  always  projecting,  always  busy,  left  us  no  time  for
idleness, though, indeed, we had each sufficient employment on our own account. It is my maxim, that
idleness is as much the pest of society as of solitude. Nothing more contracts the mind, or engenders
more tales, mischief, gossiping, and lies, than for people to be eternally shut up in the same apartment
together, and reduced, from the want of employment, to the necessity of an incessant chat. When everyone is busy (unless you have really something to say), you may continue silent; but if you have nothing
to do, you must absolutely speak continually, and this, in my mind, is the most burdensome and the
most dangerous constraint. I will go further, and maintain, that to render company harmless, as well as
agreeable, it is necessary, not only that they should have something to do, but something that requires a
degree of attention.
  Knitting, for instance, is absolutely as bad as doing nothing; you must take as much pains to amuse
a woman whose fingers are thus employed, as if she sat with her arms crossed; but let her embroider,
and it is a different matter; she is then so far busied, that a few intervals of silence may be borne with.
What is most disgusting and ridiculous, during these intermissions of conversation, is to see, perhaps, a
dozen over-grown fellows, get up, sit down again, walk backwards and forwards, turn on their heels,
play with the chimney ornaments, and rack their brains to maintain an inexhaustible chain of words:
what a charming occupation! Such people, wherever they go, must be troublesome both to others and
themselves. When I was at Motiers, I used to employ myself in making laces with my neighbors, and
were I again to mix with the world, I would always carry a cup-and-ball in my pocket; I should
sometimes play with it the whole day, that I might not be constrained to speak when I had nothing to
discourse about; and I am persuaded, that if every one would do the same, mankind would be less
mischievous,  their  company  would  become  more  rational,  and,  in  my  opinion,  a  vast  deal  more
agreeable; in a word, let wits laugh if they please, but I maintain, that the only practical lesson of
morality within the reach of the present age, is that of the cup-and-ball.
  At Chambery they did not give us the trouble of studying expedients to avoid weariness, when by
ourselves, for a troop of important visitors gave us too much by their company, to feel any when alone.
The annoyance they formerly gave me had not diminished; all the difference was, that I now found less
opportunity to abandon myself to my dissatisfaction. Poor Madam de Warrens had not lost her old
predilection for schemes and systems; on the contrary, the more she felt the pressure of her domestic
necessities, the more she endeavored to extricate herself from them by visionary projects; and, in
proportion to the decrease of her present resources, she contrived to enlarge, in idea, those of the future.
Increase of years only strengthened this folly: as she lost her relish for the pleasures of the world and
youth, she replaced it by an additional fondness for secrets and projects; her house was never clear of
quacks, contrivers of new manufactures, alchemists, projects of all kinds and of all descriptions, whose
discourses began by a distribution of millions and concluded by giving you to understand that they
were in want of a crown--piece. No one went from her empty-handed; and what astonished me most
was, how she could so long support such profusion, without exhausting the source or wearying her
creditors.
  Her principal project at the time I am now speaking of was that of establishing a Royal Physical
Garden at Chambery, with a Demonstrator attached to it; it will be unnecessary to add for whom this
office was designed. The situation of this city, in the midst of the Alps, was extremely favorable to
botany, and as Madam de Warrens was always for helping out one project with another, a College of
Pharmacy  was  to  be  added,  which  really  would  have  been  a  very  useful  foundation  in  so  poor  a
country,  where  apothecaries  are  almost  the  only  medical  practitioners.  The  retreat  of  the  chief
physician, Grossi, to Chambery, on the demise of King Victor, seemed to favor this idea, or perhaps,
first suggest it; however this may be, by flattery and attention she set about managing Grossi, who, in
fact, was not very manageable, being the most caustic and brutal, for a man who had any pretensions to
the quality of a gentleman, that ever I knew. The reader may judge for himself by two or three traits of
character, which I shall add by way of specimen.
  He  assisted  one  day  at  a  consultation  with  some  other  doctors,  and  among  the  rest,  a  young
gentleman from Annecy, who was physician in ordinary to the sick person. This young man, being but
indifferently taught for a doctor, was bold enough to differ in opinion from M. Grossi, who only
answered him by asking him when he should return, which way he meant to take, and what conveyance
he should make use of? The other, having satisfied Grossi in these particulars, asked him if there was
anything he could serve him in? "Nothing, nothing," answered he, "only I shall place myself at awindow in your way, that I may have the pleasure of seeing an ass ride on horseback." His avarice
equalled his riches and want of feeling. One of his friends wanted to borrow some money of him, on
good security. "My friend," answered he, shaking him by the arm, and grinding his teeth, "Should St.
Peter descend from heaven to borrow ten pistoles of me, and offer the Trinity as securities, I would not
lend them." One day, being invited to dinner with Count Picon, Governor of Savoy, who was very
religious,  he  arrived  before  it  was  ready,  and  found  his  excellency  busy  with  his  devotions,  who
proposed to him the same employment; not knowing how to refuse, he knelt down with a frightful
grimace, but had hardly recited two Ave-Marias, when, not being able to contain himself any longer, he
rose hastily, snatched his hat and cane, and without speaking a word, was making toward the door;
Count Picon ran after him, crying, "Monsieur Grossi! Monsieur Grossi! stop, there's a most excellent
ortolan on the spit for you." "Monsieur le Count," replied the other, turning his head, "though you
should give me a roasted angel, I would not stay." Such was M. Grossi, whom Madam de Warrens
undertook  and  succeeded  in  civilizing.  Though  his  time  was  very  much  occupied,  he  accustomed
himself  to  come  frequently  to  her  house,  conceived  a  friendship  for  Anet,  seemed  to  think  him
intelligent, spoke of him with esteem, and, what would not have been expected of such a brute, affected
to treat him with respect, wishing to efface the impressions of the past; for though Anet was no longer
on the footing of a domestic, it was known that he had been one, and nothing less than the countenance
and  example  of  the  chief  physician  was  necessary  to  set  an  example  of  respect  which  would  not
otherwise have been paid him. Thus Claude Anet, with a black coat, a well-dressed wig, a grave, decent
behavior, a circumspect conduct, and a tolerable knowledge in medical and botanical matters, might
reasonably have hoped to fill, with universal satisfaction, the place of public demonstrator, had the
proposed establishment taken place. Grossi highly approved the plan, and only waited an opportunity to
propose it to the administration, whenever a return of peace should permit them to think of useful
institutions, and enable them to spare the necessary pecuniary supplies.
  But this project, whose execution would probably have plunged me into botanical studies, for which
I am inclined to think Nature designed me, failed through one of those unexpected strokes which
frequently overthrow the best concerted plans. I was destined to become an example of human misery;
and  it  might  be  said  that  Providence,  who  called  me  by  degrees  to  these  extraordinary  trials,
disconcerted every opportunity that could prevent my encountering them.
  In an excursion which Anet made to the top of the mountain to seek for genipi, a scarce plant that
grows only on the Alps, and which Monsieur Grossi had occasion for, unfortunately he heated himself
so much, that he was seized with a pleurisy, which the genipi could not relieve, though said to be
specific in that disorder; and, notwithstanding all the art of Grossi (who certainly was very skillful), and
all the care of his good mistress and myself, he died the fifth day of his disorder, in the most cruel
agonies. During his illness he had no exhortations but mine, bestowed with such transports of grief and
zeal, that had he been in a state to understand them, they must have been some consolation to him. Thus
I lost the firmest friend I ever had; a man estimable and extraordinary; in whom Nature supplied the
defects of education, and who (though in a state of servitude) possessed all the virtues necessary to
form a great man, which, perhaps, he would have shown himself, and been acknowledged, had he lived
to fill the situation he seemed so perfectly adapted to.
  The next day I spoke of him to Madam de Warrens with the most sincere and lively affection;
when, suddenly, in the midst of our conversation, the vile, ungrateful thought occurred, that I should
inherit his wardrobe, and particularly a handsome black coat, which I thought very becoming. As I
thought this, I consequently uttered it; for when with her, to think and to speak was the same thing.
Nothing could have made her feel more forcibly the loss she had sustained, than this unworthy and
odious  observation;  disinterestedness  and  greatness  of  soul  being  qualities  that  poor  Anet  had
eminently possessed. The generous Madam de Warrens turned from me, and (without any reply) burst
into tears. Dear and precious tears! your reprehension was fully felt; ye ran into my very heart, washing
from thence even the smallest traces of such despicable and unworthy sentiments, never to return.
  This loss caused Madam de Warrens as much inconvenience as sorrow, since from this moment heraffairs were still more deranged. Anet was extremely exact, and kept everything in order; his vigilance
was universally feared, and this set some bounds to that profusion they were too apt to run into; even
Madam de Warrens, to avoid his censure, kept her dissipation within bounds; his attachment was not
sufficient, she wished to preserve his esteem, and avoid the just remonstrances he sometimes took the
liberty to make her, by representing that she squandered the property of others as well as her own. I
thought as he did, nay, I even sometimes expressed myself to the same effect, but had not an equal
ascendancy over her, and my advice did not make the same impression. On his decease, I was obliged
to occupy his place, for which I had as little inclination as abilities, and therefore filled it ill. I was not
sufficiently  careful,  and  so  very  timid,  that  though  I  frequently  found  fault  to  myself,  I  saw  ill-
management without taking courage to oppose it; besides, though I acquired an equal share of respect, I
had not the same authority. I saw the disorder that prevailed, trembled at it, sometimes complained, but
was never attended to. I was too young and lively to have any pretensions to the exercise of reason, and
when I would have acted the reformer, Madam de Warrens calling me her little Mentor, with two or
three playful slaps on the cheek, reduced me to my natural thoughtlessness. Notwithstanding, an idea of
the certain distress in which her ill-regulated expenses, sooner or later, must necessarily plunge her,
made a stronger impression on me since I had become the inspector of her household, and had a better
opportunity of calculating the inequality that subsisted between her income and her expenses. I even
date from this period the beginning of that inclination to avarice which I have ever since been sensible
of. I was never foolishly prodigal, except by intervals; but till then I was never concerned whether I had
much or little money. I now began to pay more attention to this circumstance, taking care of my purse,
and becoming mean from a laudable motive; for I only sought to insure Madam de Warrens some
resources against that catastrophe which I dreaded the approach of. I feared her creditors would seize
her pension or that it might be discontinued and she reduced to want, when I foolishly imagined that the
trifle I could save might be of essential service to her; but to accomplish this, it was necessary I should
conceal what I meant to make a reserve of; for it would have been an awkward circumstance, while she
was perpetually driven to expedients, to have her know that I hoarded money. Accordingly, I sought
out some hiding-place, where I laid up a few louis, resolving to augment this stock from time to time,
till  a  convenient  opportunity  to  lay  it  at  her  feet;  but  I  was  so  incautious  in  the  choice  of  my
repositories, that she always discovered them, and, to convince me that she did so, changed the louis I
had concealed for a larger sum in different pieces of coin. Ashamed of these discoveries, I brought back
to the common purse my little treasure, which she never failed to lay out in clothes, or other things for
my use, such as a silver hilted sword, watch, etc. Being convinced that I should never succeed in
accumulating money, and that what I could save would furnish but a very slender resource against the
misfortune I dreaded, made me wish to place myself in such a situation that I might be enabled to
provide for her, whenever she might chance to be reduced to want. Unhappily, seeking these resources
on the side of my inclinations, I foolishly determined to consider music as my principal dependence;
and ideas of harmony rising in my brain, I imagined, that if placed in a proper situation to profit by
them, I should acquire celebrity, and presently become a modern Orpheus, whose mystic sounds would
attract all the riches of Peru.
  As I began to read music tolerably well, the question was, how I should learn composition? The
difficulty lay in meeting with a good master, for, with the assistance of my Rameau alone, I despaired
of ever being able to accomplish it; and, since the departure of M. le Maitre, there was nobody in Savoy
who understood anything of the principles of harmony.
I am now about to relate another of those inconsequences, which my life is full of, and which have
so frequently carried me directly from my designs, even when I thought myself immediately within
reach of them. Venture had spoken to me in very high terms of the Abbe Blanchard, who had taught
him composition; a deserving man, possessed of great talents, who was music-master to the cathedral at
Besancon, and is now in that capacity at the Chapel of Versailles. I therefore determined to go to
Besancon, and take some lessons from the Abbe Blanchard, and the idea appeared so rational to me,
that I soon made Madam de Warrens of the same opinion, who immediately set about the preparationsfor my journey, in the same style of profusion with which all her plans were executed. Thus this project
for preventing a bankruptcy, and repairing in future the waste of dissipation, began by causing her to
expend eight hundred livres; her ruin being accelerated that I might be put in a condition to prevent it.
Foolish as this conduct may appear, the illusion was complete on my part, and even on hers, for I was
persuaded I should labor for her emolument, and she thought she was highly promoting mine.
I expected to find Venture still at Annecy, and promised myself to obtain a recommendatory letter
from him to the Abbe Blanchard; but he had left that place, and I was obliged to content myself in the
room of it, with a mass in four parts of his composition, which he had left with me. With this slender
recommendation I set out for Besancon by the way of Geneva, where I saw my relations; and through
Nion, where I saw my father, who received me in his usual manner, and promised to forward my
portmanteau, which, as I travelled on horseback, came after me. I arrived at Besancon, and was kindly
received by the Abbe Blanchard, who promised me his instruction, and offered his services in any other
particular. We had just set about our music, when I received a letter from my father, informing me that
my  portmanteau  had  been  seized  and  confiscated  at  Rousses,  a  French  barrier  on  the  side  of
Switzerland. Alarmed at the news, I employed the acquaintance I had formed at Besancon, to learn the
motive of this confiscation. Being certain there was nothing contraband among my baggage, I could not
conceive on what pretext it could have been seized on; at length, however, I learned the rights of the
story, which (as it is a very curious one) must not be omitted.
I became acquainted at Chambery with a very worthy old man, from Lyons, named Monsieur
Duvivier, who had been employed at the Visa, under the regency, and for want of other business, now
assisted at the Survey. He had lived in the polite world, possessed talents, was good-humored, and
understood music. As we both wrote in the same chamber, we preferred each other's acquaintance to
that of the unlicked cubs that surrounded us. He had some correspondents at Paris, who furnished him
with those little nothings, those daily novelties, which circulate one knows not why, and die one cares
not when, without any one thinking of them longer than they are heard. As I sometimes took him to
dine with Madam de Warrens, he in some measure treated me with respect, and (wishing to render
himself agreeable) endeavored to make me fond of these trifles, for which I naturally had such a
distaste, that I never in my life read any of them. Unhappily one of these cursed papers happened to be
in the waistcoat pocket of a new suit, which I had only worn two or three times to prevent its being
seized by the commissioners of the customs. This paper contained an insipid Jansenist parody on that
beautiful scene in Racine's Mithridates: I had not read ten lines of it, but by forgetfulness left it in my
pocket, and this caused all my necessaries to be confiscated. The commissioners at the head of the
inventory of my portmanteau, set a most pompous verbal process, in which it was taken for granted that
this most terrible writing came from Geneva for the sole purpose of being printed and distributed in
France, and then ran into holy invectives against the enemies of God and the Church, and praised the
pious vigilance of those who had prevented the execution of these most infernal machinations. They
doubtless found also that my spirits smelt of heresy, for on the strength of this dreadful paper, they
were all seized, and from that time I never received any account of my unfortunate portmanteau. The
revenue  officers  whom  I  applied  to  for  this  purpose  required  so  many  instructions,  informations,
certificates, memorials, etc., etc., that, lost a thousand times in the perplexing labyrinth, I was glad to
abandon them entirely. I feel a real regret for not having preserved this verbal process from the office of
Rousses,  for  it  was  a  piece  calculated  to  hold  a  distinguished  rank  in  the  collection  which  is  to
accompany this Work.
  The loss of my necessities immediately brought me back to Chambery, without having learned
anything of the Abbe Blanchard. Reasoning with myself on the events of this journey, and seeing that
misfortunes attended all my enterprises, I resolved to attach myself entirely to Madam de Warrens, to
share her fortune, and distress myself no longer about future events, which I could not regulate. She
received me as if I had brought back treasures, replaced by degrees my little wardrobe, and though this
misfortune fell heavy enough on us both, it was forgotten almost as suddenly as it arrived.
  Though this mischance had rather dampened my musical ardor, I did not leave off studying myRameau, and, by repeated efforts, was at length able to understand it, and to make some little attempts
at composition, the success of which encouraged me to proceed. The Count de Bellegrade, son of the
Marquis of Antremont, had returned from Dresden after the death of King Augustus. Having long
resided at Paris, he was fond of music, and particularly that of Rameau. His brother, the Count of
Nangis, played on the violin; the Countess la Tour, their sister, sung tolerably: this rendered music the
fashion at Chambery, and a kind of public concert was established there, the direction of which was at
first designed for me, but they soon discovered I was not competent to the undertaking, and it was
otherwise arranged. Notwithstanding this, I continued writing a number of little pieces, in my own way,
and, among others, a cantata, which gained great approbation; it could not, indeed, be called a finished
piece, but the airs were written in a style of novelty, and produced a good effect, which was not
expected from me. These gentlemen could not believe that, reading music so indifferently, it was
possible I should compose any that was passable, and made no doubt that I had taken to myself the
credit of some other person's labors. Monsieur de Nangis, wishing to be assured of this, called on me
one morning with a cantata of Clerambault's which he had transposed as he said, to suit his voice, and
to  which  another  bass  was  necessary,  the  transposition  having  rendered  that  of  Clerambault
impracticable. I answered, it required considerable labor, and could not be done on the spot. Being
convinced I only sought an excuse, he pressed me to write at least the bass to a recitative: I did so, not
well, doubtless, because to attempt anything with success I must have both time and freedom, but I did
it at least according to rule, and he being present, could not doubt but I understood the elements of
composition. I did not, therefore, lose my scholars, though it hurt my pride that there should be a
concert at Chambery in which I was not necessary.
  About this time, peace being concluded, the French army repassed the Alps. Several officers came
to  visit  Madam  de  Warrens,  and  among  others  the  Count  de  Lautrec,  Colonel  of  the  regiment  of
Orleans, since Plenipotentiary of Geneva, and afterwards Marshal of France, to whom she presented
me. On her recommendation, he appeared to interest himself greatly in my behalf, promising a great
deal, which he never remembered till the last year of his life, when I no longer stood in need of his
assistance. The young Marquis of Sennecterre, whose father was then ambassador at Turin, passed
through Chambery at the same time, and dined one day at M. de Menthon's, when I happened to be
among  the  guests.  After  dinner;  the  discourse  turned  on  music,  which  the  marquis  understood
extremely well. The opera of 'Jephtha' was then new; he mentioned this piece, it was brought him, and
he made me tremble by proposing to execute it between us. He opened the book at that celebrated
double chorus,
  La Terra, l'Enfer, le Ciel meme, Tout tremble devant le Seigneur!
  [The Earth, and Hell, and Heaven itself, tremble before the Lord!]
  He said, "How many parts will you take? I will do these six." I had not yet been accustomed to this
trait of French vivacity, and though acquainted with divisions, could not comprehend how one man
could undertake to perform six, or even two parts at the same time. Nothing has cost me more trouble
in music than to skip lightly from one part to another, and have the eye at once on a whole division. By
the manner in which I evaded this trial, he must have been inclined to believe I did not understand
music, and perhaps it was to satisfy himself in this particular that he proposed my noting a song for
Mademoiselle de Menthon, in such a manner that I could not avoid it. He sang this song, and I wrote
from his voice, without giving him much trouble to repeat it. When finished he read my performance,
and said (which was very true) that it was very correctly noted. He had observed my embarrassment,
and now seemed to enhance the merit of this little success. In reality, I then understood music very
well, and only wanted that quickness at first sight which I possess in no one particular, and which is
only to be acquired in this art by long and constant practice. Be that as it may, I was fully sensible of
his  kindness  in  endeavoring  to  efface  from  the  minds  of  others,  and  even  from  my  own,  the
embarrassment I had experienced on this occasion. Twelve or fifteen years afterwards, meeting this
gentleman at several houses in Paris, I was tempted to make him recollect this anecdote, and show him
I still remembered it; but he had lost his sight since that time; I feared to give him pain by recalling tohis memory how useful it formerly had been to him, and was therefore silent on that subject.
I now touch on the moment that binds my past existence to the present, some friendships of that
period, prolonged to the present time, being very dear to me, have frequently made me regret that
happy obscurity, when those who called themselves my friends were really so; loved me for myself,
through pure good will, and not from the vanity of being acquainted with a conspicuous character,
perhaps for the secret purpose of finding more occasions to injure him.
  From this time I date my first acquaintance with my old friend Gauffecourt, who, notwithstanding
every effort to disunite us, has still remained so.--Still remained so!--No, alas! I have just lost him!--but
his affection terminated only with his life--death alone could put a period to our friendship. Monsieur
de Gauffecourt was one of the most amiable men that ever existed; it was impossible to see him without
affection, or to live with him without feeling a sincere attachment. In my life I never saw features more
expressive of goodness and serenity, or that marked more feeling, more understanding, or inspired
greater confidence. However reserved one might be, it was impossible even at first sight to avoid being
as free with him as if he had been an acquaintance of twenty years; for myself, who find so much
difficulty to be at ease among new faces, I was familiar with him in a moment. His manner, accent, and
conversation, perfectly suited his features: the sound of his voice was clear, full and musical; it was an
agreeable  and  expressive  bass,  which  satisfied  the  ear,  and  sounded  full  upon  the  heart.  It  was
impossible to possess a more equal and pleasing vivacity, or more real and unaffected gracefulness,
more natural talents, or cultivated with greater taste; join to all these good qualities an affectionate
heart, but loving rather too diffusively, and bestowing his favors with too little caution; serving his
friends with zeal, or rather making himself the friend of every one he could serve, yet contriving very
dexterously to manage his own affairs, while warmly pursuing the interests of others.
  Gauffecourt was the son of a clock-maker, and would have been a clock-maker himself had not his
person and desert called him to a superior situation. He became acquainted with M. de la Closure, the
French Resident at Geneva, who conceived a friendship for him, and procured him some connections at
Paris, which were useful, and through whose influence he obtained the privilege of furnishing the salts
of Valais, which was worth twenty thousand livres a year. This very amply satisfied his wishes with
respect to fortune, but with regard to women he was more difficult; he had to provide for his own
happiness, and did what he supposed most conducive to it. What renders his character most remarkable,
and does him the greatest honor, is, that though connected with all conditions, he was universally
esteemed and sought after without being envied or hated by any one, and I really believe he passed
through life without a single enemy.--Happy man!
  He went every year to the baths of Aix, where the best company from the neighboring countries
resorted, and being on terms of friendship with all the nobility of Savoy, came from Aix to Chambery
to see the young Count de Bellegarde and his father the Marquis of Antremont. It was here Madam de
Warrens introduced me to him, and this acquaintance, which appeared at that time to end in nothing,
after many years had elapsed, was renewed on an occasion which I should relate, when it became a real
friendship. I apprehend I am sufficiently authorized in speaking of a man to whom I was so firmly
attached, but I had no personal interest in what concerned him; he was so truly amiable, and born with
so many natural good qualities that, for the honor of human nature, I should think it necessary to
preserve his memory. This man, estimable as he certainly was, had, like other mortals, some failings, as
will be seen hereafter; perhaps had it not been so, he would have been less amiable, since, to render him
as interesting as possible, it was necessary he should sometimes act in such a manner as to require a
small portion of indulgence.
  Another connection of the same time, that is not yet extinguished, and continues to flatter me with
the idea of temporal happiness, which it is so difficult to obliterate from the human heart, is Monsieur
de Conzie, a Savoyard gentleman, then young and amiable, who had a fancy to learn music, or rather to
be  acquainted  with  the  person  who  taught  it.  With  great  understanding  and  taste  for  polite
acquirements,  M.  de  Conzie  possessed  a  mildness  of  disposition  which  rendered  him  extremely
attractive, and my temper being somewhat similar, when it found a counterpart, our friendship wassoon formed. The seeds of literature and philosophy, which began to ferment in my brain, and only
waited for culture and emulation to spring up, found in him exactly what was wanting to render them
prolific. M. de Conzie had no great inclination to music, and even this was useful to me, for the hours
destined for lessons were passed anyhow rather than musically; we breakfasted, chatted, and read new
publications, but not a word of music.
  The correspondence between Voltaire and the Prince Royal of Prussia, then made a noise in the
world, and these celebrated men were frequently the subject of our conversation, one of whom recently
seated on a throne, already indicated what he would prove himself hereafter, while the other, as much
disgraced as he is now admired, made us sincerely lament the misfortunes that seemed to pursue him,
and which are so frequently the appendage of superior talents. The Prince of Prussia had not been
happy in his youth, and it appeared that Voltaire was formed never to be so. The interest we took in
both parties extended to all that concerned them, and nothing that Voltaire wrote escaped us. The
inclination I felt for these performances inspired me with a desire to write elegantly, and caused me to
endeavor to imitate the colorings of that author, with whom I was so much enchanted. Some time after,
his philosophical letters (though certainly not his best work) greatly augmented my fondness for study;
it was a rising inclination, which, from that time, has never been extinguished.
  But the moment was not yet arrived when I should give into it entirely; my rambling disposition
(rather contracted than eradicated) being kept alive by our manner of living at Madam de Warrens,
which was too unsettled for one of my solitary temper. The crowd of strangers who daily swarmed
about her from all parts, and the certainty I was in that these people sought only to dupe her, each in his
particular mode, rendered home disagreeable. Since I had succeeded Anet in the confidence of his
mistress, I had strictly examined her circumstances, and saw their evil tendency with horror. I had
remonstrated a hundred times, prayed, argued, conjured, but all to no purpose. I had thrown myself at
her feet, and strongly represented the catastrophe that threatened her, had earnestly entreated that she
would reform her expenses, and begin with myself, representing that it was better to suffer something
while she was yet young, than by multiplying her debts and creditors, expose her old age to vexation
and misery.
  Sensible of the sincerity of my zeal, she was frequently affected, and would then make the finest
promises in the world: but only let an artful schemer arrive, and in an instant all her good resolutions
were forgotten. After a thousand proofs of the inefficacy of my remonstrances, what remained but to
turn away my eyes from the ruin I could not prevent; and fly myself from the door I could not guard! I
made therefore little journeys to Geneva and Lyons, which diverted my mind in some measure from
this secret uneasiness, though it increased the cause by these additional expenses. I can truly aver that I
should have acquiesed with pleasure in every retrenchment, had Madam de Warrens really profited by
it, but being persuaded that what I might refuse myself would be distributed among a set of interested
villains, I took advantage of her easiness to partake with them, and, like the dog returning from the
shambles, carried off a portion of that morsel which I could not protect.
  Pretences were not wanting for all these journeys; even Madam de Warrens would alone have
supplied me with more than were necessary, having plenty of connections, negotiations, affairs, and
commissions, which she wished to have executed by some trusty hand. In these cases she usually
applied to me; I was always willing to go, and consequently found occasions enough to furnish out a
rambling kind of life. These excursions procured me some good connections, which have since been
agreeable or useful to me. Among others, I met at Lyons, with M. Perrichon, whose friendship I accuse
myself with not having sufficiently cultivated, considering the kindness he had for me; and that of the
good Parisot, which I shall speak of in its place, at Grenoble, that of Madam Deybens and Madam la
Presidente  de  Bardonanche,  a  woman  of  great  understanding,  and  who  would  have  entertained  a
friendship for me had it been in my power to have seen her oftener; at Geneva, that of M. de Closure,
the French Resident, who often spoke to me of my mother, the remembrance of whom neither death nor
time had erased from his heart; likewise those of the two Barillots, the father, who was very amiable, a
good companion, and one of the most worthy men I ever met, calling me his grandson. During thetroubles of the republic, these two citizens took contrary sides, the son siding with the people, the father
with the magistrates. When they took up arms in 1737, I was at Geneva, and saw the father and son quit
the same house armed, the one going to the townhouse, the other to his quarters, almost certain to meet
face to face in the course of two hours, and prepared to give or receive death from each other. This
unnatural sight made so lively an impression on me, that I solemnly vowed never to interfere in any
civil war, nor assist in deciding our internal dispute by arms, either personally or by my influence,
should I ever enter into my rights as a citizen. I can bring proofs of having kept this oath on a very
delicate occasion, and it will be confessed (at least I should suppose so) that this moderation was of
some worth.
  But I had not yet arrived at that fermentation of patriotism which the first sight of Geneva in arms
has since excited in my heart, as may be conjectured by a very grave fact that will not tell to my
advantage, which I forgot to put in its proper place, but which ought not to be omitted.
  My uncle Bernard died at Carolina, where he had been employed some years in the building of
Charles Town, which he had formed the plan of. My poor cousin, too, died in the Prussian service; thus
my aunt lost, nearly at the same period, her son and husband. These losses reanimated in some measure
her affection for the nearest relative she had remaining, which was myself. When I went to Geneva, I
reckoned her house my home, and amused myself with rummaging and turning over the books and
papers  my  uncle  had  left.  Among  them  I  found  some  curious  ones,  and  some  letters  which  they
certainly little thought of. My aunt, who set no store by these dusty papers, would willingly have given
the whole to me, but I contented myself with two or three books, with notes written by the Minister
Bernard, my grandfather, and among the rest, the posthumous works of Rohault in quarto, the margins
of which were full of excellent commentaries, which gave me an inclination to the mathematics. This
book remained among those of Madam de Warrens, and I have since lamented that I did not preserve it.
To these I added five or six memorials in manuscript, and a printed one, composed by the famous
Micheli Ducret, a man of considerable talents, being both learned and enlightened, but too much,
perhaps, inclined to sedition, for which he was cruelly treated by the magistrates of Geneva, and lately
died in the fortress of Arberg, where he had been confined many years, for being, as it was said,
concerned in the conspiracy of Berne.
  This memorial was a judicious critique on the extensive but ridiculous plan of fortification, which
had  been  adopted  at  Geneva,  though  censured  by  every  person  of  judgment  in  the  art,  who  was
unacquainted with the secret motives of the council, in the execution of this magnificent enterprise.
Monsieur  de  Micheli,  who  had  been  excluded  from  the  committee  of  fortification  for  having
condemned this plan, thought that, as a citizen, and a member of the two hundred, he might give his
advice, at large, and therefore, did so in this memorial, which he was imprudent enough to have printed,
though  he  never  published  it,  having  only  those  copies  struck  off  which  were  meant  for  the  two
hundred, and which were all intercepted at the post-house by order of the Senate.
  [The grand council of Geneva in December, 1728, pronounced this paper highly disrespectful to the
councils, and injurious to the committee of fortification.]
I found this memorial among my uncle's papers, with the answer he had been ordered to make to it,
and took both. This was soon after I had left my place at the survey, and I yet remained on good terms
with the Counsellor de Coccelli, who had the management of it. Some time after, the director of the
custom-house  entreated  me  to  stand  godfather  to  his  child,  with  Madam  Coccelli,  who  was  to  be
godmother: proud of being placed on such terms of equality with the counsellor, I wished to assume
importance, and show myself worthy of that honor.
  Full of this idea, I thought I could do nothing better than show him Micheli's memorial, which was
really a scarce piece, and would prove I was connected with people of consequence in Geneva, who
were intrusted with the secrets of the state, yet by a kind of reserve which I should find it difficult to
account for, I did not show him my uncle's answer, perhaps, because it was manuscript, and nothing
less than print was worthy to approach the counsellor. He understood, however, so well the importance
of this paper, which I had the folly to put into his hands, that I could never after get it into mypossession, and being convinced that every effort for that purpose would be ineffectual, I made a merit
of my forbearance, transforming the theft into a present. I made no doubt that this writing (more
curious, however, than useful) answered his purpose at the court of Turin, where probably he took care
to be reimbursed in some way or other for the expense which the acquisition of it might be supposed to
have cost him. Happily, of all future contingencies, the least probable, is, that ever the King of Sardina
should besiege Geneva, but as that event is not absolutely impossible, I shall ever reproach my foolish
vanity with having been the means of pointing out the greatest defects of that city to its most ancient
enemy.
I  passed  three  or  four  years  in  this  manner,  between  music,  magestry,  projects,  and  journeys,
floating incessantly from one object to another, and wishing to fix though I knew not on what, but
insensibly inclining towards study. I was acquainted with men of letters, I had heard them speak of
literature, and sometimes mingled in the conversation, yet rather adopted the jargon of books, than the
knowledge they contained. In my excursions to Geneva, I frequently called on my good old friend
Monsieur Simon, who greatly promoted my rising emulation by fresh news from the republic of letters,
extracted from Baillet on Colomies. I frequently saw too, at Chambery, a Dominican professor of
physic, a good kind of friar, whose name I have forgotten, who often made little chemical experiments
which greatly amused me. In imitation of him, I attempted to make some sympathetic ink, and having
for that purpose more than half filled a bottle with quicklime, orpiment, and water, the effervescence
immediately became extremely violent; I ran to unstop the bottle, but had not time to effect it, for,
during the attempt, it burst in my face like a bomb, and I swallowed so much of the orpiment and lime,
that it nearly cost me my life. I remained blind for six weeks, and by the event of this experiment
learned to meddle no more with experimental Chemistry while the elements were unknown to me.
  This adventure happened very unluckily for my health, which, for some time past, had been visibly
on the decline. This was rather extraordinary, as I was guilty of no kind of excess; nor could it have
been expected from my make, for my chest, being well formed and rather capacious, seemed to give
my  lungs  full  liberty  to  play;  yet  I  was  short  breathed,  felt  a  very  sensible  oppression,  sighed
involuntarily, had palpitations of the heart, and spitting of blood, accompanied with a lingering fever,
which I have never since entirely overcome. How is it possible to fall into such a state in the flower of
one's age, without any inward decay, or without having done anything to destroy health?
  It is sometimes said, "the sword wears the scabbard," this was truly the case with me: the violence
of my passions both kept me alive and hastened my dissolution. What passions? will be asked: mere
nothings: the most trivial objects in nature, but which affected me as forcibly as if the acquisition of a
Helen, or the throne of the universe were at stake. My senses, for instance, were at ease with one
woman,  but  my  heart  never  was,  and  the  necessities  of  love  consumed  me  in  the  very  bosom  of
happiness. I had a tender, respected and lovely friend, but I sighed for a mistress; my prolific fancy
painted her as such, and gave her a thousand forms, for had I conceived that my endearments had been
lavished on Madam de Warrens, they would not have been less tender, though infinitely more tranquil.
But is it possible for man to taste, in their utmost extent, the delights of love? I cannot tell, but I am
persuaded my frail existence would have sunk under the weight of them.
I was, therefore, dying for love without an object, and this state, perhaps, is, of all others, the most
dangerous.  I  was  likewise  uneasy,  tormented  at  the  bad  state  of  poor  Madam  de  Warrens'
circumstances, and the imprudence of her conduct, which could not fail to bring them, in a short time,
to total ruin. My tortured imagination (which ever paints misfortunes in the extremity) continually
beheld this in its utmost excess, and in all the horror of its consequences. I already saw myself forced
by want to quit her--to whom I had consecrated my future life, and without whom I could not hope for
happiness: thus was my soul continually agitated, and hopes and fears devoured me alternately.
  Music was a passion less turbulent, but not less consuming, from the ardor with which I attached
myself to it, by the obstinate study of the obscure books of Rameau; by an invincible resolution to
charge my memory with rules it could not contain; by continual application, and by long and immense
compilations which I frequently passed whole nights in copying: but why dwell on these particularly,while every folly that took possession of my wandering brain, the most transient ideas of a single day, a
journey, a concert, a supper, a walk, a novel to read, a play to see, things in the world the least
premeditated in my pleasures or occupation became for me the most violent passions, which by their
ridiculous  impetuosity  conveyed  the  most  serious  torments;  even  the  imaginary  misfortunes  of
Cleveland, read with avidity and frequent interruption, have, I am persuaded, disordered me more than
my own.
  There was a Genevese, named Bagueret, who had been employed under Peter the Great, of the
court of Russia, one of the most worthless, senseless fellows I ever met with; full of projects as foolish
as himself, which were to rain down millions on those who took part in them. This man, having come
to Chambery on account of some suit depending before the senate, immediately got acquainted with
Madam de Warrens, and with great reason on his side, since for those imaginary treasures that cost him
nothing, and which he bestowed with the utmost prodigality, he gained, in exchange, the unfortunate
crown pieces one by one out of her pocket. I did not like him, and he plainly perceived this, for with me
it is not a very difficult discovery, nor did he spare any sort of meanness to gain my good will, and
among other things proposed teaching me to play at chess, which game he understood something of. I
made an attempt, though almost against my inclination, and after several efforts, having learned the
march, my progress was so rapid, that before the end of the first sitting I gave him the rook, which in
the beginning he had given me. Nothing more was necessary; behold me fascinated with chess! I buy a
board, with the rest of the apparatus, and shutting myself up in my chamber, pass whole days and
nights in studying all the varieties of the game, being determined by playing alone, without end or
relaxation, to drive them into my head, right or wrong. After incredible efforts, during two or three
months passed in this curious employment, I go to the coffee-house, thin, sallow, and almost stupid; I
seat  myself,  and  again  attack  M.  Bagueret:  he  beats  me,  once,  twice,  twenty  times;  so  many
combinations were fermenting in my head, and my imagination was so stupefied, that all appeared
confusion. I tried to exercise myself with Phitidor's or Stamina's book of instructions, but I was still
equally perplexed, and, after having exhausted myself with fatigue, was further to seek than ever, and
whether I abandoned my chess for a time, or resolved to surmount every difficulty by unremitted
practice, it was the same thing. I could never advance one step beyond the improvement of the first
sitting, nay, I am convinced that had I studied it a thousand ages, I should have ended by being able to
give Bagueret the rook and nothing more.
  It will be said my time was well employed, and not a little of it passed in this occupation, nor did I
quit my first essay till unable to persist in it, for on leaving my apartment I had the appearance of a
corpse, and had I continued this course much longer I should certainly have been one.
  Any one will allow that it would have been extraordinary, especially in the ardor of youth, that such
a head should suffer the body to enjoy continued health; the alteration of mine had an effect on my
temper,  moderating  the  ardor  of  my  chimerical  fancies,  for  as  I  grew  weaker  they  became  more
tranquil, and I even lost, in some measure, my rage for travelling. I was not seized with heaviness, but
melancholy; vapors succeeded passions, languor became sorrow: I wept and sighed without cause, and
felt my life ebbing away before I had enjoyed it. I only trembled to think of the situation in which I
should leave my dear Madam de Warrens; and I can truly say, that quitting her, and leaving her in these
melancholy circumstances, was my only concern. At length I fell quite ill, and was nursed by her as
never mother nursed a child. The care she took of me was of real utility to her affairs, since it diverted
her mind from schemes, and kept projectors at a distance. How pleasing would death have been at that
time, when, if I had not tasted many of the pleasures of life, I had felt but few of its misfortunes. My
tranquil soul would have taken her flight, without having experienced those cruel ideas of the injustice
of mankind which embitters both life and death. I should have enjoyed the sweet consolation that I still
survived in the dearer part of myself: in the situation I then was, it could hardly be called death; and had
I been divested of my uneasiness on her account, it would have appeared but a gentle sleep; yet even
these disquietudes had such an affectionate and tender turn, that their bitterness was tempered by a
pleasing sensibility. I said to her, "You are the depository of my whole being, act so that I may behappy." Two or three times, when my disorder was most violent, I crept to her apartment to give her my
advice respecting her future conduct; and I dare affirm these admonitions were both wise and equitable,
in which the interest I took in her future concerns was strongly marked. As if tears had been both
nourishment and medicine, I found myself the better for those I shed with her, while seated on her bed-
side,  and  holding  her  hands  between  mine.  The  hours  crept  insensibly  away  in  these  nocturnal
discourses; I returned to my chamber better than I had quitted it, being content and calmed by the
promises she made, and the hopes with which she had inspired me: I slept on them with my heart at
peace, and fully resigned to the dispensations of Providence. God grant, that after having had so many
reasons to hate life, after being agitated with so many storms, after it has even become a burden, that
death, which must terminate all, may be no more terrible than it would have been at that moment!
  By inconceivable care and vigilance, she saved my life; and I am convinced she alone could have
done this. I have little faith in the skill of physicians, but depend greatly on the assistance of real
friends, and am persuaded that being easy in those particulars on which our happiness depends, is more
salutary than any other application. If there is a sensation in life peculiarly delightful, we experienced it
in being restored to each other; our mutual attachment did not increase, for that was impossible, but it
became, I know not how, more exquisitely tender, fresh softness being added to its former simplicity. I
became in a manner her work; we got into the habit, though without design, of being continually with
each other, and enjoying, in some measure, our whole existence together, feeling reciprocally that we
were not only necessary, but entirely sufficient for each other's happiness. Accustomed to think of no
subject foreign to ourselves, our happiness and all our desires were confined to that pleasing and
singular union, which, perhaps, had no equal, which is not, as I have before observed, love, but a
sentiment  inexpressibly  more  intimate,  neither  depending  on  the  senses,  age,  nor  figure,  but  an
assemblage of every endearing sensation that composes our rational existence and which can cease only
with our being.
  How was it that this delightful crisis did not secure our mutual felicity for the remainder of her life
and mine? I have the consoling conviction that it was not my fault; nay, I am persuaded, she did not
wilfully destroy it; the invincible peculiarity of my disposition was doomed soon to regain its empire;
but this fatal return was not suddenly accomplished, there was, thank Heaven, a short but precious
interval, that did not conclude by my fault, and which I cannot reproach myself with having employed
amiss.
  Though recovered from my dangerous illness, I did not regain my strength; my stomach was weak,
some remains of the fever kept me in a languishing condition, and the only inclination I was sensible
of, was to end my days near one so truly dear to me; to confirm her in those good resolutions she had
formed; to convince her in what consisted the real charms of a happy life, and, as far as depended on
me, to render hers so; but I foresaw that in a gloomy, melancholy house, the continual solitude of our
tete-a-tetes would at length become too dull and monotonous: a remedy presented itself: Madam de
Warrens had prescribed milk for me, and insisted that I should take it in the country; I consented,
provided she would accompany me; nothing more was necessary to gain her compliance, and whither
we should go was all that remained to be determined on. Our garden (which I have before mentioned)
was not properly in the country, being surrounded by houses and other gardens, and possessing none of
those attractions so desirable in a rural retreat; besides, after the death of Anet, we had given up this
place from economical principles, feeling no longer a desire to rear plants, and other views making us
not regret the loss of that little retreat. Improving the distaste I found she began to imbibe for the town,
I proposed to abandon it entirely, and settle ourselves in an agreeable solitude, in some small house,
distant enough from the city to avoid the perpetual intrusion of her hangers-on. She followed my
advice,  and  this  plan,  which  her  good  angel  and  mine  suggested,  might  fully  have  secured  our
happiness and tranquility till death had divided us--but this was not the state we were appointed to;
Madam de Warrens was destined to endure all the sorrows of indigence and poverty, after having
passed the former part of her life in abundance, that she might learn to quit it with the less regret; and
myself, by an assemblage of misfortunes of all kinds, was to become a striking example to those who,inspired with a love of justice and the public good, and trusting too implicitly to their own innocence,
shall openly dare to assert truth to mankind, unsupported by cabals, or without having previously
formed parties to protect them.
  An unhappy fear furnished some objections to our plan: she did not dare to quit her ill-contrived
house, for fear of displeasing the proprietor. "Your proposed retirement is charming," said she, "and
much to my taste, but we are necessitated to remain here, for, on quitting this dungeon, I hazard losing
the very means of life, and when these fail us in the woods, we must again return to seek them in the
city. That we may have the least possible cause for being reduced to this necessity, let us not leave this
house entirely, but pay a small pension to the Count of Saint-Laurent, that he may continue mine. Let
us seek some little habitation, far enough from the town to be at peace, yet near enough to return when
it may appear convenient."
  This mode was finally adopted; and after some small search, we fixed at Charmettes, on an estate
belonging to M. de Conzie, at a very small distance from Chambery; but as retired and solitary as if it
had been a hundred leagues off. The spot we had concluded on was a valley between two tolerably high
hills, which ran north and south; at the bottom, among the trees and pebbles, ran a rivulet, and above
the declivity, on either side, were scattered a number of houses, forming altogether a beautiful retreat
for those who love a peaceful romantic asylum. After having examined two or three of these houses, we
chose that which we thought the most pleasing, which was the property of a gentleman of the army,
called M. Noiret. This house was in good condition, before it a garden, forming a terrace; below that on
the declivity an orchard, and on the ascent, behind the house, a vineyard: a little wood of chestnut trees
opposite; a fountain just by, and higher up the hill, meadows for the cattle; in short, all that could be
thought necessary for the country retirement we proposed to establish. To the best of my remembrance,
we took possession of it toward the latter end of the summer Of 1736. I was delighted on going to sleep
there--"Oh!" said I, to this dear friend, embracing her with tears of tenderness and delight, "this is the
abode of happiness and innocence; if we do not find them here together it will be in vain to seek them
elsewhere."
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK VI.
  Hoc erat in votis: Modus agri non ila magnus Hortus ubi, et leclo vicinus aqua fons; Et paululum
sylvae superhis forel.
I cannot add, 'auctius acque di melius fecere'; but no matter, the former is enough for my purpose; I
had no occasion to have any property there, it was sufficient that I enjoyed it; for I have long since both
said and felt, that the proprietor and possessor are two very different people, even leaving husbands and
lovers out of the question.
  At this moment began the short happiness of my life, those peaceful and rapid moments, which
have given me a right to say, I have lived. Precious and ever--regretted moments! Ah! recommence
your delightful course; pass more slowly through my memory, if possible, than you actually did in your
fugitive succession. How shall I prolong, according to my inclination, this recital at once so pleasing
and simple? How shall I continue to relate the same occurrences, without wearying my readers with the
repetition,  any  more  than  I  was  satiated  with  the  enjoyment?  Again,  if  all  this  consisted  of  facts,
actions, or words, I could somehow or other convey an idea of it; but how shall I describe what was
neither said nor done, nor even thought, but enjoyed, felt, without being able to particularize any other
object of my happiness than the bare idea? I rose with the sun, and was happy; I walked, and was
happy;  I  saw  Madam  de  Warrens,  and  was  happy;  I  quitted  her,  and  still  was  happy!--Whether  I
rambled through the woods, over the hills, or strolled along the valley; read, was idle, worked in the
garden, or gathered fruits, happiness continually accompanied me; it was fixed on no particular object,it was within me, nor could I depart from it a single moment.
  Nothing that passed during that charming epocha, nothing that I did, said, or thought, has escaped
my  memory.  The  time  that  preceded  or  followed  it,  I  only  recollect  by  intervals,  unequally  and
confused; but here I remember all as distinctly as if it existed at this moment. Imagination, which in my
youth was perpetually anticipating the future, but now takes a retrograde course, makes some amends
by these charming recollections for the deprivation of hope, which I have lost forever. I no longer see
anything in the future that can tempt my wishes, it is a recollection of the past alone that can flatter me,
and the remembrance of the period I am now describing is so true and lively, that it sometimes makes
me happy, even in spite of my misfortunes.
  Of these recollections I shall relate one example, which may give some idea of their force and
precision. The first day we went to sleep at Charmettes, the way being up-hill, and Madam de Warrens
rather heavy, she was carried in a chair, while I followed on foot. Fearing the chairmen would be
fatigued, she got out about half-way, designing to walk the rest of it. As we passed along, she saw
something blue in the hedge, and said, "There's some periwinkle in flower yet!" I had never seen any
before, nor did I stop to examine this: my sight is too short to distinguish plants on the ground, and I
only cast a look at this as I passed: an interval of near thirty years had elapsed before I saw any more
periwinkle, at least before I observed it, when being at Cressier in 1764, with my friend, M. du Peyrou,
we went up a small mountain, on the summit of which there is a level spot, called, with reason, 'Belle--
vue', I was then beginning to herbalize;--walking and looking among the bushes, I exclaimed with
rapture, "Ah, there's some periwinkle!" Du Peyrou, who perceived my transport, was ignorant of the
cause, but will some day be informed: I hope, on reading this. The reader may judge by this impression,
made by so small an incident, what an effect must have been produced by every occurrence of that
time.
  Meantime, the air of the country did not restore my health; I was languishing and became more so; I
could  not  endure  milk,  and  was  obliged  to  discontinue  the  use  of  it.  Water  was  at  this  time  the
fashionable remedy for every complaint; accordingly I entered on a course of it, and so indiscreetly,
that it almost released me, not only from my illness but also from my life. The water I drank was rather
hard and difficult to pass, as water from mountains generally is; in short, I managed so well, that in the
coarse of two months I totally ruined my stomach, which until that time had been very good, and no
longer digesting anything properly, had no reason to expect a cure. At this time an accident happened,
as singular in itself as in its subsequent consequences, which can only terminate with my existence.
  One morning, being no worse than usual, while putting up the leaf of a small table, I felt a sudden
and almost inconceivable revolution throughout my whole frame. I know not how to describe it better
than as a kind of tempest, which suddenly rose in my blood, and spread in a moment over every part of
my body. My arteries began beating so violently that I not only felt their motion, but even heard it,
particularly that of the carotids, attended by a loud noise in my ears, which was of three, or rather four,
distinct kinds. For instance, first a grave hollow buzzing; then a more distinct murmur, like the running
of water; then an extremely sharp hissing, attended by the beating I before mentioned, and whose
throbs I could easily count, without feeling my pulse, or putting a hand to any part of my body. This
internal tumult was so violent that it has injured my auricular organs, and rendered me, from that time,
not entirely deaf, but hard of hearing.
  My surprise and fear may easily be conceived; imagining it was the stroke of death, I went to bed,
and the physician being sent for, trembling with apprehension, I related my case; judging it past all
cure. I believe the doctor was of the same opinion; however he performed his office, running over a
long  string  of  causes  and  effects  beyond  my  comprehension,  after  which,  in  consequence  of  this
sublime theory, he set about, 'in anima vili', the experimental part of his art, but the means he was
pleased to adopt in order to effect a cure were so troublesome, disgusting, and followed by so little
effect, that I soon discontinued it, and after some weeks, finding I was neither better nor worse, left my
bed, and returned to my usual method of living; but the beating of my arteries and the buzzing in my
ears has never quitted me a moment during the thirty years' time which has elapsed since that time.  Till now, I had been a great sleeper, but a total privation of repose, with other alarming symptoms
which have accompanied it, even to this time, persuaded me I had but a short time to live. This idea
tranquillized me for a time: I became less anxious about a cure, and being persuaded I could not
prolong life, determined to employ the remainder of it as usefully as possible. This was practicable by a
particular indulgence of Nature, which, in this melancholy state, exempted me from sufferings which it
might have been supposed I should have experienced. I was incommoded by the noise, but felt no pain,
nor was it accompanied by any habitual inconvenience, except nocturnal wakefulness, and at all times a
shortness of breath, which is not violent enough to be called an asthma, but was troublesome when I
attempted to run, or use any degree of exertion.
  This accident, which seemed to threaten the dissolution of my body, only killed my passions, and I
have reason to thank Heaven for the happy effect produced by it on my soul. I can truly say, I only
began to live when I considered myself as entering the grave; for, estimating at their real value those
things I was quitting; I began to employ myself on nobler objects, namely by anticipating those I hoped
shortly to have the contemplation of, and which I had hitherto too much neglected. I had often made
light of religion, but was never totally devoid of it; consequently, it cost me less pain to employ my
thoughts on that subject, which is generally thought melancholy, though highly pleasing to those who
make it an object of hope and consolation; Madam de Warrens, therefore, was more useful to me on
this occasion than all the theologians in the world would have been.
  She, who brought everything into a system, had not failed to do as much by religion; and this
system was composed of ideas that bore no affinity to each other. Some were extremely good, and
others very ridiculous, being made up of sentiments proceeding from her disposition, and prejudices
derived from education. Men, in general, make God like themselves; the virtuous make Him good, and
the profligate make Him wicked; ill-tempered and bilious devotees see nothing but hell, because they
would willingly damn all mankind; while loving and gentle souls disbelieve it altogether; and one of
the astonishments I could never overcome, is to see the good Fenelon speak of it in his Telemachus as
if he really gave credit to it; but I hope he lied in that particular, for however strict he might be in regard
to truth, a bishop absolutely must lie sometimes. Madam de Warrens spoke truth with me, and that soul,
made up without gall, who could not imagine a revengeful and ever angry God, saw only clemency and
forgiveness, where devotees bestowed inflexible justice, and eternal punishment.
  She frequently said there would be no justice in the Supreme Being should He be strictly just to us;
because, not having bestowed what was necessary to render us essentially good, it would be requiring
more than he had given. The most whimsical idea was, that not believing in hell, she was firmly
persuaded of the reality of purgatory. This arose from her not knowing what to do with the wicked,
being loathed to damn them utterly, nor yet caring to place them with the good till they had become so;
and  we  must  really  allow,  that  both  in  this  world  and  the  next,  the  wicked  are  very  troublesome
company.
  It is clearly seen that the doctrine of original sin and the redemption of mankind is destroyed by this
system; consequently that the basis of the Christian dispensation, as generally received, is shaken, and
that the Catholic faith cannot subsist with these principles; Madam de Warrens, notwithstanding, was a
good Catholic, or at least pretended to be one, and certainly desired to become such, but it appeared to
her that the Scriptures were too literally and harshly explained, supposing that all we read of everlasting
torments were figurative threatenings, and the death of Jesus Christ an example of charity, truly divine,
which should teach mankind to love God and each other; in a word, faithful to the religion she had
embraced, she acquiesced in all its professions of faith, but on a discussion of each particular article, it
was plain she thought diametrically opposite to that church whose doctrines she professed to believe. In
these cases she exhibited simplicity of art, a frankness more eloquent than sophistry, which frequently
embarrassed her confessor; for she disguised nothing from him. "I am a good Catholic," she would say,
"and will ever remain so; I adopt with all the powers of my soul the decisions of our holy Mother
Church; I am not mistress of my faith, but I am of my will, which I submit to you without reserve; I
will endeavor to believe all,--what can you require more?"  Had  there  been  no  Christian  morality  established,  I  am  persuaded  she  would  have  lived  as  if
regulated by its principles, so perfectly did they seem to accord with her disposition. She did everything
that was required; and she would have done the same had there been no such requisition: but all this
morality was subordinate to the principles of M. Tavel, or rather she pretended to see nothing in
religion that contradicted them; thus she would have favored twenty lovers in a day, without any idea of
a crime, her conscience being no more moved in that particular than her passions. I know that a number
of devotees are not more scrupulous, but the difference is, they are seduced by constitution, she was
blinded  by  her  sophisms.  In  the  midst  of  conversations  the  most  affecting,  I  might  say  the  most
edifying, she would touch on this subject, without any change of air or manner, and without being
sensible of any contradiction in her opinions; so much was she persuaded that our restrictions on that
head are merely political, and that any person of sense might interpret, apply, or make exceptions to
them, without any danger of offending the Almighty.
  Though I was far enough from being of the same opinion in this particular, I confess I dared not
combat  hers;  indeed,  as  I  was  situated,  it  would  have  been  putting  myself  in  rather  awkward
circumstances, since I could only have sought to establish my opinion for others, myself being an
exception. Besides, I entertained but little hopes of making her alter hers, which never had any great
influence on her conduct, and at the time I am speaking of none; but I have promised faithfully to
describe her principles, and I will perform my engagement--I now return to myself.
  Finding in her all those ideas I had occasion for to secure me from the fears of death and its future
consequences, I drew confidence and security from this source; my attachment became warmer than
ever,  and  I  would  willingly  have  transmitted  to  her  my  whole  existence,  which  seemed  ready  to
abandon me. From this redoubled attachment, a persuasion that I had but a short time to live, and
profound security on my future state, arose an habitual and even pleasing serenity, which, calming
every passion that extends our hopes and fears, made me enjoy without inquietude or concern the few
days which I imagined remained for me. What contributed to render them still snore agreeable was an
endeavor to encourage her rising taste for the country, by every amusement I could possibly devise,
wishing to attach her to her garden, poultry, pigeons, and cows: I amused myself with them and these
little occupations, which employed my time without injuring my tranquillity, were more serviceable
than a milk diet, or all the remedies bestowed on my poor shattered machine, even to effecting the
utmost possible reestablishment of it.
  The vintage and gathering in our fruit employed the remainder of the year; we became more and
more attached to a rustic life, and the society of our honest neighbors. We saw the approach of winter
with regret, and returned to the city as if going into exile. To me this return was particularly gloomy,
who never expected to see the return of spring, and thought I took an everlasting leave of Charmettes. I
did not quit it without kissing the very earth and trees, casting back many a wishful look as I went
towards Chambery.
  Having left my scholars for so long a time, and lost my relish for the amusements of the town, I
seldom went out, conversing only with Madam de Warrens and a Monsieur Salomon, who had lately
become  our  physician.  He  was  an  honest  man,  of  good  understanding,  a  great  Cartesian,  spoke
tolerably well on the system of the world, and his agreeable and instructive conversations were more
serviceable than his prescriptions. I could never bear that foolish trivial mode of conversation which is
so generally adopted; but useful instructive discourse has always given me great pleasure, nor was I
ever backward to join in it. I was much pleased with that of M. Salomon; it appeared to me, that when
in his company, I anticipated the acquisition of that sublime knowledge which my soul would enjoy
when freed from its mortal fetters. The inclination I had for him extended to the subjects which he
treated on, and I began to look after books which might better enable me to understand his discourse.
Those  which  mingled  devotion  with  science  were  most  agreeable  to  me,  particularly  Port  Royal's
Oratory, and I began to read or rather to devour them. One fell into my hands written by Father Lami,
called 'Entretiens sur les Sciences', which was a kind of introduction to the knowledge of those books it
treated of. I read it over a hundred times, and resolved to make this my guide; in short, I found(notwithstanding my ill state of health) that I was irresistibly drawn towards study, and though looking
on each day as the last of my life, read with as much avidity as if certain I was to live forever.
I was assured that reading would injure me; but on the contrary, I am rather inclined to think it was
serviceable,  not  only  to  my  soul,  but  also  to  my  body;  for  this  application,  which  soon  became
delightful, diverted my thoughts from my disorders, and I soon found myself much less affected by
them. It is certain, however, that nothing gave me absolute ease, but having no longer any acute pain, I
became accustomed to languishment and wakefulness; to thinking instead of acting; in short, I looked
on the gradual and slow decay of my body as inevitably progressive and only to be terminated by death.
  This opinion not only detached me from all the vain cares of life, but delivered me from the
importunity  of  medicine,  to  which  hitherto,  I  had  been  forced  to  submit,  though  contrary  to  my
inclination. Salomon, convinced that his drugs were unavailing, spared me the disagreeable task of
taking them, and contented himself with amusing the grief of my poor Madam de Warrens by some of
those harmless preparations, which serve to flatter the hopes of the patient and keep up the credit of the
doctor. I discontinued the strict regimen I had latterly observed, resumed the use of wine, and lived in
every respect like a man in perfect health, as far as my strength would permit, only being careful to run
into no excess; I even began to go out and visit my acquaintance, particularly M. de Conzie, whose
conversation was extremely pleasing to me. Whether it struck me as heroic to study to my last hour, or
that some hopes of life yet lingered in the bottom of my heart, I cannot tell, but the apparent certainty of
death, far from relaxing my inclination for improvement, seemed to animate it, and I hastened to
acquire knowledge for the other world, as if convinced I should only possess that portion I could carry
with me. I took a liking to the shop of a bookseller, whose name was Bouchard, which was frequented
by  some  men  of  letters,  and  as  the  spring  (whose  return  I  had  never  expected  to  see  again)  was
approaching, furnished myself with some books for Charmettes, in case I should have the happiness to
return there.
I had that happiness, and enjoyed it to the utmost extent. The rapture with which I saw the trees put
out their first bud, is inexpressible! The return of spring seemed to me like rising from the grave into
paradise. The snow was hardly off the ground when we left our dungeon and returned to Charmettes, to
enjoy the first warblings of the nightingale. I now thought no more of dying, and it is really singular,
that from this time I never experienced any dangerous illness in the country. I have suffered greatly, but
never kept my bed, and have often said to those about me, on finding myself worse than ordinary,
"Should you see me at the point of death, carry me under the shade of an oak, and I promise you I shall
recover."
  Though  weak,  I  resumed  my  country  occupations,  as  far  as  my  strength  would  permit,  and
conceived a real grief at not being able to manage our garden without help; for I could not take five or
six strokes with the spade without being out of breath and overcome with perspiration; when I stooped
the beating redoubled, and the blood flew with such violence to my head, that I was instantly obliged to
stand upright. Being therefore confined to less fatiguing employments, I busied myself about the dove -
-house,  and  was  so  pleased  with  it  that  I  sometimes  passed  several  hours  there  without  feeling  a
moment's weariness. The pigeon is very timid and difficult to tame, yet I inspired mine with so much
confidence that they followed me everywhere, letting me catch them at pleasure, nor could I appear in
the garden without having two or three on my arms or head in an instant, and notwithstanding the
pleasure  I  took  in  them,  their  company  became  so  troublesome  that  I  was  obliged  to  lessen  the
familiarity. I have ever taken great pleasure in taming animals, particularly those that are wild and
fearful. It appeared delightful to me, to inspire them with a confidence which I took care never to abuse,
wishing them to love me freely.
I have already mentioned that I purchased some books: I did not forget to read them, but in a
manner more proper to fatigue than instruct me. I imagined that to read a book profitably, it was
necessary to be acquainted with every branch of knowledge it even mentioned; far from thinking that
the author did not do this himself, but drew assistance from other books, as he might see occasion. Full
of  this  silly  idea,  I  was  stopped  every  moment,  obliged  to  run  from  one  book  to  another,  andsometimes, before I could reach the tenth page of what I was studying, found it necessary to turn over a
whole library. I was so attached to this ridiculous method, that I lost a prodigious deal of time and had
bewildered my head to such a degree, that I was hardly capable of doing, seeing or comprehending
anything. I fortunately perceived, at length, that I was in the wrong road, which would entangle me in
an inextricable labyrinth, and quitted it before I was irrevocably lost.
  When a person has any real taste for the sciences, the first thing he perceives in the pursuit of them
is  that  connection  by  which  they  mutually  attract,  assist,  and  enlighten  each  other,  and  that  it  is
impossible to attain one without the assistance of the rest. Though the human understanding cannot
grasp all, and one must ever be regarded as the principal object, yet if the rest are totally neglected, the
favorite study is generally obscure; I was convinced that my resolution to improve was good and useful
in  itself,  but  that  it  was  necessary  I  should  change  my  method;  I,  therefore,  had  recourse  to  the
encyclopaedia. I began by a distribution of the general mass of human knowledge into its various
branches, but soon discovered that I must pursue a contrary course, that I must take each separately,
and trace it to that point where it united with the rest: thus I returned to the general synthetical method,
but  returned  thither  with  a  conviction  that  I  was  going  right.  Meditation  supplied  the  want  of
knowledge, and a very natural reflection gave strength to my resolutions, which was, that whether I
lived or died, I had no time to lose; for having learned but little before the age of five-and-twenty, and
then resolving to learn everything, was engaging to employ the future time profitably. I was ignorant at
what point accident or death might put a period to my endeavors, and resolved at all events to acquire
with  the  utmost  expedition  some  idea  of  every  species  of  knowledge,  as  well  to  try  my  natural
disposition, as to judge for myself what most deserved cultivation.
  In the execution of my plan, I experienced another advantage which I had never thought of; this
was, spending a great deal of time profitably. Nature certainly never meant me for study, since attentive
application fatigues me so much, that I find it impossible to employ myself half an hour together
intently on any one subject; particularly while following another person's ideas, for it has frequently
happened that I have pursued my own for a much longer period with success. After reading a few pages
of an author with close application, my understanding is bewildered, and should I obstinately continue,
I tire myself to no purpose, a stupefaction seizes me, and I am no longer conscious of what I read; but
in a succession of various subjects, one relieves me from the fatigue of the other, and without finding
respite necessary, I can follow them with pleasure.
I took advantage of this observation in the plan of my studies, taking care to intermingle them in
such a manner that I was never weary: it is true that domestic and rural concerns furnished many
pleasing relaxations; but as my eagerness for improvement increased, I contrived to find opportunities
for my studies, frequently employing myself about two things at the same time, without reflecting that
both were consequently neglected.
  In relating so many trifling details, which delight me, but frequently tire my reader, I make use of
the caution to suppress a great number, though, perhaps, he would have no idea of this, if I did not take
care to inform him of it: for example, I recollect with pleasure all the different methods I adopted for
the distribution of my time, in such a manner as to produce the utmost profit and pleasure. I may say,
that the portion of my life which I passed in this retirement, though in continual ill-health, was that in
which I was least idle and least wearied. Two or three months were thus employed in discovering the
bent of my genius; meantime, I enjoyed, in the finest season of the year, and in a spot it rendered
delightful, the charms of a life whose worth I was so highly sensible of, in such a society, as free as it
was charming; if a union so perfect, and the extensive knowledge I purposed to acquire, can be called
society. It seemed to me as if I already possessed the improvements I was only in pursuit of: or rather
better, since the pleasure of learning constituted a great part of my happiness.
I must pass over these particulars, which were to me the height of enjoyment, but are too trivial to
bear repeating: indeed, true happiness is indescribable, it is only to be felt, and this consciousness of
felicity is proportionately more, the less able we are to describe it; because it does not absolutely result
from a concourse of favorable incidents, but is an affection of the mind itself. I am frequently guilty ofrepetitions, but should be infinitely more so, did I repeat the same thing as often as it recurs with
pleasure to my mind. When at length my variable mode of life was reduced to a more uniform course,
the following was nearly the distribution of time which I adopted: I rose every morning before the sun,
and passed through a neighboring orchard into a pleasant path, which, running by a vineyard, led
towards Chambery. While walking, I offered up my prayers, not by a vain motion of the lips, but a
sincere  elevation  of  my  heart,  to  the  Great  Author  of  delightful  nature,  whose  beauties  were  so
charmingly spread out before me! I never love to pray in a chamber; it seems to me that the walls and
all the little workmanship of man interposed between God and myself: I love to contemplate Him in his
works, which elevate my soul, and raise my thoughts to Him. My prayers were pure, I can affirm it, and
therefore worthy to be heard:--I asked for myself and her from whom my thoughts were never divided,
only an innocent and quiet life, exempt from vice, sorrow and want; I prayed that we might die the
death  of  the  just,  and  partake  of  their  lot  hereafter:  for  the  rest,  it  was  rather  admiration  and
contemplation than request, being satisfied that the best means to obtain what is necessary from the
Giver of every perfect good, is rather to deserve than to solicit. Returning from my walk, I lengthened
the way by taking a roundabout path, still contemplating with earnestness and delight the beautiful
scenes with which I was surrounded, those only objects that never fatigue either the eye or the heart. As
I approached our habitation, I looked forward to see if Madam de Warrens was stirring, and when I
perceived her shutters open, I even ran with joy towards the house: if they were yet shut I went into the
garden to wait their opening, amusing myself, meantime, by a retrospection of what I had read the
preceding evening, or in gardening. The moment the shutter drew back I hastened to embrace her,
frequently half asleep; and this salute, pure as it was affectionate, even from its innocence, possessed a
charm which the senses can never bestow. We usually breakfasted on milk-coffee; this was the time of
day when we had most leisure, and when we chatted with the greatest freedom. These sittings, which
were usually pretty long, have given me a fondness for breakfasts, and I infinitely prefer those of
England, or Switzerland, which are considered as a meal, at which all the family assemble, than those
of France, where they breakfast alone in their several apartments, or more frequently have none at all.
After  an  hour  or  two  passed  in  discourse,  I  went  to  my  study  till  dinner;  beginning  with  some
philosophical  work,  such  as  the  logic  of  Port-Royal,  Locke's  Essays,  Mallebranche,  Leibtnitz,
Descartes,  etc.  I  soon  found  that  these  authors  perpetually  contradict  each  other,  and  formed  the
chimerical project of reconciling them, which cost me much labor and loss of time, bewildering my
head without any profit. At length (renouncing this idea) I adopted one infinitely more profitable, to
which I attribute all the progress I have since made, notwithstanding the defects of my capacity; for 'tis
certain I had very little for study. On reading each author, I acquired a habit of following all his ideas,
without suffering my own or those of any other writer to interfere with them, or entering into any
dispute on their utility. I said to myself, "I will begin by laying up a stock of ideas, true or false, but
clearly conceived, till my understanding shall be sufficiently furnished to enable me to compare and
make  choice  of  those  that  are  most  estimable."  I  am  sensible  this  method  is  not  without  its
inconveniences, but it succeeded in furnishing me with a fund of instruction. Having passed some years
in thinking after others, without reflection, and almost without reasoning, I found myself possessed of
sufficient materials to set about thinking on my own account, and when journeys of business deprived
me of the opportunities of consulting books, I amused myself with recollecting and comparing what I
had read, weighing every opinion on the balance of reason, and frequently judging my masters. Though
it was late before I began to exercise my judicial faculties, I have not discovered that they had lost their
vigor, and on publishing my own ideas, have never been accused of being a servile disciple or of
swearing 'in verba magistri'.
  From these studies I passed to the elements of geometry, for I never went further, forcing my weak
memory to retain them by going the same ground a hundred and a hundred times over. I did not admire
Euclid, who rather seeks a chain of demonstration than a connection of ideas: I preferred the geometry
of Father Lama, who from that time became one of my favorite authors, and whose works I yet read
with pleasure. Algebra followed, and Father Lama was still my guide: when I made some progress, Iperused Father Reynaud's Science of Calculation, and then his Analysis Demonstrated; but I never went
far enough thoroughly to understand the application of algebra to geometry. I was not pleased with this
method of performing operations by rule without knowing what I was about: resolving geometrical
problems by the help of equations seemed like playing a tune by turning round a handle. The first time I
found by calculation that the square of a binocular figure was composed of the square of each of its
parts, and double the product of one by the other; though convinced that my multiplication was right, I
could not be satisfied till I had made and examined the figure: not but I admire algebra when applied to
abstract quantities, but when used to demonstrate dimensions, I wished to see the operation, and unless
explained by lines, could not rightly comprehend it.
  After this came Latin: it was my most painful study, and in which I never made great progress. I
began  by  Port-Royal's  Rudiments,  but  without  success;  I  lost  myself  in  a  crowd  of  rules;  and  in
studying the last forgot all that preceded it. A study of words is not calculated for a man without
memory,  and  it  was  principally  an  endeavor  to  make  my  memory  more  retentive,  that  urged  me
obstinately to persist in this study, which at length I was obliged to relinquish. As I understood enough
to read an easy author by the aid of a dictionary, I followed that method, and found it succeed tolerably
well.  I  likewise  applied  myself  to  translation,  not  by  writing,  but  mentally,  and  by  exercise  and
perseverance attained to read Latin authors easily, but have never been able to speak or write that
language, which has frequently embarrassed me when I have found myself (I know not by what means)
enrolled among men of letters.
  Another inconvenience that arose from this manner of learning is, that I never understood prosody,
much less the rules of versification; yet, anxious to understand the harmony of the language, both in
prose and verse, I have made many efforts to obtain it, but am convinced, that without a master it is
almost impossible. Having learned the composition of the hexameter, which is the easiest of all verses,
I had the patience to measure out the greater part of Virgil into feet and quantity, and whenever I was
dubious  whether  a  syllable  was  long  or  short,  immediately  consulted  my  Virgil.  It  may  easily  be
conceived  that  I  ran  into  many  errors  in  consequence  of  those  licenses  permitted  by  the  rules  of
versification; and it is certain, that if there is an advantage in studying alone, there are also great
inconveniences and inconceivable labor, as I have experienced more than any one.
  At twelve I quitted my books, and if dinner was not ready, paid my friends, the pigeons, a visit, or
worked in the garden till it was, and when I heard myself called, ran very willingly, and with a good
appetite to partake of it, for it is very remarkable, that let me be ever so indisposed my appetite never
fails. We dined very agreeably, chatting till Madam de Warrens could eat. Two or three times a week,
when it was fine, we drank our coffee in a cool shady arbor behind the house, that I had decorated with
hops, and which was very refreshing during the heat; we usually passed an hour in viewing our flowers
and vegetables, or in conversation relative to our manner of life, which greatly increased the pleasure of
it. I had another little family at the end of the garden; these were several hives of bees, which I never
failed to visit once a day, and was frequently accompanied by Madam de Warrens. I was greatly
interested in their labor, and amused myself seeing them return to the hives, their little thighs so loaded
with the precious store that they could hardly walk. At first, curiosity made me indiscreet, and they
stung me several times, but afterwards, we were so well acquainted, that let me approach as near as I
would, they never molested me, though the hives were full and the bees ready to swarm. At these times
I have been surrounded, having them on my hands and face without apprehending any danger. All
animals are distrustful of man, and with reason, but when once assured he does not mean to injure
them, their confidence becomes so great that he must be worse than a barbarian who abuses it.
  After this I returned to my books; but my afternoon employment ought rather to bear the name of
recreation and amusement, than labor or study. I have never been able to bear application after dinner,
and in general any kind of attention is painful to me during the heat of the day. I employed myself, 'tis
true, but without restraint or rule, and read without studying. What I most attended to at these times,
was history and geography, and as these did not require intense application, made as much progress in
them as my weak memory would permit. I had an inclination to study Father Petau, and launched intothe gloom of chronology, but was disgusted at the critical part, which I found had neither bottom nor
banks; this made me prefer the more exact measurement of time by the course of the celestial bodies. I
should even have contracted a fondness for astronomy, had I been in possession of instruments, but was
obliged to content myself with some of the elements of that art, learned from books, and a few rude
observations made with a telescope, sufficient only to give me a general idea of the situation of the
heavenly bodies; for my short sight is insufficient to distinguish the stars without the help of a glass.
I recollect an adventure on this subject, the remembrance of which has often diverted me. I had
bought a celestial planisphere to study the constellations by, and, having fixed it on a frame, when the
nights  were  fine  and  the  sky  clear,  I  went  into  the  garden;  and  fixing  the  frame  on  four  sticks,
something higher than myself, which I drove into the ground, turned the planisphere downwards, and
contrived to light it by means of a candle (which I put in a pail to prevent the wind from blowing it out)
and then placed in the centre of the above--mentioned four supporters; this done, I examined the stars
with my glass, and from time to time referring to my planisphere, endeavored to distinguish the various
constellations. I think I have before observed that our garden was on a terrace, and lay open to the road.
One night, some country people passing very late, saw me in a most grotesque habit, busily employed
in these observations: the light, which struck directly on the planisphere, proceeding from a cause they
could not divine (the candle being concealed by the sides of the pail), the four stakes supporting a large
paper, marked over with various uncouth figures, with the motion of the telescope, which they saw
turning backwards and forwards, gave the whole an air of conjuration that struck them with horror and
amazement. My figure was by no means calculated to dispel their fears; a flapped hat put on over my
nightcap, and a short cloak about my shoulder (which Madam de Warrens had obliged me to put on)
presented in their idea the image of a real sorcerer. Being near midnight, they made no doubt but this
was  the  beginning  of  some  diabolical  assembly,  and  having  no  curiosity  to  pry  further  into  these
mysteries, they fled with all possible speed, awakened their neighbors, and described this most dreadful
vision. The story spread so fast that the next day the whole neighborhood was informed that a nocturnal
assembly of witches was held in the garden that belonged to Monsieur Noiret, and I am ignorant what
might have been the consequence of this rumor if one of the countrymen who had been witness to my
conjurations had not the same day carried his complaint to two Jesuits, who frequently came to visit us,
and who, without knowing the foundation of the story, undeceived and satisfied them. These Jesuits
told us the whole affair, and I acquainted them with the cause of it, which altogether furnished us with a
hearty laugh. However, I resolved for the future to make my observations without light, and consult my
planisphere in the house. Those who have read Venetian magic, in the 'Letters from the Mountain', may
find that I long since had the reputation of being a conjurer.
  Such was the life I led at Charmettes when I had no rural employments, for they ever had the
preference, and in those that did not exceed my strength, I worked like a peasant; but my extreme
weakness left me little except the will; besides, as I have before observed, I wished to do two things at
once, and therefore did neither well. I obstinately persisted in forcing my memory to retain a great deal
by heart, and for that purpose, I always carried some book with me, which, while at work, I studied
with inconceivable labor. I was continually repeating something, and am really amazed that the fatigue
of these vain and continual efforts did not render me entirely stupid. I must have learned and relearned
the Eclogues of Virgil twenty times over, though at this time I cannot recollect a single line of them. I
have lost or spoiled a great number of books by a custom I had of carrying them with me into the dove-
house, the garden, orchard or vineyard, when, being busy about something else, I laid my book at the
foot of a tree, on the hedge, or the first place that came to hand, and frequently left them there, finding
them a fortnight after, perhaps, rotted to pieces, or eaten by the ants or snails; and this ardor for learning
became so far a madness that it rendered me almost stupid, and I was perpetually muttering some
passage or other to myself.
  The writings of Port-Royal, and those of the Oratory, being what I most read, had made me half a
Jansenist, and, notwithstanding all my confidence, their harsh theology sometimes alarmed me. A dread
of hell, which till then I had never much apprehended, by little and little disturbed my security, and hadnot  Madam  de  Warrens  tranquillized  my  soul,  would  at  length  have  been  too  much  for  me.  My
confessor, who was hers likewise, contributed all in his power to keep up my hopes. This was a Jesuit,
named Father Hemet; a good and wise old man, whose memory I shall ever hold in veneration. Though
a Jesuit, he had the simplicity of a child, and his manners, less relaxed than gentle, were precisely what
was necessary to balance the melancholy impressions made on me by Jansenism. This good man and
his companion, Father Coppier, came frequently to visit us at Charmette, though the road was very
rough and tedious for men of their age. These visits were very comfortable to me, which may the
Almighty return to their souls, for they were so old that I cannot suppose them yet living. I sometimes
went to see them at Chambery, became acquainted at their convent, and had free access to the library.
The remembrance of that happy time is so connected with the idea of those Jesuits, that I love one on
account of the other, and though I have ever thought their doctrines dangerous, could never find myself
in a disposition to hate them cordially.
I should like to know whether there ever passed such childish notions in the hearts of other men as
sometimes  do  in  mine.  In  the  midst  of  my  studies,  and  of  a  life  as  innocent  as  man  could  lead,
notwithstanding every persuasion to the contrary, the dread of hell frequently tormented me. I asked
myself,  "What  state  am  I  in?  Should  I  die  at  this  instant,  must  I  be  damned?"  According  to  my
Jansenists the matter was indubitable, but according to my conscience it appeared quite the contrary:
terrified and floating in this cruel uncertainty, I had recourse to the most laughable expedient to resolve
my doubts, for which I would willingly shut up any man as a lunatic should I see him practise the same
folly. One day, meditating on this melancholy subject, I exercised myself in throwing stones at the
trunks of trees, with my usual dexterity, that is to say, without hitting any of them. In the height of this
charming exercise, it entered my mind to make a kind of prognostic, that might calm my inquietude; I
said, "I will throw this stone at the tree facing me; if I hit my mark, I will consider it as a sign of
salvation; if I miss, as a token of damnation." While I said this, I threw the stone with a trembling hand
and beating breast but so happily that it struck the body of the tree, which truly was not a difficult
matter, for I had taken care to choose one that was very large and very near me. From that moment I
never doubted my salvation: I know not on recollecting this trait, whether I ought to laugh or shudder at
myself. Ye great geniuses, who surely laugh at my folly, congratulate yourselves on your superior
wisdom, but insult not my unhappiness, for I swear to you that I feel it most sensibly.
  These troubles, these alarms, inseparable, perhaps, from devotion, were only at intervals; in general,
I was tranquil, and the impression made on my soul by the idea of approaching death, was less that of
melancholy than a peaceful languor, which even had its pleasures. I have found among my old papers a
kind of congratulation and exhortation which I made to myself on dying at an age when I had the
courage to meet death with serenity, without having experienced any great evils, either of body or
mind. How much justice was there in the thought! A preconception of what I had to suffer made me
fear to live, and it seemed that I dreaded the fate which must attend my future days. I have never been
so near wisdom as during this period, when I felt no great remorse for the past, nor tormenting fear for
the future; the reigning sentiment of my soul being the enjoyment of the present. Serious people usually
possess a lively sensuality, which makes them highly enjoy those innocent pleasures that are allowed
them. Worldlings (I know not why) impute this to them as a crime: or rather, I well know the cause of
this imputation, it is because they envy others the enjoyment of those simple and pure delights which
they have lost the relish of. I had these inclinations, and found it charming to gratify them in security of
conscience. My yet inexperienced heart gave in to all with the calm happiness of a child, or rather (if I
dare use the expression) with the raptures of an angel; for in reality these pure delights are as serene as
those of paradise. Dinners on the grass at Montagnole, suppers in our arbor, gathering in the fruits, the
vintage, a social meeting with our neighbors; all these were so many holidays, in which Madam de
Warrens took as much pleasure as myself. Solitary walks afforded yet purer pleasure, because in them
our hearts expanded with greater freedom: one particularly remains in my memory; it was on a St.
Louis' day, whose name Madam de Warrens bore: we set out together early and unattended, after
having heard a mass at break of day in a chapel adjoining our house, from a Carmelite, who attendedfor that purpose. As I proposed walking over the hills opposite our dwelling, which we had not yet
visited,  we  sent  our  provisions  on  before;  the  excursion  being  to  last  the  whole  day.  Madam  de
Warrens, though rather corpulent, did not walk ill, and we rambled from hill to hill and wood to wood,
sometimes in the sun, but oftener in the shade, resting from time to time, and regardless how the hours
stole away; speaking of ourselves, of our union, of the gentleness of our fate, and offering up prayers
for its duration, which were never heard. Everything conspired to augment our happiness: it had rained
for several days previous to this, there was no dust, the brooks were full and rapid, a gentle breeze
agitated the leaves, the air was pure, the horizon free from clouds, serenity reigned in the sky as in our
hearts. Our dinner was prepared at a peasant's house, and shared with him and his family, whose
benedictions we received. These poor Savoyards are the worthiest of people! After dinner we regained
the shade, and while I was picking up bits of dried sticks, to boil our coffee, Madam de Warrens
amused herself with herbalizing among the bushes, and with the flowers I had gathered for her in my
way. She made me remark in their construction a thousand natural beauties, which greatly amused me,
and which ought to have given me a taste for botany; but the time was not yet come, and my attention
was arrested by too many other studies. Besides this, an idea struck me, which diverted my thoughts
from flowers and plants: the situation of my mind at that moment, all that we had said or done that day,
every object that had struck me, brought to my remembrance the kind of waking dream I had at Annecy
seven or eight years before, and which I have given an account of in its place. The similarity was so
striking that it affected me even to tears: in a transport of tenderness I embraced Madam de Warrens.
"My dearest friend," said I, "this day has long since been promised me: I can see nothing beyond it: my
happiness, by your means, is at its height; may it never decrease; may it continue as long as I am
sensible of its value-then it can only finish with my life."
  Thus happily passed my days, and the more happily as I perceived nothing that could disturb or
bring them to a conclusion; not that the cause of my former uneasiness had absolutely ceased, but I saw
it take another course, which I directed with my utmost care to useful objects, that the remedy might
accompany the evil. Madam de Warrens naturally loved the country, and this taste did not cool while
with me. By little and little she contracted a fondness for rustic employments, wished to make the most
of her land, and had in that particular a knowledge which she practised with pleasure.
  Not satisfied with what belonged to the house, she hired first a field, then a meadow, transferring
her enterprising humor to the objects of agriculture, and instead of remaining unemployed in the house,
was in the way of becoming a complete farmer. I was not greatly pleased to see this passion increase,
and endeavored all I could to oppose it; for I was certain she would be deceived, and that her liberal
extravagant disposition would infallibly carry her expenses beyond her profits; however, I consoled
myself by thinking the produce could not be useless, and would at least help her to live. Of all the
projects she could form, this appeared the least ruinous: without regarding it, therefore, in the light she
did, as a profitable scheme, I considered it as a perpetual employment, which would keep her from
more ruinous enterprises, and out of the reach of impostors. With this idea, I ardently wished to recover
my health and strength, that I might superintend her affairs, overlook her laborers, or, rather, be the
principal one myself. The exercise this naturally obliged me to take, with the relaxation it procured me
from books and study, was serviceable to my health.
  The winter following, Barillot returning from Italy, brought me some books; and among others, the
'Bontempi' and 'la Cartella per Musica', of Father Banchieri; these gave me a taste for the history of
music and for the theoretical researches of that pleasing art. Barillot remained some time with us, and
as I had been of age some months, I determined to go to Geneva the following spring, and demand my
mother's inheritance, or at least that part which belonged to me, till it could be ascertained what had
become of my brother. This plan was executed as it had been resolved: I went to Geneva; my father met
me there, for he had occasionally visited Geneva a long time since, without its being particularly
noticed, though the decree that had been pronounced against him had never been reversed; but being
esteemed for his courage, and respected for his probity, the situation of his affairs was pretended to be
forgotten; or perhaps, the magistrates, employed with the great project that broke out some little timeafter, were not willing to alarm the citizens by recalling to their memory, at an improper time, this
instance of their former partiality.
I apprehended that I should meet with difficulties, on account of having changed my religion, but
none occurred; the laws of Geneva being less harsh in that particular than those of Berne, where,
whoever changes his religion, not only loses his freedom, but his property. My rights, however, were
not disputed: but I found my patrimony, I know not how, reduced to very little, and though it was
known almost to a certainty that my brother was dead, yet, as there was no legal proof, I could not lay
claim to his share, which I left without regret to my father, who enjoyed it as long as he lived. No
sooner  were  the  necessary  formalities  adjusted,  and  I  had  received  my  money,  some  of  which  I
expended in books, than I flew with the remainder to Madam de Warrens; my heart beat with joy
during the journey, and the moment in which I gave the money into her hands, was to me a thousand
times more delightful than that which gave it into mine. She received this with a simplicity common to
great souls, who, doing similar actions without effort, see them without admiration; indeed it was
almost all expended for my use, for it would have been employed in the same manner had it come from
any other quarter.
  My health was not yet re-established; I decayed visibly, was pale as death, and reduced to an
absolute skeleton; the beating of my arteries was extreme, my palpitations were frequent: I was sensible
of a continual oppression, and my weakness became at length so great, that I could scarcely move or
step without danger of suffocation, stoop without vertigoes, or lift even the smallest weight, which
reduced me to the most tormenting inaction for a man so naturally stirring as myself. It is certain my
disorder  was  in  a  great  measure  hypochondriacal.  The  vapors  is  a  malady  common  to  people  in
fortunate situations: the tears I frequently shed, without reason; the lively alarms I felt on the falling of
a leaf, or the fluttering of a bird; inequality of humor in the calm of a most pleasing life; lassitude which
made me weary even of happiness, and carried sensibility to extravagance, were an instance of this. We
are  so  little  formed  for  felicity,  that  when  the  soul  and  body  do  not  suffer  together,  they  must
necessarily endure separate inconveniences, the good state of the one being almost always injurious to
the happiness of the other. Had all the pleasure of life courted me, my weakened frame would not have
permitted the enjoyment of them, without my being able to particularize the real seat of my complaint;
yet in the decline of life; after having encountered very serious and real evils, my body seemed to
regain its strength, as if on purpose to encounter additional misfortunes; and, at the moment I write this,
though infirm, near sixty, and overwhelmed with every kind of sorrow, I feel more ability to suffer than
I ever possessed for enjoyment when in the very flower of my age, and in the bosom of real happiness.
  To complete me, I had mingled a little physiology among my other readings: I set about studying
anatomy, and considering the multitude, movement, and wonderful construction of the various parts
that composed the human machine; my apprehensions were instantly increased, I expected to feel mine
deranged twenty times a day, and far from being surprised to find myself dying, was astonished that I
yet existed! I could not read the description of any malady without thinking it mine, and, had I not been
already indisposed, I am certain I should have become so from this study. Finding in every disease
symptoms similar to mine, I fancied I had them all, and, at length, gained one more troublesome than
any I yet suffered, which I had thought myself delivered from; this was, a violent inclination to seek a
cure; which it is very difficult to suppress, when once a person begins reading physical books. By
searching, reflecting, and comparing, I became persuaded that the foundation of my complaint was a
polypus at the heart, and Doctor Salomon appeared to coincide with the idea. Reasonably this opinion
should have confirmed my former resolution of considering myself past cure; this, however, was not
the case; on the contrary; I exerted every power of my understanding in search of a remedy for a
polypus, resolving to undertake this marvellous cure.
  In  a  journey  which  Anet  had  made  to  Montpelier,  to  see  the  physical  garden  there,  and  visit
Monsieur Sauvages, the demonstrator, he had been informed that Monsieur Fizes had cured a polypus
similar to that I fancied myself afflicted with: Madam de Warrens, recollecting this circumstance,
mentioned it to me, and nothing more was necessary to inspire me with a desire to consult MonsieurFizes. The hope of recovery gave me courage and strength to undertake the journey; the money from
Geneva furnished the means; Madam de Warrens, far from dissuading, entreated me to go: behold me,
therefore, without further ceremony, set out for Montpelier!--but it was not necessary to go so far to
find the cure I was in search of.
  Finding the motion of the horse too fatiguing, I had hired a chaise at Grenoble, and on entering
Moirans, five or six other chaises arrived in a rank after mine. The greater part of these were in the train
of a new married lady called Madam du Colombier; with her was a Madam de Larnage, not so young or
handsome as the former, yet not less amiable. The bride was to stop at Romans, but the other lady was
to pursue her route as far as Saint-Andiol, near the bridge du St. Esprit. With my natural timidity it will
not be conjectured that I was very ready at forming an acquaintance with these fine ladies, and the
company that attended them; but travelling the same road, lodging at the same inns, and being obliged
to eat at the same table, the acquaintance seemed unavoidable, as any backwardness on my part would
have got me the character of a very unsociable being: it was formed then, and even sooner than I
desired, for all this bustle was by no means convenient to a person in ill health, particularly to one of
my  humor.  Curiosity  renders  these  vixens  extremely  insinuating;  they  accomplish  their  design  of
becoming  acquainted  with  a  man  by  endeavoring  to  turn  his  brain,  and  this  was  precisely  what
happened to me. Madam du Colombier was too much surrounded by her young gallants to have any
opportunity of paying much attention to me; besides, it was not worthwhile, as we were to separate in
so short a time; but Madam de Larnage (less attended to than her young friend) had to provide herself
for the remainder of the journey; behold me, then, attacked by Madam de Larnage, and adieu to poor
Jean Jacques, or rather farewell to fever, vapors, and polypus; all completely vanished when in her
presence. The ill state of my health was the first subject of our conversation; they saw I was indisposed,
knew I was going to Montpelier, but my air and manner certainly did not exhibit the appearance of a
libertine, since it was clear by what followed they did not suspect I was going there for a reason that
carries many that road.
  In the morning they sent to inquire after my health and invite me to take chocolate with them, and
when I made my appearance asked how I had passed the night. Once, according to my praiseworthy
custom of speaking without thought, I replied, "I did not know," which answer naturally made them
conclude  I  was  a  fool:  but,  on  questioning  me  further;  the  examination  turned  out  so  far  to  my
advantage, that I rather rose in their opinion, and I once heard Madam du Colombier say to her friend,
"He  is  amiable,  but  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  world."  These  words  were  a  great
encouragement, and assisted me in rendering myself agreeable.
  As we became more familiar, it was natural to give each other some little account of whence we
came and who we were: this embarrassed me greatly, for I was sensible that in good company and
among women of spirit, the very name of a new convert would utterly undo me. I know not by what
whimsicallity I resolved to pass for an Englishman; however, in consequence of that determination I
gave myself out for a Jacobite, and was readily believed. They called me Monsieur Dudding, which
was the name I assumed with my new character, and a cursed Marquis Torignan, who was one of the
company, an invalid like myself, and both old and ill --tempered, took it in his head to begin a long
conversation with me. He spoke of King James, of the Pretender, and the old court of St. Germain's; I
sat on thorns the whole time, for I was totally unacquainted with all these except what little I had
picked up in the account of Earl Hamilton, and from the gazettes; however, I made such fortunate use
of the little I did know as to extricate myself from this dilemma, happy in not being questioned on the
English language, which I did not know a single word of.
  The company were all very agreeable; we looked forward to the moment of separation with regret,
and therefore made snails' journeys. We arrived one Sunday at St. Marcelein's; Madam de Larnage
would go to mass; I accompanied her, and had nearly ruined all my affairs, for by my modest reserved
countenance during the service, she concluded me a bigot, and conceived a very indifferent opinion of
me, as I learned from her own account two days after. It required a great deal of gallantry on my part to
efface this ill impression, or rather Madam de Larnage (who was not easily disheartened) determined torisk the first advances, and see how I should behave. She made several, but far from being presuming
on my figure, I thought she was making sport of me: full of this ridiculous idea there was no folly I was
not guilty of.
  Madam de Larnage persisted in such caressing behavior, that a much wiser man than myself could
hardly have taken it seriously. The more obvious her advances were, the more I was confirmed in my
mistake, and what increased my torment, I found I was really in love with her. I frequently said to
myself, and sometimes to her, sighing, "Ah! why is not all this real? then should I be the most fortunate
of men." I am inclined to think my stupidity did but increase her resolution, and make her determined to
get the better of it.
  We  left  Madam  du  Colombier  at  Romans;  after  which  Madam  de  Larnage,  the  Marquis  de
Torignan, and myself continued our route slowly, and in the most agreeable manner. The marquis,
though indisposed, and rather ill-humored, was an agreeable companion, but was not best pleased at
seeing the lady bestow all her attentions on me, while he passed unregarded; for Madam de Larnage
took so little care to conceal her inclination, that he perceived it sooner than I did, and his sarcasms
must have given me that confidence I could not presume to take from the kindness of the lady, if by a
surmise,  which  no  one  but  myself  could  have  blundered  on,  I  had  not  imagined  they  perfectly
understood each other, and were agreed to turn my passion into ridicule. This foolish idea completed
my stupidity, making me act the most ridiculous part, while, had I listened to the feelings of my heart, I
might have been performing one far more brilliant. I am astonished that Madam de Larnage was not
disgusted at my folly, and did not discard me with disdain; but she plainly perceived there was more
bashfulness than indifference in my composition.
  We arrived at Valence to dinner, and according to our usual custom passed the remainder of the day
there. We lodged out of the city, at the St. James, an inn I shall never forget. After dinner, Madam de
Larnage proposed a walk; she knew the marquis was no walker, consequently, this was an excellent
plan for a tete-a-tete, which she was predetermined to make the most of. While we were walking round
the city by the side of the moats, I entered on a long history of my complaint, to which she answered in
so tender an accent, frequently pressing my arm, which she held to her heart, that it required all my
stupidity not to be convinced of the sincerity of her attachment. I have already observed that she was
amiable; love rendered her charming, adding all the loveliness of youth: and she managed her advances
with so much art, that they were sufficient to have seduced the most insensible: I was, therefore, in very
uneasy circumstances, and frequently on the point of making a declaration; but the dread of offending
her, and the still greater of being laughed at, ridiculed, made table-talk, and complimented on my
enterprise by the satirical marquis, had such unconquerable power over me, that, though ashamed of my
ridiculous  bashfulness,  I  could  not  take  courage  to  surmount  it.  I  had  ended  the  history  of  my
complaints, which I felt the ridiculousness of at this time; and not knowing how to look, or what to say,
continued silent, giving the finest opportunity in the world for that ridicule I so much dreaded. Happily,
Madam de Larnage took a more favorable resolution, and suddenly interrupted this silence by throwing
her arms round my neck, while, at the same instant, her lips spoke too plainly on mine to be any longer
misunderstood.  This  was  reposing  that  confidence  in  me  the  want  of  which  has  almost  always
prevented me from appearing myself: for once I was at ease, my heart, eyes and tongue, spoke freely
what I felt; never did I make better reparation for my mistakes, and if this little conquest had cost
Madam de Larnage some difficulties, I have reason to believe she did not regret them.
  Was I to live a hundred years, I should never forget this charming woman. I say charming, for
though neither young nor beautiful, she was neither old nor ugly, having nothing in her appearance that
could prevent her wit and accomplishments from producing all their effects. It was possible to see her
without falling in love, but those she favored could not fail to adore her; which proves, in my opinion,
that she was not generally so prodigal of her favors. It is true, her inclination for me was so sudden and
lively, that it scarce appears excusable; though from the short, but charming interval I passed with her, I
have reason to think her heart was more influenced than her passions.
  Our good intelligence did not escape the penetration of the marquis; not that he discontinued hisusual raillery; on the contrary, he treated me as a sighing, hopeless swain, languishing under the rigors
of his mistress; not a word, smile, or look escaped him by which I could imagine he suspected my
happiness; and I should have thought him completely deceived, had not Madam de Larnage, who was
more clear-sighted than myself, assured me of the contrary; but he was a well-bred man, and it was
impossible  to  behave  with  more  attention  or  greater  civility,  than  he  constantly  paid  me
(notwithstanding his satirical sallies), especially after my success, which, as he was unacquainted with
my stupidity, he perhaps gave me the honor of achieving. It has already been seen that he was mistaken
in this particular; but no matter, I profited by his error, for being conscious that the laugh was on my
side, I took all his sallies in good part, and sometimes parried them with tolerable success; for, proud of
the reputation of wit which Madam de Larnage had thought fit to discover in me, I no longer appeared
the same man.
  We were both in a country and season of plenty, and had everywhere excellent cheer, thanks to the
good cares of the marquis; though I would willingly have relinquished this advantage to have been
more satisfied with the situation of our chambers; but he always sent his footman on to provide them;
and whether of his own accord, or by the order of his master, the rogue always took care that the
marquis' chamber should be close by Madam de Larnage's, while mine was at the further end of the
house: but that made no great difference, or perhaps it rendered our rendezvous the more charming; this
happiness lasted four or five days, during which time I was intoxicated with delight, which I tasted pure
and serene without any alloy; an advantage I could never boast before; and, I may add, it is owing to
Madam de Larnage that I did not go out of the world without having tasted real pleasure.
  If the sentiment I felt for her was not precisely love, it was at least a very tender return of what she
testified for me; our meetings were so delightful, that they possessed all the sweets of love; without that
kind of delirium which affects the brain, and even tends to diminish our happiness. I never experienced
true love but once in my life, and that was not with Madam de Larnage, neither did I feel that affection
for her which I had been sensible of, and yet continued to possess, for Madam de Warrens; but for this
very reason, our tete-a-tetes were a hundred times more delightful. When with Madam de Warrens, my
felicity was always disturbed by a secret sadness, a compunction of heart, which I found it impossible
to surmount. Instead of being delighted at the acquisition of so much happiness, I could not help
reproaching myself for contributing to render her I loved unworthy: on the contrary, with Madam de
Lamage,  I  was  proud  of  my  happiness,  and  gave  in  to  it  without  repugnance,  while  my  triumph
redoubled every other charm.
I do not recollect exactly where we quitted the marquis, who resided in this country, but I know we
were alone on our arrival at Montelimar, where Madam de Larnage made her chambermaid get into my
chaise, and accommodate me with a seat in hers. It will easily be believed, that travelling in this manner
was by no means displeasing to me, and that I should be very much puzzled to give any account of the
country we passed through. She had some business at Montelimar, which detained her there two or
three days; during this time she quitted me but one quarter of an hour, for a visit she could not avoid,
which embarrassed her with a number of invitations she had no inclination to accept, and therefore
excused  herself  by  pleading  some  indisposition;  though  she  took  care  this  should  not  prevent  our
walking together every day, in the most charming country, and under the finest sky imaginable. Oh!
these three days! what reason have I to regret them! Never did such happiness return again.
  The amours of a journey cannot be very durable: it was necessary we should part, and I must
confess it was almost time; not that I was weary of my happiness, but I might as well have been. We
endeavored to comfort each other for the pain of parting, by forming plans for our reunion; and it was
concluded, that after staying five or six weeks at Montpelier (which would give Madam de Larnage
time to prepare for my reception in such a manner as to prevent scandal) I should return to Saint-
Andiol,  and  spend  the  winter  under  her  direction.  She  gave  me  ample  instruction  on  what  it  was
necessary I should know, on what it would be proper to say; and how I should conduct myself. She
spoke much and earnestly on the care of my health, conjured me to consult skilful physicians, and be
attentive and exact in following their prescriptions whatever they might happen to be. I believe herconcern  was  sincere,  for  she  loved  me,  and  gave  proofs  of  her  affection  less  equivocal  than  the
prodigality  of  her  favors;  for  judging  by  my  mode  of  travelling,  that  I  was  not  in  very  affluent
circumstances (though not rich herself), on our parting, she would have had me share the contents of
her purse, which she had brought pretty well furnished from Grenoble, and it was with great difficulty I
could make her put up with a denial. In a word, we parted; my heart full of her idea, and leaving in hers
(if I am not mistaken) a firm attachment to me.
  While pursuing the remainder of my journey, remembrance ran over everything that had passed
from the commencement of it, and I was well satisfied at finding myself alone in a comfortable chaise,
where I could ruminate at ease on the pleasures I had enjoyed, and those which awaited my return. I
only thought of Saint-Andiol; of the life I was to lead there; I saw nothing but Madam de Larnage, or
what related to her; the whole universe besides was nothing to me--even Madam de Warrens was
forgotten!--I set about combining all the details by which Madam de Larnage had endeavored to give
me in advance an idea of her house, of the neighborhood, of her connections, and manner of life,
finding everything charming.
  She had a daughter, whom she had often described in the warmest terms of maternal affection: this
daughter was fifteen lively, charming, and of an amiable disposition. Madam de Larnage promised me
her  friendship;  I  had  not  forgotten  that  promise,  and  was  curious  to  know  how  Mademoiselle  de
Larnage would treat her mother's 'bon ami'. These were the subjects of my reveries from the bridge of
St. Esprit to Remoulin: I had been advised to visit the Pont-du-Gard; hitherto I had seen none of the
remaining monuments of Roman magnificence, and I expected to find this worthy the hands by which
it was constructed; for once, the reality surpassed my expectation; this was the only time in my life it
ever did so, and the Romans alone could have produced that effect. The view of this noble and sublime
work, struck me the more forcibly, from being in the midst of a desert, where silence and solitude
render the majestic edifice more striking, and admiration more lively, for though called a bridge it is
nothing more than an aqueduct. One cannot help exclaiming, what strength could have transported
these enormous stones so far from any quarry? And what motive could have united the labors of so
many millions of men, in a place that no one inhabited? I remained here whole hours, in the most
ravishing contemplation, and returned pensive and thoughtful to my inn. This reverie was by no means
favorable to Madam de Larnage; she had taken care to forewarn me against the girls of Montpelier, but
not against the Pont-du-Gard--it is impossible to provide for every contingency.
  On my arrival at Nismes, I went to see the amphitheatre, which is a far more magnificent work than
even the Pont-du-Gard, yet it made a much less impression on me, perhaps, because my admiration had
been already exhausted on the former object; or that the situation of the latter, in the midst of a city,
was less proper to excite it. This vast and superb circus is surrounded by small dirty houses, while yet
smaller and dirtier fill up the area, in such a manner that the whole produces an unequal and confused
effect, in which regret and indignation stifle pleasure and surprise. The amphitheatre at Verona is a vast
deal smaller, and less beautiful than that at Nismes, but preserved with all possible care and neatness,
by which means alone it made a much stronger and more agreeable impression on me. The French pay
no regard to these things, respect no monument of antiquity; ever eager to undertake, they never finish,
nor preserve anything that is already finished to their hands.
I was so much better, and had gained such an appetite by exercise, that I stopped a whole day at
Pont-du-Lunel, for the sake of good entertainment and company, this being deservedly esteemed at that
time the best inn in Europe; for those who kept it, knowing how to make its fortunate situation turn to
advantage, took care to provide both abundance and variety. It was really curious to find in a lonely
country-house, a table every day furnished with sea and fresh-water fish, excellent game, and choice
wines, served up with all the attention and care, which are only to be expected among the great or
opulent, and all this for thirty five sous each person: but the Pont-du-Lunel did not long remain on this
footing, for the proprietor, presuming too much on its reputation, at length lost it entirely.
  During this journey, I really forgot my complaints, but recollected them again on my arrival at
Montpelier. My vapors were absolutely gone, but every other complaint remained, and though customhad rendered them less troublesome, they were still sufficient to make any one who had been suddenly
seized with them, suppose himself attacked by some mortal disease. In effect they were rather alarming
than painful, and made the mind suffer more than the body, though it apparently threatened the latter
with destruction. While my attention was called off by the vivacity of my passions, I paid no attention
to my health; but as my complaints were not altogether imaginary, I thought of them seriously when the
tumult had subsided. Recollecting the salutary advice of Madam de Larnage, and the cause of my
journey,  I  consulted  the  most  famous  practitioners,  particularly  Monsieur  Fizes;  and  through
superabundance of precaution boarded at a doctor's who was an Irishman, and named Fitz-Morris.
  This person boarded a number of young gentlemen who were studying physic; and what rendered
his  house  very  commodious  for  an  invalid,  he  contented  himself  with  a  moderate  pension  for
provisions, lodging, etc., and took nothing of his boarders for attendance as a physician. He even
undertook to execute the orders of M. Fizes, and endeavored to re-establish my health. He certainly
acquitted himself very well in this employment; as to regimen, indigestions were not to be gained at his
table; and though I am not much hurt at privations of that kind, the objects of comparison were so near,
that I could not help thinking with myself sometimes, that M. de Torignan was a much better provider
than M. Fitz-Morris; notwithstanding, as there was no danger of, dying with hunger, and all the youths
were gay and good-humored, I believe this manner of living was really serviceable, and prevented my
falling into those languors I had latterly been so subject to. I passed the morning in taking medicines,
particularly, I know not what kind of waters, but believe they were those of Vals, and in writing to
Madam de Larnage: for the correspondence was regularly kept up, and Rousseau kindly undertook to
receive these letters for his good friend Dudding. At noon I took a walk to the Canourgue, with some of
our young boarders, who were all very good lads; after this we assembled for dinner; when this was
over, an affair of importance employed the greater part of us till night; this was going a little way out of
town to take our afternoon's collation, and make up two or three parties at mall, or mallet. As I had
neither strength nor skill, I did not play myself but I betted on the game, and, interested for the success
of my wager, followed the players and their balls over rough and stony roads, procuring by this means
both an agreeable and salutary exercise. We took our afternoon's refreshment at an inn out of the city. I
need not observe that these meetings were extremely merry, but should not omit that they were equally
innocent, though the girls of the house were very pretty. M. Fitz-Morris (who was a great mall player
himself) was our president; and I must observe, notwithstanding the imputation of wildness that is
generally bestowed on students, that I found more virtuous dispositions among these youths than could
easily be found among an equal number of men: they were rather noisy than fond of wine, and more
merry than libertine.
I accustomed myself so much to this mode of life, and it accorded so entirely with my humor, that I
should have been very well content with a continuance of it. Several of my fellow-boarders were Irish,
from whom I endeavored to learn some English words, as a precaution for Saint-Andiol. The time now
drew near for my departure; every letter Madam de Larnage wrote, she entreated me not to delay it, and
at length I prepared to obey her.
I  was  convinced  that  the  physicians  (who  understood  nothing  of  my  disorder)  looked  on  my
complaint  as  imaginary,  and  treated  me  accordingly,  with  their  waters  and  whey.  In  this  respect
physicians and philosophers differ widely from theologians; admitting the truth only of what they can
explain, and making their knowledge the measure of possibilities. These gentlemen understood nothing
of my illness, therefore concluded I could not be ill; and who would presume to doubt the profound
skill of a physician? I plainly saw they only meant to amuse, and make me swallow my money; and
judging their substitute at Saint-Andiol would do me quite as much service, and be infinitely more
agreeable,  I  resolved  to  give  her  the  preference;  full,  therefore,  of  this  wise  resolution,  I  quitted
Montpelier.
I set off towards the end of November, after a stay of six weeks or two months in that city, where I
left a dozen louis, without either my health or understanding being the better for it, except from a short
course of anatomy begun under M. Fitz-Morris, which I was soon obliged to abandon, from the horridstench of the bodies he dissected, which I found it impossible to endure.
  Not thoroughly satisfied in my own mind on the rectitude of this expedition, as I advanced towards
the Bridge of St. Esprit (which was equally the road to Saint-Andiol and to Chambery) I began to
reflect on Madam de Warrens, the remembrance of whose letters, though less frequent than those from
Madam de Larnage, awakened in my heart a remorse that passion had stifled in the first part of my
journey, but which became so lively on my return, that, setting just estimate on the love of pleasure, I
found myself in such a situation of mind that I could listen wholly to the voice of reason. Besides, in
continuing to act the part of an adventurer, I might be less fortunate than I had been in the beginning;
for it was only necessary that in all Saint-Andiol there should be one person who had been in England,
or who knew the English or anything of their language, to prove me an impostor. The family of Madam
de Larnage might not be pleased with me, and would, perhaps, treat me unpolitely; her daughter too
made me uneasy, for, spite of myself, I thought more of her than was necessary. I trembled lest I should
fall in love with this girl, and that very fear had already half done the business. Was I going, in return
for the mother's kindness, to seek the ruin of the daughter? To sow dissension, dishonor, scandal, and
hell itself, in her family? The very idea struck me with horror, and I took the firmest resolution to
combat and vanquish this unhappy attachment, should I be so unfortunate as to experience it. But why
expose myself to this danger? How miserable must the situation be to live with the mother, whom I
should be weary of, and sigh for the daughter, without daring to make known my affection! What
necessity was there to seek this situation, and expose myself to misfortunes, affronts and remorse, for
the sake of pleasures whose greatest charm was already exhausted? For I was sensible this attachment
had lost its first vivacity. With these thoughts were mingled reflections relative to my situation and duty
to that good and generous friend, who already loaded with debts, would become more so from the
foolish expenses I was running into, and whom I was deceiving so unworthily. This reproach at length
became so keen that it triumphed over every temptation, and on approaching the bridge of St. Esprit I
formed  the  resolution  to  burn  my  whole  magazine  of  letters  from  Saint-Andiol,  and  continue  my
journey right forward to Chambery.
I  executed  this  resolution  courageously,  with  some  sighs  I  confess,  but  with  the  heart-felt
satisfaction, which I enjoyed for the first time in my life, of saying, "I merit my own esteem, and know
how to prefer duty to pleasure." This was the first real obligation I owed my books, since these had
taught me to reflect and compare. After the virtuous principles I had so lately adopted, after all the rules
of wisdom and honor I had proposed to myself, and felt so proud to follow, the shame of possessing so
little stability, and contradicting so egregiously my own maxims, triumphed over the allurements of
pleasure. Perhaps, after all, pride had as much share in my resolution as virtue; but if this pride is not
virtue itself, its effects are so similar that we are pardonable in deceiving ourselves.
  One  advantage  resulting  from  good  actions  is  that  they  elevate  the  soul  to  a  disposition  of
attempting still better; for such is human weakness, that we must place among our good deeds an
abstinence from those crimes we are tempted to commit. No sooner was my resolution confirmed than I
became another man, or rather, I became what I was before I had erred, and saw in its true colors what
the intoxication of the moment had either concealed or disguised. Full of worthy sentiments and wise
resolutions, I continued my journey, intending to regulate my future conduct by the laws of virtue, and
dedicate myself without reserve to that best of friends, to whom I vowed as much fidelity in future as I
felt real attachment. The sincerity of this return to virtue appeared to promise a better destiny; but mine,
alas! was fixed, and already begun: even at the very moment when my heart, full of good and virtuous
sentiments, was contemplating only innocence and happiness through life, I touched on the fatal period
that was to draw after it the long chain of my misfortunes!
  My impatience to arrive at Chambery had made me use more diligence than I meant to do. I had
sent a letter from Valence, mentioning the day and hour I should arrive, but I had gained half a day on
this calculation, which time I passed at Chaparillan, that I might arrive exactly at the time I mentioned.
I wished to enjoy to its full extent the pleasure of seeing her, and preferred deferring this happiness a
little, that expectancy might increase the value of it. This precaution had always succeeded; hitherto myarrival had caused a little holiday; I expected no less this time, and these preparations, so dear to me,
would have been well worth the trouble of contriving them.
I arrived then exactly at the hour, and while at a considerable distance, looked forward with an
expectancy of seeing her on the road to meet me. The beating of my heart increased as I drew near the
house; at length I arrived, quite out of breath; for I had left my chaise in the town. I see no one in the
garden, at the door, or at the windows; I am seized with terror, fearful that some accident has happened.
I enter; all is quiet; the laborers are eating their luncheon in the kitchen, and far from observing any
preparation, the servants seem surprised to see me, not knowing I was expected. I go up--stairs, at
length see her!--that dear friend! so tenderly, truly, and entirely beloved. I instantly ran towards her,
and threw myself at her feet. "Ah! child!" said she, "art thou returned then!" embracing me at the same
time. "Have you had a good journey? How do you do?" This reception amused me for some moments. I
then asked, whether she had received my letter? she answered "Yes."--"I should have thought not,"
replied I; and the information concluded there. A young man was with her at this time. I recollected
having seen him in the house before my departure, but at present he seemed established there; in short,
he was so; I found my place already supplied!
  This young man came from the country of Vaud; his father, named Vintzenried, was keeper of the
prison, or, as he expressed himself, Captain of the Castle of Chillon. This son of the captain was a
journeyman peruke-maker, and gained his living in that capacity when he first presented himself to
Madam de Warrens, who received him kindly, as she did all comers, particularly those from her own
country. He was a tall, fair, silly youth; well enough made, with an unmeaning face, and a mind of the
same description, speaking always like the beau in a comedy, and mingling the manners and customs of
his former situation with a long history of his gallantry and success; naming, according to his account,
not above half the marchionesses who had favored him and pretending never to have dressed the head
of  a  pretty  woman,  without  having  likewise  decorated  her  husband's;  vain,  foolish,  ignorant  and
insolent; such was the worthy substitute taken in my absence, and the companion offered me on my
return!
  O! if souls disengaged from their terrestrial bonds, yet view from the bosom of eternal light what
passes here below, pardon, dear and respectable shade, that I show no more favor to your failings than
my own, but equally unveil both. I ought and will be just to you as to myself; but how much less will
you  lose  by  this  resolution  than  I  shall!  How  much  do  your  amiable  and  gentle  disposition,  your
inexhaustible goodness of heart, your frankness and other amiable virtues, compensate for your foibles,
if a subversion of reason alone can be called such. You had errors, but not vices; your conduct was
reprehensible, but your heart was ever pure.
  The new-comer had shown himself zealous and exact in all her little commissions, which were ever
numerous,  and  he  diligently  overlooked  the  laborers.  As  noisy  and  insolent  as  I  was  quiet  and
forbearing, he was seen or rather heard at the plough, in the hay-loft, wood-house, stable, farm-yard, at
the same instant. He neglected the gardening, this labor being too peaceful and moderate; his chief
pleasure was to load or drive the cart, to saw or cleave wood; he was never seen without a hatchet or
pick-axe in his hand, running, knocking and hallooing with all his might. I know not how many men's
labor he performed, but he certainly made noise enough for ten or a dozen at least. All this bustle
imposed on poor Madam de Warrens; she thought this young man a treasure, and, willing to attach him
to herself, employed the means she imagined necessary for that purpose, not forgetting what she most
depended on, the surrender of her person.
  Those who have thus far read this work should be able to form some judgment of my heart; its
sentiments  were  the  most  constant  and  sincere,  particularly  those  which  had  brought  me  back  to
Chambery; what a sudden and complete overthrow was this to my whole being! but to judge fully of
this, the reader must place himself for a moment in my situation. I saw all the future felicity I had
promised myself vanish in a moment; all the charming ideas I had indulged so affectionately, disappear
entirely; and I, who even from childhood had not been able to consider my existence for a moment as
separate from hers, for the first time saw myself utterly alone. This moment was dreadful, and thosethat succeeded it were ever gloomy. I was yet young, but the pleasing sentiments of enjoyment and
hope, which enliven youth, were extinguished. From that hour my existence seemed half annihilated. I
contemplated in advance the melancholy remains of an insipid life, and if at any time an image of
happiness glanced through my mind, it was not that which appeared natural to me, and I felt that even
should I obtain it I must still be wretched.
I was so dull of apprehension, and my confidence in her was so great, that, notwithstanding the
familiar tone of the new-comer, which I looked on as an effect of the easy disposition of Madam de
Warrens, which rendered her free with everyone, I never should have suspected his real situation had
not she herself informed me of it; but she hastened to make this avowal with a freedom calculated to
inflame me with resentment, could my heart have turned to that point. Speaking of this connection as
quite immaterial with respect to herself, she reproached me with negligence in the care of the family,
and mentioned my frequent absence, as though she had been in haste to supply my place. "Ah!" said I,
my heart bursting with the most poignant grief, "what do you dare to inform me of? Is this the reward
of an attachment like mine? Have you so many times preserved my life, for the sole purpose of taking
from me all that could render it desirable? Your infidelity will bring me to the grave, but you will regret
my loss!" She answered with a tranquillity sufficient to distract me, that I talked like a child; that
people did not die from such slight causes; that our friendship need be no less sincere, nor we any less
intimate, for that her tender attachment to me could neither diminish nor end but with herself; in a word
she gave me to understand that my happiness need not suffer any decrease from the good fortune of this
new favorite.
  Never did the purity, truth and force of my attachment to her appear more evident; never did I feel
the sincerity and honesty of my soul more forcibly, than at that moment. I threw myself at her feet,
embracing her knees with torrents of tears. "No, madam," replied I, with the most violent agitation, "I
love you too much to disgrace you thus far, and too truly to share you; the regret that accompanied the
first acquisition of your favors has continued to increase with my affection. I cannot preserve them by
so violent an augmentation of it. You shall ever have my adoration: be worthy of it; to me that is more
necessary than all you can bestow. It is to you, O my dearest friend! that I resign my rights; it is to the
union of our hearts that I sacrifice my pleasure; rather would I perish a thousand times than thus
degrade her I love."
I preserved this resolution with a constancy worthy, I may say, of the sentiment that gave it birth.
From this moment I saw this beloved woman but with the eyes of a real son. It should be remarked
here, that this resolve did not meet her private approbation, as I too well perceived; yet she never
employed the least art to make me renounce it either by insinuating proposals, caresses, or any of those
means which women so well know how to employ without exposing themselves to violent censure, and
which seldom fail to succeed. Reduced to seek a fate independent of hers, and not able to devise one, I
passed to the other extreme, placing my happiness so absolutely in her, that I became almost regardless
of myself. The ardent desire to see her happy, at any rate, absorbed all my affections; it was in vain she
endeavored to separate her felicity from mine, I felt I had a part in it, spite of every impediment.
  Thus those virtues whose seeds in my heart begun to spring up with my misfortunes: they had been
cultivated by study, and only waited the fermentation of adversity to become prolific. The first-fruit of
this disinterested disposition was to put from my heart every sentiment of hatred and envy against him
who had supplanted me. I even sincerely wished to attach myself to this young man; to form and
educate him; to make him sensible of his happiness, and, if possible, render him worthy of it; in a word,
to do for him what Anet had formerly done for me. But the similarity of dispositions was wanting.
More  insinuating  and  enlightened  than  Anet,  I  possessed  neither  his  coolness,  fortitude,  nor
commanding strength of character, which I must have had in order to succeed. Neither did the young
man possess those qualities which Anet found in me; such as gentleness, gratitude, and above all, the
knowledge of a want of his instructions, and an ardent desire to render them useful. All these were
wanting; the person I wished to improve, saw in me nothing but an importunate, chattering pedant:
while on the contrary he admired his own importance in the house, measuring the services he thoughthe rendered by the noise he made, and looking on his saws, hatchets, and pick-axes, as infinitely more
useful than all my old books: and, perhaps, in this particular, he might not be altogether blamable; but
he gave himself a number of airs sufficient to make anyone die with laughter. With the peasants he
assumed the airs of a country gentleman; presently he did as much with me, and at length with Madam
de Warrens herself. His name, Vintzenried, did not appear noble enough, he therefore changed it to that
of Monsieur de Courtilles, and by the latter appellation he was known at Chambery, and in Maurienne,
where he married.
  At length this illustrious personage gave himself such airs of consequence, that he was everything
in the house, and myself nothing. When I had the misfortune to displease him, he scolded Madam de
Warrens, and a fear of exposing her to his brutality rendered me subservient to all his whims, so that
every time he cleaved wood (an office which he performed with singular pride) it was necessary I
should be an idle spectator and admirer of his prowess. This lad was not, however, of a bad disposition;
he loved Madam de Warrens, indeed it was impossible to do otherwise; nor had he any aversion even to
me, and when he happened to be out of his airs would listen to our admonitions, and frankly own he
was a fool; yet notwithstanding these acknowledgements his follies continued in the same proportion.
His knowledge was so contracted, and his inclinations so mean, that it was useless to reason, and
almost impossible to be pleased with him. Not content with a most charming woman, he amused
himself with an old red-haired, toothless waiting-maid, whose unwelcome service Madam de Warrens
had the patience to endure, though it was absolutely disgusting. I soon perceived this new inclination,
and was exasperated at it; but I saw something else, which affected me yet more, and made a deeper
impression on me than anything had hitherto done; this was a visible coldness in the behavior of
Madam de Warrens towards me.
  The privation I had imposed on myself, and which she affected to approve, is one of those affronts
which women scarcely ever forgive. Take the most sensible; the most philosophic female, one the least
attached to pleasure, and slighting her favors, if within your reach, will be found the most unpardonable
crime, even though she may care nothing for the man. This rule is certainly without exception; since a
sympathy  so  natural  and  ardent  was  impaired  in  her,  by  an  abstinence  founded  only  on  virtue,
attachment  and  esteem,  I  no  longer  found  with  her  that  union  of  hearts  which  constituted  all  the
happiness of mine; she seldom sought me but when we had occasion to complain of this new-comer,
for when they were agreed, I enjoyed but little of her confidence, and, at length, was scarcely ever
consulted in her affairs. She seemed pleased, indeed, with my company, but had I passed whole days
without seeing her she would hardly have missed me.
  Insensibly, I found myself desolate and alone in that house where I had formerly been the very soul;
where, if I may so express myself, I had enjoyed a double life, and by degrees, I accustomed myself to
disregard everything that, passed, and even those who dwelt there. To avoid continual mortifications, I
shut myself up with my books, or else wept and sighed unnoticed in the woods. This life soon became
insupportable; I felt that the presence of a woman so dear to me, while estranged from her heart,
increased my unhappiness, and was persuaded, that, ceasing to see her, I should feel myself less cruelly
separated.
I  resolved,  therefore,  to  quit  the  house,  mentioned  it  to  her,  and  she,  far  from  opposing  my
resolution,  approved  it.  She  had  an  acquaintance  at  Grenoble,  called  Madam  de  Deybens,  whose
husband  was  on  terms  of  friendship  with  Monsieur  Malby,  chief  Provost  of  Lyons.  M.  Deybens
proposed my educating M. Malby's children; I accepted this offer, and departed for Lyons without
causing, and almost without feeling, the least regret at a separation, the bare idea of which, a few
months before, would have given us both the most excruciating torments.
I had almost as much knowledge as was necessary for a tutor, and flattered myself that my method
would be unexceptionable; but the year I passed at M. Malby's was sufficient to undeceive me in that
particular. The natural gentleness of my disposition seemed calculated for the employment, if hastiness
had not been mingled with it. While things went favorably, and I saw the pains (which I did not spare)
succeed, I was an angel; but a devil when they went contrary. If my pupils did not understand me, I washasty, and when they showed any symptoms of an untoward disposition, I was so provoked that I could
have killed them; which behavior was not likely to render them either good or wise. I had two under my
care, and they were of very different tempers. St. Marie, who was between eight and nine years old, had
a good person and quick apprehension, was giddy, lively, playful and mischievous; but his mischief
was  ever  good-humored.  The  younger  one,  named  Condillac,  appeared  stupid  and  fretful,  was
headstrong as a mule, and seemed incapable of instruction. It may be supposed that between both I did
not want employment, yet with patience and temper I might have succeeded; but wanting both, I did
nothing worth mentioning, and my pupils profited very little. I could only make use of three means,
which are very weak, and often pernicious with children; namely, sentiment, reasoning, passion. I
sometimes exerted myself so much with St. Marie, that I could not refrain from tears, and wished to
excite similar sensations in him; as if it was reasonable to suppose a child could be susceptible to such
emotions. Sometimes I exhausted myself in reasoning, as if persuaded he could comprehend me; and as
he frequently formed very subtle arguments, concluded he must be reasonable, because he bid fair to be
so good a logician.
  The little Condillac was still more embarrassing; for he neither understood, answered, nor was
concerned at anything; he was of an obstinacy beyond belief, and was never happier than when he had
succeeded in putting me in a rage; then, indeed, he was the philosopher, and I the child. I was conscious
of all my faults, studied the tempers of my pupils, and became acquainted with them; but where was the
use of seeing the evil, without being able to apply a remedy? My penetration was unavailing, since it
never prevented any mischief; and everything I undertook failed, because all I did to effect my designs
was precisely what I ought not to have done.
I was not more fortunate in what had only reference to myself, than in what concerned my pupils.
Madam Deybens, in recommending me to her friend Madam de Malby, had requested her to form my
manners, and endeavor to give me an air of the world. She took some pains on this account, wishing to
teach me how to do the honors of the house; but I was so awkward, bashful, and stupid, that she found
it necessary to stop there. This, however, did not prevent me from falling in love with her, according to
my usual custom; I even behaved in such a manner, that she could not avoid observing it; but I never
durst declare my passion; and as the lady never seemed in a humor to make advances, I soon became
weary of my sighs and ogling, being convinced they answered no manner of purpose.
I  had  quite  lost  my  inclination  for  little  thieveries  while  with  Madam  de  Warrens;  indeed,  as
everything belonged to me, there was nothing to steal; besides, the elevated notions I had imbibed
ought to have rendered me in future above such meanness, and generally speaking they certainly did so;
but this rather proceeded from my having learned to conquer temptations, than having succeeded in
rooting out the propensity, and I should even now greatly dread stealing, as in my infancy, were I yet
subject to the same inclinations. I had a proof of this at M. Malby's, when, though surrounded by a
number of little things that I could easily have pilfered, and which appeared no temptation, I took it into
my head to covert some white Arbois wine, some glasses of which I had drank at table, and thought
delicious. It happened to be rather thick, and as I fancied myself an excellent finer of wine, I mentioned
my skill, and this was accordingly trusted to my care, but in attempting to mend, I spoiled it, though to
the sight only, for it remained equally agreeable to the taste. Profiting by this opportunity, I furnished
myself from time to time with a few bottles to drink in my own apartment; but unluckily, I could never
drink without eating; the difficulty lay therefore, in procuring bread. It was impossible to make a
reserve of this article, and to have it brought by the footman was discovering myself, and insulting the
master of the house; I could not bear to purchase it myself; how could a fine gentleman, with a sword at
his side, enter a baker's shop to buy a small loaf of bread? it was utterly impossible. At length I
recollected the thoughtless saying of a great princess, who, on being informed that the country people
had no bread, replied, "Then let them eat pastry!" Yet even this resource was attended with a difficulty.
I sometimes went out alone for this very purpose, running over the whole city, and passing thirty pastry
cook's shops, without daring to enter any one of them. In the first place, it was necessary there should
be only one person in the shop, and that person's physiognomy must be so encouraging as to give meconfidence to pass the threshold; but when once the dear little cake was procured, and I shut up in my
chamber with that and a bottle of wine, taken cautiously from the bottom of a cupboard, how much did
I enjoy drinking my wine, and reading a few pages of a novel; for when I have no company I always
wish to read while eating; it seems a substitute for society, and I dispatch alternately a page and a
morsel; 'tis indeed, as if my book dined with me.
I was neither dissolute nor sottish, never in my whole life having been intoxicated with liquor; my
little thefts were not very indiscreet, yet they were discovered; the bottles betrayed me, and though no
notice was taken of it, I had no longer the management of the cellar. In all this Monsieur Malby
conducted himself with prudence and politeness, being really a very deserving man, who, under a
manner  as  harsh  as  his  employment,  concealed  a  real  gentleness  of  disposition  and  uncommon
goodness of heart: he was judicious, equitable, and (what would not be expected from an officer of the
Marechausse) very humane.
  Sensible of his indulgence, I became greatly attached to him, which made my stay at Lyons longer
than it would otherwise have been; but at length, disgusted with an employment which I was not
calculated for, and a situation of great confinement, consequently disagreeable to me, after a year's trial,
during which time I spared no pains to fulfill my engagement, I determined to quit my pupils; being
convinced I should never succeed in educating them properly. Monsieur Malby saw this as clearly as
myself, though I am inclined to think he would never have dismissed me had I not spared him the
trouble, which was an excess of condescension in this particular, that I certainly cannot justify.
  What rendered my situation yet more insupportable was the comparison I was continually drawing
between the life I now led and that which I had quitted; the remembrance of my dear Charmettes, my
garden, trees, fountain and orchard, but, above all, the company of her who was born to give life and
soul to every other enjoyment. On calling to mind our pleasures and innocent life, I was seized with
such oppressions and heaviness of heart, as deprived me of the power of performing anything as it
should be. A hundred times was I tempted instantly to set off on foot to my dear Madam de Warrens,
being persuaded that could I once more see her, I should be content to die that moment: in fine, I could
no longer resist the tender emotions which recalled me back to her, whatever it might cost me. I
accused myself of not having been sufficiently patient, complaisant and kind; concluding I might yet
live happily with her on the terms of tender friendship, and by showing more for her than I had hitherto
done. I formed the finest projects in the world, burned to execute them, left all, renounced everything,
departed, fled, and arriving in all the transports of my early youth, found myself once more at her feet.
Alas! I should have died there with joy, had I found in her reception, in her embrace, or in her heart,
one-quarter of what I had formerly found there, and which I yet found the undiminished warmth of.
  Fearful illusions of transitory things, how often dost thou torment us in vain! She received me with
that excellence of heart which could only die with her; but I sought the influence there which could
never be recalled, and had hardly been half an hour with her before I was once more convinced that my
former happiness had vanished forever, and that I was in the same melancholy situation which I had
been  obliged  to  fly  from;  yet  without  being  able  to  accuse  any  person  with  my  unhappiness,  for
Courtilles really was not to blame, appearing to see my return with more pleasure than dissatisfaction.
But how could I bear to be a secondary person with her to whom I had been everything, and who could
never cease being such to me? How could I live an alien in that house where I had been the child? The
sight of every object that had been witness to my former happiness, rendered the comparison yet more
distressing;  I  should  have  suffered  less  in  any  other  habitation,  for  this  incessantly  recalled  such
pleasing remembrances, that it was irritating the recollection of my loss.
  Consumed with vain regrets, given up to the most gloomy melancholy, I resumed the custom of
remaining alone, except at meals; shut up with my books, I sought to give some useful diversion to my
ideas, and feeling the imminent danger of want, which I had so long dreaded, I sought means to prepare
for and receive it, when Madam de Warrens should have no other resource. I had placed her household
on a footing not to become worse; but since my departure everything had been altered. He who now
managed her affairs was a spendthrift, and wished to make a great appearance; such as keeping a goodhorse with elegant trappings; loved to appear gay in the eyes of the neighbors, and was perpetually
undertaking something he did not understand. Her pension was taken up in advance, her rent was in
arrears, debts of every kind continued to accumulate; I could plainly foresee that her pension would be
seized, and perhaps suppressed; in short, I expected nothing but ruin and misfortune, and the moment
appeared to approach so rapidly that I already felt all its horrors.
  My closet was my only amusement, and after a tedious search for remedies for the sufferings of my
mind, I determined to seek some against the evil of distressing circumstances, which I daily expected
would fall upon us, and returning to my old chimeras, behold me once more building castles in the air
to relieve this dear friend from the cruel extremities into which I saw her ready to fall. I did not believe
myself wise enough to shine in the republic of letters, or to stand any chance of making a fortune by
that means; a new idea, therefore, inspired me with that confidence, which the mediocrity of my talents
could not impart.
  In ceasing to teach music I had not abandoned the thoughts of it; on the contrary, I had studied the
theory sufficiently to consider myself well informed on the subject. When reflecting on the trouble it
had cost me to read music, and the great difficulty I yet experienced in singing at sight, I began to think
the fault might as well arise from the manner of noting as from my own dulness, being sensible it was
an art which most people find difficult to understand. By examining the formation of the signs, I was
convinced they were frequently very ill devised. I had before thought of marking the gamut by figures,
to prevent the trouble of having lines to draw, on noting the plainest air; but had been stopped by the
difficulty of the octaves, and by the distinction of measure and quantity: this idea returned again to my
mind, and on a careful revision of it, I found the difficulties by no means insurmountable. I pursued it
successfully, and was at length able to note any music whatever by figures, with the greatest exactitude
and simplicity. From this moment I supposed my fortune made, and in the ardor of sharing it with her
to whom I owed everything, thought only of going to Paris, not doubting that on presenting my project
to the Academy, it would be adopted with rapture. I had brought some money from Lyons; I augmented
this stock by the sale of my books, and in the course of a fortnight my resolution was both formed and
executed: in short, full of the magnificent ideas it had inspired, and which were common to me on
every occasion, I departed from Savoy with my new system of music, as I had formerly done from
Turin with my heron-fountain.
  Such have been the errors and faults of my youth; I have related the history of them with a fidelity
which my heart approves; if my riper years were dignified with some virtues, I should have related
them with the same frankness; it was my intention to have done this, but I must forego this pleasing
task and stop here. Time, which renders justice to the characters of most men, may withdraw the veil;
and should my memory reach posterity, they may one day discover what I had to say--they will then
understand why I am now silent.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK VII.
  After two years' silence and patience, and notwithstanding my resolutions, I again take up my pen:
Reader, suspend your judgment as to the reasons which force me to such a step: of these you can be no
judge until you shall have read my book.
  My  peaceful  youth  has  been  seen  to  pass  away  calmly  and  agreeably  without  any  great
disappointments or remarkable prosperity. This mediocrity was mostly owing to my ardent yet feeble
nature, less prompt in undertaking than easy to discourage; quitting repose for violent agitations, but
returning to it from lassitude and inclinations, and which, placing me in an idle and tranquil state for
which alone I felt I was born, at a distance from the paths of great virtues and still further from those of
great vices, never permitted me to arrive at anything great, either good or bad. What a different accountwill I soon have to give of myself! Fate, which for thirty years forced my inclinations, for thirty others
has seemed to oppose them; and this continued opposition, between my situation and inclinations, will
appear to have been the source of enormous faults, unheard of misfortunes, and every virtue except that
fortitude which alone can do honor to adversity.
  The history of the first part of my life was written from memory, and is consequently full of errors.
As I am obliged to write the second part from memory also, the errors in it will probably be still more
numerous.  The  agreeable  remembrance  of  the  finest  portion  of  my  years,  passed  with  so  much
tranquillity  and  innocence,  has  left  in  my  heart  a  thousand  charming  impressions  which  I  love
incessantly to call to my recollection. It will soon appear how different from these those of the rest of
my life have been. To recall them to my mind would be to renew their bitterness. Far from increasing
that  of  my  situation  by  these  sorrowful  reflections,  I  repel  them  as  much  as  possible,  and  in  this
endeavor often succeed so well as to be unable to find them at will. This facility of forgetting my
misfortunes is a consolation which Heaven has reserved to me in the midst of those which fate has one
day  to  accumulate  upon  my  head.  My  memory,  which  presents  to  me  no  objects  but  such  as  are
agreeable, is the happy counterpoise of my terrified imagination, by which I foresee nothing but a cruel
futurity.
  All the papers I had collected to aid my recollection, and guide me in this undertaking, are no
longer in my possession, nor can I ever again hope to regain them.
I have but one faithful guide on which I can depend: this is the chain of the sentiments by which the
succession of my existence has been marked, and by these the events which have been either the cause
or the effect of the manner of it. I easily forget my misfortunes, but I cannot forget my faults, and still
less my virtuous sentiments. The remembrance of these is too dear to me ever to suffer them to be
effaced from my mind. I may omit facts, transpose events, and fall into some errors of dates; but I
cannot be deceived in what I have felt, nor in that which from sentiment I have done; and to relate this
is the chief end of my present work. The real object of my confessions is to communicate an exact
knowledge of what I interiorly am and have been in every situation of my life. I have promised the
history of my mind, and to write it faithfully I have no need of other memoirs: to enter into my own
heart, as I have hitherto done, will alone be sufficient.
  There is, however, and very happily, an interval of six or seven years, relative to which I have exact
references, in a collection of letters copied from the originals, in the hands of M. du Peyrou. This
collection, which concludes in 1760, comprehends the whole time of my residence at the hermitage,
and my great quarrel with those who called themselves my friends; that memorable epocha of my life,
and the source of all my other misfortunes. With respect to more recent original letters which may
remain in my possession, and are but few in number, instead of transcribing them at the end of this
collection, too voluminous to enable me to deceive the vigilance of my Arguses, I will copy them into
the work whenever they appear to furnish any explanation, be this either for or against myself; for I am
not under the least apprehension lest the reader should forget I make my confession, and be induced to
believe I make my apology; but he cannot expect I shall conceal the truth when it testifies in my favor.
  The second part, it is likewise to be remembered, contains nothing in common with the first, except
truth; nor has any other advantage over it, but the importance of the facts; in everything else, it is
inferior to the former. I wrote the first with pleasure, with satisfaction, and at my ease, at Wootton, or in
the castle Trie: everything I had to recollect was a new enjoyment. I returned to my closet with an
increased pleasure, and, without constraint, gave that turn to my descriptions which most flattered my
imagination.
  At present my head and memory are become so weak as to render me almost incapable of every
kind of application: my present undertaking is the result of constraint, and a heart full of sorrow. I have
nothing to treat of but misfortunes, treacheries, perfidies, and circumstances equally afflicting. I would
give the world, could I bury in the obscurity of time, every thing I have to say, and which, in spite of
myself, I am obliged to relate. I am, at the same time, under the necessity of being mysterious and
subtle, of endeavoring to impose and of descending to things the most foreign to my nature. The ceilingunder which I write has eyes; the walls of my chamber have ears. Surrounded by spies and by vigilant
and malevolent inspectors, disturbed, and my attention diverted, I hastily commit to paper a few broken
sentences, which I have scarcely time to read, and still less to correct. I know that, notwithstanding the
barriers which are multiplied around me, my enemies are afraid truth should escape by some little
opening. What means can I take to introduce it to the world? This, however, I attempt with but few
hopes  of  success.  The  reader  will  judge  whether  or  not  such  a  situation  furnishes  the  means  of
agreeable  descriptions,  or  of  giving  them  a  seductive  coloring!  I  therefore  inform  such  as  may
undertake to read this work, that nothing can secure them from weariness in the prosecution of their
task, unless it be the desire of becoming more fully acquainted with a man whom they already know,
and a sincere love of justice and truth.
  In my first part I brought down my narrative to my departure with infinite regret from Paris, leaving
my heart at Charmettes, and, there building my last castle in the air, intending some day to return to the
feet of mamma, restored to herself, with the treasures I should have acquired, and depending upon my
system of music as upon a certain fortune.
I made some stay at Lyons to visit my acquaintance, procure letters of recommendation to Paris,
and to sell my books of geometry which I had brought with me. I was well received by all whom I
knew. M. and Madam de Malby seemed pleased to see me again, and several times invited me to
dinner. At their house I became acquainted with the Abbe de Malby, as I had already done with the
Abbe de Condillac, both of whom were on a visit to their brother. The Abbe de Malby gave me letters
to Paris; among others, one to M. de Pontenelle, and another to the Comte de Caylus. These were very
agreeable acquaintances, especially the first, to whose friendship for me his death only put a period, and
from  whom,  in  our  private  conversations,  I  received  advice  which  I  ought  to  have  more  exactly
followed.
I likewise saw M. Bordes, with whom I had been long acquainted, and who had frequently obliged
me with the greatest cordiality and the most real pleasure. He it was who enabled me to sell my books;
and he also gave me from himself good recommendations to Paris. I again saw the intendant for whose
acquaintance I was indebted to M. Bordes, and who introduced me to the Duke de Richelieu, who was
then passing through Lyons. M. Pallu presented me. The Duke received me well, and invited me to
come and see him at Paris; I did so several times; although this great acquaintance, of which I shall
frequently have occasion to speak, was never of the most trifling utility to me.
I visited the musician David, who, in one of my former journeys, and in my distress, had rendered
me service. He had either lent or given me a cap and a pair of stockings, which I have never returned,
nor has he ever asked me for them, although we have since that time frequently seen each other. I,
however, made him a present, something like an equivalent. I would say more upon this subject, were
what I have owned in question; but I have to speak of what I have done, which, unfortunately, is far
from being the same thing.
I also saw the noble and generous Perrichon, and not without feeling the effects of his accustomed
munificence; for he made me the same present he had previously done to the elegant Bernard, by
paying for my place in the diligence. I visited the surgeon Parisot, the best and most benevolent of men;
as also his beloved Godefroi, who had lived with him ten years, and whose merit chiefly consisted in
her gentle manners and goodness of heart. It was impossible to see this woman without pleasure, or to
leave  her  without  regret.  Nothing  better  shows  the  inclinations  of  a  man,  than  the  nature  of  his
attachments.
  [Unless  he  be  deceived  in  his  choice,  or  that  she,  to  whom  he  attaches  himself,  changes  her
character by an extraordinary concurrence of causes, which is not absolutely impossible. Were this
consequence to be admitted without modification, Socrates must be judged of by his wife Xantippe,
and Dion by his friend Calippus, which would be the most false and iniquitous judgment ever made.
However, let no injurious application be here made to my wife. She is weak and more easily deceived
than I at first imagined, but by her pure and excellent character she is worthy of all my esteem.]
  Those who had once seen the gentle Godefroi, immediately knew the good and amiable Parisot.I  was  much  obliged  to  all  these  good  people,  but  I  afterwards  neglected  them  all;  not  from
ingratitude,  but  from  that  invincible  indolence  which  so  often  assumes  its  appearance.  The
remembrance of their services has never been effaced from my mind, nor the impression they made
from my heart; but I could more easily have proved my gratitude, than assiduously have shown them
the exterior of that sentiment. Exactitude in correspondence is what I never could observe; the moment
I began to relax, the shame and embarrassment of repairing my fault made me aggravate it, and I
entirely desist from writing; I have, therefore, been silent, and appeared to forget them. Parisot and
Perrichon took not the least notice of my negligence, and I ever found them the same. But, twenty years
afterwards it will be seen, in M. Bordes, to what a degree the self-love of a wit can make him carry his
vengeance when he feels himself neglected.
  Before I leave Lyons, I must not forget an amiable person, whom I again saw with more pleasure
than ever, and who left in my heart the most tender remembrance. This was Mademoiselle Serre, of
whom I have spoken in my first part; I renewed my acquaintance with her whilst I was at M. de
Malby's.
  Being  this  time  more  at  leisure,  I  saw  her  more  frequently,  and  she  made  the  most  sensible
impressions on my heart. I had some reason to believe her own was not unfavorable to my pretensions;
but she honored me with her confidence so far as to remove from me all temptation to allure her
partiality.
  She had no fortune, and in this respect exactly resembled myself; our situations were too similar to
permit us to become united; and with the views I then had, I was far from thinking of marriage. She
gave me to understand that a young merchant, one M. Geneve, seemed to wish to obtain her hand. I
saw him once or twice at her lodgings; he appeared to me to be an honest man, and this was his general
character. Persuaded she would be happy with him, I was desirous he should marry her, which he
afterwards did; and that I might not disturb their innocent love, I hastened my departure; offering up,
for the happiness of that charming woman, prayers, which, here below were not long heard. Alas! her
time was very short, for I afterwards heard she died in the second or third year after her marriage. My
mind, during the journey, was wholly absorbed in tender regret. I felt, and since that time, when these
circumstances have been present to my recollection, have frequently done the same; that although the
sacrifices  made  to  virtue  and  our  duty  may  sometimes  be  painful,  we  are  well  rewarded  by  the
agreeable remembrance they leave deeply engravers in our hearts.
I this time saw Paris in as favorable a point of view as it had appeared to me in an unfavorable one
at my first journey; not that my ideas of its brilliancy arose from the splendor of my lodgings; for in
consequence of an address given me by M. Bordes, I resided at the Hotel St. Quentin, Rue des Cordier,
near the Sorbonne; a vile street, a miserable hotel, and a wretched apartment: but nevertheless a house
in which several men of merit, such as Gresset, Bordes, Abbe Malby, Condillac, and several others, of
whom unfortunately I found not one, had taken up their quarters; but I there met with M. Bonnefond, a
man unacquainted with the world, lame, litigious, and who affected to be a purist. To him I owe the
acquaintance  of  M.  Roguin,  at  present  the  oldest  friend  I  have  and  by  whose  means  I  became
acquainted with Diderot, of whom I shall soon have occasion to say a good deal.
I arrived at Paris in the autumn of 1741, with fifteen louis in my purse, and with my comedy of
Narcissus and my musical project in my pocket. These composed my whole stock; consequently I had
not much time to lose before I attempted to turn the latter to some advantage. I therefore immediately
thought of making use of my recommendations.
  A young man who arrives at Paris, with a tolerable figure, and announces himself by his talents, is
sure to be well received. This was my good fortune, which procured me some pleasure without leading
to anything solid. Of all the persons to whom I was recommended, three only were useful to me. M.
Damesin,  a  gentleman  of  Savoy,  at  that  time  equerry,  and  I  believe  favorite,  of  the  Princess  of
Carignan; M. de Boze, Secretary of the Academy of Inscriptions, and keeper of the medals of the king's
cabinet; and Father Castel, a Jesuit, author of the 'Clavecin oculaire'.--[ocular harpsichord.]
  All these recommendations, except that to M. Damesin, were given me by the Abbe de Malby.  M. Damesin provided me with that which was most needful, by means of two persons with whom
he brought me acquainted. One was M. Gase, 'president a mortier' of the parliament of Bordeaux, and
who played very well upon the violin; the other, the Abbe de Leon, who then lodged in the Sorbonne, a
young  nobleman;  extremely  amiable,  who  died  in  the  flower  of  his  age,  after  having,  for  a  few
moments, made a figure in the world under the name of the Chevalier de Rohan. Both these gentlemen
had an inclination to learn composition. In this I gave them lessons for a few months, by which means
my decreasing purse received some little aid. The Abbe Leon conceived a friendship for me, and
wished me to become his secretary; but he was far from being rich, and all the salary he could offer me
was eight hundred livres, which, with infinite regret, I refused; since it was insufficient to defray the
expenses of my lodging, food, and clothing.
I was well received by M. de Boze. He had a thirst for knowledge, of which he possessed not a
little, but was somewhat pedantic. Madam de Boze much resembled him; she was lively and affected. I
sometimes dined with them, and it is impossible to be more awkward than I was in her presence. Her
easy manner intimidated me, and rendered mine more remarkable. When she presented me a plate, I
modestly put forward my fork to take one of the least bits of what she offered me, which made her give
the plate to her servant, turning her head aside that I might not see her laugh. She had not the least
suspicion that in the head of the rustic with whom she was so diverted there was some small portion of
wit. M. de Boze presented me to M. de Reaumur, his friend, who came to dine with him every Friday,
the day on which the Academy of Sciences met. He mentioned to him my project, and the desire I had
of having it examined by the academy. M. de Reaumur consented to make the proposal, and his offer
was accepted. On the day appointed I was introduced and presented by M. de Reaumur, and on the
same day, August 22d, 1742, I had the honor to read to the academy the memoir I had prepared for that
purpose. Although this illustrious assembly might certainly well be expected to inspire me with awe, I
was less intimidated on this occasion than I had been in the presence of Madam de Boze, and I got
tolerably  well  through  my  reading  and  the  answers  I  was  obliged  to  give.  The  memoir  was  well
received, and acquired me some compliments by which I was equally surprised and flattered, imagining
that before such an assembly, whoever was not a member of it could not have commonsense. The
persons appointed to examine my system were M. Mairan, M. Hellot, and M. de Fouchy, all three men
of merit, but not one of them understood music, at least not enough of composition to enable them to
judge of my project.
  During my conference with these gentlemen, I was convinced with no less certainty than surprise,
that if men of learning have sometimes fewer prejudices than others, they more tenaciously retain those
they have. However weak or false most of their objections were, and although I answered them with
great  timidity,  and  I  confess,  in  bad  terms,  yet  with  decisive  reasons,  I  never  once  made  myself
understood, or gave them any explanation in the least satisfactory. I was constantly surprised at the
facility with which, by the aid of a few sonorous phrases, they refuted, without having comprehended
me. They had learned, I know not where, that a monk of the name of Souhaitti had formerly invented a
mode of noting the gamut by ciphers: a sufficient proof that my system was not new. This might,
perhaps,  be  the  case;  for  although  I  had  never  heard  of  Father  Souhaitti,  and  notwithstanding  his
manner of writing the seven notes without attending to the octaves was not, under any point of view,
worthy of entering into competition with my simple and commodious invention for easily noting by
ciphers every possible kind of music, keys, rests, octaves, measure, time, and length of note; things on
which  Souhaitti  had  never  thought  it  was  nevertheless  true,  that  with  respect  to  the  elementary
expression of the seven notes, he was the first inventor.
  But besides their giving to this primitive invention more importance than was due to it, they went
still further, and, whenever they spoke of the fundamental principles of the system, talked nonsense.
The greatest advantage of my scheme was to supersede transpositions and keys, so that the same piece
of music was noted and transposed at will by means of the change of a single initial letter at the head of
the air. These gentlemen had heard from the music--masters of Paris that the method of executing by
transposition was a bad one; and on this authority converted the most evident advantage of my systeminto an invincible objection against it, and affirmed that my mode of notation was good for vocal
music, but bad for instrumental; instead of concluding as they ought to have done, that it was good for
vocal, and still better for instrumental. On their report the academy granted me a certificate full of fine
compliments, amidst which it appeared that in reality it judged my system to be neither new nor useful.
I did not think proper to ornament with such a paper the work entitled 'Dissertation sur la musique
moderne', by which I appealed to the public.
I  had  reason  to  remark  on  this  occasion  that,  even  with  a  narrow  understanding,  the  sole  but
profound knowledge of a thing is preferable for the purpose of judging of it, to all the lights resulting
from a cultivation of the sciences, when to these a particular study of that in question has not been
joined. The only solid objection to my system was made by Rameau. I had scarcely explained it to him
before he discovered its weak part. "Your signs," said he, "are very good inasmuch as they clearly and
simply determine the length of notes, exactly represent intervals, and show the simple in the double
note, which the common notation does not do; but they are objectionable on account of their requiring
an operation of the mind, which cannot always accompany the rapidity of execution. The position of
our notes," continued he, "is described to the eye without the concurrence of this operation. If two
notes, one very high and the other very low, be joined by a series of intermediate ones, I see at the first
glance the progress from one to the other by conjoined degrees; but in your system, to perceive this
series, I must necessarily run over your ciphers one after the other; the glance of the eye is here
useless." The objection appeared to me insurmountable, and I instantly assented to it. Although it be
simple and striking, nothing can suggest it but great knowledge and practice of the art, and it is by no
means astonishing that not one of the academicians should have thought of it. But what creates much
surprise is, that these men of great learning, and who are supposed to possess so much knowledge,
should so little know that each ought to confine his judgment to that which relates to the study with
which he has been conversant.
  My frequent visits to the literati appointed to examine my system and the other academicians gave
me an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the most distinguished men of letters in Paris, and by
this means the acquaintance that would have been the consequence of my sudden admission amongst
them, which afterwards came to pass, was already established. With respect to the present moment,
absorbed in my new system of music, I obstinately adhered to my intention of effecting a revolution in
the  art,  and  by  that  means  of  acquiring  a  celebrity  which,  in  the  fine  arts,  is  in  Paris  mostly
accompanied  by  fortune.  I  shut  myself  in  my  chamber  and  labored  three  or  four  months  with
inexpressible  ardor,  in  forming  into  a  work  for  the  public  eye,  the  memoir  I  had  read  before  the
academy. The difficulty was to find a bookseller to take my manuscript; and this on account of the
necessary expenses for new characters, and because booksellers give not their money by handfuls to
young authors; although to me it seemed but just my work should render me the bread I had eaten while
employed in its composition.
  Bonnefond introduced me to Quillau the father, with whom I agreed to divide the profits, without
reckoning the privilege, of which I paid the whole expense. Such were the future proceedings of this
Quillau that I lost the expenses of my privilege, never having received a farthing from that edition;
which, probably, had but very middling success, although the Abbe des Fontaines promised to give it
celebrity, and, notwithstanding the other journalists, had spoken of it very favorably.
  The greatest obstacle to making the experiment of my system was the fear, in case of its not being
received, of losing the time necessary to learn it. To this I answered, that my notes rendered the ideas so
clear, that to learn music by means of the ordinary characters, time would be gained by beginning with
mine. To prove this by experience, I taught music gratis to a young American lady, Mademoiselle des
Roulins, with whom M. Roguin had brought me acquainted. In three months she read every kind of
music, by means of my notation, and sung at sight better than I did myself, any piece that was not too
difficult. This success was convincing, but not known; any other person would have filled the journals
with the detail, but with some talents for discovering useful things, I never have possessed that of
setting them off to advantage.  Thus was my airy castle again overthrown; but this time I was thirty years of age, and in Paris,
where it is impossible to live for a trifle. The resolution I took upon this occasion will astonish none but
those by whom the first part of these memoirs has not been read with attention. I had just made great
and fruitless efforts, and was in need of relaxation. Instead of sinking with despair I gave myself up
quietly to my indolence and to the care of Providence; and the better to wait for its assistance with
patience, I lay down a frugal plan for the slow expenditure of a few louis, which still remained in my
possession, regulating the expense of my supine pleasures without retrenching it; going to the coffee-
house but every other day, and to the theatre but twice a week. With respect to the expenses of girls of
easy virtue, I had no retrenchment to make; never having in the whole course of my life applied so
much as a farthing to that use except once, of which I shall soon have occasion to speak. The security,
voluptuousness, and confidence with which I gave myself up to this indolent and solitary life, which I
had not the means of continuing for three months, is one of the singularities of my life, and the oddities
of  my  disposition.  The  extreme  desire  I  had,  the  public  should  think  of  me  was  precisely  what
discouraged me from showing myself; and the necessity of paying visits rendered them to such a degree
insupportable,  that  I  ceased  visiting  the  academicians  and  other  men  of  letters,  with  whom  I  had
cultivated an acquaintance. Marivaux, the Abbe Malby, and Fontenelle, were almost the only persons
whom I sometimes went to see. To the first I showed my comedy of Narcissus. He was pleased with it,
and had the goodness to make in it some improvements. Diderot, younger than these, was much about
my  own  age.  He  was  fond  of  music,  and  knew  it  theoretically;  we  conversed  together,  and  he
communicated  to  me  some  of  his  literary  projects.  This  soon  formed  betwixt  us  a  more  intimate
connection, which lasted fifteen years, and which probably would still exist were not I, unfortunately,
and by his own fault, of the same profession with himself.
  It would be impossible to imagine in what manner I employed this short and precious interval
which still remained to me, before circumstances forced me to beg my bread:--in learning by memory
passages from the poets which I had learned and forgotten a hundred times. Every morning at ten
o'clock, I went to walk in the Luxembourg with a Virgil and a Rousseau in my pocket, and there, until
the hour of dinner, I passed away the time in restoring to my memory a sacred ode or a bucolic, without
being discouraged by forgetting, by the study of the morning, what I had learned the evening before. I
recollected that after the defeat of Nicias at Syracuse the captive Athenians obtained a livelihood by
reciting the poems of Homer. The use I made of this erudition to ward off misery was to exercise my
happy memory by learning all the poets by rote.
I had another expedient, not less solid, in the game of chess, to which I regularly dedicated, at
Maugis, the evenings on which I did not go to the theatre. I became acquainted with M. de Legal, M.
Husson, Philidor, and all the great chess players of the day, without making the least improvement in
the game. However, I had no doubt but, in the end, I should become superior to them all, and this, in
my own opinion, was a sufficient resource. The same manner of reasoning served me in every folly to
which  I  felt  myself  inclined.  I  said  to  myself:  whoever  excels  in  anything  is  sure  to  acquire  a
distinguished reception in society. Let us therefore excel, no matter in what, I shall certainly be sought
after; opportunities will present themselves, and my own merit will do the rest. This childishness was
not the sophism of my reason; it was that of my indolence. Dismayed at the great and rapid efforts
which would have been necessary to call forth my endeavors, I strove to flatter my idleness, and by
arguments suitable to the purpose, veiled from my own eyes the shame of such a state.
I thus calmly waited for the moment when I was to be without money; and had not Father Castel,
whom I sometimes went to see in my way to the coffee-house, roused me from my lethargy, I believe I
should have seen myself reduced to my last farthing without the least emotion. Father Castel was a
madman, but a good man upon the whole; he was sorry to see me thus impoverish myself to no
purpose. "Since musicians and the learned," said he, "do not sing by your scale, change the string, and
apply to the women. You will perhaps succeed better with them. I have spoken of you to Madam de
Beuzenval; go to her from me; she is a good woman who will be glad to see the countryman of her son
and husband. You will find at her house Madam de Broglie, her daughter, who is a woman of wit.Madam Dupin is another to whom I also have mentioned you; carry her your work; she is desirous of
seeing you, and will receive you well. No thing is done in Paris without the women. They are the
curves, of which the wise are the asymptotes; they incessantly approach each other, but never touch."
  After having from day to day delayed these very disagreeable steps, I at length took courage, and
called upon Madam de Beuzenval. She received me with kindness; and Madam de Broglio entering the
chamber, she said to her: "Daughter, this is M. Rousseau, of whom Father Castel has spoken to us."
Madam de Broglie complimented me upon my work, and going to her harpsichord proved to me she
had already given it some attention. Perceiving it to be about one o'clock, I prepared to take my leave.
Madam de Beuzenval said to me: "You are at a great distance from the quarter of the town in which
you reside; stay and dine here." I did not want asking a second time. A quarter of an hour afterwards, I
understood, by a word, that the dinner to which she had invited me was that of her servants' hall.
Madam de Beuzenval was a very good kind of woman, but of a confined understanding, and too full of
her illustrious Polish nobility: she had no idea of the respect due to talents. On this occasion, likewise,
she judged me by my manner rather than by my dress, which, although very plain, was very neat, and
by no means announced a man to dine with servants. I had too long forgotten the way to the place
where they eat to be inclined to take it again. Without suffering my anger to appear, I told Madam de
Beuzenval that I had an affair of a trifling nature which I had just recollected obliged me to return
home, and I immediately prepared to depart. Madam de Broglie approached her mother, and whispered
in her ear a few words which had their effect. Madam de Beuzenval rose to prevent me from going, and
said, "I expect that you will do us the honor to dine with us." In this case I thought to show pride would
be a mark of folly, and I determined to stay. The goodness of Madam de Broglie had besides made an
impression upon me, and rendered her interesting in my eyes. I was very glad to dine with her, and
hoped,  that  when  she  knew  me  better,  she  would  not  regret  having  procured  me  that  honor.  The
President  de  Lamoignon,  very  intimate  in  the  family,  dined  there  also.  He,  as  well  as  Madam  de
Broglie, was a master of all the modish and fashionable small talk jargon of Paris. Poor Jean Jacques
was unable to make a figure in this way. I had sense enough not to pretend to it, and was silent. Happy
would it have been for me, had I always possessed the same wisdom; I should not be in the abyss into
which I am now fallen. I was vexed at my own stupidity, and at being unable to justify to Madam de
Broglie what she had done in my favor.
  After dinner I thought of my ordinary resource. I had in my pocket an epistle in verse, written to
Parisot during my residence at Lyons. This fragment was not without some fire, which I increased by
my manner of reading, and made them all three shed tears. Whether it was vanity, or really the truth, I
thought the eyes of Madam de Broglie seemed to say to her mother: "Well, mamma, was I wrong in
telling you this man was fitter to dine with us than with your women?" Until then my heart had been
rather burdened, but after this revenge I felt myself satisfied. Madam de Broglie, carrying her favorable
opinion of me rather too far, thought I should immediately acquire fame in Paris, and become a favorite
with fine ladies. To guide my inexperience she gave me the confessions of the Count de -----. "This
book," said she, "is a Mentor, of which you will stand in need in the great world. You will do well by
sometimes consulting it." I kept the book upwards of twenty years with a sentiment of gratitude to her
from whose hand I had received it, although I frequently laughed at the opinion the lady seemed to
have of my merit in gallantry. From the moment I had read the work, I was desirous of acquiring the
friendship of the author. My inclination led me right; he is the only real friend I ever possessed amongst
men of letters.
  [I have so long been of the same opinion, and so perfectly convinced of its being well founded, that
since my return to Paris I confided to him the manuscript of my confessions. The suspicious J. J. never
suspected perfidy and falsehood until he had been their victim.]
  From this time I thought I might depend on the services of Madam the Baroness of Beuzenval, and
the Marchioness of Broglie, and that they would not long leave me without resource. In this I was not
deceived. But I must now speak of my first visit to Madam Dupin, which produced more lasting
consequences.  Madam Dupin was, as every one in Paris knows, the daughter of Samuel Bernard and Madam
Fontaine. There were three sisters, who might be called the three graces. Madam de la Touche who
played a little prank, and went to England with the Duke of Kingston. Madam Darby, the eldest of the
three; the friend, the only sincere friend of the Prince of Conti; an adorable woman, as well by her
sweetness  and  the  goodness  of  her  charming  character,  as  by  her  agreeable  wit  and  incessant
cheerfulness. Lastly, Madam Dupin, more beautiful than either of her sisters, and the only one who has
not been reproached with some levity of conduct.
  She was the reward of the hospitality of M. Dupin, to whom her mother gave her in marriage with
the place of farmer general and an immense fortune, in return for the good reception he had given her in
his province. When I saw her for the first time, she was still one of the finest women in Paris. She
received me at her toilette, her arms were uncovered, her hair dishevelled, and her combing-cloth ill-
arranged. This scene was new to me; it was too powerful for my poor head, I became confused, my
senses wandered; in short, I was violently smitten by Madam Dupin.
  My confusion was not prejudicial to me; she did not perceive it. She kindly received the book and
the author; spoke with information of my plan, sung, accompanied herself on the harpsichord, kept me
to dinner, and placed me at table by her side. Less than this would have turned my brain; I became mad.
She permitted me to visit her, and I abused the permission. I went to see her almost every day, and
dined with her twice or thrice a week. I burned with inclination to speak, but never dared attempt it.
Several circumstances increased my natural timidity. Permission to visit in an opulent family was a
door open to fortune, and in my situation I was unwilling to run the risk of shutting it against myself.
  Madam Dupin, amiable as she was, was serious and unanimated; I found nothing in her manners
sufficiently alluring to embolden me. Her house, at that time, as brilliant as any other in Paris, was
frequented by societies the less numerous, as the persons by whom they were composed were chosen
on account of some distinguished merit. She was fond of seeing every one who had claims to a marked
superiority; the great men of letters, and fine women. No person was seen in her circle but dukes,
ambassadors,  and  blue  ribbons.  The  Princess  of  Rohan,  the  Countess  of  Forcalquier,  Madam  de
Mirepoix,  Madam  de  Brignole,  and  Lady  Hervey,  passed  for  her  intimate  friends.  The  Abbes  de
Fontenelle, de Saint Pierre, and Saltier, M. de Fourmont, M. de Berms, M. de Buffon, and M. de
Voltaire, were of her circle and her dinners. If her reserved manner did not attract many young people,
her society inspired the greater awe, as it was composed of graver persons, and the poor Jean-Jacques
had no reason to flatter himself he should be able to take a distinguished part in the midst of such
superior talents. I therefore had not courage to speak; but no longer able to contain myself, I took a
resolution to write. For the first two days she said not a word to me upon the subject. On the third day,
she returned me my letter, accompanying it with a few exhortations which froze my blood. I attempted
to speak, but my words expired upon my lips; my sudden passion was extinguished with my hopes, and
after a declaration in form I continued to live with her upon the same terms as before, without so much
as speaking to her even by the language of the eyes.
I thought my folly was forgotten, but I was deceived. M. de Francueil, son to M. Dupin, and son-in-
law to Madam Dupin, was much the same with herself and me. He had wit, a good person, and might
have pretensions. This was said to be the case, and probably proceeded from his mother-in-law's having
given him an ugly wife of a mild disposition, with whom, as well as with her husband, she lived upon
the best of terms. M. de Francueil was fond of talents in others, and cultivated those he possessed.
Music, which he understood very well, was a means of producing a connection between us. I frequently
saw him, and he soon gained my friendship. He, however, suddenly gave me to understand that Madam
Dupin thought my visits too frequent, and begged me to discontinue them. Such a compliment would
have been proper when she returned my letter; but eight or ten days afterwards, and without any new
cause, it appeared to me ill-timed. This rendered my situation the more singular, as M. and Madam de
Francueil still continued to give me the same good reception as before.
I however made the intervals between my visits longer, and I should entirely have ceased calling on
them, had not Madam Dupin, by another unexpected caprice, sent to desire I would for a few days takecare of her son, who changing his preceptor, remained alone during that interval. I passed eight days in
such torments as nothing but the pleasure of obeying Madam Dupin could render supportable: I would
not have undertaken to pass eight other days like them had Madam Dupin given me herself for the
recompense.
  M. de Francueil conceived a friendship for me, and I studied with him. We began together a course
of chemistry at Rouelles. That I might be nearer at hand, I left my hotel at Quentin, and went to lodge at
the Tennis Court, Rue Verdelet, which leads into the Rue Platiere, where M. Dupin lived. There, in
consequence of a cold neglected, I contracted an inflammation of the lungs that had liked to have
carried me off. In my younger days I frequently suffered from inflammatory disorders, pleurisies, and
especially quinsies, to which I was very subject, and which frequently brought me near enough to death
to familiarize me to its image.
  During my convalescence I had leisure to reflect upon my situation, and to lament my timidity,
weakness and indolence; these, notwithstanding the fire with which I found myself inflamed, left me to
languish in an inactivity of mind, continually on the verge of misery. The evening preceding the day on
which I was taken ill, I went to an opera by Royer; the name I have forgotten. Notwithstanding my
prejudice in favor of the talents of others, which has ever made me distrustful of my own, I still thought
the music feeble, and devoid of animation and invention. I sometimes had the vanity to flatter myself: I
think I could do better than that. But the terrible idea I had formed of the composition of an opera, and
the importance I heard men of the profession affix to such an undertaking, instantly discouraged me,
and made me blush at having so much as thought of it. Besides, where was I to find a person to write
the words, and one who would give himself the trouble of turning the poetry to my liking? These ideas
of music and the opera had possession of my mind during my illness, and in the delirium of my fever I
composed songs, duets, and choruses. I am certain I composed two or three little pieces, 'di prima
infenzione', perhaps worthy of the admiration of masters, could they have heard them executed. Oh,
could an account be taken of the dreams of a man in a fever, what great and sublime things would
sometimes proceed from his delirium!
  These subjects of music and opera still engaged my attention during my convalescence, but my
ideas were less energetic. Long and frequent meditations, and which were often involuntary, and made
such an impression upon my mind that I resolved to attempt both words and music. This was not the
first time I had undertaken so difficult a task. Whilst I was at Chambery I had composed an opera
entitled 'Iphis and Anaxarete', which I had the good sense to throw into the fire. At Lyons I had
composed another, entitled 'La Decouverte du Nouveau Monde', which, after having read it to M.
Bordes, the Abbes Malby, Trublet, and others, had met the same fate, notwithstanding I had set the
prologue and the first act to music, and although David, after examining the composition, had told me
there were passages in it worthy of Buononcini.
  Before I began the work I took time to consider of my plan. In a heroic ballet I proposed three
different subjects, in three acts, detached from each other, set to music of a different character, taking
for each subject the amours of a poet. I entitled this opera Les Muses Galantes. My first act, in music
strongly  characterized,  was  Tasso;  the  second  in  tender  harmony,  Ovid;  and  the  third,  entitled
Anacreon, was to partake of the gayety of the dithyrambus. I tried my skill on the first act, and applied
to it with an ardor which, for the first time, made me feel the delightful sensation produced by the
creative power of composition. One evening, as I entered the opera, feeling myself strongly incited and
overpowered by my ideas, I put my money again into my pocket, returned to my apartment, locked the
door, and, having close drawn all the curtains, that every ray of light might be excluded, I went to bed,
abandoning myself entirely to this musical and poetical 'oestrum', and in seven or eight hours rapidly
composed the greatest part of an act. I can truly say my love for the Princess of Ferrara (for I was Tasso
for the moment) and my noble and lofty sentiment with respect to her unjust brother, procured me a
night a hundred times more delicious than one passed in the arms of the princess would have been. In
the morning but a very little of what I had done remained in my head, but this little, almost effaced by
sleep and lassitude, still sufficiently evinced the energy of the pieces of which it was the scatteredremains.
I this time did, not proceed far with my undertaking, being interrupted by other affairs. Whilst I
attached  myself  to  the  family  of  Dupin,  Madam  de  Beuzenval  and  Madam  de  Broglie,  whom  I
continued to visit, had not forgotten me. The Count de Montaigu, captain in the guards, had just been
appointed ambassador to Venice. He was an ambassador made by Barjac, to whom he assiduously paid
his court. His brother, the Chevalier de Montaigu, 'gentilhomme de la manche' to the dauphin, was
acquainted with these ladies, and with the Abbe Alary of the French academy, whom I sometimes
visited. Madam de Broglie having heard the ambassador was seeking a secretary, proposed me to him.
A conference was opened between us. I asked a salary of fifty guineas, a trifle for an employment
which required me to make some appearance. The ambassador was unwilling to give more than a
thousand livres, leaving me to make the journey at my own expense. The proposal was ridiculous. We
could not agree, and M. de Francueil, who used all his efforts to prevent my departure, prevailed.
I stayed, and M. de Montaigu set out on his journey, taking with him another secretary, one M.
Follau, who had been recommended to him by the office of foreign affairs. They no sooner arrived at
Venice than they quarrelled. Bollau perceiving he had to do with a madman, left him there, and M. de
Montaigu having nobody with him, except a young abbe of the name of Binis, who wrote under the
secretary, and was unfit to succeed him, had recourse to me. The chevalier, his brother, a man of wit, by
giving me to understand there were advantages annexed to the place of secretary, prevailed upon me to
accept  the  thousand  livres.  I  was  paid  twenty  louis  in  advance  for  my  journey,  and  immediately
departed.
  At Lyons I would most willingly have taken the road to Mount Cenis, to see my poor mamma. But I
went down the Rhone, and embarked at Toulon, as well on account of the war, and from a motive of
economy, as to obtain a passport from M. de Mirepoix, who then commanded in Provence, and to
whom I was recommended. M. de Montaigu not being able to do without me, wrote letter after letter,
desiring I would hasten my journey; this, however, an accident considerably prolonged.
  It was at the time of the plague at Messina, and the English fleet had anchored there, and visited the
Felucca, on board of which I was, and this circumstance subjected us, on our arrival, after a long and
difficult voyage, to a quarantine of one--and--twenty days.
  The passengers had the choice of performing it on board or in the Lazaretto, which we were told
was not yet furnished. They all chose the Felucca. The insupportable heat, the closeness of the vessel,
the impossibility of walking in it, and the vermin with which it swarmed, made me at all risks prefer the
Lazaretto. I was therefore conducted to a large building of two stories, quite empty, in which I found
neither window, bed, table, nor chair, not so much as even a joint-stool or bundle of straw. My night
sack and my two trunks being brought me, I was shut in by great doors with huge locks, and remained
at full liberty to walk at my ease from chamber to chamber and story to story, everywhere finding the
same solitude and nakedness.
  This, however, did not induce me to repent that I had preferred the Lazaretto to the Felucca; and,
like another Robinson Crusoe, I began to arrange myself for my one-and twenty days, just as I should
have done for my whole life. In the first place, I had the amusement of destroying the vermin I had
caught in the Felucca. As soon as I had got clear of these, by means of changing my clothes and linen, I
proceeded to furnish the chamber I had chosen. I made a good mattress with my waistcoats and shirts;
my napkins I converted, by sewing them together, into sheets; my robe de chambre into a counterpane;
and my cloak into a pillow. I made myself a seat with one of my trunks laid flat, and a table with the
other. I took out some writing paper and an inkstand, and distributed, in the manner of a library, a
dozen books which I had with me. In a word, I so well arranged my few movables, that except curtains
and windows, I was almost as commodiously lodged in this Lazeretto, absolutely empty as it was, as I
had been at the Tennis Court in the Rue Verdelet. My dinners were served with no small degree of
pomp; they were escorted by two grenadiers with bayonets fixed; the staircase was my dining--room,
the landing-place my table, and the steps served me for a seat; and as soon as my dinner was served up
a little bell was rung to inform me I might sit down to table.  Between my repasts, when I did not either read or write or work at the furnishing of my apartment, I
went to walk in the burying-ground of the Protestants, which served me as a courtyard. From this place
I ascended to a lanthorn which looked into the harbor, and from which I could see the ships come in
and go out. In this manner I passed fourteen days, and should have thus passed the whole time of the
quarantine without the least weariness had not M. Joinville, envoy from France, to whom I found
means to send a letter, vinegared, perfumed, and half burnt, procured eight days of the time to be taken
off: these I went and spent at his house, where I confess I found myself better lodged than in the
Lazaretto. He was extremely civil to me. Dupont, his secretary, was a good creature: he introduced me,
as well at Genoa as in the country, to several families, the company of which I found very entertaining
and agreeable; and I formed with him an acquaintance and a correspondence which we kept up for a
considerable length of time. I continued my journey, very agreeably, through Lombardy. I saw Milan,
Verona, Brescie, and Padua, and at length arrived at Venice, where I was impatiently expected by the
ambassador.
I found there piles of despatches, from the court and from other ambassadors, the ciphered part of
which he had not been able to read, although he had all the ciphers necessary for that purpose, never
having been employed in any office, nor even seen the cipher of a minister. I was at first apprehensive
of meeting with some embarrassment; but I found nothing could be more easy, and in less than a week I
had deciphered the whole, which certainly was not worth the trouble; for not to mention the little
activity  required  in  the  embassy  of  Venice,  it  was  not  to  such  a  man  as  M.  de  Montaigu  that
government would confide a negotiation of even the most trifling importance. Until my arrival he had
been much embarrassed, neither knowing how to dictate nor to write legibly. I was very useful to him,
of which he was sensible; and he treated me well. To this he was also induced by another motive. Since
the time of M. de Froulay, his predecessor, whose head became deranged, the consul from France, M.
le Blond, had been charged with the affairs of the embassy, and after the arrival of M. de Montaigu,
continued to manage them until he had put him into the track. M. de Montaigu, hurt at this discharge of
his duty by another, although he himself was incapable of it, became disgusted with the consul, and as
soon as I arrived deprived him of the functions of secretary to the embassy to give them to me. They
were inseparable from the title, and he told me to take it. As long as I remained with him he never sent
any person except myself under this title to the senate, or to conference, and upon the whole it was
natural enough he should prefer having for secretary to the embassy a man attached to him, to a consul
or a clerk of office named by the court.
  This rendered my situation very agreeable, and prevented his gentlemen, who were Italians, as well
as  his  pages,  and  most  of  his  suite  from  disputing  precedence  with  me  in  his  house.  I  made  an
advantageous use of the authority annexed to the title he had conferred upon me, by maintaining his
right of protection, that is, the freedom of his neighborhood, against the attempts several times made to
infringe it; a privilege which his Venetian officers took no care to defend. But I never permitted banditti
to take refuge there, although this would have produced me advantages of which his excellency would
not have disdained to partake. He thought proper, however, to claim a part of those of the secretaryship,
which is called the chancery. It was in time of war, and there were many passports issued. For each of
these  passports  a  sequin  was  paid  to  the  secretary  who  made  it  out  and  countersigned  it.  All  my
predecessors had been paid this sequin by Frenchmen and others without distinction. I thought this
unjust, and although I was not a Frenchman, I abolished it in favor of the French; but I so rigorously
demanded my right from persons of every other nation, that the Marquis de Scotti, brother to the
favorite of the Queen of Spain, having asked for a passport without taking notice of the sequin: I sent to
demand it; a boldness which the vindictive Italian did not forget. As soon as the new regulation I had
made, relative to passports, was known, none but pretended Frenchmen, who in a gibberish the most
mispronounced, called themselves Provencals, Picards, or Burgundians, came to demand them. My ear
being very fine, I was not thus made a dupe, and I am almost persuaded that not a single Italian ever
cheated me of my sequin, and that not one Frenchman ever paid it. I was foolish enough to tell M. de
Montaigu, who was ignorant of everything that passed, what I had done. The word sequin made himopen his ears, and without giving me his opinion of the abolition of that tax upon the French, he
pretended  I  ought  to  account  with  him  for  the  others,  promising  me  at  the  same  time  equivalent
advantages. More filled with indignation at this meanness, than concern for my own interest, I rejected
his proposal. He insisted, and I grew warm. "No, sir," said I, with some heat, "your excellency may
keep what belongs to you, but do not take from me that which is mine; I will not suffer you to touch a
penny of the perquisites arising from passports." Perceiving he could gain nothing by these means he
had recourse to others, and blushed not to tell me that since I had appropriated to myself the profits of
the chancery, it was but just I should pay the expenses. I was unwilling to dispute upon this subject, and
from that time I furnished at my own expense, ink, paper, wax, wax-candle, tape, and even a new seal,
for which he never reimbursed me to the amount of a farthing. This, however, did not prevent my
giving a small part of the produce of the passports to the Abbe de Binis, a good creature, and who was
far from pretending to have the least right to any such thing. If he was obliging to me my politeness to
him was an equivalent, and we always lived together on the best of terms.
  On the first trial I made of his talents in my official functions, I found him less troublesome than I
expected he would have been, considering he was a man without experience, in the service of an
ambassador  who  possessed  no  more  than  himself,  and  whose  ignorance  and  obstinacy  constantly
counteracted everything with which common-sense and some information inspired me for his service
and that of the king. The next thing the ambassador did was to connect himself with the Marquis Mari,
ambassador from Spain, an ingenious and artful man, who, had he wished so to do, might have led him
by the nose, yet on account of the union of the interests of the two crowns he generally gave him good
advice, which might have been of essential service, had not the other, by joining his own opinion,
counteracted it in the execution. The only business they had to conduct in concert with each other was
to  engage  the  Venetians  to  maintain  their  neutrality.  These  did  not  neglect  to  give  the  strongest
assurances  of  their  fidelity  to  their  engagement  at  the  same  time  that  they  publicly  furnished
ammunition to the Austrian troops, and even recruits under pretense of desertion. M. de Montaigu, who
I believe wished to render himself agreeable to the republic, failed not on his part, notwithstanding my
representation to make me assure the government in all my despatches, that the Venetians would never
violate an article of the neutrality. The obstinacy and stupidity of this poor wretch made me write and
act extravagantly: I was obliged to be the agent of his folly, because he would have it so, but he
sometimes rendered my employment insupportable and the functions of it almost impracticable. For
example, he insisted on the greatest part of his despatches to the king, and of those to the minister,
being written in cipher, although neither of them contained anything that required that precaution. I
represented to him that between the Friday, the day the despatches from the court arrived, and Saturday,
on which ours were sent off, there was not sufficient time to write so much in cipher, and carry on the
considerable correspondence with which I was charged for the same courier. He found an admirable
expedient, which was to prepare on Thursday the answer to the despatches we were expected to receive
on the next day. This appeared to him so happily imagined, that notwithstanding all I could say on the
impossibility of the thing, and the absurdity of attempting its execution, I was obliged to comply during
the whole time I afterwards remained with him, after having made notes of the few loose words he
spoke to me in the course of the week, and of some trivial circumstances which I collected by hurrying
from place to place. Provided with these materials I never once failed carrying to him on the Thursday
morning a rough draft of the despatches which were to be sent off on Saturday, excepting the few
additions and corrections I hastily made in answer to the letters which arrived on the Friday, and to
which  ours  served  for  answer.  He  had  another  custom,  diverting  enough  and  which  made  his
correspondence ridiculous beyond imagination. He sent back all information to its respective source,
instead of making it follow its course. To M. Amelot he transmitted the news of the court; to M.
Maurepas, that of Paris; to M. d' Havrincourt, the news from Sweden; to M. de Chetardie, that from
Petersbourg; and sometimes to each of those the news they had respectively sent to him, and which I
was employed to dress up in terms different from those in which it was conveyed to us. As he read
nothing  of  what  I  laid  before  him,  except  the  despatches  for  the  court,  and  signed  those  to  otherambassadors without reading them, this left me more at liberty to give what turn I thought proper to the
latter, and in these therefore I made the articles of information cross each other. But it was impossible
for-me to do the same by despatches of importance; and I thought myself happy when M. de Montaigu
did not take it into his head to cram into them an impromptu of a few lines after his manner. This
obliged me to return, and hastily transcribe the whole despatch decorated with his new nonsense, and
honor it with the cipher, without which he would have refused his signature. I was frequently almost
tempted, for the sake of his reputation, to cipher something different from what he had written, but
feeling that nothing could authorize such a deception, I left him to answer for his own folly, satisfying
myself with having spoken to him with freedom, and discharged at my own peril the duties of my
station. This is what I always did with an uprightness, a zeal and courage, which merited on his part a
very different recompense from that which in the end I received from him. It was time I should once be
what Heaven, which had endowed me with a happy disposition, what the education that had been given
me by the best of women, and that I had given myself, had prepared me for, and I became so. Left to
my own reflections, without a friend or advice, without experience, and in a foreign country, in the
service of a foreign nation, surrounded by a crowd of knaves, who, for their own interest, and to avoid
the scandal of good example, endeavored to prevail upon me to imitate them; far from yielding to their
solicitations, I served France well, to which I owed nothing, and the ambassador still better, as it was
right and just I should do to the utmost of my power. Irreproachable in a post, sufficiently exposed to
censure, I merited and obtained the esteem of the republic, that of all the ambassadors with whom we
were in correspondence, and the affection of the French who resided at Venice, not even excepting the
consul, whom with regret I supplanted in the functions which I knew belonged to him, and which
occasioned me more embarrassment than they afforded me satisfaction.
  M. de Montaigu, confiding without reserve to the Marquis Mari, who did not thoroughly understand
his duty, neglected it to such a degree that without me the French who were at Venice would not have
perceived that an ambassador from their nation resided there. Always put off without being heard when
they stood in need of his protection, they became disgusted and no longer appeared in his company or
at his table, to which indeed he never invited them. I frequently did from myself what it was his duty to
have done; I rendered to the French, who applied to me, all the services in my power. In any other
country I should have done more, but, on account of my employment, not being able to see persons in
place, I was often obliged to apply to the consul, and the consul, who was settled in the country with his
family, had many persons to oblige, which prevented him from acting as he otherwise would have
done. However, perceiving him unwilling and afraid to speak, I ventured hazardous measures, which
sometimes succeeded. I recollect one which still makes me laugh. No person would suspect it was to
me, the lovers of the theatre at Paris, owe Coralline and her sister Camille, nothing however, can be
more true. Veronese, their father, had engaged himself with his children in the Italian company, and
after having received two thousand livres for the expenses of his journey, instead of setting out for
France, quietly continued at Venice, and accepted an engagement in the theatre of Saint Luke, to which
Coralline,  a  child  as  she  still  was,  drew  great  numbers  of  people.  The  Duke  de  Greves,  as  first
gentleman  of  the  chamber,  wrote  to  the  ambassador  to  claim  the  father  and  the  daughter.  M.  de
Montaigu when he gave me the letter, confined his instructions to saying, 'voyez cela', examine and pay
attention to this. I went to M. Blond to beg he would speak to the patrician, to whom the theatre
belonged,  and  who,  I  believe,  was  named  Zustinian,  that  he  might  discharge  Veronese,  who  had
engaged in the name of the king. Le Blond, to whom the commission was not very agreeable, executed
it badly.
  Zustinian answered vaguely, and Veronese was not discharged. I was piqued at this. It was during
the carnival, and having taken the bahute and a mask, I set out for the palace Zustinian. Those who saw
my gondola arrive with the livery of the ambassador, were lost in astonishment. Venice had never seen
such a thing. I entered, and caused myself to be announced by the name of 'Una Siora Masehera'. As
soon as I was introduced I took off my mask and told my name. The senator turned pale and appeared
stupefied with surprise. "Sir;" said I to him in Venetian, "it is with much regret I importune yourexcellency with this visit; but you have in your theatre of Saint Luke, a man of the name of Veronese,
who is engaged in the service of the king, and whom you have been requested, but in vain, to give up: I
come to claim him in the name of his majesty." My short harangue was effectual. I had no sooner left
the palace than Zustinian ran to communicate the adventure to the state inquisitors, by whom he was
severely reprehended. Veronese was discharged the same day. I sent him word that if he did not set off
within a week I would have him arrested. He did not wait for my giving him this intimation a second
time.
  On another occasion I relieved from difficulty solely by my own means, and almost without the
assistance of any other person, the captain of a merchant-ship. This was one Captain Olivet, from
Marseilles; the name of the vessel I have forgotten. His men had quarreled with the Sclavonians in the
service of the republic, some violence had been committed, and the vessel was under so severe an
embargo that nobody except the master was suffered to go on board or leave it without permission. He
applied to the ambassador, who would hear nothing he had to say. He afterwards went to the consul,
who told him it was not an affair of commerce, and that he could not interfere in it. Not knowing what
further steps to take he applied to me. I told M. de Montaigu he ought to permit me to lay before the
senate a memoir on the subject. I do not recollect whether or not he consented, or that I presented the
memoir; but I perfectly remember that if I did it was ineffectual, and the embargo still continuing, I
took another method, which succeeded. I inserted a relation of the affairs in one of our letters to M. de
Maurepas, though I had difficulty in prevailing upon M. de Montaigne to suffer the article to pass.
I knew that our despatches, although their contents were insignificant, were opened at Venice. Of
this I had a proof by finding the articles they contained, verbatim in the gazette, a treachery of which I
had in vain attempted to prevail upon the ambassador to complain. My object in speaking of the affair
in the letter was to turn the curiosity of the ministers of the republic to advantage, to inspire them with
some apprehensions, and to induce the state to release the vessel: for had it been necessary to this effect
to wait for an answer from the court, the captain would have been ruined before it could have arrived. I
did still more, I went alongside the vessel to make inquiries of the ship's company. I took with me the
Abbe Patizel, chancellor of the consulship, who would rather have been excused, so much were these
poor creatures afraid of displeasing the Senate. As I could not go on board, on account of the order
from the states, I remained in my gondola, and there took the depositions successively, interrogating
each of the mariners, and directing my questions in such a manner as to produce answers which might
be to their advantage. I wished to prevail upon Patizel to put the questions and take depositions himself,
which in fact was more his business than mine; but to this he would not consent; he never once opened
his  mouth  and  refused  to  sign  the  depositions  after  me.  This  step,  somewhat  bold,  was  however,
successful, and the vessel was released long before an answer came from the minister. The captain
wished to make me a present; but without being angry with him on that account, I tapped him on the
shoulder, saying, "Captain Olivet, can you imagine that he who does not receive from the French his
perquisite for passports, which he found his established right, is a man likely to sell them the king's
protection?" He, however, insisted on giving me a dinner on board his vessel, which I accepted, and
took with me the secretary to the Spanish embassy, M. Carrio, a man of wit and amiable manners, to
partake of it: he has since been secretary to the Spanish embassy at Paris and charge des affaires. I had
formed an intimate connection with him after the example of our ambassadors.
  Happy should I have been, if, when in the most disinterested manner I did all the service I could, I
had known how to introduce sufficient order into all these little details, that I might not have served
others at my own expense. But in employments similar to that I held, in which the most trifling faults
are  of  consequence,  my  whole  attention  was  engaged  in  avoiding  all  such  mistakes  as  might  be
detrimental to my service. I conducted, till the last moment, everything relative to my immediate duty,
with the greatest order and exactness. Excepting a few errors which a forced precipitation made me
commit in ciphering, and of which the clerks of M. Amelot once complained, neither the ambassador
nor any other person had ever the least reason to reproach me with negligence in any one of my
functions. This is remarkable in a man so negligent as I am. But my memory sometimes failed me, andI was not sufficiently careful in the private affairs with which I was charged; however, a love of justice
always made me take the loss on myself, and this voluntarily, before anybody thought of complaining. I
will  mention  but  one  circumstance  of  this  nature;  it  relates  to  my  departure  from  Venice,  and  I
afterwards felt the effects of it in Paris.
  Our cook, whose name was Rousselot, had brought from France an old note for two hundred livres,
which a hairdresser, a friend of his, had received from a noble Venetian of the name of Zanetto Nani,
who had had wigs of him to that amount. Rousselot brought me the note, begging I would endeavor to
obtain payment of some part of it, by way of accommodation. I knew, and he knew it also, that the
constant custom of noble Venetians was, when once returned to their country, never to pay the debts
they had contracted abroad. When means are taken to force them to payment, the wretched creditor
finds so many delays, and incurs such enormous expenses, that he becomes disgusted and concludes by
giving up his debtor accepting the most trifling composition. I begged M. le Blond to speak to Zanetto.
The Venetian acknowledged the note, but did not agree to payment. After a long dispute he at length
promised three sequins; but when Le Blond carried him the note even these were not ready, and it was
necessary to wait. In this interval happened my quarrel with the ambassador and I quitted his service. I
had left the papers of the embassy in the greatest order, but the note of Rousselot was not to be found.
M. le Blond assured me he had given it me back. I knew him to be too honest a man to have the least
doubt of the matter; but it was impossible for me to recollect what I had done with it. As Zanetto had
acknowledged the debt, I desired M. le Blond to endeavor to obtain from him the three sequins on
giving him a receipt for the amount, or to prevail upon him to renew the note by way of duplicate.
Zanetto, knowing the note to be lost, would not agree to either. I offered Rousselot the three sequins
from my own purse, as a discharge of the debt. He refused them, and said I might settle the matter with
the creditor at Paris, of whom he gave me the address. The hair-dresser, having been informed of what
had  passed,  would  either  have  his  note  or  the  whole  sum  for  which  it  was  given.  What,  in  my
indignation, would I have given to have found this vexatious paper! I paid the two hundred livres, and
that in my greatest distress. In this manner the loss of the note produced to the creditor the payment of
the whole sum, whereas had it, unfortunately for him, been found, he would have had some difficulty in
recovering even the ten crowns, which his excellency, Zanetto Nani, had promised to pay.
  The talents I thought I felt in myself for my employment made me discharge the functions of it with
satisfaction, and except the society of my friend de Carrio, that of the virtuous Altuna, of whom I shall
soon have an occasion to speak, the innocent recreations of the place Saint Mark, of the theatre, and of
a few visits which we, for the most part, made together, my only pleasure was in the duties of my
station. Although these were not considerable, especially with the aid of the Abbe de Binis, yet as the
correspondence was very extensive and there was a war, I was a good deal employed. I applied to
business the greatest part of every morning, and on the days previous to the departure of the courier, in
the evenings, and sometimes till midnight. The rest of my time I gave to the study of the political
professions  I  had  entered  upon,  and  in  which  I  hoped,  from  my  successful  beginning,  to  be
advantageously employed. In fact I was in favor with every one; the ambassador himself spoke highly
of my services, and never complained of anything I did for him; his dissatisfaction proceeded from my
having insisted on quitting him, inconsequence of the useless complaints I had frequently made on
several occasions. The ambassadors and ministers of the king with whom we were in correspondence
complimented him on the merit of his secretary, in a manner by which he ought to have been flattered,
but which in his poor head produced quite a contrary effect. He received one in particular relative to an
affair of importance, for which he never pardoned me.
  He was so incapable of bearing the least constraint, that on the Saturday, the day of the despatches
for most of the courts he could not contain himself, and wait till the business was done before he went
out, and incessantly pressing me to hasten the despatches to the king and ministers, he signed them with
precipitation,  and  immediately  went  I  know  not  where,  leaving  most  of  the  other  letters  without
signing; this obliged me, when these contained nothing but news, to convert them into journals; but
when affairs which related to the king were in question it was necessary somebody should sign, and Idid it. This once happened relative to some important advice we had just received from M. Vincent,
charge des affaires from the king, at Vienna. The Prince Lobkowitz was then marching to Naples, and
Count Gages had just made the most memorable retreat, the finest military manoeuvre of the whole
century, of which Europe has not sufficiently spoken. The despatch informed us that a man, whose
person M. Vincent described, had set out from Vienna, and was to pass by Venice, in his way into
Abruzzo, where he was secretly to stir up the people at the approach of the Austrians.
  In the absence of M. le Comte de Montaigu, who did not give himself the least concern about
anything, I forwarded this advice to the Marquis de l'Hopital, so apropos, that it is perhaps to the poor
Jean  Jacques,  so  abused  and  laughed  at,  that  the  house  of  Bourbon  owes  the  preservation  of  the
kingdom of Naples.
  The Marquis de l'Hopital, when he thanked his colleague, as it was proper he should do, spoke to
him of his secretary, and mentioned the service he had just rendered to the common cause. The Comte
de Montaigu, who in that affair had to reproach himself with negligence, thought he perceived in the
compliment paid him by M. de l'Hopital, something like a reproach, and spoke of it to me with signs of
ill-humor. I found it necessary to act in the same manner with the Count de Castellane, ambassador at
Constantinople, as I had done with the Marquis de l'Hopital, although in things of less importance. As
there was no other conveyance to Constantinople than by couriers, sent from time to time by the senate
to its Bailli, advice of their departure was given to the ambassador of France, that he might write by
them to his colleague, if he thought proper so to do. This advice was commonly sent a day or two
beforehand; but M. de Montaigu was held in so little respect, that merely for the sake of form he was
sent to, a couple of hours before the couriers set off. This frequently obliged me to write the despatch in
his absence. M. de Castellane, in his answer made honorable mention of me; M. de Jonville, at Genoa,
did the same, and these instances of their regard and esteem became new grievances.
I acknowledge I did not neglect any opportunity of making myself known; but I never sought one
improperly, and in serving well I thought I had a right to aspire to the natural return for essential
services; the esteem of those capable of judging of, and rewarding them. I will not say whether or not
my exactness in discharging the duties of my employment was a just subject of complaint from the
ambassador; but I cannot refrain from declaring that it was the sole grievance he ever mentioned
previous to our separation.
  His house, which he had never put on a good footing, was constantly filled with rabble; the French
were ill-treated in it, and the ascendancy was given to the Italians; of these even, the more honest part,
they who had long been in the service of the embassy, were indecently discharged, his first gentleman
in particular, whom he had taken from the Comte de Froulay, and who, if I remember right, was called
Comte de Peati, or something very like that name. The second gentleman, chosen by M. de Montaigu,
was an outlaw highwayman from Mantua, called Dominic Vitali, to whom the ambassador intrusted the
care of his house, and who had by means of flattery and sordid economy, obtained his confidence, and
became his favorite to the great prejudice of the few honest people he still had about him, and of the
secretary who was at their head. The countenance of an upright man always gives inquietude to knaves.
Nothing more was necessary to make Vitali conceive a hatred against me: but for this sentiment there
was still another cause which rendered it more cruel. Of this I must give an account, that I may be
condemned if I am found in the wrong.
  The ambassador had, according to custom, a box at each of the theaters. Every day at dinner he
named the theater to which it was his intention to go: I chose after him, and the gentlemen disposed of
the other boxes. When I went out I took the key of the box I had chosen. One day, Vitali not being in
the way, I ordered the footman who attended on me, to bring me the key to a house which I named to
him. Vitali, instead of sending the key, said he had disposed of it. I was the more enraged at this as the
footman delivered his message in public. In the evening Vitali wished to make me some apology, to
which however I would not listen. "To--morrow, sir," said I to him, "you will come at such an hour and
apologize to me in the house where I received the affront, and in the presence of the persons who were
witnesses to it; or after to--morrow, whatever may be the consequences, either you or I will leave thehouse." This firmness intimidated him. He came to the house at the hour appointed, and made me a
public apology, with a meanness worthy of himself. But he afterwards took his measures at leisure, and
at the same time that he cringed to me in public, he secretly acted in so vile a manner, that although
unable to prevail on the ambassador to give me my dismission, he laid me under the necessity of
resolving to leave him.
  A wretch like him, certainly, could not know me, but he knew enough of my character to make it
serviceable to his purposes. He knew I was mild to an excess, and patient in bearing involuntary
wrongs; but haughty and impatient when insulted with premeditated offences; loving decency and
dignity in things in which these were requisite, and not more exact in requiring the respect due to
myself, than attentive in rendering that which I owed to others. In this he undertook to disgust me, and
in this he succeeded. He turned the house upside down, and destroyed the order and subordination I had
endeavored to establish in it. A house without a woman stands in need of rather a severe discipline to
preserve that modesty which is inseparable from dignity. He soon converted ours into a place of filthy
debauch and scandalous licentiousness, the haunt of knaves and debauchees. He procured for second
gentleman to his excellency, in the place of him whom he got discharged, another pimp like himself,
who kept a house of ill--fame, at the Cross of Malta; and the indecency of these two rascals was
equalled by nothing but their insolence. Except the bed-chamber of the ambassador, which, however,
was not in very good order, there was not a corner in the whole house supportable to an modest man.
  As his excellency did not sup, the gentleman and myself had a private table, at which the Abbe
Binis and the pages also eat. In the most paltry ale-house people are served with more cleanliness and
decency, have cleaner linen, and a table better supplied. We had but one little and very filthy candle,
pewter plates, and iron forks.
I could have overlooked what passed in secret, but I was deprived of my gondola. I was the only
secretary to an ambassador, who was obliged to hire one or go on foot, and the livery of his excellency
no longer accompanied me, except when I went to the senate. Besides, everything which passed in the
house was known in the city. All those who were in the service of the other ambassadors loudly
exclaimed; Dominic, the only cause of all, exclaimed louder than anybody, well knowing the indecency
with which we were treated was more affecting to me than to any other person. Though I was the only
one in the house who said nothing of the matter abroad, I complained loudly of it to the ambassador, as
well as of himself, who, secretly excited by the wretch, entirely devoted to his will, daily made me
suffer some new affront. Obliged to spend a good deal to keep up a footing with those in the same
situation with myself, and to make are appearance proper to my employment, I could not touch a
farthing of my salary, and when I asked him for money, he spoke of his esteem for me, and his
confidence, as if either of these could have filled my purse, and provided for everything.
  These two banditti at length quite turned the head of their master, who naturally had not a good one,
and ruined him by a continual traffic, and by bargains, of which he was the dupe, whilst they persuaded
him they were greatly in his favor. They persuaded him to take upon the Brenta, a Palazzo, at twice the
rent it was worth, and divided the surplus with the proprietor. The apartments were inlaid with mosaic,
and ornamented with columns and pilasters, in the taste of the country. M. de Montaigu, had all these
superbly masked by fir wainscoting, for no other reason than because at Paris apartments were thus
fitted up. It was for a similar reason that he only, of all the ambassadors who were at Venice, took from
his pages their swords, and from his footmen their canes. Such was the man, who, perhaps from the
same motive took a dislike to me on account of my serving him faithfully.
I  patiently  endured  his  disdain,  his  brutality,  and  ill-treatment,  as  long  as,  perceiving  them
accompanied by ill-humor, I thought they had in them no portion of hatred; but the moment I saw the
design formed of depriving me of the honor I merited by my faithful services, I resolved to resign my
employment. The first mark I received of his ill will was relative to a dinner he was to give to the Duke
of Modena and his family, who were at Venice, and at which he signified to me I should not be present.
I answered, piqued, but not angry, that having the honor daily to dine at his table, if the Duke of
Modena, when he came, required I should not appear at it, my duty as well as the dignity of hisexcellency  would  not  suffer  me  to  consent  to  such  a  request.  "How;"  said  he  passionately,  "my
secretary, who is not a gentleman, pretends to dine with a sovereign when my gentlemen do not!" "Yes,
sir,"  replied  I,  "the  post  with  which  your  excellency  has  honored  me,  as  long  as  I  discharge  the
functions of it, so far ennobles me that my rank is superior to that of your gentlemen or of the persons
calling themselves such; and I am admitted where they cannot appear. You cannot but know that on the
day on which you shall make your public entry, I am called to the ceremony by etiquette; and by an
immemorial custom, to follow you in a dress of ceremony, and afterwards to dine with you at the
palace of St. Mark; and I know not why a man who has a right and is to eat in public with the doge and
the senate of Venice should not eat in private with the Duke of Modena." Though this argument was
unanswerable, it did not convince the ambassador; but we had no occasion to renew the dispute, as the
Duke of Modena did not come to dine with him.
  From  that  moment  he  did  everything  in  his  power  to  make  things  disagreeable  to  me;  and
endeavored unjustly to deprive me of my rights, by taking from me the pecuniary advantages annexed
to my employment, to give them to his dear Vitali; and I am convinced that had he dared to send him to
the senate, in my place, he would have done it. He commonly employed the Abbe Binis in his closet, to
write his private letters: he made use of him to write to M. de Maurepas an account of the affair of
Captain Olivet, in which, far from taking the least notice of me, the only person who gave himself any
concern about the matter, he deprived me of the honor of the depositions, of which he sent him a
duplicate, for the purpose of attributing them to Patizel, who had not opened his mouth. He wished to
mortify me, and please his favorite; but had no desire to dismiss me his service. He perceived it would
be more difficult to find me a successor, than M. Follau, who had already made him known to the
world. An Italian secretary was absolutely necessary to him, on account of the answers from the senate;
one who could write all his despatches, and conduct his affairs, without his giving himself the least
trouble about anything; a person who, to the merit of serving him well, could join the baseness of being
the toad-eater of his gentlemen, without honor, merit, or principles. He wished to retain, and humble
me, by keeping me far from my country, and his own, without money to return to either, and in which
he would, perhaps, had succeeded, had he began with more moderation: but Vitali, who had other
views, and wished to force me to extremities, carried his point. The moment I perceived, I lost all my
trouble, that the ambassador imputed to me my services as so many crimes, instead of being satisfied
with them; that with him I had nothing to expect, but things disagreeable at home, and injustice abroad;
and that, in the general disesteem into which he was fallen, his ill offices might be prejudicial to me,
without the possibility of my being served by his good ones; I took my resolution, and asked him for
my  dismission,  leaving  him  sufficient  time  to  provide  himself  with  another  secretary.  Without
answering  yes  or  no,  he  continued  to  treat  me  in  the  same  manner,  as  if  nothing  had  been  said.
Perceiving things to remain in the same state, and that he took no measures to procure himself a new
secretary, I wrote to his brother, and, explaining to him my motives, begged he would obtain my
dismission from his excellency, adding that whether I received it or not, I could not possibly remain
with him. I waited a long time without any answer, and began to be embarrassed: but at length the
ambassador received a letter from his brother, which must have remonstrated with him in very plain
terms; for although he was extremely subject to ferocious rage, I never saw him so violent as on this
occasion. After torrents of unsufferable reproaches, not knowing what more to say, he accused me of
having sold his ciphers. I burst into a loud laughter, and asked him, in a sneering manner, if he thought
there was in Venice a man who would be fool enough to give half a crown for them all. He threatened
to call his servants to throw me out of the window. Until then I had been very composed; but on this
threat, anger and indignation seized me in my turn. I sprang to the door, and after having turned a
button which fastened it within: "No, count," said I, returning to him with a grave step, "Your servants
shall have nothing to do with this affair; please to let it be settled between ourselves." My action and
manner instantly made him calm; fear and surprise were marked in his countenance. The moment I saw
his fury abated, I bid him adieu in a very few words, and without waiting for his answer, went to the
door, opened it, and passed slowly across the antechamber, through the midst of his people, who roseaccording to custom, and who, I am of opinion, would rather have lent their assistance against him than
me. Without going back to my apartment, I descended the stairs, and immediately went out of the
palace never more to enter it.
I hastened immediately to M. le Blond and related to him what had happened. Knowing the man, he
was but little surprised. He kept me to dinner. This dinner, although without preparation, was splendid.
All the French of consequence who were at Venice, partook of it. The ambassador had not a single
person. The consul related my case to the company. The cry was general, and by no means in favor of
his excellency. He had not settled my account, nor paid me a farthing, and being reduced to the few
louis I had in my pocket, I was extremely embarrassed about my return to France. Every purse was
opened to me. I took twenty sequins from that of M. le Blond, and as many from that of M. St. Cyr,
with whom, next to M. le Blond, I was the most intimately connected. I returned thanks to the rest; and,
till my departure, went to lodge at the house of the chancellor of the consulship, to prove to the public,
the nation was not an accomplice in the injustice of the ambassador.
  His excellency, furious at seeing me taken notice of in my misfortune, at the same time that,
notwithstanding  his  being  an  ambassador,  nobody  went  near  his  house,  quite  lost  his  senses  and
behaved like a madman. He forgot himself so far as to present a memoir to the senate to get me
arrested. On being informed of this by the Abbe de Binis, I resolved to remain a fortnight longer,
instead of setting off the next day as I had intended. My conduct had been known and approved of by
everybody; I was universally esteemed. The senate did not deign to return an answer to the extravagant
memoir of the ambassador, but sent me word I might remain in Venice as long as I thought proper,
without making myself uneasy about the attempts of a madman. I continued to see my friends: I went to
take leave of the ambassador from Spain, who received me well, and of the Comte de Finochietti,
minister  from  Naples,  whom  I  did  not  find  at  home.  I  wrote  him  a  letter  and  received  from  his
excellency the most polite and obliging answer. At length I took my departure, leaving behind me,
notwithstanding my embarrassment, no other debts than the two sums I had borrowed, and of which I
have just spoken; and an account of fifty crowns with a shopkeeper, of the name of Morandi, which
Carrio promised to pay, and which I have never reimbursed him, although we have frequently met since
that time; but with respect to the two sums of money, I returned them very exactly the moment I had it
in my power.
I cannot take leave of Venice without saying something of the celebrated amusements of that city,
or at least of the little part of them of which I partook during my residence there. It has been seen how
little in my youth I ran after the pleasures of that age, or those that are so called. My inclinations did not
change at Venice, but my occupations, which moreover would have prevented this, rendered more
agreeable to me the simple recreations I permitted myself. The first and most pleasing of all was the
society of men of merit. M. le Blond, de St. Cyr, Carrio Altuna, and a Forlinian gentleman, whose
name I am very sorry to have forgotten, and whom I never call to my recollection without emotion: he
was the man of all I ever knew whose heart most resembled my own. We were connected with two or
three Englishmen of great wit and information, and, like ourselves, passionately fond of music. All
these gentlemen had their wives, female friends, or mistresses: the latter were most of them women of
talents, at whose apartments there were balls and concerts. There was but little play; a lively turn,
talents, and the theatres rendered this amusement incipid. Play is the resource of none but men whose
time hangs heavy on their hands. I had brought with me from Paris the prejudice of that city against
Italian  music;  but  I  had  also  received  from  nature  a  sensibility  and  niceness  of  distinction  which
prejudice cannot withstand. I soon contracted that passion for Italian music with which it inspires all
those who are capable of feeling its excellence. In listening to barcaroles, I found I had not yet known
what singing was, and I soon became so fond of the opera that, tired of babbling, eating, and playing in
the boxes when I wished to listen, I frequently withdrew from the company to another part of the
theater. There, quite alone, shut up in my box, I abandoned myself, notwithstanding the length of the
representation, to the pleasure of enjoying it at ease unto the conclusion. One evening at the theatre of
Saint Chrysostom, I fell into a more profound sleep than I should have done in my bed. The loud andbrilliant airs did not disturb my repose. But who can explain the delicious sensations given me by the
soft  harmony  of  the  angelic  music,  by  which  I  was  charmed  from  sleep;  what  an  awaking!  what
ravishment! what ecstasy, when at the same instant I opened my ears and eyes! My first idea was to
believe I was in paradise. The ravishing air, which I still recollect and shall never forget, began with
these words:
  Conservami la bella, Che si m'accende il cor.
I was desirous of having it; I had and kept it for a time; but it was not the same thing upon paper as
in my head. The notes were the same but the thing was different. This divine composition can never be
executed but in my mind, in the same manner as it was the evening on which it woke me from sleep.
  A kind of music far superior, in my opinion, to that of operas, and which in all Italy has not its
equal,  nor  perhaps  in  the  whole  world,  is  that  of  the  'scuole'.  The  'scuole'  are  houses  of  charity,
established for the education of young girls without fortune, to whom the republic afterwards gives a
portion either in marriage or for the cloister. Amongst talents cultivated in these young girls, music is in
the first rank. Every Sunday at the church of each of the four 'scuole', during vespers, motettos or
anthems with full choruses, accompanied by a great orchestra, and composed and directed by the best
masters in Italy, are sung in the galleries by girls only; not one of whom is more than twenty years of
age. I have not an idea of anything so voluptuous and affecting as this music; the richness of the art, the
exquisite taste of the vocal part, the excellence of the voices, the justness of the execution, everything
in these delightful concerts concurs to produce an impression which certainly is not the mode, but from
which I am of opinion no heart is secure. Carrio and I never failed being present at these vespers of the
'Mendicanti', and we were not alone. The church was always full of the lovers of the art, and even the
actors of the opera came there to form their tastes after these excellent models. What vexed me was the
iron grate, which suffered nothing to escape but sounds, and concealed from me the angels of which
they were worthy. I talked of nothing else. One day I spoke of it at Le Blond's; "If you are so desirous,"
said he, "to see those little girls, it will be an easy matter to satisfy your wishes. I am one of the
administrators of the house, I will give you a collation with them." I did not let him rest until he had
fulfilled his promise. In entering the saloon, which contained these beauties I so much sighed to see, I
felt a trembling of love which I had never before experienced. M. le Blond presented to me one after
the other, these celebrated female singers, of whom the names and voices were all with which I was
acquainted. Come, Sophia,--she was horrid. Come, Cattina,--she had but one eye. Come, Bettina,--the
small-pox had entirely disfigured her. Scarcely one of them was without some striking defect.
  Le Blond laughed at my surprise; however, two or three of them appeared tolerable; these never
sung but in the choruses; I was almost in despair. During the collation we endeavored to excite them,
and they soon became enlivened; ugliness does not exclude the graces, and I found they possessed
them. I said to myself, they cannot sing in this manner without intelligence and sensibility, they must
have both; in fine, my manner of seeing them changed to such a degree that I left the house almost in
love with each of these ugly faces. I had scarcely courage enough to return to vespers. But after having
seen the girls, the danger was lessened. I still found their singing delightful; and their voices so much
embellished their persons that, in spite of my eyes, I obstinately continued to think them beautiful.
  Music in Italy is accompanied with so trifling an expense, that it is not worth while for such as have
a taste for it to deny themselves the pleasure it affords. I hired a harpsichord, and, for half a crown, I
had at my apartment four or five symphonists, with whom I practised once a week in executing such
airs, etc., as had given me most pleasure at the opera. I also had some symphonies performed from my
'Muses Galantes'. Whether these pleased the performers, or the ballet-master of St. John Chrysostom
wished to flatter me, he desired to have two of them; and I had afterwards the pleasure of hearing these
executed by that admirable orchestra. They were danced to by a little Bettina, pretty and amiable, and
kept by a Spaniard, M. Fagoaga, a friend of ours with whom we often went to spend the evening. But
apropos of girls of easy virtue: it is not in Venice that a man abstains from them. Have you nothing to
confess, somebody will ask me, upon this subject? Yes: I have something to say upon it, and I will
proceed to the confession with the same ingenuousness with which I have made my former ones.I always had a disinclination to girls of pleasure, but at Venice those were all I had within my reach;
most of the houses being shut against me on account of my place. The daughters of M. le Blond were
very amiable, but difficult of access; and I had too much respect for the father and mother ever once to
have the least desire for them.
I should have had a much stronger inclination to a young lady named Mademoiselle de Cataneo,
daughter to the agent from the King of Prussia, but Carrio was in love with her there was even between
them some question of marriage. He was in easy circumstances, and I had no fortune: his salary was a
hundred louis (guineas) a year, and mine amounted to no more than a thousand livres (about forty
pounds sterling) and, besides my being unwilling to oppose a friend, I knew that in all places, and
especially at Venice, with a purse so ill furnished as mine was, gallantry was out of the question. I had
not lost the pernicious custom of deceiving my wants. Too busily employed forcibly to feel those
proceeding from the climate, I lived upwards of a year in that city as chastely as I had done in Paris,
and at the end of eighteen months I quitted it without having approached the sex, except twice by
means of the singular opportunities of which I am going to speak.
  The first was procured me by that honest gentleman, Vitali, some time after the formal apology I
obliged him to make me. The conversation at the table turned on the amusements of Venice. These
gentlemen reproached me with my indifference with regard to the most delightful of them all; at the
same time extolling the gracefulness and elegant manners of the women of easy virtue of Venice; and
adding that they were superior to all others of the same description in any other part of the world.
"Dominic," said I, "(I) must make an acquaintance with the most amiable of them all," he offered to
take me to her apartments, and assured me I should be pleased with her. I laughed at this obliging offer:
and Count Piati, a man in years and venerable, observed to me, with more candor than I should have
expected from an Italian, that he thought me too prudent to suffer myself to be taken to such a place by
my enemy. In fact I had no inclination to do it: but notwithstanding this, by an incoherence I cannot
myself comprehend, I at length was prevailed upon to go, contrary to my inclination, the sentiment of
my  heart,  my  reason,  and  even  my  will;  solely  from  weakness,  and  being  ashamed  to  show  an
appearance to the least mistrust; and besides, as the expression of the country is, 'per non parer troppo
cogliono'--[Not to appear too great a blockhead.]--The 'Padoana' whom we went to visit was pretty, she
was even handsome, but her beauty was not of that kind that pleased me. Dominic left me with her, I
sent for Sorbetti, and asked her to sing. In about half an hour I wished to take my leave, after having put
a ducat on the table, but this by a singular scruple she refused until she had deserved it, and I from as
singular a folly consented to remove her doubts. I returned to the palace so fully persuaded that I should
feel the consequences of this step, that the first thing I did was to send for the king's surgeon to ask him
for ptisans. Nothing can equal the uneasiness of mind I suffered for three weeks, without its being
justified by any real inconvenience or apparent sign. I could not believe it was possible to withdraw
with  impunity  from  the  arms  of  the  'padoana'.  The  surgeon  himself  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in
removing my apprehensions; nor could he do this by any other means than by persuading me I was
formed in such a manner as not to be easily infected: and although in the experiment I exposed myself
less than any other man would have done, my health in that respect never having suffered the least
inconvenience,  in  my  opinion  a  proof  the  surgeon  was  right.  However,  this  has  never  made  me
imprudent, and if in fact I have received such an advantage from nature I can safely assert I have never
abused it.
  My second adventure, although likewise with a common girl, was of a nature very different, as well
in its origin as in its effects; I have already said that Captain Olivet gave me a dinner on board his
vessel, and that I took with me the secretary of the Spanish embassy. I expected a salute of cannon.
  The ship's company was drawn up to receive us, but not so much as a priming was burnt, at which I
was mortified, on account of Carrio, whom I perceived to be rather piqued at the neglect. A salute of
cannon was given on board merchant-ships to people of less consequence than we were; I besides
thought  I  deserved  some  distinguished  mark  of  respect  from  the  captain.  I  could  not  conceal  my
thoughts, because this at all times was impossible to me, and although the dinner was a very good one,and Olivet did the honors of it perfectly well, I began it in an ill humor, eating but little, and speaking
still less. At the first health, at least, I expected a volley; nothing. Carrio, who read what passed within,
me, laughed at hearing me grumble like a child. Before dinner was half over I saw a gondola approach
the vessel. "Bless me, sir," said the captain, "take care of yourself, the enemy approaches." I asked him
what he meant, and he answered jocosely. The gondola made the ship's side, and I observed a gay
young damsel come on board very lightly, and coquettishly dressed, and who at three steps was in the
cabin, seated by my side, before I had time to perceive a cover was laid for her. She was equally
charming and lively, a brunette, not more than twenty years of age. She spoke nothing but Italian, and
her accent alone was sufficient to turn my head. As she eat and chattered she cast her eyes upon me;
steadfastly looked at me for a moment, and then exclaimed, "Good Virgin! Ah, my dear Bremond, what
an age it is since I saw thee!" Then she threw herself into my arms, sealed her lips to mine, and pressed
me almost to strangling. Her large black eyes, like those of the beauties of the East, darted fiery shafts
into my heart, and although the surprise at first stupefied my senses, voluptuousness made a rapid
progress within, and this to such a degree that the beautiful seducer herself was, notwithstanding the
spectators, obliged to restrain my ardor, for I was intoxicated, or rather become furious. When she
perceived she had made the impression she desired, she became more moderate in her caresses, but not
in her vivacity, and when she thought proper to explain to us the real or false cause of all her petulance,
she said I resembled M. de Bremond, director of the customs of Tuscany, to such a degree as to be
mistaken for him; that she had turned this M. de Bremond's head, and would do it again; that she had
quitted him because he was a fool; that she took me in his place; that she would love me because it
pleased her so to do, for which reason I must love her as long as it was agreeable to her, and when she
thought proper to send me about my business, I must be patient as her dear Bremond had been. What
was said was done. She took possession of me as of a man that belonged to her, gave me her gloves to
keep, her fan, her cinda, and her coif, and ordered me to go here or there, to do this or that, and I
instantly obeyed her. She told me to go and send away her gondola, because she chose to make use of
mine, and I immediately sent it away; she bid me to move from my place, and pray Carrio to sit down
in it, because she had something to say to him; and I did as she desired. They chatted a good while
together, but spoke low, and I did not interrupt them. She called me, and I approached her. "Hark thee,
Zanetto," said she to me, "I will not be loved in the French manner; this indeed will not be well. In the
first moment of lassitude, get thee gone: but stay not by the way, I caution thee." After dinner we went
to see the glass manufactory at Murano. She bought a great number of little curiosities; for which she
left me to pay without the least ceremony. But she everywhere gave away little trinkets to a much
greater amount than of the things we had purchased. By the indifference with which she threw away her
money, I perceived she annexed to it but little value. When she insisted upon a payment, I am of
opinion it was more from a motive of vanity than avarice. She was flattered by the price her admirers
set upon her favors.
  In the evening we conducted her to her apartments. As we conversed together, I perceived a couple
of pistols upon her toilette. "Ah! Ah!" said I, taking one of them up, "this is a patchbox of a new
construction: may I ask what is its use? I know you have other arms which give more fire than those
upon your table." After a few pleasantries of the same kind, she said to us, with an ingenuousness
which rendered her still more charming, "When I am complaisant to persons whom I do not love, I
make them pay for the weariness they cause me; nothing can be more just; but if I suffer their caresses,
I will not bear their insults; nor miss the first who shall be wanting to me in respect."
  At taking leave of her, I made another appointment for the next day. I did not make her wait. I
found her in 'vestito di conidenza', in an undress more than wanton, unknown to northern countries, and
which I will not amuse myself in describing, although I recollect it perfectly well. I shall only remark
that her ruffles and collar were edged with silk network ornamented with rose--colored pompons. This,
in my eyes, much enlivened a beautiful complexion. I afterwards found it to be the mode at Venice, and
the effect is so charming that I am surprised it has never been introduced in France. I had no idea of the
transports  which  awaited  me.  I  have  spoken  of  Madam  de  Larnage  with  the  transport  which  theremembrance of her still sometimes gives me; but how old, ugly and cold she appeared, compared with
my Zulietta! Do not attempt to form to yourself an idea of the charms and graces of this enchanting girl,
you will be far too short of truth. Young virgins in cloisters are not so fresh: the beauties of the seraglio
are less animated: the houris of paradise less engaging. Never was so sweet an enjoyment offered to the
heart and senses of a mortal. Ah! had I at least been capable of fully tasting of it for a single moment! I
had tasted of it, but without a charm. I enfeebled all its delights: I destroyed them as at will. No; Nature
has not made me capable of enjoyment. She has infused into my wretched head the poison of that
ineffable happiness, the desire of which she first placed in my heart.
  If there be a circumstance in my life, which describes my nature, it is that which I am going to
relate. The forcible manner in which I at this moment recollect the object of my book, will here make
me hold in contempt the false delicacy which would prevent me from fulfilling it. Whoever you may be
who are desirous of knowing a man, have the courage to read the two or three following pages, and you
will become fully acquainted with J. J. Rousseau.
I entered the chamber of a woman of easy virtue, as the sanctuary of love and beauty: and in her
person, I thought I saw the divinity. I should have been inclined to think that without respect and
esteem it was impossible to feel anything like that which she made me experience. Scarcely had I, in
her first familiarities, discovered the force of her charms and caresses, before I wished, for fear of
losing the fruit of them, to gather it beforehand. Suddenly, instead of the flame which consumed me, I
felt a mortal cold run through all my veins; my legs failed me; and ready to faint away, I sat down and
wept like a child.
  Who would guess the cause of my tears, and what, at this moment, passed within me? I said to
myself:  the  object  in  my  power  is  the  masterpiece  of  love;  her  wit  and  person  equally  approach
perfection;  she  is  as  good  and  generous  as  she  is  amiable  and  beautiful.  Yet  she  is  a  miserable
prostitute, abandoned to the public. The captain of a merchantship disposed of her at will; she has
thrown herself into my arms, although she knows I have nothing; and my merit with which she cannot
be acquainted, can be to her no inducement. In this there is something inconceivable. Either my heart
deceives me, fascinates my senses, and makes me the dupe of an unworthy slut, or some secret defect,
of which I am ignorant, destroys the effect of her charms, and renders her odious in the eyes of those by
whom her charms would otherwise be disputed. I endeavored, by an extraordinary effort of mind, to
discover this defect, but it did not so much as strike me that even the consequences to be apprehended,
might possibly have some influence. The clearness of her skin, the brilliancy of her complexion, her
white teeth, sweet breath, and the appearance of neatness about her person, so far removed from me this
idea, that, still in doubt relative to my situation after the affair of the 'padoana', I rather apprehended I
was not sufficiently in health for her: and I am firmly persuaded I was not deceived in my opinion.
These reflections, so apropos, agitated me to such a degree as to make me shed tears. Zuliette, to whom
the scene was quite novel, was struck speechless for a moment. But having made a turn in her chamber,
and passing before her glass, she comprehended, and my eyes confirmed her opinion, that disgust had
no part in what had happened. It was not difficult for her to recover me and dispel this shamefacedness.
  But, at the moment in which I was ready to faint upon a bosom, which for the first time seemed to
suffer the impression of the hand and lips of a man, I perceived she had a withered 'teton'. I struck my
forehead: I examined, and thought I perceived this teton was not formed like the other. I immediately
began to consider how it was possible to have such a defect, and persuaded of its proceeding from some
great natural vice, I was clearly convinced, that, instead of the most charming person of whom I could
form to myself an idea, I had in my arms a species of a monster, the refuse of nature, of men and of
love. I carried my stupidity so far as to speak to her of the discovery I had made. She, at first, took what
I said jocosely; and in her frolicsome humor, did and said things which made me die of love. But
perceiving an inquietude I could not conceal, she at length reddened, adjusted her dress, raised herself
up, and without saying a word, went and placed herself at a window. I attempted to place myself by her
side: she withdrew to a sofa, rose from it the next moment, and fanning herself as she walked about the
chamber, said to me in a reserved and disdainful tone of voice, "Zanetto, 'lascia le donne, a studia lamatematica."--[Leave women and study mathematics.]
  Before I took leave I requested her to appoint another rendezvous for the next day, which she
postponed for three days, adding, with a satirical smile, that I must needs be in want of repose. I was
very ill at ease during the interval; my heart was full of her charms and graces; I felt my extravagance,
and reproached myself with it, regretting the loss of the moments I had so ill employed, and which, had
I chosen, I might have rendered more agreeable than any in my whole life; waiting with the most
burning impatience for the moment in which I might repair the loss, and yet, notwithstanding all my
reasoning upon what I had discovered, anxious to reconcile the perfections of this adorable girl with the
indignity of her situation. I ran, I flew to her apartment at the hour appointed. I know not whether or not
her ardor would have been more satisfied with this visit, her pride at least would have been flattered by
it, and I already rejoiced at the idea of my convincing her, in every respect, that I knew how to repair
the  wrongs  I  had  done.  She  spared  me  this  justification.  The  gondolier  whom  I  had  sent  to  her
apartment brought me for answer that she had set off, the evening before, for Florence. If I had not felt
all the love I had for her person when this was in my possession, I felt it in the most cruel manner on
losing her. Amiable and charming as she was in my eyes, I could not console myself for the loss of her;
but this I have never been able to do relative to the contemptuous idea which at her departure she must
have had of me.
  These are my two narratives. The eighteen months I passed at Venice furnished me with no other of
the same kind, except a simple prospect at most. Carrio was a gallant. Tired of visiting girls engaged to
others, he took a fancy to have one to himself, and, as we were inseparable, he proposed to mean
arrangement common enough at Venice, which was to keep one girl for us both. To this I consented.
The question was, to find one who was safe. He was so industrious in his researches that he found out a
little girl from eleven to twelve years of age, whom her infamous mother was endeavoring to sell, and I
went with Carrio to see her. The sight of the child moved me to the most lively compassion. She was
fair and as gentle as a lamb. Nobody would have taken her for an Italian. Living is very cheap in
Venice; we gave a little money to the mother, and provided for the subsistence of her daughter. She had
a voice, and to procure her some resource we gave her a spinnet, and a singing--master. All these
expenses did not cost each of us more than two sequins a month, and we contrived to save a much
greater sum in other matters; but as we were obliged to wait until she became of a riper age, this was
sowing a long time before we could possibly reap. However, satisfied with passing our evenings,
chatting and innocently playing with the child, we perhaps enjoyed greater pleasure than if we had
received the last favors. So true is it that men are more attached to women by a certain pleasure they
have in living with them, than by any kind of libertinism. My heart became insensibly attached to the
little  Anzoletta,  but  my  attachment  was  paternal,  in  which  the  senses  had  so  little  share,  that  in
proportion as the former increased, to have connected it with the latter would have been less possible;
and I felt I should have experienced, at approaching this little creature when become nubile, the same
horror with which the abominable crime of incest would have inspired me. I perceived the sentiments
of Carrio take, unobserved by himself, exactly the same turn. We thus prepared for ourselves, without
intending it, pleasure not less delicious, but very different from that of which we first had an idea; and I
am  fully  persuaded  that  however  beautiful  the  poor  child  might  have  become,  far  from  being  the
corrupters of her innocence we should have been the protectors of it. The circumstance which shortly
afterwards befell me deprived me, of the happiness of taking a part in this good work, and my only
merit in the affair was the inclination of my heart.
I will now return to my journey.
  My first intentions after leaving M. de Montaigu, was to retire to Geneva, until time and more
favorable circumstances should have removed the obstacles which prevented my union with my poor
mamma; but the quarrel between me and M. de Montaigu being become public, and he having had the
folly to write about it to the court, I resolved to go there to give an account of my conduct and complain
of that of a madman. I communicated my intention, from Venice, to M. du Theil, charged per interim
with foreign affairs after the death of M. Amelot. I set off as soon as my letter, and took my routethrough Bergamo, Como, and Domo D'Oscela, and crossing Saint Plomb. At Sion, M. de Chaignon,
charge des affaires from France, showed me great civility; at Geneva M. de la Closure treated me with
the same polite attention. I there renewed my acquaintance with M. de Gauffecourt, from whom I had
some money to receive. I had passed through Nion without going to see my father: not that this was a
matter of indifference to me, but because I was unwilling to appear before my mother-in-law, after the
disaster  which  had  befallen  me,  certain  of  being  condemned  by  her  without  being  heard.  The
bookseller, Du Villard, an old friend of my father's, reproached me severely with this neglect. I gave
him my reasons for it, and to repair my fault, without exposing myself to meet my mother-in-law, I
took a chaise and we went together to Nion and stopped at a public house. Du Villard went to fetch my
father, who came running to embrace me. We supped together, and, after passing an evening very
agreeable to the wishes of my heart, I returned the next morning to Geneva with Du Villard, for whom I
have ever since retained a sentiment of gratitude in return for the service he did me on this occasion.
  Lyons was a little out of my direct road, but I was determined to pass through that city in order to
convince myself of a knavish trick played me by M. de Montaigu. I had sent me from Paris a little box
containing  a  waistcoat,  embroidered  with  gold,  a  few  pairs  of  ruffles,  and  six  pairs  of  white  silk
stockings; nothing more. Upon a proposition made me by M. de Montaigu, I ordered this box to be
added to his baggage. In the apothecary's bill he offered me in payment of my salary, and which he
wrote out himself, he stated the weight of this box, which he called a bale, at eleven hundred pounds,
and charged me with the carriage of it at an enormous rate. By the cares of M. Boy de la Tour, to whom
I was recommended by M. Roquin, his uncle, it was proved from the registers of the customs of Lyons
and Marseilles, that the said bale weighed no more than forty-five pounds, and had paid carriage
according to that weight. I joined this authentic extract to the memoir of M, de Montaigu, and provided
with these papers and others containing stronger facts, I returned to Paris, very impatient to make use of
them. During the whole of this long journey I had little adventures; at Como, in Valais, and elsewhere. I
there  saw  many  curious  things,  amongst  others  the  Boroma  islands,  which  are  worthy  of  being
described. But I am pressed by time, and surrounded by spies. I am obliged to write in haste, and very
imperfectly, a work which requires the leisure and tranquility I do not enjoy. If ever providence in its
goodness grants me days more calm, I shall destine them to new modelling this work, should I be able
to do it, or at least to giving a supplement, of which I perceive it stands in the greatest need.--[I have
given up this project.]
  The news of my quarrel had reached Paris before me and on my arrival I found the people in all the
offices, and the public in general, scandalized at the follies of the ambassador.
    Notwithstanding this, the public talk at Venice, and the unanswerable proof I exhibited, I could not
obtain  even  the  shadow  of  justice.  Far  from  obtaining  satisfaction  or  reparation,  I  was  left  at  the
discretion of the ambassador for my salary, and this for no other reason than because, not being a
Frenchman, I had no right to national protection, and that it was a private affair between him and
myself. Everybody agreed I was insulted, injured, and unfortunate; that the ambassador was mad, cruel,
and iniquitous, and that the whole of the affair dishonored him forever. But what of this! He was the
ambassador, and I was nothing more than the secretary.
  Order, or that which is so called, was in opposition to my obtaining justice, and of this the least
shadow was not granted me. I supposed that, by loudly complaining, and by publicly treating this
madman in the manner he deserved, I should at length be told to hold my tongue; this was what I
wished for, and I was fully determined not to obey until I had obtained redress. But at that time there
was no minister for foreign affairs. I was suffered to exclaim, nay, even encouraged to do it, and joined
with; but the affair still remained in the same state, until, tired of being in the right without obtaining
justice, my courage at length failed me, and let the whole drop.
  The only person by whom I was ill received, and from whom I should have least expected such an
injustice,  was  Madam  de  Beuzenval.  Full  of  the  prerogatives  of  rank  and  nobility,  she  could  not
conceive it was possible an ambassador could ever be in the wrong with respect to his secretary. The
reception she gave me was conformable to this prejudice. I was so piqued at it that, immediately afterleaving her, I wrote her perhaps one of the strongest and most violent letters that ever came from my
pen, and since that time I never once returned to her house. I was better received by Father Castel; but,
in the midst of his Jesuitical wheedling I perceived him faithfully to follow one of the great maxims of
his society, which is to sacrifice the weak to the powerful. The strong conviction I felt of the justice of
my cause, and my natural greatness of mind did not suffer me patiently to endure this partiality. I
ceased visiting Father Castel, and on that account, going to the college of the Jesuits, where I knew
nobody but himself. Besides the intriguing and tyrannical spirit of his brethren, so different from the
cordiality of the good Father Hemet, gave me such a disgust for their conversation that I have never
since been acquainted with, nor seen anyone of them except Father Berthier, whom I saw twice or
thrice at M. Dupin's, in conjunction with whom he labored with all his might at the refutation of
Montesquieu.
  That I may not return to the subject, I will conclude what I have to say of M. de Montaigu. I had
told him in our quarrels that a secretary was not what he wanted, but an attorney's clerk. He took the
hint, and the person whom he procured to succeed me was a real attorney, who in less than a year
robbed him of twenty or thirty thousand livres. He discharged him, and sent him to prison, dismissed
his  gentleman  with  disgrace,  and,  in  wretchedness,  got  himself  everywhere  into  quarrels,  received
affronts which a footman would not have put up with, and, after numerous follies, was recalled, and
sent from the capital. It is very probable that among the reprimands he received at court, his affair with
me was not forgotten. At least, a little time after his return he sent his maitre d' hotel, to settle my
account, and give me some money. I was in want of it at that moment; my debts at Venice, debts of
honor, if ever there were any, lay heavy upon my mind. I made use of the means which offered to
discharge them, as well as the note of Zanetto Nani. I received what was offered me, paid all my debts,
and remained as before, without a farthing in my pocket, but relieved from a weight which had become
insupportable. From that time I never heard speak of M. de Montaigu until his death, with which I
became acquainted by means of the Gazette. The peace of God be with that poor man! He was as fit for
the functions of an ambassador as in my infancy I had been for those of Grapignan.--[I have not been
able to find this word in any dictionary, nor does any Frenchman of letters of my acquaintance know
what  it  means.  --T.]--However,  it  was  in  his  power  to  have  honorably  supported  himself  by  my
services, and rapidly to have advanced me in a career to which the Comte de Gauvon had destined me
in my youth, and of the functions of which I had in a more advanced age rendered myself capable.
  The justice and inutility of my complaints, left in my mind seeds of indignation against our foolish
civil institutions, by which the welfare of the public and real justice are always sacrificed to I know not
what appearance of order, and which does nothing more than add the sanction of public authority to the
oppression of the weak, and the iniquity of the powerful. Two things prevented these seeds from
putting forth at that time as they afterwards did: one was, myself being in question in the affair, and
private interest, whence nothing great or noble ever proceeded, could not draw from my heart the
divine soarings, which the most pure love, only of that which is just and sublime, can produce. The
other was the charm of friendship which tempered and calmed my wrath by the ascendancy of a more
pleasing sentiment. I had become acquainted at Venice with a Biscayan, a friend of my friend Carrio's,
and worthy of being that of every honest man. This amiable young man, born with every talent and
virtue, had just made the tour of Italy to gain a taste for the fine arts, and, imagining he had nothing
more to acquire, intended to return by the most direct road to his own country. I told him the arts were
nothing more than a relaxation to a genius like his, fit to cultivate the sciences; and to give him a taste
for these, I advised him to make a journey to Paris and reside there for six months. He took my advice,
and went to Paris. He was there and expected me when I arrived. His lodging was too considerable for
him, and he offered me the half of it, which I instantly accepted. I found him absorbed in the study of
the sublimest sciences. Nothing was above his reach. He digested everything with a prodigious rapidity.
How cordially did he thank me for having procured him this food for his mind, which was tormented
by a thirst after knowledge, without his being aware of it! What a treasure of light and virtue I found in
the vigorous mind of this young man! I felt he was the friend I wanted. We soon became intimate. Ourtastes were not the same, and we constantly disputed. Both opinionated, we never could agree about
anything.  Nevertheless  we  could  not  separate;  and,  notwithstanding  our  reciprocal  and  incessant
contradiction, we neither of us wished the other to be different from what he was.
  Ignacio Emanuel de Altuna was one of those rare beings whom only Spain produces, and of whom
she produces too few for her glory. He had not the violent national passions common in his own
country. The idea of vengeance could no more enter his head, than the desire of it could proceed from
his heart. His mind was too great to be vindictive, and I have frequently heard him say, with the
greatest coolness, that no mortal could offend him. He was gallant, without being tender. He played
with women as with so many pretty children. He amused himself with the mistresses of his friends, but
I never knew him to have one of his own, nor the least desire for it. The emanations from the virtue
with which his heart was stored, never permitted the fire of the passions to excite sensual desires.
  After  his  travels  he  married,  died  young,  and  left  children;  and,  I  am  as  convinced  as  of  my
existence, that his wife was the first and only woman with whom he ever tasted of the pleasures of love.
  Externally he was devout, like a Spaniard, but in his heart he had the piety of an angel. Except
myself, he is the only man I ever saw whose principles were not intolerant. He never in his life asked
any person his opinion in matters of religion. It was not of the least consequence to him whether his
friend was a Jew, a Protestant, a Turk, a Bigot, or an Atheist, provided he was an honest man. Obstinate
and headstrong in matters of indifference, but the moment religion was in question, even the moral part,
he collected himself, was silent, or simply said: "I am charged with the care of myself, only." It is
astonishing  so  much  elevation  of  mind  should  be  compatible  with  a  spirit  of  detail  carried  to
minuteness. He previously divided the employment of the day by hours, quarters and minutes; and so
scrupulously adhered to this distribution, that had the clock struck while he was reading a phrase, he
would have shut his book without finishing it. His portions of time thus laid out, were some of them set
apart to studies of one kind, and others to those of another: he had some for reflection, conversation,
divine service, the reading of Locke, for his rosary, for visits, music and painting; and neither pleasure,
temptation, nor complaisance, could interrupt this order: a duty he might have had to discharge was the
only thing that could have done it. When he gave me a list of his distribution, that I might conform
myself thereto, I first laughed, and then shed tears of admiration. He never constrained anybody nor
suffered constraint: he was rather rough with people, who from politeness, attempted to put it upon
him. He was passionate without being sullen. I have often seen him warm, but never saw him really
angry with any person. Nothing could be more cheerful than his temper: he knew how to pass and
receive a joke; raillery was one of his distinguished talents, and with which he possessed that of pointed
wit and repartee. When he was animated, he was noisy and heard at a great distance; but whilst he
loudly inveighed, a smile was spread over his countenance, and in the midst of his warmth he used
some diverting expression which made all his hearers break out into a loud laugh. He had no more of
the Spanish complexion than of the phlegm of that country. His skin was white, his cheeks finely
colored, and his hair of a light chestnut. He was tall and well made; his body was well formed for the
residence of his mind.
  This wise--hearted as well as wise--headed man, knew mankind, and was my friend; this was my
only answer to such as are not so. We were so intimately united, that our intention was to pass our days
together. In a few years I was to go to Ascoytia to live with him at his estate; every part of the project
was arranged the eve of his departure; nothing was left undetermined, except that which depends not
upon men in the best concerted plans, posterior events. My disasters, his marriage, and finally, his
death, separated us forever. Some men would be tempted to say, that nothing succeeds except the dark
conspiracies  of  the  wicked,  and  that  the  innocent  intentions  of  the  good  are  seldom  or  never
accomplished. I had felt the inconvenience of dependence, and took a resolution never again to expose
myself  to  it;  having  seen  the  projects  of  ambition,  which  circumstances  had  induced  me  to  form,
overturned in their birth. Discouraged in the career I had so well begun, from which, however, I had
just  been  expelled,  I  resolved  never  more  to  attach  myself  to  any  person,  but  to  remain  in  an
independent state, turning my talents to the best advantage: of these I at length began to feel the extent,and that I had hitherto had too modest an opinion of them. I again took up my opera, which I had laid
aside to go to Venice; and that I might be less interrupted after the departure of Altuna, I returned to my
old hotel St. Quentin; which, in a solitary part of the town, and not far from the Luxembourg, was more
proper for my purpose than noisy Rue St. Honor.
  There the only consolation which Heaven suffered me to taste in my misery, and the only one
which rendered it supportable, awaited me. This was not a trancient acquaintance; I must enter into
some detail relative to the manner in which it was made.
  We had a new landlady from Orleans; she took for a needlewoman a girl from her own country, of
between twenty--two and twenty--three years of age, and who, as well as the hostess, ate at our table.
This girl, named Theresa le Vasseur, was of a good family; her father was an officer in the mint of
Orleans, and her mother a shopkeeper; they had many children. The function of the mint of Orleans
being suppressed, the father found himself without employment; and the mother having suffered losses,
was reduced to narrow circumstances. She quitted her business and came to Paris with her husband and
daughter, who, by her industry, maintained all the three.
  The first time I saw this girl at table, I was struck with her modesty; and still more so with her lively
yet charming look, which, with respect to the impression it made upon me, was never equalled. Beside
M. de Bonnefond, the company was composed of several Irish priests, Gascons and others of much the
same description. Our hostess herself had not made the best possible use of her time, and I was the only
person at the table who spoke and behaved with decency. Allurements were thrown out to the young
girl. I took her part, and the joke was then turned against me. Had I had no natural inclination to the
poor girl, compassion and contradiction would have produced it in me: I was always a great friend to
decency in manners and conversation, especially in the fair sex. I openly declared myself her champion,
and perceived she was not insensible of my attention; her looks, animated by the gratitude she dared not
express by words, were for this reason still more penetrating.
  She  was  very  timid,  and  I  was  as  much  so  as  herself.  The  connection  which  this  disposition
common to both seemed to remove to a distance, was however rapidly formed. Our landlady perceiving
its progress, became furious, and her brutality forwarded my affair with the young girl, who, having no
person in the house except myself to give her the least support, was sorry to see me go from home, and
sighed for the return of her protector. The affinity our hearts bore to each other, and the similarity of
our dispositions, had soon their ordinary effect. She thought she saw in me an honest man, and in this
she was not deceived. I thought I perceived in her a woman of great sensibility, simple in her manners,
and devoid of all coquetry:--I was no more deceived in her than she in me. I began by declaring to her
that I would never either abandon or marry her. Love, esteem, artless sincerity were the ministers of my
triumph,  and  it  was  because  her  heart  was  tender  and  virtuous,  that  I  was  happy  without  being
presuming.
  The apprehensions she was under of my not finding in her that for which I sought, retarded my
happiness more than every other circumstance. I perceived her disconcerted and confused before she
yielded her consent, wishing to be understood and not daring to explain herself. Far from suspecting the
real cause of her embarrassment, I falsely imagined it to proceed from another motive, a supposition
highly insulting to her morals, and thinking she gave me to understand my health might be exposed to
danger, I fell into so perplexed a state that, although it was no restraint upon me, it poisoned my
happiness  during  several  days.  As  we  did  not  understand  each  other,  our  conversations  upon  this
subject  were  so  many  enigmas  more  than  ridiculous.  She  was  upon  the  point  of  believing  I  was
absolutely mad; and I on my part was as near not knowing what else to think of her. At last we came to
an explanation; she confessed to me with tears the only fault of the kind of her whole life, immediately
after she became nubile; the fruit of her ignorance and the address of her seducer. The moment I
comprehended what she meant, I gave a shout of joy. "A Hymen!" exclaimed I; "sought for at Paris,
and at twenty years of age! Ah my Theresa! I am happy in possessing thee, virtuous and healthy as thou
art, and in not finding that for which I never sought."
  At first amusement was my only object; I perceived I had gone further and had given myself acompanion.  A  little  intimate  connection  with  this  excellent  girl,  and  a  few  reflections  upon  my
situation, made me discover that, while thinking of nothing more than my pleasures, I had done a great
deal towards my happiness. In the place of extinguished ambition, a life of sentiment, which had entire
possession of my heart, was necessary to me. In a word, I wanted a successor to mamma: since I was
never again to live with her, it was necessary some person should live with her pupil, and a person, too,
in whom I might find that simplicity and docility of mind and heart which she had found in me. It was,
moreover, necessary that the happiness of domestic life should indemnify me for the splendid career I
had just renounced. When I was quite alone there was a void in my heart, which wanted nothing more
than another heart to fill it up. Fate had deprived me of this, or at least in part alienated me from that for
which by nature I was formed. From that moment I was alone, for there never was for me the least
thing intermediate between everything and nothing. I found in Theresa the supplement of which I stood
in need; by means of her I lived as happily as I possibly could do, according to the course of events.
I at first attempted to improve her mind. In this my pains were useless. Her mind is as nature
formed it: it was not susceptible of cultivation. I do not blush in acknowledging she never knew how to
read well, although she writes tolerably. When I went to lodge in the Rue Neuve des Petits Champs,
opposite to my windows at the Hotel de Ponchartrain, there was a sun-dial, on which for a whole month
I used all my efforts to teach her to know the hours; yet, she scarcely knows them at present. She never
could enumerate the twelve months of the year in order, and cannot distinguish one numeral from
another, notwithstanding all the trouble I took endeavoring to teach them to her. She neither knows how
to count money, nor to reckon the price of anything. The word which when she speaks, presents itself
to  her  mind,  is  frequently  opposite  to  that  of  which  she  means  to  make  use.  I  formerly  made  a
dictionary of her phrases, to amuse M. de Luxembourg, and her 'qui pro quos' often became celebrated
among those with whom I was most intimate. But this person, so confined in her intellects, and, if the
world pleases, so stupid, can give excellent advice in cases of difficulty. In Switzerland, in England and
in France, she frequently saw what I had not myself perceived; she has often given me the best advice I
could possibly follow; she has rescued me from dangers into which I had blindly precipitated myself,
and in the presence of princes and the great, her sentiments, good sense, answers, and conduct have
acquired her universal esteem, and myself the most sincere congratulations on her merit. With persons
whom we love, sentiment fortifies the mind as well as the heart; and they who are thus attached, have
little need of searching for ideas elsewhere.
I lived with my Theresa as agreeably as with the finest genius in the world. Her mother, proud of
having been brought up under the Marchioness of Monpipeau, attempted to be witty, wished to direct
the judgment of her daughter, and by her knavish cunning destroyed the simplicity of our intercourse.
  The  fatigue  of  this  opportunity  made  me  in  some  degree  surmount  the  foolish  shame  which
prevented me from appearing with Theresa in public; and we took short country walks, tete-a-tete, and
partook of little collations, which, to me, were delicious. I perceived she loved me sincerely, and this
increased my tenderness. This charming intimacy left me nothing to wish; futurity no longer gave me
the least concern, or at most appeared only as the present moment prolonged: I had no other desire than
that of insuring its duration.
  This attachment rendered all other dissipation superfluous and insipid to me. As I only went out for
the purpose of going to the apartment of Theresa, her place of residence almost became my own. My
retirement was so favorable to the work I had undertaken, that, in less than three months, my opera was
entirely finished, both words and music, except a few accompaniments, and fillings up which still
remained to be added. This maneuvering business was very fatiguing to me. I proposed it to Philidor,
offering him at the same time a part of the profits. He came twice, and did something to the middle
parts in the act of Ovid; but he could not confine himself to an assiduous application by the allurement
of advantages which were distant and uncertain. He did not come a third time, and I finished the work
myself.
  My opera completed, the next thing was to make something of it: this was by much the more
difficult task of the two. A man living in solitude in Paris will never succeed in anything. I was on thepoint of making my way by means of M. de la Popliniere, to whom Gauffecourt, at my return to
Geneva had introduced me. M. de la Popliniere was the Mecaenas of Rameau; Madam de la Popliniere
his very humble scholar. Rameau was said to govern in that house. Judging that he would with pleasure
protect the work of one of his disciples, I wished to show him what I had done. He refused to examine
it; saying he could not read score, it was too fatiguing to him. M. de la Popliniere, to obviate this
difficulty, said he might hear it; and offered me to send for musicians to execute certain detached
pieces. I wished for nothing better. Rameau consented with an ill grace, incessantly repeating that the
composition of a man not regularly bred to the science, and who had learned music without a master,
must certainly be very fine! I hastened to copy into parts five or six select passages. Ten symphonies
were procured, and Albert, Berard, and Mademoiselle Bourbonois undertook the vocal part. Remeau,
the moment he heard the overture, was purposely extravagant in his eulogium, by which he intended it
should be understood it could not be my composition. He showed signs of impatience at every passage:
but  after  a  counter  tenor  song,  the  air  of  which  was  noble  and  harmonious,  with  a  brilliant
accompaniment, he could no longer contain himself; he apostrophised me with a brutality at which
everybody was shocked, maintaining that a part of what he had heard was by a man experienced in the
art, and the rest by some ignorant person who did not so much as understand music. It is true my
composition, unequal and without rule, was sometimes sublime, and at others insipid, as that of a
person who forms himself in an art by the soarings of his own genius, unsupported by science, must
necessarily be. Rameau pretended to see nothing in me but a contemptible pilferer, without talents or
taste. The rest of the company, among whom I must distinguish the master of the house, were of a
different opinion. M. de Richelieu, who at that time frequently visited M. and Madam de la Popliniere,
heard them speak of my work, and wished to hear the whole of it, with an intention, if it pleased him, to
have it performed at court. The opera was executed with full choruses, and by a great orchestra, at the
expense of the king, at M. de Bonneval's intendant of the Menus; Francoeur directed the band. The
effect was surprising: the duke never ceased to exclaim and applaud; and, at the end of one of the
choruses, in the act of Tasso, he arose and came to me, and, pressing my hand, said: "M. Rousseau, this
is transporting harmony. I never heard anything finer. I will get this performed at Versailles."
  Madam de la Poliniere, who was present, said not a word. Rameau, although invited, refused to
come. The next day, Madam de la Popliniere received me at her toilette very ungraciously, affected to
undervalue my piece, and told me, that although a little false glitter had at first dazzled M. de Richelieu,
he had recovered from his error, and she advised me not to place the least dependence upon my opera.
The duke arrived soon after, and spoke to me in quite a different language. He said very flattering
things of my talents, and seemed as much disposed as ever to have my composition performed before
the king. "There is nothing," said he, "but the act of Tasso which cannot pass at court: you must write
another." Upon this single word I shut myself up in my apartment; and in three weeks produced, in the
place of Tasso, another act, the subject of which was Hesiod inspired by the muses. In this I found the
secret of introducing a part of the history of my talents, and of the jealousy with which Rameau had
been pleased to honor me. There was in the new act an elevation less gigantic and better supported than
in the act of Tasso. The music was as noble and the composition better; and had the other two acts been
equal to this, the whole piece would have supported a representation to advantage. But whilst I was
endeavoring to give it the last finishing, another undertaking suspended the completion of that I had in
my hand. In the winter which succeeded the battle of Fontenoi, there were many galas at Versailles, and
several operas performed at the theater of the little stables. Among the number of the latter was the
dramatic piece of Voltaire, entitled 'La Princesse de Navarre', the music by Rameau, the name of which
has just been changed to that of 'Fetes de Ramire'. This new subject required several changes to be
made in the divertissements, as well in the poetry as in the music.
  A person capable of both was now sought after. Voltaire was in Lorraine, and Rameau also; both of
whom were employed on the opera of the Temple of Glory, and could not give their attention to this.
M. de Richelieu thought of me, and sent to desire I would undertake the alterations; and, that I might
the better examine what there was to do, he gave me separately the poem and the music. In the firstplace, I would not touch the words without the consent of the author, to whom I wrote upon the subject
a very polite and respectful letter, such a one as was proper; and received from him the following
answer:
  "SIR: In you two talents, which hitherto have always been separated, are united. These are two
good reasons for me to esteem and to endeavor to love you. I am sorry, on your account, you should
employ these talents in a work which is so little worthy of them. A few months ago the Duke de
Richelieu commanded me to make, absolutely in the twinkling of an eye, a little and bad sketch of a
few insipid and imperfect scenes to be adapted to divertissements which are not of a nature to be joined
with them. I obeyed with the greatest exactness. I wrote very fast, and very ill. I sent this wretched
production to M. de Richelieu, imagining he would make no use of it, or that I should have it again to
make the necessary corrections. Happily it is in your hands, and you are at full liberty to do with it
whatever you please: I have entirely lost sight of the thing. I doubt not but you will have corrected all
the faults which cannot but abound in so hasty a composition of such a very simple sketch, and am
persuaded you will have supplied whatever was wanting.
  "I remember that, among other stupid inattentions, no account is given in the scenes which connect
the divertissements of the manner in which the Grenadian prince immediately passes from a prison to a
garden or palace. As it is not a magician but a Spanish nobleman who gives her the gala, I am of
opinion nothing should be effected by enchantment.
  "I beg, sir, you will examine this part, of which I have but a confused idea.
  "You will likewise consider, whether or not it be necessary the prison should be opened, and the
princess conveyed from it to a fine palace, gilt and varnished, and prepared for her. I know all this is
wretched, and that it is beneath a thinking being to make a serious affair of such trifles; but, since we
must  displease  as  little  as  possible,  it  is  necessary  we  should  conform  to  reason,  even  in  a  bad
divertissement of an opera.
  "I depend wholly upon you and M. Ballot, and soon expect to have the honor of returning you my
thanks, and assuring you how much I am, etc."
  There is nothing surprising in the great politeness of this letter, compared with the almost crude
ones which he has since written to me. He thought I was in great favor with Madam Richelieu; and the
courtly  suppleness,  which  everyone  knows  to  be  the  character  of  this  author,  obliged  him  to  be
extremely polite to a new comer, until he become better acquainted with the measure of the favor and
patronage he enjoyed.
  Authorized by M. de Voltaire, and not under the necessity of giving myself the least concern about
M. Rameau, who endeavored to injure me, I set to work, and in two months my undertaking was
finished. With respect to the poetry, it was confined to a mere trifle; I aimed at nothing more than to
prevent the difference of style from being perceived, and had the vanity to think I had succeeded. The
musical part was longer and more laborious. Besides my having to compose several preparatory pieces,
and, amongst others, the overture, all the recitative, with which I was charged, was extremely difficult
on account of the necessity there was of connecting, in a few verses, and by very rapid modulations,
symphonies and choruses, in keys very different from each other; for I was determined neither to
change nor transpose any of the airs, that Rameau might not accuse me of having disfigured them. I
succeeded in the recitative; it was well accented, full of energy and excellent modulation. The idea of
two men of superior talents, with whom I was associated, had elevated my genius, and I can assert, that
in this barren and inglorious task, of which the public could have no knowledge, I was for the most part
equal to my models.
  The piece, in the state to which I had brought it, was rehearsed in the great theatre of the opera. Of
the three authors who had contributed to the production, I was the only one present. Voltaire was not in
Paris, and Rameau either did not come, or concealed himself. The words of the first monologue were
very mournful; they began with:
  O Mort! viens terminer les malheurs de ma vie.
  [O Death! hasten to terminate the misfortunes of my life.]  To these, suitable music was necessary. It was, however, upon this that Madam de la Popliniere
founded her censure; accusing me, with much bitterness, of having composed a funeral anthem. M. de
Richelieu  very  judiciously  began  by  informing  himself  who  was  the  author  of  the  poetry  of  this
monologue; I presented him the manuscript he had sent me, which proved it was by Voltaire. "In that
case," said the duke, "Voltaire alone is to blame." During the rehearsal, everything I had done was
disapproved by Madam de la Popliniere, and approved of by M. de Richelieu; but I had afterwards to
do with too powerful an adversary. It was signified to me that several parts of my composition wanted
revising, and that on this it was necessary I should consult M. Rameau; my heart was wounded by such
a conclusion, instead of the eulogium I expected, and which certainly I merited, and I returned to my
apartment  overwhelmed  with  grief,  exhausted  with  fatigue,  and  consumed  by  chagrin.  I  was
immediately taken ill, and confined to my chamber for upwards of six weeks.
  Rameau, who was charged with the alterations indicated by Madam de la Popliniere, sent to ask me
for the overture of my great opera, to substitute it to that I had just composed. Happily I perceived the
trick he intended to play me, and refused him the overture. As the performance was to be in five or six
days, he had not time to make one, and was obliged to leave that I had prepared. It was in the Italian
taste, and in a style at that time quite new in France. It gave satisfaction, and I learned from M. de
Valmalette, maitre d'hotel to the king, and son-in-law to M. Mussard, my relation and friend, that the
connoisseurs were highly satisfied with my work, and that the public had not distinguished it from that
of Rameau. However, he and Madam de la Popliniere took measures to prevent any person from
knowing I had any concern in the matter. In the books distributed to the audience, and in which the
authors  are  always  named,  Voltaire  was  the  only  person  mentioned,  and  Rameau  preferred  the
suppression of his own name to seeing it associated with mine.
  As soon as I was in a situation to leave my room, I wished to wait upon M. de Richelieu, but it was
too late; he had just set off for Dunkirk, where he was to command the expedition destined to Scotland.
At his return, said I to myself, to authorize my idleness, it will be too late for my purpose, not having
seen him since that time. I lost the honor of mywork and the emoluments it should have produced me,
besides considering my time, trouble, grief, and vexation, my illness, and the money this cost me,
without  ever  receiving  the  least  benefit,  or  rather,  recompense.  However,  I  always  thought  M.  de
Richelieu  was  disposed  to  serve  me,  and  that  he  had  a  favorable  opinion  of  my  talents;  but  my
misfortune, and Madam de la Popliniere, prevented the effect of his good wishes.
I could not divine the reason of the aversion this lady had to me. I had always endeavored to make
myself agreeable to her, and regularly paid her my court. Gauffecourt explained to me the causes of her
dislike: "The first," said he, "is her friendship for Rameau, of whom she is the declared panegyrist, and
who will not suffer a competitor; the next is an original sin, which ruins you in her estimation, and
which she will never forgive; you are a Genevese." Upon this he told me the Abbe Hubert, who was
from the same city, and the sincere friend of M. de la Popliniere, had used all his efforts to prevent him
from marrying this lady, with whose character and temper he was very well acquainted; and that after
the marriage she had vowed him an implacable hatred, as well as all the Genevese. "Although La
Popliniere has a friendship for you, do not," said he, "depend upon his protection: he is still in love with
his wife: she hates you, and is vindictive and artful; you will never do anything in that house." All this I
took for granted.
  The same Gauffecourt rendered me much about this time, a service of which I stood in the greatest
need. I had just lost my virtuous father, who was about sixty years of age. I felt this loss less severely
than I should have done at any other time, when the embarrassments of my situation had less engaged
my attention. During his life-time I had never claimed what remained of the property of my mother, and
of which he received the little interest. His death removed all my scruples upon this subject. But the
want of a legal proof of the death of my brother created a difficulty which Gauffecourt undertook to
remove, and this he effected by means of the good offices of the advocate De Lolme. As I stood in need
of the little resource, and the event being doubtful, I waited for a definitive account with the greatest
anxiety.  One evening on entering my apartment I found a letter, which I knew to contain the information I
wanted, and I took it up with an impatient trembling, of which I was inwardly ashamed. What? said I to
myself, with disdain, shall Jean Jacques thus suffer himself to be subdued by interest and curiosity? I
immediately laid the letter again upon the chimney-piece. I undressed myself, went to bed with great
composure, slept better than ordinary, and rose in the morning at a late hour, without thinking more of
my letter. As I dressed myself, it caught my eye; I broke the seal very leisurely, and found under the
envelope a bill of exchange. I felt a variety of pleasing sensations at the same time: but I can assert,
upon my honor, that the most lively of them all was that proceeding from having known how to be
master of myself.
I could mention twenty such circumstances in my life, but I am too much pressed for time to say
everything. I sent a small part of this money to my poor mamma; regretting, with my eyes suffused
with tears, the happy time when I should have laid it all at her feet. All her letters contained evident
marks of her distress. She sent me piles of recipes, and numerous secrets, with which she pretended I
might make my fortune and her own. The idea of her wretchedness already affected her heart and
contracted her mind. The little I sent her fell a prey to the knaves by whom she was surrounded; she
received not the least advantage from anything. The idea of dividing what was necessary to my own
subsistence with these wretches disgusted me, especially after the vain attempt I had made to deliver
her from them, and of which I shall have occasion to speak. Time slipped away, and with it the little
money I had; we were two, or indeed, four persons; or, to speak still more correctly, seven or eight.
Although Theresa was disinterested to a degree of which there are but few examples, her mother was
not so. She was no sooner a little relieved from her necessities by my cares, than she sent for her whole
family to partake of the fruits of them. Her sisters, sons, daughters, all except her eldest daughter,
married to the director of the coaches of Augers, came to Paris. Everything I did for Theresa, her
mother diverted from its original destination in favor of these people who were starving. I had not to do
with an avaricious person; and, not being under the influence of an unruly passion, I was not guilty of
follies. Satisfied with genteelly supporting Theresa without luxury, and unexposed to pressing wants, I
readily consented to let all the earnings of her industry go to the profit of her mother; and to this even I
did not confine myself; but, by a fatality by which I was pursued, whilst mamma was a prey to the
rascals about her Theresa was the same to her family; and I could not do anything on either side for the
benefit of her to whom the succor I gave was destined. It was odd enough the youngest child of M. de
la Vasseur, the only one who had not received a marriage portion from her parents, should provide for
their subsistence; and that, after having along time been beaten by her brothers, sisters, and even her
nieces, the poor girl should be plundered by them all, without being more able to defend herself from
their thefts than from their blows. One of her nieces, named Gorton le Duc, was of a mild and amiable
character;  although  spoiled  by  the  lessons  and  examples  of  the  others.  As  I  frequently  saw  them
together, I gave them names, which they afterwards gave to each other; I called the niece my niece, and
the aunt my aunt; they both called me uncle. Hence the name of aunt, by which I continued to call
Theresa, and which my friends sometimes jocosely repeated. It will be judged that in such a situation I
had not a moment to lose, before I attempted to extricate myself. Imagining M. de Richelieu had
forgotten me, and having no more hopes from the court, I made some attempts to get my opera brought
out at Paris; but I met with difficulties which could not immediately be removed, and my situation
became daily more painful. I presented my little comedy of Narcisse to the Italians; it was received, and
I had the freedom of the theatre, which gave much pleasure. But this was all; I could never get my piece
performed, and, tired of paying my court to players, I gave myself no more trouble about them. At
length I had recourse to the last expedient which remained to me, and the only one of which I ought to
have made use. While frequenting the house of M. de la Popliniere, I had neglected the family of
Dupin. The two ladies, although related, were not on good terms, and never saw each other. There was
not the least intercourse between the two families, and Thieriot was the only person who visited both.
He was desired to endeavor to bring me again to M. Dupin's. M. de Francueil was then studying natural
history  and  chemistry,  and  collecting  a  cabinet.  I  believe  he  aspired  to  become  a  member  of  theAcademy of Sciences; to this effect he intended to write a book, and judged I might be of use to him in
the undertaking. Madam de Dupin, who, on her part, had another work in contemplation, had much the
same views in respect to me. They wished to have me in common as a kind of secretary, and this was
the reason of the invitations of Thieriot.
I required that M. de Francueil should previously employ his interest with that of Jelyote to get my
work  rehearsed  at  the  operahouse;  to  this  he  consented.  The  Muses  Galantes  were  several  times
rehearsed, first at the Magazine, and afterwards in the great theatre. The audience was very numerous at
the great rehearsal, and several parts of the composition were highly applauded. However, during this
rehearsal, very ill-conducted by Rebel, I felt the piece would not be received; and that, before it could
appear, great alterations were necessary. I therefore withdrew it without saying a word, or exposing
myself to a refusal; but I plainly perceived, by several indications, that the work, had it been perfect,
could not have succeeded. M. de Francueil had promised me to get it rehearsed, but not that it should be
received. He exactly kept his word. I thought I perceived on this occasion, as well as many others, that
neither Madam Dupin nor himself were willing I should acquire a certain reputation in the world, lest,
after the publication of their books, it should be supposed they had grafted their talents upon mine. Yet
as Madam Dupin always supposed those I had to be very moderate, and never employed me except it
was to write what she dictated, or in researches of pure erudition, the reproach, with respect to her,
would have been unjust.
  This last failure of success completed my discouragement. I abandoned every prospect of fame and
advancement; and, without further troubling my head about real or imaginary talents, with which I had
so little success, I dedicated my whole time and cares to procure myself and Theresa a subsistence in
the manner most pleasing to those to whom it should be agreeable to provide for it. I therefore entirely
attached  myself  to  Madam  Dupin  and  M.  de  Francueil.  This  did  not  place  me  in  a  very  opulent
situation; for with eight or nine hundred livres, which I had the first two years, I had scarcely enough to
provide for my primary wants; being obliged to live in their neighborhood, a dear part of the town, in a
furnished lodging, and having to pay for another lodging at the extremity of Paris, at the very top of the
Rue Saint Jacques, to which, let the weather be as it would, I went almost every evening to supper. I
soon got into the track of my new occupations, and conceived a taste for them. I attached myself to the
study of chemistry, and attended several courses of it with M. de Francueil at M. Rouelle's, and we
began to scribble over paper upon that science, of which we scarcely possessed the elements. In 1717,
we went to pass the autumn in Tourraine, at the castle of Chenonceaux, a royal mansion upon the Cher,
built by Henry the II, for Diana of Poitiers, of whom the ciphers are still seen, and which is now in the
possession of M. Dupin, a farmer general. We amused ourselves very agreeably in this beautiful place,
and lived very well: I became as fat there as a monk. Music was a favorite relaxation. I composed
several trios full of harmony, and of which I may perhaps speak in my supplement if ever I should write
one.  Theatrical  performances  were  another  resource.  I  wrote  a  comedy  in  fifteen  days,  entitled
'l'Engagement Temeraire',--[The Rash Engagement]--which will be found amongst my papers; it has no
other merit than that of being lively. I composed several other little things: amongst others a poem
entitled, 'l'Aliee de Sylvie', from the name of an alley in the park upon the bank of the Cher; and this
without discontinuing my chemical studies, or interrupting what I had to do for Madam Dupin.
  Whilst I was increasing my corpulency at Chenonceaux, that of my poor Theresa was augmented at
Paris  in  another  manner,  and  at  my  return  I  found  the  work  I  had  put  upon  the  frame  in  greater
forwardness than I had expected. This, on account of my situation, would have thrown me into the
greatest embarrassment, had not one of my messmates furnished me with the only resource which could
relieve  me  from  it.  This  is  one  of  those  essential  narratives  which  I  cannot  give  with  too  much
simplicity; because, in making an improper use of their names, I should either excuse or inculpate
myself, both of which in this place are entirely out of the question.
  During the residence of Altuna at Paris, instead of going to eat at a 'Traiteurs', he and I commonly
eat in the neighborhood, almost opposite the cul de sac of the opera, at the house of a Madam la Selle,
the wife of a tailor, who gave but very ordinary dinners, but whose table was much frequented onaccount of the safe company which generally resorted to it; no person was received without being
introduced by one of those who used the house. The commander, De Graville, an old debauchee, with
much wit and politeness, but obscene in conversation, lodged at the house, and brought to it a set of
riotous and extravagant young men; officers in the guards and mousquetaires. The Commander de
Nonant, chevalier to all the girls of the opera, was the daily oracle, who conveyed to us the news of this
motley crew. M. du Plessis, a lieutenant-colonel, retired from the service, an old man of great goodness
and wisdom; and M. Ancelet, an officer in the mousquetaires kept the young people in a certain kind of
order.
  [It was to this M. Ancelet I gave a little comedy, after my own manner entitled 'les Prisouniers de
Guerre', which I wrote after the disasters of the French in Bavaria and Bohemia: I dared not either avow
this comedy or show it, and this for the singular reason that neither the King of France nor the French
were ever better spoken of nor praised with more sincerity of heart than in my piece though written by a
professed republican, I dared not declare myself the panegyrist of a nation, whose maxims were exactly
the reverse of my own. More grieved at the misfortunes of France than the French themselves I was
afraid the public would construe into flattery and mean complaisance the marks of a sincere attachment,
of which in my first part I have mentioned the date and the cause, and which I was ashamed to show.]
  This table was also frequented by commercial people, financiers and contractors, but extremely
polite, and such as were distinguished amongst those of the same profession. M. de Besse, M. de
Forcade, and others whose names I have forgotten, in short, well-dressed people of every description
were seen there; except abbes and men of the long robe, not one of whom I ever met in the house, and it
was agreed not to introduce men of either of these professions. This table, sufficiently resorted to, was
very  cheerful  without  being  noisy,  and  many  of  the  guests  were  waggish,  without  descending  to
vulgarity. The old commander with all his smutty stories, with respect to the substance, never lost sight
of the politeness of the old court; nor did any indecent expression, which even women would not have
pardoned him, escape his lips. His manner served as a rule to every person at table; all the young men
related their adventures of gallantry with equal grace and freedom, and these narratives were the more
complete, as the seraglio was at the door; the entry which led to it was the same; for there was a
communication between this and the shop of Le Duchapt, a celebrated milliner, who at that time had
several very pretty girls, with whom our young people went to chat before or after dinner. I should thus
have amused myself as well as the rest, had I been less modest: I had only to go in as they did, but this I
never had courage enough to do. With respect to Madam de Selle, I often went to eat at her house after
the departure of Altuna. I learned a great number of amusing anecdotes, and by degrees I adopted,
thank  God,  not  the  morals,  but  the  maxims  I  found  to  be  established  there.  Honest  men  injured,
husbands deceived, women seduced, were the most ordinary topics, and he who had best filled the
foundling hospital was always the most applauded. I caught the manners I daily had before my eyes: I
formed my manner of thinking upon that I observed to be the reigning one amongst amiable: and upon
the whole, very honest people. I said to myself, since it is the custom of the country, they who live here
may adopt it; this is the expedient for which I sought. I cheerfully determined upon it without the least
scruple, and the only one I had to overcome was that of Theresa, whom, with the greatest imaginable
difficulty, I persuaded to adopt this only means of saving her honor. Her mother, who was moreover
apprehensive of a new embarrassment by an increase of family, came to my aid, and she at length
suffered herself to be prevailed upon. We made choice of a midwife, a safe and prudent woman,
Mademoiselle Gouin, who lived at the Point Saint Eustache, and when the time came, Theresa was
conducted to her house by her mother.
I went thither several times to see her, and gave her a cipher which I had made double upon two
cards; one of them was put into the linen of the child, and by the midwife deposited with the infant in
the office of the foundling hospital according to the customary form. The year following, a similar
inconvenience was remedied by the same expedient, excepting the cipher, which was forgotten: no
more reflection on my part, nor approbation on that of the mother; she obeyed with trembling. All the
vicissitudes which this fatal conduct has produced in my manner of thinking, as well as in my destiny,will be successively seen. For the present, we will confine ourselves to this first period; its cruel and
unforeseen consequences will but too frequently oblige me to refer to it.
I here mark that of my first acquaintance with Madam D'Epinay, whose name will frequently
appear in these memoirs. She was a Mademoiselle D' Esclavelles, and had lately been married to M.
D'Epinay, son of M. de Lalive de Bellegarde, a farmer general. She understood music, and a passion for
the art produced between these three persons the greatest intimacy. Madam Prancueil introduced me to
Madam D'Epinay, and we sometimes supped together at her house. She was amiable, had wit and
talent, and was certainly a desirable acquaintance; but she had a female friend, a Mademoiselle d'Ette,
who was said to have much malignancy in her disposition; she lived with the Chevalier de Valory,
whose temper was far from being one of the best. I am of opinion, an acquaintance with these two
persons was prejudicial to Madam D'Epinay, to whom, with a disposition which required the greatest
attention from those about her, nature had given very excellent qualities to regulate or counterbalance
her extravagant pretensions. M. de Francueil inspired her with a part of the friendship he had conceived
for me, and told me of the connection between them, of which, for that reason, I would not now speak,
were it not become so public as not to be concealed from M. D'Epinay himself.
  M. de Francueil confided to me secrets of a very singular nature relative to this lady, of which she
herself never spoke to me, nor so much as suspected my having a knowledge; for I never opened my
lips to her upon the subject, nor will I ever do it to any person. The confidence all parties had in my
prudence  rendered  my  situation  very  embarrassing,  especially  with  Madam  de  Francueil,  whose
knowledge of me was sufficient to remove from her all suspicion on my account, although I was
connected with her rival. I did everything I could to console this poor woman, whose husband certainly
did not return the affection she had for him. I listened to these three persons separately; I kept all their
secrets so faithfully that not one of the three ever drew from me those of the two others, and this,
without concealing from either of the women my attachment to each of them. Madam de Francueil,
who frequently wished to make me an agent, received refusals in form, and Madam D'Epinay, once
desiring  me  to  charge  myself  with  a  letter  to  M.  de  Francueil  received  the  same  mortification,
accompanied by a very express declaration, that if ever she wished to drive me forever from the house,
she had only a second time to make me a like proposition.
  In justice to Madam D'Epinay, I must say, that far from being offended with me she spoke of my
conduct to M. de Francueil in terms of the highest approbation, and continued to receive me as well,
and as politely as ever. It was thus, amidst the heart-burnings of three persons to whom I was obliged to
behave with the greatest circumspection, on whom I in some measure depended, and for whom I had
conceived  an  attachment,  that  by  conducting  myself  with  mildness  and  complaisance,  although
accompanied with the greatest firmness, I preserved unto the last not only their friendship, but their
esteem and confidence. Notwithstanding my absurdities and awkwardness, Madam D'Epinay would
have me make one of the party to the Chevrette, a country-house, near Saint Denis, belonging to M. de
Bellegarde. There was a theatre, in which performances were not unfrequent. I had a part given me,
which I studied for six months without intermission, and in which, on the evening of the representation,
I was obliged to be prompted from the beginning to the end. After this experiment no second proposal
of the kind was ever made to me.
  My  acquaintance  with  M.  D'Epinay  procured  me  that  of  her  sister-in-law,  Mademoiselle  de
Bellegarde, who soon afterwards became Countess of Houdetot. The first time I saw her she was upon
the point of marriage; when she conversed with me a long time, with that charming familiarity which
was natural to her. I thought her very amiable, but I was far from perceiving that this young person
would lead me, although innocently, into the abyss in which I still remain.
  Although I have not spoken of Diderot since my return from Venice, no more than of my friend M.
Roguin,  I  did  not  neglect  either  of  them,  especially  the  former,  with  whom  I  daily  became  more
intimate.  He  had  a  Nannette,  as  well  as  I  a  Theresa;  this  was  between  us  another  conformity  of
circumstances. But my Theresa, as fine a woman as his Nannette, was of a mild and amiable character,
which might gain and fix the affections of a worthy man; whereas Nannette was a vixen, a troublesomeprater, and had no qualities in the eyes of others which in any measure compensated for her want of
education. However he married her, which was well done of him, if he had given a promise to that
effect. I, for my part, not having entered into any such engagement, was not in the least haste to imitate
him.
I was also connected with the Abbe de Condillac, who had acquired no more literary fame than
myself, but in whom there was every appearance of his becoming what he now is. I was perhaps the
first who discovered the extent of his abilities, and esteemed them as they deserved. He on his part
seemed satisfied with me, and, whilst shut up in my chamber in the Rue Jean Saint Denis, near the
opera-house, I composed my act of Hesiod, he sometimes came to dine with me tete-a-tete. We sent for
our dinner, and paid share and share alike. He was at that time employed on his Essay on the Origin of
Human Knowledge, which was his first work. When this was finished, the difficulty was to find a
bookseller who would take it. The booksellers of Paris are shy of every author at his beginning, and
metaphysics, not much then in vogue, were no very inviting subject. I spoke to Diderot of Condillac
and his work, and I afterwards brought them acquainted with each other. They were worthy of each
other's  esteem,  and  were  presently  on  the  most  friendly  terms.  Diderot  persuaded  the  bookseller,
Durand, to take the manuscript from the abbe, and this great metaphysician received for his first work,
and almost as a favor, a hundred crowns, which perhaps he would not have obtained without my
assistance. As we lived in a quarter of the town very distant from each other, we all assembled once a
week at the Palais Royal, and went to dine at the Hotel du Panier Fleuri. These little weekly dinners
must have been extremely pleasing to Diderot; for he who failed in almost all his appointments never
missed one of these. At our little meeting I formed the plan of a periodical paper, entitled 'le Persifleur'-
-[The Jeerer] --which Diderot and I were alternately to write. I sketched out the first sheet, and this
brought  me  acquainted  with  D'Alembert,  to  whom  Diderot  had  mentioned  it.  Unforeseen  events
frustrated our intention, and the project was carried no further.
  These  two  authors  had  just  undertaken  the  'Dictionnaire  Encyclopedique',  which  at  first  was
intended to be nothing more than a kind of translation of Chambers, something like that of the Medical
Dictionary of James, which Diderot had just finished. Diderot was desirous I should do something in
this second undertaking, and proposed to me the musical part, which I accepted. This I executed in
great haste, and consequently very ill, in the three months he had given me, as well as all the authors
who were engaged in the work. But I was the only person in readiness at the time prescribed. I gave
him my manuscript, which I had copied by a laquais, belonging to M. de Francueil of the name of
Dupont, who wrote very well. I paid him ten crowns out of my own pocket, and these have never been
reimbursed me. Diderot had promised me a retribution on the part of the booksellers, of which he has
never since spoken to me nor I to him.
  This  undertaking  of  the  'Encyclopedie'  was  interrupted  by  his  imprisonment.  The  'Pensees
Philosophiquiest'  drew  upon  him  some  temporary  inconvenience  which  had  no  disagreeable
consequences. He did not come off so easily on account of the 'Lettre sur les Aveugles', --[Letter
concerning blind persons.]--in which there was nothing reprehensible, but some personal attacks with
which Madam du Pre St. Maur, and M. de Raumur were displeased: for this he was confined in the
dungeon of Vincennes. Nothing can describe the anguish I felt on account of the misfortunes of my
friend. My wretched imagination, which always sees everything in the worst light, was terrified. I
imagined him to be confined for the remainder of his life. I was almost distracted with the thought. I
wrote to Madam de Pompadour, beseeching her to release him or obtain an order to shut me up in the
same dungeon. I received no answer to my letter: this was too reasonable to be efficacious, and I do not
flatter myself that it contributed to the alleviation which, some time afterwards, was granted to the
severities of the confinement of poor Diderot. Had this continued for any length of time with the same
rigor, I verily believe I should have died in despair at the foot of the hated dungeon. However, if my
letter  produced  but  little  effect,  I  did  not  on  account  of  it  attribute  to  myself  much  merit,  for  I
mentioned it but to very few people, and never to Diderot himself.
  
 
 
 
  BOOK VIII.
  At the end of the preceding book a pause was necessary. With this begins the long chain of my
misfortunes deduced from their origin.
  Having lived in the two most splendid houses in Paris, I had, notwithstanding my candor and
modesty, made some acquaintance. Among others at Dupin's, that of the young hereditary prince of
Saxe-Gotha, and of the Baron de Thun, his governor; at the house of M. de la Popliniere, that of M.
Seguy,  friend  to  the  Baron  de  Thun,  and  known  in  the  literary  world  by  his  beautiful  edition  of
Rousseau. The baron invited M. Seguy and myself to go and pass a day or two at Fontenai sous bois,
where the prince had a house. As I passed Vincennes, at the sight of the dungeon, my feelings were
acute; the effect of which the baron perceived on my countenance. At supper the prince mentioned the
confinement of Diderot. The baron, to hear what I had to say, accused the prisoner of imprudence; and I
showed not a little of the same in the impetuous manner in which I defended him. This excess of zeal,
inspired  by  the  misfortune  which  had  befallen  my  friend,  was  pardoned,  and  the  conversation
immediately changed. There were present two Germans in the service of the prince. M. Klupssel, a man
of great wit, his chaplain, and who afterwards, having supplanted the baron, became his governor. The
other was a young man named M. Grimm, who served him as a reader until he could obtain some place,
and  whose  indifferent  appearance  sufficiently  proved  the  pressing  necessity  he  was  under  of
immediately finding one. From this very evening Klupssel and I began an acquaintance which soon led
to friendship. That with the Sieur Grimm did not make quite so rapid a progress; he made but few
advances, and was far from having that haughty presumption which prosperity afterwards gave him.
The next day at dinner, the conversation turned upon music; he spoke well on the subject. I was
transported with joy when I learned from him he could play an accompaniment on the harpsichord.
After dinner was over music was introduced, and we amused ourselves the rest of the afternoon on the
harpischord of the prince. Thus began that friendship which, at first, was so agreeable to me, afterwards
so fatal, and of which I shall hereafter have so much to say.
  At my return to Paris, I learned the agreeable news that Diderot was released from the dungeon, and
that he had on his parole the castle and park of Vincennes for a prison, with permission to see his
friends. How painful was it to me not to be able instantly to fly to him! But I was detained two or three
days at Madam Dupin's by indispensable business. After ages of impatience, I flew to the arms of my
friend. He was not alone: D' Alembert and the treasurer of the Sainte Chapelle were with him. As I
entered I saw nobody but himself, I made but one step, one cry; I riveted my face to his: I pressed him
in my arms, without speaking to him, except by tears and sighs: I stifled him with my affection and joy.
The first thing he did, after quitting my arms, was to turn himself towards the ecclesiastic, and say:
"You see, sir, how much I am beloved by my friends." My emotion was so great, that it was then
impossible for me to reflect upon this manner of turning it to advantage; but I have since thought that,
had I been in the place of Diderot, the idea he manifested would not have been the first that would have
occurred to me.
I found him much affected by his imprisonment. The dungeon had made a terrible impression upon
his mind, and, although he was very agreeably situated in the castle, and at liberty to, walk where he
pleased in the park, which was not inclosed even by a wall, he wanted the society of his friends to
prevent him from yielding to melancholy. As I was the person most concerned for his sufferings, I
imagined I should also be the friend, the sight of whom would give him consolation; on which account,
notwithstanding  very  pressing  occupations,  I  went  every  two  days  at  farthest,  either  alone,  or
accompanied by his wife, to pass the afternoon with him.
  The heat of the summer was this year (1749) excessive. Vincennes is two leagues from Paris. The
state of my finances not permitting me to pay for hackney coaches, at two o'clock in the afternoon, Iwent on foot, when alone, and walked as fast as possible, that I might arrive the sooner. The trees by
the side of the road, always lopped, according to the custom of the country, afforded but little shade,
and exhausted by fatigue, I frequently threw myself on the ground, being unable to proceed any further.
I thought a book in my hand might make me moderate my pace. One day I took the Mercure de France,
and as I walked and read, I came to the following question proposed by the academy of Dijon, for the
premium of the ensuing year, 'Has the progress of sciences and arts contributed to corrupt or purify
morals?'
  The  moment  I  had  read  this,  I  seemed  to  behold  another  world,  and  became  a  different  man.
Although I have a lively remembrance of the impression it made upon me, the detail has escaped my
mind, since I communicated it to M. de Malesherbes in one of my four letters to him. This is one of the
singularities of my memory which merits to be remarked. It serves me in proportion to my dependence
upon it; the moment I have committed to paper that with which it was charged, it forsakes me, and I
have no sooner written a thing than I had forgotten it entirely. This singularity is the same with respect
to music. Before I learned the use of notes I knew a great number of songs; the moment I had made a
sufficient progress to sing an air set to music, I could not recollect any one of them; and, at present, I
much doubt whether I should be able entirely to go through one of those of which I was the most fond.
All I distinctly recollect upon this occasion is, that on my arrival at Vincennes, I was in an agitation
which  approached  a  delirium.  Diderot  perceived  it;  I  told  him  the  cause,  and  read  to  him  the
prosopopoeia of Fabricius, written with a pencil under a tree. He encouraged me to pursue my ideas,
and to become a competitor for the premium. I did so, and from that moment I was ruined.
  All the rest of my misfortunes during my life were the inevitable effect of this moment of error.
  My sentiments became elevated with the most inconceivable rapidity to the level of my ideas. All
my  little  passions  were  stifled  by  the  enthusiasm  of  truth,  liberty,  and  virtue;  and,  what  is  most
astonishing,  this  effervescence  continued  in  my  mind  upwards  of  five  years,  to  as  great  a  degree
perhaps as it has ever done in that of any other man. I composed the discourse in a very singular
manner, and in that style which I have always followed in my other works. I dedicated to it the hours of
the night in which sleep deserted me, I meditated in my bed with my eyes closed, and in my mind
turned over and over again my periods with incredible labor and care; the moment they were finished to
my satisfaction, I deposited them in my memory, until I had an opportunity of committing them to
paper; but the time of rising and putting on my clothes made me lose everything, and when I took up
my pen I recollected but little of what I had composed. I made Madam le Vasseur my secretary; I had
lodged her with her daughter, and husband, nearer to myself; and she, to save me the expense of a
servant, came every morning to make my fire, and to do such other little things as were necessary. As
soon as she arrived I dictated to her while in bed what I had composed in the night, and this method,
which for a long time I observed, preserved me many things I should otherwise have forgotten.
  As soon as the discourse was finished, I showed it to Diderot. He was satisfied with the production,
and pointed out some corrections he thought necessary to be made.
  However, this composition, full of force and fire, absolutely wants logic and order; of all the works
I ever wrote, this is the weakest in reasoning, and the most devoid of number and harmony. With
whatever talent a man may be born, the art of writing is not easily learned.
I sent off this piece without mentioning it to anybody, except, I think, to Grimm, with whom, after
his  going  to  live  with  the  Comte  de  Vriese,  I  began  to  be  upon  the  most  intimate  footing.  His
harpsichord served as a rendezvous, and I passed with him at it all the moments I had to spare, in
singing Italian airs, and barcaroles; sometimes without intermission, from morning till night, or rather
from night until morning; and when I was not to be found at Madam Dupin's, everybody concluded I
was with Grimm at his apartment, the public walk, or theatre. I left off going to the Comedie Italienne,
of which I was free, to go with him, and pay, to the Comedie Francoise, of which he was passionately
fond.  In  short,  so  powerful  an  attraction  connected  me  with  this  young  man,  and  I  became  so
inseparable from him, that the poor aunt herself was rather neglected, that is, I saw her less frequently;
for in no moment of my life has my attachment to her been diminished.  This impossibility of dividing, in favor of my inclinations, the little time I had to myself, renewed
more strongly than ever the desire I had long entertained of having but one home for Theresa and
myself; but the embarrassment of her numerous family, and especially the want of money to purchase
furniture, had hitherto withheld me from accomplishing it. An opportunity to endeavor at it presented
itself, and of this I took advantage. M. de Francueil and Madam Dupin, clearly perceiving that eight or
nine hundred livres a year were unequal to my wants, increased of their own accord, my salary to fifty
guineas; and Madam Dupin, having heard I wished to furnish myself lodgings, assisted me with some
articles for that purpose. With this furniture and that Theresa already had, we made one common stock,
and, having an apartment in the Hotel de Languedoc, Rue de Grevelle St, Honor, kept by very honest
people, we arranged ourselves in the best manner we could, and lived there peaceably and agreeably
during seven years, at the end of which I removed to go and live at the Hermitage.
  Theresa's father was a good old man, very mild in his disposition, and much afraid of his wife; for
this reason he had given her the surname of Lieutenant Criminal, which Grimm, jocosely, afterwards
transferred to the daughter. Madam le Vasseur did not want sense, that is address; and pretended to the
politeness  and  airs  of  the  first  circles;  but  she  had  a  mysterious  wheedling,  which  to  me  was
insupportable,  gave  bad  advice  to  her  daughter,  endeavored  to  make  her  dissemble  with  me,  and
separately, cajoled my friends at my expense, and that of each other; excepting these circumstances; she
was a tolerably good mother, because she found her account in being so, and concealed the faults of her
daughter to turn them to her own advantage. This woman, who had so much of my care and attention,
to whom I made so many little presents, and by whom I had it extremely at heart to make myself
beloved, was, from the impossibility of my succeeding in this wish, the only cause of the uneasiness I
suffered in my little establishment. Except the effects of this cause I enjoyed, during these six or seven,
years, the most perfect domestic happiness of which human weakness is capable. The heart of my
Theresa was that of an angel; our attachment increased with our intimacy, and we were more and more
daily convinced how much we were made for each other. Could our pleasures be described, their
simplicity would cause laughter. Our walks, tete-a-tete, on the outside of the city, where I magnificently
spent  eight  or  ten  sous  in  each  guinguette.--[Ale-house]--Our  little  suppers  at  my  window,  seated
opposite to each other upon two little chairs, placed upon a trunk, which filled up the spare of the
embrasure. In this situation the window served us as a table, we respired the fresh air, enjoyed the
prospect of the environs and the people who passed; and, although upon the fourth story, looked down
into the street as we ate.
  Who can describe, and how few can feel, the charms of these repasts, consisting of a quartern loaf,
a few cherries, a morsel of cheese, and half-a-pint of wine which we drank between us? Friendship,
confidence,  intimacy,  sweetness  of  disposition,  how  delicious  are  your  reasonings!  We  sometimes
remained in this situation until midnight, and never thought of the hour, unless informed of it by the old
lady. But let us quit these details, which are either insipid or laughable; I have always said and felt that
real enjoyment was not to be described.
  Much about the same time I indulged in one not so delicate, and the last of the kind with which I
have  to  reproach  myself.  I  have  observed  that  the  minister  Klupssel  was  an  amiable  man;  my
connections with him were almost as intimate as those I had with Grimm, and in the end became as
familiar; Grimm and he sometimes eat at my apartment. These repasts, a little more than simple, were
enlivened  by  the  witty  and  extravagant  wantonness  of  expression  of  Klupssel,  and  the  diverting
Germanicisms of Grimm, who was not yet become a purist.
  Sensuality did not preside at our little orgies, but joy, which was preferable, reigned in them all, and
we enjoyed ourselves so well together that we knew not how to separate. Klupssel had furnished a
lodging for a little girl, who, notwithstanding this, was at the service of anybody, because he could not
support her entirely himself. One evening as we were going into the coffee-house, we met him coming
out to go and sup with her. We rallied him; he revenged himself gallantly, by inviting us to the same
supper, and there rallying us in our turn. The poor young creature appeared to be of a good disposition,
mild and little fitted to the way of life to which an old hag she had with her, prepared her in the bestmanner she could. Wine and conversation enlivened us to such a degree that we forgot ourselves. The
amiable Klupssel was unwilling to do the honors of his table by halves, and we all three successively
took a view of the next chamber, in company with his little friend, who knew not whether she should
laugh or cry. Grimm has always maintained that he never touched her; it was therefore to amuse
himself with our impatience, that he remained so long in the other chamber, and if he abstained, there is
not much probability of his having done so from scruple, because previous to his going to live with the
Comte de Friese, he lodged with girls of the town in the same quarter of St. Roch.
I left the Rue des Moineaux, where this girl lodged, as much ashamed as Saint Preux left the house
in which he had become intoxicated, and when I wrote his story I well remembered my own. Theresa
perceived by some sign, and especially by my confusion, I had something with which I reproached
myself; I relieved my mind by my free and immediate confession. I did well, for the next day Grimm
came in triumph to relate to her my crime with aggravation, and since that time he has never failed
maliciously to recall it to her recollection; in this he was the more culpable, since I had freely and
voluntarily given him my confidence, and had a right to expect he would not make me repent of it. I
never had a more convincing proof than on this occasion, of the goodness of my Theresa's heart; she
was more shocked at the behavior of Grimm than at my infidelity, and I received nothing from her but
tender reproaches, in which there was not the least appearance of anger.
  The simplicity of mind of this excellent girl was equal to her goodness of heart; and this is saying
everything: but one instance of it, which is present to my recollection, is worthy of being related. I had
told her Klupssel was a minister, and chaplain to the prince of Saxe-Gotha. A minister was to her so
singular a man, that oddly confounding the most dissimilar ideas, she took it into her head to take
Klupssel for the pope; I thought her mad the first time she told me when I came in, that the pope had
called to see me. I made her explain herself and lost not a moment in going to relate the story to Grimm
and Klupssel, who amongst ourselves never lost the name of pope. We gave to the girl in the Rue des
Moineaux the name of Pope Joan. Our laughter was incessant; it almost stifled us. They, who in a letter
which it hath pleased them to attribute to me, have made me say I never laughed but twice in my life,
did not know me at this period, nor in my younger days; for if they had, the idea could never have
entered into their heads.
  The year following (1750), not thinking more of my discourse; I learned it had gained the premium
at Dijon. This news awakened all the ideas which had dictated it to me, gave them new animation, and
completed the fermentation of my heart of that first leaven of heroism and virtue which my father, my
country, and Plutarch had inspired in my infancy. Nothing now appeared great in my eyes but to be free
and virtuous, superior to fortune and opinion, and independent of all exterior circumstances; although a
false shame, and the fear of disapprobation at first prevented me from conducting myself according to
these principles, and from suddenly quarreling with the maxims of the age in which I lived, I from that
moment took a decided resolution to do it.--[And of this I purposely delayed the execution, that irritated
by contradiction f it might be rendered triumphant.]
  While I was philosophizing upon the duties of man, an event happened which made me better
reflect upon my own. Theresa became pregnant for the third time. Too sincere with myself, too haughty
in my mind to contradict my principles by my actions, I began to examine the destination of my
children, and my connections with the mother, according to the laws of nature, justice, and reason, and
those of that religion, pure, holy, and eternal, like its author, which men have polluted while they
pretended to purify it, and which by their formularies they have reduced to a religion of words, since
the difficulty of prescribing impossibilities is but trifling to those by whom they are not practised.
  If I deceived myself in my conclusions, nothing can be more astonishing than the security with
which I depended upon them. Were I one of those men unfortunately born deaf to the voice of nature,
in whom no sentiment of justice or humanity ever took the least root, this obduracy would be natural.
But that warmth of heart, strong sensibility, and facility of forming attachments; the force with which
they subdue me; my cruel sufferings when obliged to break them; the innate benevolence I cherished
towards my fellow-creatures; the ardent love I bear to great virtues, to truth and justice, the horror inwhich I hold evil of every kind; the impossibility of hating, of injuring or wishing to injure anyone; the
soft and lively emotion I feel at the sight of whatever is virtuous, generous and amiable; can these meet
in the same mind with the depravity which without scruple treads under foot the most pleasing of all
our duties? No, I feel, and openly declare this to be impossible. Never in his whole life could J. J. be a
man without sentiment or an unnatural father. I may have been deceived, but it is impossible I should
have lost the least of my feelings. Were I to give my reasons, I should say too much; since they have
seduced me, they would seduce many others. I will not therefore expose those young persons by whom
I may be read to the same danger. I will satisfy myself by observing that my error was such, that in
abandoning my children to public education for want of the means of bringing them up myself; in
destining  them  to  become  workmen  and  peasants,  rather  than  adventurers  and  fortune-hunters,  I
thought I acted like an honest citizen, and a good father, and considered myself as a member of the
republic of Plato. Since that time the regrets of my heart have more than once told me I was deceived;
but my reason was so far from giving me the same intimation, that I have frequently returned thanks to
Heaven for having by this means preserved them from the fate of their father, and that by which they
were threatened the moment I should have been under the necessity of leaving them. Had I left them to
Madam d'Upinay, or Madam de Luxembourg, who, from friendship, generosity, or some other motive,
offered to take care of them in due time, would they have been more happy, better brought up, or
honester men? To this I cannot answer; but I am certain they would have been taught to hate and
perhaps betray their parents: it is much better that they have never known them.
  My third child was therefore carried to the foundling hospital as well as the two former, and the
next two were disposed of in the same manner; for I have had five children in all. This arrangement
seemed to me to be so good, reasonable and lawful, that if I did not publicly boast of it, the motive by
which I was withheld was merely my regard for their mother: but I mentioned it to all those to whom I
had  declared  our  connection,  to  Diderot,  to  Grimm,  afterwards  to  M.  d'Epinay,  and  after  another
interval  to  Madam  de  Luxembourg;  and  this  freely  and  voluntarily,  without  being  under  the  least
necessity of doing it, having it in my power to conceal the step from all the world; for La Gouin was an
honest woman, very discreet, and a person on whom I had the greatest reliance. The only one of my
friends to whom it was in some measure my interest to open myself, was Thierry the physician, who
had the care of my poor aunt in one of her lyings in, in which she was very ill. In a word, there was no
mystery in my conduct, not only on account of my never having concealed anything from my friends,
but because I never found any harm in it. Everything considered, I chose the best destination for my
children, or that which I thought to be such. I could have wished, and still should be glad, had I been
brought up as they have been.
  Whilst I was thus communicating what I had done, Madam. le Vasseur did the same thing amongst
her acquaintance, but with less disinterested views. I introduced her and her daughter to Madam Dupin,
who, from friendship to me, showed them the greatest kindness. The mother confided to her the secret
of the daughter. Madam Dupin, who is generous and kind, and to whom she never told how attentive I
was to her, notwithstanding my moderate resources, in providing for everything, provided on her part
for what was necessary, with a liberality which, by order of her mother, the daughter concealed from
me during my residence in Paris, nor ever mentioned it until we were at the Hermitage, when she
informed me of it, after having disclosed to me several other secrets of her heart. I did not know
Madam Dupin, who never took the least notice to me of the matter, was so well informed: I know not
yet whether Madam de Chenonceaux, her daughter-in-law, was as much in the secret: but Madam de
Brancueil knew the whole and could not refrain from prattling. She spoke of it to me the following
year, after I had left her house. This induced me to write her a letter upon the subject, which will be
found in my collections, and wherein I gave such of my reasons as I could make public, without
exposing Madam le Vasseur and her family; the most determinative of them came from that quarter,
and these I kept profoundly secret.
I can rely upon the discretion of Madam Dupin, and the friendship of Madam de Chenonceaux; I
had the same dependence upon that of Madam de Francuiel, who, however, was long dead before mysecret made its way into the world. This it could never have done except by means of the persons to
whom I intrusted it, nor did it until after my rupture with them. By this single fact they are judged;
without exculpating myself from the blame I deserve, I prefer it to that resulting from their malignity.
My fault is great, but it was an error. I have neglected my duty, but the desire of doing an injury never
entered my heart; and the feelings of a father were never more eloquent in favor of children whom he
never saw. But: betraying the confidence of friendship, violating the most sacred of all engagements,
publishing secrets confided to us, and wantonly dishonoring the friend we have deceived, and who in
detaching himself from our society still respects us, are not faults, but baseness of mind, and the last
degree of heinousness.
I have promised my confession and not my justification; on which account I shall stop here. It is my
duty faithfully to relate the truth, that of the reader to be just; more than this I never shall require of
him.
  The marriage of M. de Chenonceaux rendered his mother's house still more agreeable to me, by the
wit and merit of the new bride, a very amiable young person, who seemed to distinguish me amongst
the scribes of M. Dupin. She was the only daughter of the Viscountess de Rochechouart, a great friend
of the Comte de Friese, and consequently of Grimm's who was very attentive to her. However, it was I
who introduced him to her daughter; but their characters not suiting each other, this connection was not
of long duration; and Grimm, who from that time aimed at what was solid, preferred the mother, a
woman of the world, to the daughter who wished for steady friends, such as were agreeable to her,
without troubling her head about the least intrigue, or making any interest amongst the great. Madam
Dupin no longer finding in Madam de Chenonceaux all the docility she expected, made her house very
disagreeable  to  her,  and  Madam  de  Chenonceaux,  having  a  great  opinion  of  her  own  merit,  and,
perhaps, of her birth, chose rather to give up the pleasures of society, and remain almost alone in her
apartment, than to submit to a yoke she was not disposed to bear. This species of exile increased my
attachment to her, by that natural inclination which excites me to approach the wretched, I found her
mind metaphysical and reflective, although at times a little sophistical; her conversation, which was by
no means that of a young woman coming from a convent, had for me the greatest attractions; yet she
was not twenty years of age. Her complexion was seducingly fair; her figure would have been majestic
had she held herself more upright. Her hair, which was fair, bordering upon ash color, and uncommonly
beautiful, called to my recollection that of my poor mamma in the flower of her age, and strongly
agitated my heart. But the severe principles I had just laid down for myself, by which at all events I was
determined to be guided, secured me from the danger of her and her charms. During the whole summer
I passed three or four hours a day in a tete-a-tete conversation with her, teaching her arithmetic, and
fatiguing her with my innumerable ciphers, without uttering a single word of gallantry, or even once
glancing my eyes upon her. Five or six years later I should not have had so much wisdom or folly; but
it was decreed I was never to love but once in my life, and that another person was to have the first and
last sighs of my heart.
  Since I had lived in the house of Madam Dupin, I had always been satisfied with my situation,
without showing the least sign of a desire to improve it. The addition which, in conjunction with M. de
Francueil, she had made to my salary, was entirely of their own accord. This year M. de Francueil,
whose friendship for me daily increased, had it in his thoughts to place me more at ease, and in a less
precarious situation. He was receiver-general of finance. M. Dudoyer, his cash-keeper, was old and
rich, and wished to retire. M. de Francueil offered me his place, and to prepare myself for it, I went
during a few weeks, to Dudoyer, to take the necessary instructions. But whether my talents were ill-
suited to the employment, or that M. Dudoyer, who I thought wished to procure his place for another,
was not in earnest in the instructions he gave me, I acquired by slow degrees, and very imperfectly, the
knowledge I was in want of, and could never understand the nature of accounts, rendered intricate,
perhaps designedly. However, without having possessed myself of the whole scope of the business, I
learned enough of the method to pursue it without the least difficulty; I even entered on my new office;
I kept the cashbook and the cash; I paid and received money, took and gave receipts; and although thisbusiness was so ill suited to my inclinations as to my abilities, maturity of years beginning to render me
sedate, I was determined to conquer my disgust, and entirely devote myself to my new employment.
  Unfortunately for me, I had no sooner begun to proceed without difficulty, than M. de Francueil
took a little journey, during which I remained intrusted with the cash, which, at that time, did not
amount to more than twenty-five to thirty thousand livres. The anxiety of mind this sum of money
occasioned me, made me perceive I was very unfit to be a cash-keeper, and I have no doubt but my
uneasy situation, during his absence, contributed to the illness with which I was seized after his return.
I have observed in my first part that I was born in a dying state. A defect in the bladder caused me,
during my early years, to suffer an almost continual retention of urine, and my Aunt Susan, to whose
care I was intrusted, had inconceivable difficulty in preserving me. However, she succeeded, and my
robust  constitution  at  length  got  the  better  of  all  my  weakness,  and  my  health  became  so  well
established that except the illness from languor, of which I have given an account, and frequent heats in
the bladder which the least heating of the blood rendered troublesome, I arrived at the age of thirty
almost without feeling my original infirmity. The first time this happened was upon my arrival at
Venice. The fatigue of the voyage, and the extreme heat I had suffered, renewed the burnings, and gave
me a pain in the loins, which continued until the beginning of winter. After having seen padoana, I
thought myself near the end of my career, but I suffered not the least inconvenience. After exhausting
my imagination more than my body for my Zulietta, I enjoyed better health than ever. It was not until
after the imprisonment of Diderot that the heat of blood, brought on by my journeys to Vincennes
during the terrible heat of that summer, gave me a violent nephritic colic, since which I have never
recovered my primitive good state of health.
  At the time of which I speak, having perhaps fatigued myself too much in the filthy work of the
cursed receiver-general's office, I fell into a worse state than ever, and remained five or six weeks in my
bed in the most melancholy state imaginable. Madam Dupin sent me the celebrated Morand who,
notwithstanding his address and the delicacy of his touch, made me suffer the greatest torments. He
advised me to have recourse to Daran, who, in fact gave me some relief: but Morand, when he gave
Madam Dupin an account of the state I was in, declared to her I should not be alive in six months. This
afterwards came to my ear, and made me reflect seriously on my situation and the folly of sacrificing
the repose of the few days I had to live to the slavery of an employment for which I felt nothing but
disgust. Besides, how was it possible to reconcile the severe principles I had just adopted to a situation
with which they had so little relation? Should not I, the cash-keeper of a receiver-general of finances,
have preached poverty and disinterestedness with a very ill grace? These ideas fermented so powerfully
in my mind with the fever, and were so strongly impressed, that from that time nothing could remove
them; and, during my convalescence, I confirmed myself with the greatest coolness in the resolutions I
had taken during my delirium. I forever abandoned all projects of fortune and advancement, resolved to
pass in independence and poverty the little time I had to exist. I made every effort of which my mind
was capable to break the fetters of prejudice, and courageously to do everything that was right without
giving myself the least concern about the judgment of others. The obstacles I had to combat, and the
efforts I made to triumph over them, are inconceivable. I succeeded as much as it was possible I should,
and to a greater degree than I myself had hoped for. Had I at the same time shaken off the yoke of
friendship as well as that of prejudice, my design would have been accomplished, perhaps the greatest,
at least the most useful one to virtue, that mortal ever conceived; but whilst I despised the foolish
judgments of the vulgar tribe called great and wise, I suffered myself to be influenced and led by
persons who called themselves my friends. These, hurt at seeing me walk alone in a new path, while I
seemed to take measures for my happiness, used all their endeavors to render me ridiculous, and that
they might afterwards defame me, first strove to make me contemptible. It was less my literary fame
than my personal reformation, of which I here state the period, that drew upon me their jealousy; they
perhaps might have pardoned me for having distinguished myself in the art of writing; but they could
never forgive my setting them, by my conduct, an example, which, in their eyes, seemed to reflect on
themselves. I was born for friendship; my mind and easy disposition nourished it without difficulty. Aslong as I lived unknown to the public I was beloved by all my private acquaintance, and I had not a
single enemy. But the moment I acquired literary fame, I had no longer a friend. This, was a great
misfortune;  but  a  still  greater  was  that  of  being  surrounded  by  people  who  called  themselves  my
friends, and used the rights attached to that sacred name to lead me on to destruction. The succeeding
part of these memoirs will explain this odious conspiracy. I here speak of its origin, and the manner of
the first intrigue will shortly appear.
  In the independence in which I lived, it was, however, necessary to subsist. To this effect I thought
of very simple means: which were copying music at so much a page. If any employment more solid
would have fulfilled the same end I would have taken it up; but this occupation being to my taste, and
the only one which, without personal attendance, could procure me daily bread, I adopted it. Thinking I
had no longer need of foresight, and, stifling the vanity of cash-keeper to a financier, I made myself a
copyist of music. I thought I had made an advantageous choice, and of this I so little repented, that I
never quitted my new profession until I was forced to do it, after taking a fixed resolution to return to it
as soon as possible.
  The success of my first discourse rendered the execution of this resolution more easy. As soon as it
had gained the premium, Diderot undertook to get it printed. Whilst I was in my bed, he wrote me a
note informing me of the publication and effect: "It takes," said he, "beyond all imagination; never was
there an instance of alike success."
  This favor of the public, by no means solicited, and to an unknown author, gave me the first real
assurance of my talents, of which, notwithstanding an internal sentiment, I had always had my doubts. I
conceived the great advantage to be drawn from it in favor of the way of life I had determined to
pursue; and was of opinion, that a copyist of some celebrity in the republic of letters was not likely to
want employment.
  The moment my resolution was confirmed, I wrote a note to M, de Francueil, communicating to
him my intentions, thanking him and Madam Dupin for all goodness, and offering them my services in
the way of my new profession. Francueil did not understand my note, and, thinking I was still in the
delirium of fever, hastened to my apartment; but he found me so determined, that all he could say to me
was without the least effect. He went to Madam Dupin, and told her and everybody he met, that I had
become insane. I let him say what he pleased, and pursued the plan I had conceived. I began the change
in my dress; I quitted laced clothes and white stockings; I put on a round wig, laid aside my sword, and
sold my watch; saying to myself, with inexpressible pleasure: "Thank Heaven! I shall no longer want to
know the hour!" M. de Francueil had the goodness to wait a considerable time before he disposed of
my place. At length perceiving me inflexibly resolved, he gave it to M. d'Alibard, formerly tutor to the
young Chenonceaux, and known as a botanist by his Flora Parisiensis.
  [I doubt not but these circumstances are now differently related by M. Francueil and his consorts:
but I appeal to what he said of them at the time and long afterwards, to everybody he knew, until the
forming of the conspiracy, and of which men of common sense and honor, must have preserved a
remembrance.]
  However austere my sumptuary reform might be, I did not at first extend it to my linen, which was
fine and in great quantity, the remainder of my stock when at Venice, and to which I was particularly
attached. I had made it so much an object of cleanliness, that it became one of luxury, which was rather
expensive. Some persons, however, did me the favor to deliver me from this servitude. On Christmas
Eve, whilst the governesses were at vespers, and I was at the spiritual concert, the door of a garret, in
which all our linen was hung up after being washed, was broken open. Everything was stolen; and
amongst other things, forty-two of my shirts, of very fine linen, and which were the principal part of my
stock. By the manner in which the neighbors described a man whom they had seen come out of the
hotel with several parcels whilst we were all absent, Theresa and myself suspected her brother, whom
we knew to be a worthless man. The mother strongly endeavored to remove this suspicion, but so many
circumstances concurred to prove it to be well founded, that, notwithstanding all she could say, our
opinions remained still the same: I dared not make a strict search for fear of finding more than I wishedto do. The brother never returned to the place where I lived, and, at length, was no more heard of by
any of us. I was much grieved Theresa and myself should be connected with such a family, and I
exhorted  her  more  than  ever  to  shake  off  so  dangerous  a  yoke.  This  adventure  cured  me  of  my
inclination for fine linen, and since that time all I have had has been very common, and more suitable to
the rest of my dress.
  Having thus completed the change of that which related to my person, all my cares tendered to
render it solid and lasting, by striving to root out from my heart everything susceptible of receiving an
impression from the judgment of men, or which, from the fear of blame, might turn me aside from
anything good and reasonable in itself. In consequence of the success of my work, my resolution made
some noise in the world also, and procured me employment; so that I began my new profession with
great appearance of success. However, several causes prevented me from succeeding in it to the same
degree I should under any other circumstances have done. In the first place my ill state of health. The
attack I had just had, brought on consequences which prevented my ever being so well as I was before;
and I am of opinion, the physicians, to whose care I intrusted myself, did me as much harm as my
illness. I was successively under the hands of Morand, Daran, Helvetius, Malouin, and Thyerri: men
able in their profession, and all of them my friends, who treated me each according to his own manner,
without  giving  me  the  least  relief,  and  weakened  me  considerably.  The  more  I  submitted  to  their
direction, the yellower, thinner, and weaker I became. My imagination, which they terrified, judging of
my  situation  by  the  effect  of  their  drugs,  presented  to  me,  on  this  side  of  the  tomb,  nothing  but
continued sufferings from the gravel, stone, and retention of urine. Everything which gave relief to
others, ptisans, baths, and bleeding, increased my tortures. Perceiving the bougees of Daran, the only
ones that had any favorable effect, and without which I thought I could no longer exist, to give me a
momentary relief, I procured a prodigious number of them, that, in case of Daran's death, I might never
be at a loss. During the eight or ten years in which I made such frequent use of these, they must, with
what I had left, have cost me fifty louis.
  It will easily be judged, that such expensive and painful means did not permit me to work without
interruption; and that a dying man is not ardently industrious in the business by which he gains his daily
bread.
  Literary occupations caused another interruption not less prejudicial to my daily employment. My
discourse had no sooner appeared than the defenders of letters fell upon me as if they had agreed with
each to do it. My indignation was so raised at seeing so many blockheads, who did not understand the
question, attempt to decide upon it imperiously, that in my answer I gave some of them the worst of it.
One M. Gautier, of Nancy, the first who fell under the lash of my pen, was very roughly treated in a
letter to M. Grimm. The second was King Stanislaus, himself, who did not disdain to enter the lists with
me. The honor he did me, obliged me to change my manner in combating his opinions; I made use of a
graver style, but not less nervous; and without failing in respect to the author, I completely refuted his
work. I knew a Jesuit, Father de Menou, had been concerned in it. I depended on my judgment to
distinguish what was written by the prince, from the production of the monk, and falling without mercy
upon all the jesuitical phrases, I remarked, as I went along, an anachronism which I thought could come
from nobody but the priest. This composition, which, for what reason I knew not, has been less spoken
of than any of my other writings, is the only one of its kind. I seized the opportunity which offered of
showing to the public in what manner an individual may defend the cause of truth even against a
sovereign. It is difficult to adopt a more dignified and respectful manner than that in which I answered
him. I had the happiness to have to do with an adversary to whom, without adulation, I could show
every mark of the esteem of which my heart was full; and this I did with success and a proper dignity.
My friends, concerned for my safety, imagined they already saw me in the Bastile. This apprehension
never once entered my head, and I was right in not being afraid. The good prince, after reading my
answer, said: "I have enough of at; I will not return to the charge." I have, since that time received from
him different marks of esteem and benevolence, some of which I shall have occasion to speak of; and
what I had written was read in France, and throughout Europe, without meeting the least censure.  In a little time I had another adversary whom I had not expected; this was the same M. Bordes, of
Lyons, who ten years before had shown me much friendship, and from whom I had received several
services. I had not forgotten him, but had neglected him from idleness, and had not sent him my
writings for want of an opportunity, without seeking for it, to get them conveyed to his hands. I was
therefore in the wrong, and he attacked me; this, however, he did politely, and I answered in the same
manner. He replied more decidedly. This produced my last answer; after which I heard no more from
him upon the subject; but he became my most violent enemy, took the advantage of the time of my
misfortunes, to publish against me the most indecent libels, and made a journey to London on purpose
to do me an injury.
  All this controversy employed me a good deal, and caused me a great loss of my time in my
copying, without much contributing to the progress of truth, or the good of my purse. Pissot, at that
time my bookseller, gave me but little for my pamphlets, frequently nothing at all, and I never received
a farthing for my first discourse. Diderot gave it him. I was obliged to wait a long time for the little he
gave me, and to take it from him in the most trifling sums. Notwithstanding this, my copying went on
but slowly. I had two things together upon my hands, which was the most likely means of doing them
both ill.
  They were very opposite to each other in their effects by the different manners of living to which
they rendered me subject. The success of my first writings had given me celebrity. My new situation
excited curiosity. Everybody wished to know that whimsical man who sought not the acquaintance of
any one, and whose only desire was to live free and happy in the manner he had chosen; this was
sufficient to make the thing impossible to me. My apartment was continually full of people, who, under
different pretences, came to take up my time. The women employed a thousand artifices to engage me
to dinner. The more unpolite I was with people, the more obstinate they became. I could not refuse
everybody. While I made myself a thousand enemies by my refusals, I was incessantly a slave to my
complaisance, and, in whatever manner I made my engagements, I had not an hour in a day to myself.
I then perceived it was not so easy to be poor and independent, as I had imagined. I wished to live
by my profession: the public would not suffer me to do it. A thousand means were thought of to
indemnify me for the time I lost. The next thing would have been showing myself like Punch, at so
much each person. I knew no dependence more cruel and degrading than this. I saw no other method of
putting an end to it than refusing all kinds of presents, great and small, let them come from whom they
would. This had no other effect than to increase the number of givers, who wished to have the honor of
overcoming my resistance, and to force me, in spite of myself, to be under an obligation to them.
  Many,  who  would  not  have  given  me  half-a-crown  had  I  asked  it  from  them,  incessantly
importuned  me  with  their  offers,  and,  in  revenge  for  my  refusal,  taxed  me  with  arrogance  and
ostentation.
  It will naturally be conceived that the resolutions I had taken, and the system I wished to follow,
were not agreeable to Madam le Vasseur. All the disinterestedness of the daughter did not prevent her
from following the directions of her mother; and the governesses, as Gauffecourt called them, were not
always so steady in their refusals as I was. Although many things were concealed from me, I perceived
so many as were necessary to enable me to judge that I did not see all, and this tormented me less by
the accusation of connivance, which it was so easy for me to foresee, than by the cruel idea of never
being master in my own apartments, nor even of my own person. I prayed, conjured, and became angry,
all to no purpose; the mother made me pass for an eternal grumbler, and a man who was peevish and
ungovernable. She held perpetual whisperings with my friends; everything in my little family was
mysterious and a secret to me; and, that I might not incessantly expose myself to noisy quarrelling, I no
longer dared to take notice of what passed in it. A firmness of which I was not capable, would have
been necessary to withdraw me from this domestic strife. I knew how to complain, but not how to act:
they suffered me to say what I pleased, and continued to act as they thought proper.
  This constant teasing, and the daily importunities to which I was subject, rendered the house, and
my residence at Paris, disagreeable to me. When my indisposition permitted me to go out, and I did notsuffer myself to be led by my acquaintance first to one place and then to another, I took a walk, alone,
and reflected on my grand system, something of which I committed to paper, bound up between two
covers,  which,  with  a  pencil,  I  always  had  in  my  pocket.  In  this  manner,  the  unforeseen
disagreeableness of a situation I had chosen entirely led me back to literature, to which unsuspectedly I
had recourse as a means of releaving my mind, and thus, in the first works I wrote, I introduced the
peevishness  and  ill-humor  which  were  the  cause  of  my  undertaking  them.  There  was  another
circumstance which contributed not a little to this; thrown into the world despite of myself, without
having the manners of it, or being in a situation to adopt and conform myself to them, I took it into my
head to adopt others of my own, to enable me to dispense with those of society. My foolish timidity,
which I could not conquer, having for principle the fear of being wanting in the common forms, I took,
by way of encouraging myself, a resolution to tread them under foot. I became sour and cynic from
shame,  and  affected  to  despise  the  politeness  which  I  knew  not  how  to  practice.  This  austerity,
conformable to my new principles, I must confess, seemed to ennoble itself in my mind; it assumed in
my eyes the form of the intrepidity of virtue, and I dare assert it to be upon this noble basis, that it
supported itself longer and better than could have been expected from anything so contrary to my
nature. Yet, not withstanding, I had the name of a misanthrope, which my exterior appearance and
some happy expressions had given me in the world: it is certain I did not support the character well in
private, that my friends and acquaintance led this untractable bear about like a lamb, and that, confining
my sarcasms to severe but general truths, I was never capable of saying an uncivil thing to any person
whatsoever.
  The 'Devin du Village' brought me completely into vogue, and presently after there was not a man
in Paris whose company was more sought after than mine. The history of this piece, which is a kind of
era in my life, is joined with that of the connections I had at that time. I must enter a little into
particulars to make what is to follow the better understood.
I had a numerous acquaintance, yet no more than two friends: Diderot and Grimm. By an effect of
the desire I have ever felt to unite everything that is dear to me, I was too much a friend to both not to
make them shortly become so to each other. I connected them: they agreed well together, and shortly
become more intimate with each other than with me. Diderot had a numerous acquaintance, but Grimm,
a stranger and a new-comer, had his to procure, and with the greatest pleasure I procured him all I
could.  I  had  already  given  him  Diderot.  I  afterwards  brought  him  acquainted  with  Gauffecourt.  I
introduced him to Madam Chenonceaux, Madam D'Epinay, and the Baron d'Holbach; with whom I had
become connected almost in spite of myself. All my friends became his: this was natural: but not one of
his ever became mine; which was inclining to the contrary. Whilst he yet lodged at the house of the
Comte de Friese, he frequently gave us dinners in his apartment, but I never received the least mark of
friendship from the Comte de Friese, Comte de Schomberg, his relation, very familiar with Grimm, nor
from any other person, man or woman, with whom Grimm, by their means, had any connection. I
except the Abbe Raynal, who, although his friend, gave proofs of his being mine; and in cases of need,
offered me his purse with a generosity not very common. But I knew the Abbe Raynal long before
Grimm had any acquaintance with him, and had entertained a great regard for him on account of his
delicate and honorable behavior to me upon a slight occasion, which I shall never forget.
  The Abbe Raynal is certainly a warm friend; of this I saw a proof, much about the time of which I
speak, with respect to Grimm himself, with whom he was very intimate. Grimm, after having been
sometime on a footing of friendship with Mademoiselle Fel, fell violently in love with her, and wished
to supplant Cahusac. The young lady, piquing herself on her constancy, refused her new admirer. He
took this so much to heart, that the appearance of his affliction became tragical. He suddenly fell into
the strangest state imaginable. He passed days and nights in a continued lethargy. He lay with his eyes
open;  and  although  his  pulse  continued  to  beat  regularly,  without  speaking  eating,  or  stirring,  yet
sometimes  seeming  to  hear  what  was  said  to  him,  but  never  answering,  not  even  by  a  sign,  and
remaining almost as immovable as if he had been dead, yet without agitation, pain, or fever. The Abbe
Raynal and myself watched over him; the abbe, more robust, and in better health than I was, by night,and I by day, without ever both being absent at one time. The Comte de Friese was alarmed, and
brought to him Senac, who, after having examined the state in which he was, said there was nothing to
apprehend, and took his leave without giving a prescription. My fears for my friend made me carefully
observe the countenance of the physician, and I perceived him smile as he went away. However, the
patient  remained  several  days  almost  motionless,  without  taking  anything  except  a  few  preserved
cherries, which from time to time I put upon his tongue, and which he swallowed without difficulty. At
length he, one morning, rose, dressed himself, and returned to his usual way of life, without either at
that time or afterwards speaking to me or the Abbe Raynal, at least that I know of, or to any other
person, of this singular lethargy, or the care we had taken of him during the time it lasted.
  The affair made a noise, and it would really have been a wonderful circumstance had the cruelty of
an opera girl made a man die of despair. This strong passion brought Grimm into vogue; he was soon
considered as a prodigy in love, friendship, and attachments of every kind. Such an opinion made his
company sought after, and procured him a good reception in the first circles; by which means he
separated from me, with whom he was never inclined to associate when he could do it with anybody
else.  I  perceived  him  to  be  on  the  point  of  breaking  with  me  entirely;  for  the  lively  and  ardent
sentiments, of which he made a parade, were those which with less noise and pretensions, I had really
conceived for him. I was glad he succeeded in the world; but I did not wish him to do this by forgetting
his friend. I one day said to him: "Grimm, you neglect me, and I forgive you for it. When the first
intoxication of your success is over, and you begin to perceive a void in your enjoyments, I hope you
will  return  to  your  friend,  whom  you  will  always  find  in  the  same  sentiments;  at  present  do  not
constrain yourself, I leave you at liberty to act as you please, and wait your leisure." He said I was right,
made his arrangements in consequence, and shook off all restraint, so that I saw no more of him except
in company with our common friends.
  Our chief rendezvous, before he was connected with Madam d'Epinay as he afterwards became,
was at the house of Baron d'Holbach. This said baron was the son of a man who had raised himself
from obscurity. His fortune was considerable, and he used it nobly, receiving at his house men of letters
and merit: and, by the knowledge he himself had acquired, was very worthy of holding a place amongst
them. Having been long attached to Diderot, he endeavored to become acquainted with me by his
means, even before my name was known to the world. A natural repugnancy prevented me a long time
from answering his advances. One day, when he asked me the reason of my unwillingness, I told him
he was too rich. He was, however, resolved to carry his point, and at length succeeded. My greatest
misfortune proceeded from my being unable to resist the force of marked attention. I have ever had
reason to repent of having yielded to it.
  Another acquaintance which, as soon as I had any pretensions to it, was converted into friendship,
was that of M. Duclos. I had several years before seen him, for the first time, at the Chevrette, at the
house of Madam d'Epinay, with whom he was upon very good terms. On that day we only dined
together, and he returned to town in the afternoon. But we had a conversation of a few moments after
dinner. Madam d'Epinay had mentioned me to him, and my opera of the 'Muses Gallantes'. Duclos,
endowed  with  too  great  talents  not  to  be  a  friend  to  those  in  whom  the  like  were  found,  was
prepossessed  in  my  favor,  and  invited  me  to  go  and  see  him.  Notwithstanding  my  former  wish,
increased by an acquaintance, I was withheld by my timidity and indolence, as long as I had no other
passport to him than his complaisance. But encouraged by my first success, and by his eulogiums,
which reached my ears, I went to see him; he returned my visit, and thus began the connection between
us, which will ever render him dear to me. By him, as well as from the testimony of my own heart, I
learned that uprightness and probity may sometimes be connected with the cultivation of letters.
  Many other connections less solid, and which I shall not here particularize, were the effects of my
first success, and lasted until curiosity was satisfied. I was a man so easily known, that on the next day
nothing new was to be discovered in me. However, a woman, who at that time was desirous of my
acquaintance,  became  much  more  solidly  attached  to  me  than  any  of  those  whose  curiosity  I  had
excited: this was the Marchioness of Crequi, niece to M. le Bailli de Froulay, ambassador from Malta,whose brother had preceded M. de Montaigu in the embassy to Venice, and whom I had gone to see on
my  return  from  that  city.  Madam  de  Crequi  wrote  to  me:  I  visited  her:  she  received  me  into  her
friendship. I sometimes dined with her. I met at her table several men of letters, amongst others M.
Saurin, the author of Spartacus, Barnevelt, etc., since become my implacable enemy; for no other
reason, at least that I can imagine, than my bearing the name of a man whom his father has cruelly
persecuted.
  It will appear that for a copyist, who ought to be employed in his business from morning till night, I
had many interruptions, which rendered my days not very lucrative, and prevented me from being
sufficiently attentive to what I did to do it well; for which reason, half the time I had to myself was lost
in  erasing  errors  or  beginning  my  sheet  anew.  This  daily  importunity  rendered  Paris  more
unsupportable, and made me ardently wish to be in the country. I several times went to pass a few days
at Mercoussis, the vicar of which was known to Madam le Vasseur, and with whom we all arranged
ourselves in such a manner as not to make things disagreeable to him. Grimm once went thither with
us.
  [Since I have neglected to relate here a trifling, but memorable adventure I had with the said Grimm
one day, on which we were to dine at the fountain of St. Vandrille, I will let it pass: but when I thought
of it afterwards, I concluded that he was brooding in his heart the conspiracy he has, with so much
success, since carried into execution.]
  The vicar had a tolerable voice, sung well, and, although he did not read music, learned his part
with  great  facility  and  precision.  We  passed  our  time  in  singing  the  trios  I  had  composed  at
Chenonceaux. To these I added two or three new ones, to the words Grimm and the vicar wrote, well or
ill. I cannot refrain from regretting these trios composed and sung in moments of pure joy, and which I
left at Wootton, with all my music. Mademoiselle Davenport has perhaps curled her hair with them; but
they are worthy of being preserved, and are, for the most part, of very good counterpoint. It was after
one of these little excursions in which I had the pleasure of seeing the aunt at her ease and very
cheerful, and in which my spirits were much enlivened, that I wrote to the vicar very rapidly and very
ill, an epistle in verse which will be found amongst my papers.
I had nearer to Paris another station much to my liking with M. Mussard, my countryman, relation
and friend, who at Passy had made himself a charming retreat, where I have passed some very peaceful
moments. M. Mussard was a jeweller, a man of good sense, who, after having acquired a genteel
fortune, had given his only daughter in marriage to M. de Valmalette, the son of an exchange broker,
and maitre d'hotel to the king, took the wise resolution to quit business in his declining years, and to
place  an  interval  of  repose  and  enjoyment  between  the  hurry  and  the  end  of  life.  The  good  man
Mussard, a real philosopher in practice, lived without care, in a very pleasant house which he himself
had built in a very pretty garden, laid out with his own hands. In digging the terraces of this garden he
found fossil shells, and in such great quantities that his lively imagination saw nothing but shells in
nature. He really thought the universe was composed of shells and the remains of shells, and that the
whole earth was only the sand of these in different stratae. His attention thus constantly engaged with
his singular discoveries, his imagination became so heated with the ideas they gave him, that, in his
head, they would soon have been converted into a system, that is into folly, if, happily for his reason,
but unfortunately for his friends, to whom he was dear, and to whom his house was an agreeable
asylum, a most cruel and extraordinary disease had not put an end to his existence. A constantly
increasing tumor in his stomach prevented him from eating, long before the cause of it was discovered,
and, after several years of suffering, absolutely occasioned him to die of hunger. I can never, without
the greatest affliction of mind, call to my recollection the last moments of this worthy man, who still
received with so much pleasure, Leneips and myself, the only friends whom the sight of his sufferings
did not separate from him until his last hour, when he was reduced to devouring with his eyes the
repasts he had placed before us, scarcely having the power of swallowing a few drops of weak tea,
which came up again a moment afterwards. But before these days of sorrow, how many have I passed
at his house, with the chosen friends he had made himself! At the head of the list I place the AbbePrevot, a very amiable man, and very sincere, whose heart vivified his writings, worthy of immortality,
and who, neither in his disposition nor in society, had the least of the melancholy coloring he gave to
his works. Procope, the physician, a little Esop, a favorite with the ladies; Boulanger, the celebrated
posthumous  author  of  'Despotisme  Oriental',  and  who,  I  am  of  opinion  extended  the  systems  of
Mussard on the duration of the world. The female part of his friends consisted of Madam Denis, niece
to Voltaire, who, at that time, was nothing more than a good kind of woman, and pretended not to wit:
Madam  Vanloo,  certainly  not  handsome,  but  charming,  and  who  sang  like  an  angel:  Madam  de
Valmalette, herself, who sang also, and who, although very thin, would have been very amiable had she
had fewer pretensions. Such, or very nearly such, was the society of M. Mussard, with which I should
had been much pleased, had not his conchyliomania more engaged my attention; and I can say, with
great truth, that, for upwards of six months, I worked with him in his cabinet with as much pleasure as
he felt himself.
  He had long insisted upon the virtue of the waters of Passy, that they were proper in my case, and
recommended me to come to his house to drink them. To withdraw myself from the tumult of the city, I
at length consented, and went to pass eight or ten days at Passy, which, on account of my being in the
country, were of more service to me than the waters I drank during my stay there. Mussard played the
violincello, and was passionately found of Italian music. This was the subject of a long conversation we
had one evening after supper, particularly the 'opera-buffe' we had both seen in Italy, and with which
we were highly delighted. My sleep having forsaken me in the night, I considered in what manner it
would be possible to give in France an idea of this kind of drama. The 'Amours de Ragonde' did not in
the least resemble it. In the morning, whilst I took my walk and drank the waters, I hastily threw
together a few couplets to which I adapted such airs as occurred to me at the moments. I scribbled over
what I had composed, in a kind of vaulted saloon at the end of the garden, and at tea. I could not refrain
from showing the airs to Mussard and to Mademoiselle du Vernois, his 'gouvernante', who was a very
good and amiable girl. Three pieces of composition I had sketched out were the first monologue: 'J'ai
perdu mon serviteur;'--the air of the Devin; 'L'amour croit s'il s'inquiete;' and the last duo: 'A jamais,
Colin, je t'engage, etc.' I was so far from thinking it worth while to continue what I had begun, that, had
it not been for the applause and encouragement I received from both Mussard and Mademoiselle, I
should have throw n my papers into the fire and thought no more of their contents, as I had frequently
done by things of much the same merit; but I was so animated by the encomiums I received, that in six
days, my drama, excepting a few couplets, was written. The music also was so far sketched out, that all
I had further to do to it after my return from Paris, was to compose a little of the recitative, and to add
the middle parts, the whole of which I finished with so much rapidity, that in three weeks my work was
ready for representation. The only thing now wanting, was the divertissement, which was not composed
until a long time afterwards.
  My imagination was so warmed by the composition of this work that I had the strongest desire to
hear it performed, and would have given anything to have seen and heard the whole in the manner I
should have chosen, which would have been that of Lully, who is said to have had 'Armide' performed
for himself only. As it was not possible I should hear the performance unaccompanied by the public, I
could not see the effect of my piece without getting it received at the opera. Unfortunately it was quite a
new species of composition, to which the ears of the public were not accustomed; and besides the ill
success of the 'Muses Gallantes' gave too much reason to fear for the Devin, if I presented it in my own
name.  Duclos  relieved  me  from  this  difficulty,  and  engaged  to  get  the  piece  rehearsed  without
mentioning the author. That I might not discover myself, I did not go to the rehearsal, and the 'Petits
violons', by whom it was directed, knew not who the author was until after a general plaudit had borne
the testimony of the work.
  [Rebel and Frauneur, who, when they were very young, went together from house to house playing
on the violin, were so called.]
  Everybody present was so delighted with it, that, on the next day, nothing else was spoken of in the
different companies. M. de Cury, Intendant des Menus, who was present at the rehearsal, demanded thepiece to have it performed at court. Duclos, who knew my intentions, and thought I should be less
master of my work at the court than at Paris, refused to give it. Cury claimed it authoratively. Duclos
persisted in his refusal, and the dispute between them was carried to such a length, that one day they
would have gone out from the opera-house together had they not been separated. M. de Cury applied to
me, and I referred him to Duclos. This made it necessary to return to the latter. The Duke d'Aumont
interfered; and at length Duclos thought proper to yield to authority, and the piece was given to be
played at Fontainebleau.
  The part to which I had been most attentive, and in which I had kept at the greatest distance from
the common track, was the recitative. Mine was accented in a manner entirely new, and accompanied
the utterance of the word. The directors dared not suffer this horrid innovation to pass, lest it should
shock  the  ears  of  persons  who  never  judge  for  themselves.  Another  recitative  was  proposed  by
Francueil and Jelyotte, to which I consented; but refused at the same time to have anything to do with it
myself.
  When everything was ready and the day of performance fixed, a proposition was made me to go to
Fontainebleau, that I might at least be at the last rehearsal. I went with Mademoiselle Fel, Grimm, and I
think the Abbe Raynal, in one of the stages to the court. The rehearsal was tolerable: I was more
satisfied with it than I expected to have been. The orchestra was numerous, composed of the orchestras
of the opera and the king's band. Jelyotte played Colin, Mademoiselle Fel, Colette, Cuvillier the Devin:
the choruses were those of the opera. I said but little; Jelyotte had prepared everything; I was unwilling
either to approve of or censure what he had done; and notwithstanding I had assumed the air of an old
Roman, I was, in the midst of so many people, as bashful as a schoolboy.
  The  next  morning,  the  day  of  performance,  I  went  to  breakfast  at  the  coffee-house  'du  grand
commun', where I found a great number of people. The rehearsal of the preceding evening, and the
difficulty of getting into the theatre, were the subjects of conversation. An officer present said he
entered with the greatest ease, gave a long account of what had passed, described the author, and
related what he had said and done; but what astonished me most in this long narrative, given with as
much assurance as simplicity, was that it did not contain a syllable of truth. It was clear to me that he
who spoke so positively of the rehearsal had not been at it, because, without knowing him, he had
before his eyes that author whom he said he had seen and examined so minutely. However, what was
more singular still in this scene, was its effect upon me. The officer was a man rather in years, he had
nothing of the appearance of a coxcomb; his features appeared to announce a man of merit; and his
cross of Saint Louis, an officer of long standing. He interested me: notwithstanding his impudence.
Whilst he uttered his lies, I blushed, looked down, and was upon thorns; I, for some time, endeavored
within myself to find the means of believing him to be in an involuntary error. At length, trembling lest
some person should know me, and by this means confound him, I hastily drank my chocolate, without
saying a word, and, holding down my head, I passed before him, got out of the coffee-house as soon as
possible, whilst the company were making their remarks upon the relation that had been given. I was no
sooner in the street than I was in a perspiration, and had anybody known and named me before I left the
room, I am certain all the shame and embarrassment of a guilty person would have appeared in my
countenance, proceeding from what I felt the poor man would have had to have suffered had his lie
been discovered.
I come to one of the critical moments of my life, in which it is difficult to do anything more than to
relate, because it is almost impossible that even narrative should not carry with it the marks of censure
or apology. I will, however, endeavor to relate how and upon what motives I acted, with out adding
either approbation or censure.
I was on that day in the same careless undress as usual, with a long beard and wig badly combed.
Considering this want of decency as an act of courage, I entered the theatre wherein the king, queen,
the royal family, and the whole court were to enter immediately after. I was conducted to a box by M.
de Cury, and which belonged to him. It was very spacious, upon the stage and opposite to a lesser, but
more elevated one, in which the king sat with Madam de Pompadour.  As I was surrounded by women, and the only man in front of the box, I had no doubt of my having
been placed there purposely to be exposed to view. As soon as the theatre was lighted up, finding I was
in the midst of people all extremely well dressed, I began to be less at my ease, and asked myself if I
was in my place? whether or not I was properly dressed? After a few minutes of inquietude: "Yes,"
replied I, with an intrepidity which perhaps proceeded more from the impossibility of retracting than
the force of all my reasoning, "I am in my place, because I am going to see my own piece performed, to
which I have been invited, for which reason only I am come here; and after all, no person has a greater
right than I have to reap the fruit of my labor and talents; I am dressed as usual, neither better nor
worse; and if I once begin to subject myself to public opinion, I shall shortly become a slave to it in
everything. To be always consistent with myself, I ought not to blush, in any place whatever, at being
dressed in a manner suitable to the state I have chosen. My exterior appearance is simple, but neither
dirty nor slovenly; nor is a beard either of these in itself, because it is given us by nature, and according
to time, place and custom, is sometimes an ornament. People think I am ridiculous, nay, even absurd;
but what signifies this to me? I ought to know how to bear censure and ridicule, provided I do not
deserve them." After this little soliloquy I became so firm that, had it been necessary, I could have been
intrepid. But whether it was the effect of the presence of his majesty, or the natural disposition of those
about me, I perceived nothing but what was civil and obliging in the curiosity of which I was the
object. This so much affected me that I began to be uneasy for myself, and the fate of my piece; fearing
I should efface the favorable prejudices which seemed to lead to nothing but applause. I was armed
against raillery; but, so far overcome, by the flattering and obliging treatment I had not expected, that I
trembled like a child when the performance was begun.
I had soon sufficient reason to be encouraged. The piece was very ill played with respect to the
actors, but the musical part was well sung and executed. During the first scene, which was really of a
delightful simplicity, I heard in the boxes a murmur of surprise and applause, which, relative to pieces
of the same kind, had never yet happened. The fermentation was soon increased to such a degree as to
be perceptible through the whole audience, and of which, to speak--after the manner of Montesquieu--
the effect was augmented by itself. In the scene between the two good little folks, this effect was
complete. There is no clapping of hands before the king; therefore everything was heard, which was
advantageous to the author and the piece. I heard about me a whispering of women, who appeared as
beautiful as angels. They said to each other in a low voice: "This is charming: That is ravishing: There
is not a sound which does not go to the heart." The pleasure of giving this emotion to so many amiable
persons moved me to tears; and these I could not contain in the first duo, when I remarked that I was
not the only person who wept. I collected myself for a moment, on recollecting the concert of M. de
Treitorens. This reminiscence had the effect of the slave who held the crown over the head of the
general who triumphed, but my reflection was short, and I soon abandoned myself without interruption
to the pleasure of enjoying my success. However, I am certain the voluptuousness of the sex was more
predominant than the vanity of the author, and had none but men been present, I certainly should not
have had the incessant desire I felt of catching on my lips the delicious tears I had caused to flow. I
have known pieces excite more lively admiration, but I never saw so complete, delightful, and affecting
an intoxication of the senses reign, during a whole representation, especially at court, and at a first
performance. They who saw this must recollect it, for it has never yet been equalled.
  The same evening the Duke d' Aumont sent to desire me to be at the palace the next day at eleven
o'clock, when he would present me to the king. M. de Cury, who delivered me the message, added that
he thought a pension was intended, and that his majesty wished to announce it to me himself. Will it be
believed that the night of so brilliant a day was for me a night of anguish and perplexity? My first idea,
after that of being presented, was that of my frequently wanting to retire; this had made me suffer very
considerably at the theatre, and might torment me the next day when I should be in the gallery, or in the
king's apartment, amongst all the great, waiting for the passing of his majesty. My infirmity was the
principal cause which prevented me from mixing in polite companies, and enjoying the conversation of
the fair. The idea alone of the situation in which this want might place me, was sufficient to produce itto such a degree as to make me faint away, or to recur to means to which, in my opinion, death was
much preferable. None but persons who are acquainted with this situation can judge of the horror which
being exposed to the risk of it inspires.
I then supposed myself before the king, presented to his majesty, who deigned to stop and speak to
me.  In  this  situation,  justness  of  expression  and  presence  of  mind  were  peculiarly  necessary  in
answering. Would my timidity which disconcerts me in presence of any stranger whatever, have been
shaken off in presence of the King of France; or would it have suffered me instantly to make choice of
proper expressions? I wished, without laying aside the austere manner I had adopted, to show myself
sensible of the honor done me by so great a monarch, and in a handsome and merited eulogium to
convey some great and useful truth. I could not prepare a suitable answer without exactly knowing
what his majesty was to say to me; and had this been the case, I was certain that, in his presence, I
should not recollect a word of what I had previously meditated. "What," said I, "will become of me in
this moment, and before the whole court, if, in my confusion, any of my stupid expressions should
escape me?" This danger alarmed and terrified me. I trembled to such a degree that at all events I was
determined not to expose myself to it.
I  lost,  it  is  true,  the  pension  which  in  some  measure  was  offered  me;  but  I  at  the  same  time
exempted myself from the yoke it would have imposed. Adieu, truth, liberty, and courage! How should
I afterwards have dared to speak of disinterestedness and independence? Had I received the pension I
must either have become a flatterer or remained silent; and, moreover, who would have insured to me
the payment of it! What steps should I have been under the necessity of taking! How many people must
I have solicited! I should have had more trouble and anxious cares in preserving than in doing without
it. Therefore, I thought I acted according to my principles by refusing, and sacrificing appearances to
reality. I communicated my resolution to Grimm, who said nothing against it. To others I alleged my ill
state of health, and left the court in the morning.
  My departure made some noise, and was generally condemned. My reasons could not be known to
everybody, it was therefore easy to accuse me of foolish pride, and thus not irritate the jealousy of such
as felt they would not have acted as I had done. The next day Jelyotte wrote me a note, in which he
stated the success of my piece, and the pleasure it had afforded the king. "All day long," said he, "his
majesty sings, with the worst voice in his kingdom: 'J'ai perdu mon serviteur: J'ai perdu tout mon
bonheur.'" He likewise added, that in a fortnight the Devin was to be performed a second time; which
confirmed in the eyes of the public the complete success of the first.
  Two  days  afterwards,  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  as  I  was  going  to  sup  with  Madam
D'Epinay, I perceived a hackney-coach pass by the door. Somebody within made a sign to me to
approach. I did so, and got into it, and found the person to be Diderot. He spoke of the pension with
more warmth than, upon such a subject, I should have expected from a philosopher. He did not blame
me  for  having  been  unwilling  to  be  presented  to  the  king,  but  severely  reproached  me  with  my
indifference about the pension. He observed that although on my own account I might be disinterested,
I ought not to be so on that of Madam Vasseur and her daughter; that it was my duty to seize every
means of providing for their subsistence; and that as, after all, it could not be said I had refused the
pension, he maintained I ought, since the king seemed disposed to grant it to me, to solicit and obtain it
by one means or another. Although I was obliged to him for his good wishes, I could not relish his
maxims, which produced a warm dispute, the first I ever had with him. All our disputes were of this
kind, he prescribing to me what he pretended I ought to do, and I defending myself because I was of a
different opinion.
  It was late when we parted. I would have taken him to supper at Madam d' Epinay's, but he refused
to go; and, notwithstanding all the efforts which at different times the desire of uniting those I love
induced me to make, to prevail upon him to see her, even that of conducting her to his door which he
kept  shut  against  us,  he  constantly  refused  to  do  it,  and  never  spoke  of  her  but  with  the  utmost
contempt. It was not until after I had quarrelled with both that they became acquainted and that he
began to speak honorably of her.  From this time Diderot and Grimm seemed to have undertaken to alienate from me the governesses,
by giving them to understand that if they were not in easy circumstances the fault was my own, and that
they never would be so with me. They endeavored to prevail on them to leave me, promising them the
privilege  for  retailing  salt,  a  snuff  shop,  and  I  know  not  what  other  advantages  by  means  of  the
influence of Madam d' Epinay. They likewise wished to gain over Duclos and d'Holback, but the
former constantly refused their proposals. I had at the time some intimation of what was going forward,
but I was not fully acquainted with the whole until long afterwards; and I frequently had reason to
lament the effects of the blind and indiscreet zeal of my friends, who, in my ill state of health, striving
to reduce me to the most melancholy solitude, endeavored, as they imagined, to render me happy by the
means which, of all others, were the most proper to make me miserable.
  In the carnival following the conclusion of the year 1753, the Devin was performed at Paris, and in
this interval I had sufficient time to compose the overture and divertissement. This divertissement, such
as it stands engraved, was to be in action from the beginning to the end, and in a continued subject,
which in my opinion, afforded very agreeable representations. But when I proposed this idea at the
opera-house, nobody would so much as hearken to me, and I was obliged to tack together music and
dances in the usual manner: on this account the divertissement, although full of charming ideas which
do not diminish the beauty of scenes, succeeded but very middlingly. I suppressed the recitative of
Jelyotte, and substituted my own, such as I had first composed it, and as it is now engraved; and this
recitative a little after the French manner, I confess, drawled out, instead of pronounced by the actors,
far from shocking the ears of any person, equally succeeded with the airs, and seemed in the judgment
of the public to possess as much musical merit. I dedicated my piece to Duclos, who had given it his
protection, and declared it should be my only dedication. I have, however, with his consent, written a
second; but he must have thought himself more honored by the exception, than if I had not written a
dedication to any person.
I could relate many anecdotes concerning this piece, but things of greater importance prevent me
from entering into a detail of them at present. I shall perhaps resume the subject in a supplement. There
is however one which I cannot omit, as it relates to the greater part of what is to follow. I one day
examined the music of D'Holbach, in his closet. After having looked over many different kinds, he said,
showing me a collection of pieces for the harpsichord: "These were composed for me; they are full of
taste and harmony, and unknown to everybody but myself. You ought to make a selection from them
for your divertissement." Having in my head more subjects of airs and symphonies than I could make
use of, I was not the least anxious to have any of his. However, he pressed me so much, that, from a
motive of complaisance, I chose a Pastoral, which I abridged and converted into a trio, for the entry of
the  companions  of  Colette.  Some  months  afterwards,  and  whilst  the  Devin  still  continued  to  be
performed, going into Grimms I found several people about his harpsichord, whence he hastily rose on
my arrival. As I accidently looked toward his music stand, I there saw the same collection of the Baron
d'Holback, opened precisely at the piece he had prevailed upon me to take, assuring me at the same
time that it should never go out of his hands. Some time afterwards, I again saw the collection open on
the harpischord of M. d'Papinay, one day when he gave a little concert. Neither Grimm, nor anybody
else, ever spoke to me of the air, and my reason for mentioning it here is that some time afterwards, a
rumor was spread that I was not the author of Devin. As I never made a great progress in the practical
part, I am persuaded that had it not been for my dictionary of music, it would in the end have been said
I did not understand composition.
  Sometime before the 'Devin du Village' was performed, a company of Italian Bouffons had arrived
at Paris, and were ordered to perform at the opera-house, without the effect they would produce there
being foreseen. Although they were detestable, and the orchestra, at that time very ignorant, mutilated
at will the pieces they gave, they did the French opera an injury that will never be repaired. The
comparison of these two kinds of music, heard the same evening in the same theatre, opened the ears of
the French; nobody could endure their languid music after the marked and lively accents of Italian
composition;  and  the  moment  the  Bouffons  had  done,  everybody  went  away.  The  managers  wereobliged to change the order of representation, and let the performance of the Bouffons be the last. 'Egle
Pigmalion' and 'le Sylphe' were successively given: nothing could bear the comparison. The 'Devin du
Village' was the only piece that did it, and this was still relished after 'la Serva Padroma'. When I
composed my interlude, my head was filled with these pieces, and they gave me the first idea of it: I
was,  however,  far  from  imagining  they  would  one  day  be  passed  in  review  by  the  side  of  my
composition. Had I been a plagiarist, how many pilferings would have been manifest, and what care
would have been taken to point them out to the public! But I had done nothing of the kind. All attempts
to discover any such thing were fruitless: nothing was found in my music which led to the recollection
of that of any other person; and my whole composition compared with the pretended original, was
found to be as new as the musical characters I had invented. Had Mondonville or Rameau undergone
the same ordeal, they would have lost much of their substance.
  The  Bouffons  acquired  for  Italian  music  very  warm  partisans.  All  Paris  was  divided  into  two
parties, the violence of which was greater than if an affair of state or religion had been in question. One
of them, the most powerful and numerous, composed of the great, of men of fortune, and the ladies,
supported French music; the other, more lively and haughty, and fuller of enthusiasm, was composed of
real connoisseurs, and men of talents, and genius. This little group assembled at the opera-house, under
the box belonging to the queen. The other party filled up the rest of the pit and the theatre; but the heads
were mostly assembled under the box of his majesty. Hence the party names of Coin du Roi, Coin de la
Reine,--[King's  corner,--Queen's  corner.]--then  in  great  celebrity.  The  dispute,  as  it  became  more
animated, produced several pamphlets. The king's corner aimed at pleasantry; it was laughed at by the
'Petit Prophete'. It attempted to reason; the 'Lettre sur la Musique Francoise' refuted its reasoning. These
two little productions, the former of which was by Grimm, the latter by myself, are the only ones which
have outlived the quarrel; all the rest are long since forgotten.
  But the Petit Prophete, which, notwithstanding all I could say, was for a long time attributed to me,
was considered as a pleasantry, and did not produce the least inconvenience to the author: whereas the
letter on music was taken seriously, and incensed against me the whole nation, which thought itself
offended by this attack on its music. The description of the incredible effect of this pamphlet would be
worthy of the pen of Tacitus. The great quarrel between the parliament and the clergy was then at its
height. The parliament had just been exiled; the fermentation was general; everything announced an
approaching insurrection. The pamphlet appeared: from that moment every other quarrel was forgotten;
the perilous state of French music was the only thing by which the attention of the public was engaged,
and the only insurrection was against myself. This was so general that it has never since been totally
calmed. At court, the bastile or banishment was absolutely determined on, and a 'lettre de cachet' would
have been issued had not M. de Voyer set forth in the most forcible manner that such a step would be
ridiculous. Were I to say this pamphlet probably prevented a revolution, the reader would imagine I
was in a dream. It is, however, a fact, the truth of which all Paris can attest, it being no more than
fifteen years since the date of this singular fact. Although no attempts were made on my liberty, I
suffered numerous insults; and even my life was in danger. The musicians of the opera orchestra
humanely resolved to murder me as I went out of the theatre. Of this I received information; but the
only effect it produced on me was to make me more assiduously attend the opera; and I did not learn,
until a considerable time afterwards, that M. Ancelot, officer in the mousquetaires, and who had a
friendship for me, had prevented the effect of this conspiracy by giving me an escort, which, unknown
to myself, accompanied me until I was out of danger. The direction of the opera-house had just been
given to the hotel de ville. The first exploit performed by the Prevot des Marchands, was to take from
me my freedom of the theatre, and this in the most uncivil manner possible. Admission was publicly
refused me on my presenting myself, so that I was obliged to take a ticket that I might not that evening
have the mortification to return as I had come. This injustice was the more shameful, as the only price I
had set on my piece when I gave it to the managers was a perpetual freedom of the house; for although
this  was  a  right,  common  to  every  author,  and  which  I  enjoyed  under  a  double  title,  I  expressly
stipulated for it in presence of M. Duclos. It is true, the treasurer brought me fifty louis, for which I hadnot asked; but, besides the smallness of the sum, compared with that which, according to the rule,
established in such cases, was due to me, this payment had nothing in common with the right of entry
formerly  granted,  and  which  was  entirely  independent  of  it.  There  was  in  this  behavior  such  a
complication of iniquity and brutality, that the public, notwithstanding its animosity against me, which
was then at its highest, was universally shocked at it, and many persons who insulted me the preceding
evening, the next day exclaimed in the open theatre, that it was shameful thus to deprive an author of
his right of entry; and particularly one who had so well deserved it, and was entitled to claim it for
himself and another person. So true is the Italian proverb: Ogn' un ama la giustizia in cosa d altrui.--
[Every one loves justice in the affairs of another.]
  In this situation the only thing I had to do was to demand my work, since the price I had agreed to
receive for it was refused me. For this purpose I wrote to M. d'Argenson, who had the department of the
opera. I likewise enclosed to him a memoir which was unanswerable; but this, as well as my letter, was
ineffectual, and I received no answer to either. The silence of that unjust man hurt me extremely, and
did  not  contribute  to  increase  the  very  moderate  good  opinion  I  always  had  of  his  character  and
abilities. It was in this manner the managers kept my piece while they deprived me of that for which I
had given it them. From the weak to the strong, such an act would be a theft: from the strong to the
weak, it is nothing more than an appropriation of property, without a right.
  With respect to the pecuniary advantages of the work, although it did not produce me a fourth part
of the sum it would have done to any other. person, they were considerable enough to enable me to
subsist several years, and to make amends for the ill success of copying, which went on but very
slowly. I received a hundred louis from the king; fifty from Madam de Pompadour, for the performance
at Bellevue, where she herself played the part of Colin; fifty from the opera; and five hundred livres
from Pissot, for the engraving; so that this interlude, which cost me no more than five or six weeks'
application, produced, notwithstanding the ill treatment I received from the managers and my stupidity
at court, almost as much money as my 'Emilius', which had cost me twenty years' meditation, and three
years' labor. But I paid dearly for the pecuniary ease I received from the piece, by the infinite vexations
it brought upon me. It was the germ of the secret jealousies which did not appear until a long time
afterwards. After its success I did not remark, either in Grimm, Diderot, or any of the men of letters,
with whom I was acquainted, the same cordiality and frankness, nor that pleasure in seeing me, I had
previously experienced. The moment I appeared at the baron's, the conversation was no longer general;
the company divided into small parties; whispered into each other's ears; and I remained alone, without
knowing to whom to address myself. I endured for a long time this mortifying neglect; and, perceiving
that Madam d'Holbach, who was mild and amiable, still received me well, I bore with the vulgarity of
her husband as long as it was possible. But he one day attacked me without reason or pretence, and
with such brutality, in presence of Diderot, who said not a word, and Margency, who since that time
has often told me how much he admired the moderation and mildness of my answers, that, at length
driven from his house, by this unworthy treatment, I took leave with a resolution never to enter it again.
This did not, however, prevent me from speaking honorably of him and his house, whilst he continually
expressed himself relative to me in the most insulting terms, calling me that 'petit cuistre': the little
college pedant, or servitor in a college, without, however, being able to charge me with having done
either to himself or any person to whom he was attached the most trifling injury. In this manner he
verified my fears and predictions, I am of opinion my pretended friends would have pardoned me for
having written books, and even excellent ones, because this merit was not foreign to themselves; but
that they could not forgive my writing an opera, nor the brilliant success it had; because there was not
one amongst them capable of the same, nor in a situation to aspire to like honors. Duclos, the only
person superior to jealousy, seemed to become more attached to me: he introduced me to Mademoiselle
Quinault, in whose house I received polite attention, and civility to as great an extreme, as I had found a
want of it in that of M. d'Holbach.
  Whilst the performance of the 'Devin du Village' was continued at the opera-house, the author of it
had an advantageous negotiation with the managers of the French comedy. Not having, during seven oreight  years,  been  able  to  get  my  'Narcissis'  performed  at  the  Italian  theatre,  I  had,  by  the  bad
performance in French of the actors, become disgusted with it, and should rather have had my piece
received at the French theatre than by them. I mentioned this to La None, the comedian, with whom I
had become acquainted, and who, as everybody knows, was a man of merit and an author. He was
pleased with the piece, and promised to get it performed without suffering the name of the author to be
known; and in the meantime procured me the freedom of the theatre, which was extremely agreeable to
me, for I always preferred it to the two others. The piece was favorably received, and without the
author's name being mentioned; but I have reason to believe it was known to the actors and actresses,
and many other persons. Mademoiselles Gauffin and Grandval played the amorous parts; and although
the whole performance was, in my opinion, injudicious, the piece could not be said to be absolutely ill
played. The indulgence of the public, for which I felt gratitude, surprised me; the audience had the
patience to listen to it from the beginning to the end, and to permit a second representation without
showing the least sign of disapprobation. For my part, I was so wearied with the first, that I could not
hold out to the end; and the moment I left the theatre, I went into the Cafe de Procope, where I found
Boissi, and others of my acquaintance, who had probably been as much fatigued as myself. I there
humbly or haughtily avowed myself the author of the piece, judging it as everybody else had done. This
public avowal of an author of a piece which had not succeeded, was much admired, and was by no
means painful to myself. My self-love was flattered by the courage with which I made it: and I am of
opinion, that, on this occasion, there was more pride in speaking, than there would have been foolish
shame in being silent. However, as it was certain the piece, although insipid in the performance would
bear to be read, I had it printed: and in the preface, which is one of the best things I ever wrote, I began
to make my principles more public than I had before done.
I soon had an opportunity to explain them entirely in a work of the greatest importance: for it was, I
think, this year, 1753, that the programma of the Academy of Dijon upon the 'Origin of the Inequality
of Mankind' made its appearance. Struck with this great question, I was surprised the academy had
dared to propose it: but since it had shown sufficient courage to do it, I thought I might venture to treat
it, and immediately undertook the discussion.
  That I might consider this grand subject more at my ease, I went to St. Germain for seven or eight
days with Theresa, our hostess, who was a good kind of woman, and one of her friends. I consider this
walk as one of the most agreeable ones I ever took. The weather was very fine. These good women
took upon themselves all the care and expense. Theresa amused herself with them; and I, free from all
domestic concerns, diverted myself, without restraint, at the hours of dinner and supper. All the rest of
the day wandering in the forest, I sought for and found there the image of the primitive ages of which I
boldly traced the history. I confounded the pitiful lies of men; I dared to unveil their nature; to follow
the progress of time, and the things by which it has been disfigured; and comparing the man of art with
the natural man, to show them, in their pretended improvement, the real source of all their misery. My
mind,  elevated  by  these  contemplations,  ascended  to  the  Divinity,  and  thence,  seeing  my  fellow
creatures follow in the blind track of their prejudices that of their errors and misfortunes, I cried out to
them, in a feeble voice, which they could not hear: "Madmen! know that all your evils proceed from
yourselves!"
  From these meditations resulted the discourse on Inequality, a work more to the taste of Diderot
than any of my other writings, and in which his advice was of the greatest service to me.
  [At the time I wrote this, I had not the least suspicion of the grand conspiracy of Diderot and
Grimm. otherwise I should easily. have discovered how much the former abused my confidence, by
giving to my writings that severity and melancholy which were not to be found in them from the
moments he ceased to direct me. The passage of the philosopher, who argues with himself, and stops
his ears against the complaints of a man in distress, is after his manner: and he gave me others still
more extraordinary; which I could never resolve to make use of. But, attributing, this melancholy to
that he had acquired in the dungeon of Vincennes, and of which there is a very sufficient dose in his
Clairoal, I never once suspected the least unfriendly dealing. ]  It was, however, understood but by few readers, and not one of these would ever speak of it. I had
written it to become a competitor for the premium, and sent it away fully persuaded it would not obtain
it; well convinced it was not for productions of this nature that academies were founded.
  This excursion and this occupation enlivened my spirits and was of service to my health. Several
years before, tormented by my disorder, I had entirely given myself up to the care of physicians, who,
without alleviating my sufferings, exhausted my strength and destroyed my constitution. At my return
from St. Germain, I found myself stronger and perceived my health to be improved. I followed this
indication, and determined to cure myself or die without the aid of physicians and medicine. I bade
them forever adieu, and lived from day to day, keeping close when I found myself indisposed, and
going abroad the moment I had sufficient strength to do it. The manner of living in Paris amidst people
of pretensions was so little to my liking; the cabals of men of letters, their little candor in their writings,
and the air of importance they gave themselves in the world, were so odious to me; I found so little
mildness, openness of heart and frankness in the intercourse even of my friends; that, disgusted with
this  life  of  tumult,  I  began  ardently  to  wish  to  reside  in  the  country,  and  not  perceiving  that  my
occupation permitted me to do it, I went to pass there all the time I had to spare. For several months I
went after dinner to walk alone in the Bois de Boulogne, meditating on subjects for future works, and
not returning until evening.
  Gauffecourt, with whom I was at that time extremely intimate, being on account of his employment
obliged to go to Geneva, proposed to me the journey, to which I consented. The state of my health was
such as to require the care of the governess; it was therefore decided she should accompany us, and that
her mother should remain in the house. After thus having made our arrangements, we set off on the first
of June, 1754.
  This was the period when at the age of forty-two, I for the first time in my life felt a diminution of
my natural confidence to which I had abandoned myself without reserve or inconvenience. We had a
private carriage, in which with the same horses we travelled very slowly. I frequently got out and
walked. We had scarcely performed half our journey when Theresa showed the greatest uneasiness at
being left in the carriage with Gauffecourt, and when, notwithstanding her remonstrances, I would get
out as usual, she insisted upon doing the same, and walking with me. I chid her for this caprice, and so
strongly opposed it, that at length she found herself obliged to declare to me the cause whence it
proceeded. I thought I was in a dream; my astonishment was beyond expression, when I learned that
my  friend  M.  de  Gauffecourt,  upwards  of  sixty  years  of  age,  crippled  by  the  gout,  impotent  and
exhausted  by  pleasures,  had,  since  our  departure,  incessantly  endeavored  to  corrupt  a  person  who
belonged to his friend, and was no longer young nor handsome, by the most base and shameful means,
such  as  presenting  to  her  a  purse,  attempting  to  inflame  her  imagination  by  the  reading  of  an
abominable book, and by the sight of infamous figures, with which it was filled. Theresa, full of
indignation, once threw his scandalous book out of the carriage; and I learned that on the first evening
of our journey, a violent headache having obliged me to retire to bed before supper, he had employed
the whole time of this tete-a-tete in actions more worthy of a satyr than a man of worth and honor, to
whom I thought I had intrusted my companion and myself. What astonishment and grief of heart for
me! I, who until then had believed friendship to be inseparable from every amiable and noble sentiment
which  constitutes  all  its  charm,  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  found  myself  under  the  necessity  of
connecting it with disdain, and of withdrawing my confidence from a man for whom I had an affection,
and by whom I imagined myself beloved! The wretch concealed from me his turpitude; and that I might
not expose Theresa, I was obliged to conceal from him my contempt, and secretly to harbor in my heart
such sentiments as were foreign to its nature. Sweet and sacred illusion of friendship! Gauffecourt first
took the veil from before my eyes. What cruel hands have since that time prevented it from again being
drawn over them!
  At Lyons I quitted Gauffecourt to take the road to Savoy, being unable to be so near to mamma
without seeing her. I saw her--Good God, in what a situation! How contemptible! What remained to her
of primitive virtue? Was it the same Madam de Warrens, formerly so gay and lively, to whom the vicarof Pontverre had given me recommendations? How my heart was wounded! The only resource I saw
for her was to quit the country. I earnestly but vainly repeated the invitation I had several times given
her in my letters to come and live peacefully with me, assuring her I would dedicate the rest of my life,
and  that  of  Theresa,  to  render  her  happy.  Attached  to  her  pension,  from  which,  although  it  was
regularly paid, she had not for a long time received the least advantage, my offers were lost upon her. I
again gave her a trifling part of the contents of my purse, much less than I ought to have done, and
considerably less than I should have offered her had not I been certain of its not being of the least
service to herself. During my residence at Geneva, she made a journey into Chablais, and came to see
me at Grange-canal. She was in want of money to continue her journey: what I had in my pocket was
insufficient to this purpose, but an hour afterwards I sent it her by Theresa. Poor mamma! I must relate
this proof of the goodness of her heart. A little diamond ring was the last jewel she had left. She took it
from her finger, to put it upon that of Theresa, who instantly replaced it upon that whence it had been
taken, kissing the generous hand which she bathed with her tears. Ah! this was the proper moment to
discharge my debt! I should have abandoned everything to follow her, and share her fate: let it be what
it would. I did nothing of the kind. My attention was engaged by another attachment, and I perceived
the attachment I had to her was abated by the slender hopes there were of rendering it useful to either of
us. I sighed after her, my heart was grieved at her situation, but I did not follow her. Of all the remorse I
felt this was the strongest and most lasting. I merited the terrible chastisement with which I have since
that time incessantly been overwhelmed: may this have expiated my ingratitude! Of this I appear guilty
in my conduct, but my heart has been too much distressed by what I did ever to have been that of an
ungrateful man.
  Before my departure from Paris I had sketched out the dedication of my discourse on the 'Inequality
of Mankind'. I finished it at Chambery, and dated it from that place, thinking that, to avoid all chicane,
it was better not to date it either from France or Geneva. The moment I arrived in that city I abandoned
myself to the republican enthusiasm which had brought me to it. This was augmented by the reception I
there met with. Kindly treated by persons of every description, I entirely gave myself up to a patriotic
zeal,  and  mortified  at  being  excluded  from  the  rights  of  a  citizen  by  the  possession  of  a  religion
different from that of my forefathers, I resolved openly to return to the latter. I thought the gospel being
the same for every Christian, and the only difference in religious opinions the result of the explanations
given by men to that which they did not understand, it was the exclusive right of the sovereign power in
every country to fix the mode of worship, and these unintelligible opinions; and that consequently it
was the duty of a citizen to admit the one, and conform to the other in the manner prescribed by the
law. The conversation of the encyclopaedists, far from staggering my faith, gave it new strength by my
natural aversion to disputes and party. The study of man and the universe had everywhere shown me
the final causes and the wisdom by which they were directed. The reading of the Bible, and especially
that of the New Testament, to which I had for several years past applied myself, had given me a
sovereign contempt for the base and stupid interpretations given to the words of Jesus Christ by persons
the least worthy of understanding his divine doctrine. In a word, philosophy, while it attached me to the
essential part of religion, had detached me from the trash of the little formularies with which men had
rendered it obscure. Judging that for a reasonable man there were not two ways of being a Christian, I
was also of opinion that in each country everything relative to form and discipline was within the
jurisdiction of the laws. From this principle, so social and pacific, and which has brought upon me such
cruel persecutions, it followed that, if I wished to be a citizen of Geneva, I must become a Protestant,
and conform to the mode of worship established in my country. This I resolved upon; I moreover put
myself under the instructions of the pastor of the parish in which I lived, and which was without the
city. All I desired was not to appear at the consistory. However, the ecclesiastical edict was expressly to
that effect; but it was agreed upon to dispense with it in my favor, and a commission of five or six
members was named to receive my profession of faith. Unfortunately, the minister Perdriau, a mild and
an amiable man, took it into his head to tell me the members were rejoiced at the thoughts of hearing
me speak in the little assembly. This expectation alarmed me to such a degree that having night and dayduring three weeks studied a little discourse I had prepared, I was so confused when I ought to have
pronounced it that I could not utter a single word, and during the conference I had the appearance of the
most  stupid  schoolboy.  The  persons  deputed  spoke  for  me,  and  I  answered  yes  and  no,  like  a
blockhead; I was afterwards admitted to the communion, and reinstated in my rights as a citizen. I was
enrolled as such in the lists of guards, paid by none but citizens and burgesses, and I attended at a
council-general extraordinary to receive the oath from the syndic Mussard. I was so impressed with the
kindness shown me on this occasion by the council and the consistory, and by the great civility and
obliging behavior of the magistrates, ministers and citizens, that, pressed by the worthy De Luc, who
was incessant in his persuasions, and still more so by my own inclination, I did not think of going back
to Paris for any other purpose than to break up housekeeping, find a situation for M. and Madam le
Vassear, or provide for their subsistence, and then return with Theresa to Geneva, there to settle for the
rest of my days.
  After taking this resolution I suspended all serious affairs the better to enjoy the company of my
friends until the time of my departure. Of all the amusements of which I partook, that with which I was
most pleased, was sailing round the lake in a boat, with De Luc, the father, his daughter-in-law, his two
sons, and my Theresa. We gave seven days to this excursion in the finest weather possible. I preserved
a lively remembrance of the situation which struck me at the other extremity of the lake, and of which I,
some years afterwards, gave a description in my New Eloisa.
  The principal connections I made at Geneva, besides the De Lucs, of which I have spoken, were the
young Vernes, with whom I had already been acquainted at Paris, and of whom I then formed a better
opinion than I afterwards had of him. M. Perdriau, then a country pastor, now professor of Belles
Lettres, whose mild and agreeable society will ever make me regret the loss of it, although he has since
thought proper to detach himself from me; M. Jalabert, at that time professor of natural philosophy,
since  become  counsellor  and  syndic,  to  whom  I  read  my  discourse  upon  Inequality  (but  not  the
dedication), with which he seemed to be delighted; the Professor Lullin, with whom I maintained a
correspondence until his death, and who gave me a commission to purchase books for the library; the
Professor Vernet, who, like most other people, turned his back upon me after I had given him proofs of
attachment and confidence of which he ought to, have been sensible, if a theologian can be affected by
anything; Chappins, clerk and successor to Gauffecourt, whom he wished to supplant, and who, soon
afterwards, was him self supplanted; Marcet de Mezieres, an old friend of my father's, and who had
also shown himself to be mine: after having well deserved of his country, he became a dramatic author,
and, pretending to be of the council of two hundred, changed his principles, and, before he died,
became ridiculous. But he from whom I expected most was M. Moultout, a very promising young man
by his talents and his brilliant imagination, whom I have always loved, although his conduct with
respect to me was frequently equivocal, and, not withstanding his being connected with my most cruel
enemies, whom I cannot but look upon as destined to become the defender of my memory and the
avenger of his friend.
  In the midst of these dissipations, I neither lost the taste for my solitary excursions, nor the habit of
them; I frequently made long ones upon the banks of the lake, during which my mind, accustomed to
reflection, did not remain idle; I digested the plan already formed of my political institutions, of which I
shall shortly have to speak; I meditated a history of the Valais; the plan of a tragedy in prose, the
subject of which, nothing less than Lucretia, did not deprive me of the hope of succeeding, although I
had dared again to exhibit that unfortunate heroine, when she could no longer be suffered upon any
French stage. I at that time tried my abilities with Tacitus, and translated the first books of his history,
which will be found amongst my papers.
  After a residence of four months at Geneva, I returned in the month of October to Paris; and
avoided  passing  through  Lyons  that  I  might  not  again  have  to  travel  with  Gauffecourt.  As  the
arrangement I had made did not require my being at Geneva until the spring following, I returned,
during the winter, to my habits and occupations; the principal of the latter was examining the proof
sheets of my discourse on the Inequality of Mankind, which I had procured to be printed in Holland, bythe bookseller Rey, with whom I had just become acquainted at Geneva. This work was dedicated to
the republic; but as the publication might be unpleasing to the council, I wished to wait until it had
taken  its  effect  at  Geneva  before  I  returned  thither.  This  effect  was  not  favorable  to  me;  and  the
dedication,  which  the  most  pure  patriotism  had  dictated,  created  me  enemies  in  the  council,  and
inspired even many of the burgesses with jealousy. M. Chouet, at that time first syndic, wrote me a
polite but very cold letter, which will be found amongst my papers. I received from private persons,
amongst others from Du Luc and De Jalabert, a few compliments, and these were all. I did not perceive
that a single Genevese was pleased with the hearty zeal found in the work. This indifference shocked
all those by whom it was remarked. I remember that dining one day at Clichy, at Madam Dupin's, with
Crommelin, resident from the republic, and M. de Mairan, the latter openly declared the council owed
me a present and public honors for the work, and that it would dishonor itself if it failed in either.
Crommelin, who was a black and mischievous little man, dared not reply in my presence, but he made
a frightful grimace, which however forced a smile from Madam Dupin. The only advantage this work
procured me, besides that resulting from the satisfaction of my own heart, was the title of citizen given
me by my friends, afterwards by the public after their example, and which I afterwards lost by having
too well merited.
  This ill success would not, however, have prevented my retiring to Geneva, had not more powerful
motives tended to the same effect. M. D'Epinay, wishing to add a wing which was wanting to the
chateau of the Chevrette, was at an immense expense in completing it. Going one day with Madam
D'Epinay to see the building, we continued our walk a quarter of a league further to the reservoir of the
waters of the park which joined the forest of Montmorency, and where there was a handsome kitchen
garden, with a little lodge, much out of repair, called the Hermitage. This solitary and very agreeable
place had struck me when I saw it for the first time before my journey to Geneva. I had exclaimed in
my transport: "Ah, madam, what a delightful habitation! This asylum was purposely prepared for me."
Madam D'Epinay did not pay much attention to what I said; but at this second journey I was quite
surprised to find, instead of the old decayed building, a little house almost entirely new, well laid out,
and very habitable for a little family of three persons. Madam D'Epinay had caused this to be done in
silence, and at a very small expense, by detaching a few materials and some of the work men from the
castle. She now said to me, on remarking my surprise: "My dear, here behold your asylum; it is you
who have chosen it; friendship offers it to you. I hope this will remove from you the cruel idea of
separating from me." I do not think I was ever in my life more strongly or more deliciously affected. I
bathed with tears the beneficent hand of my friend; and if I were not conquered from that very instant
even, I was extremely staggered. Madam D'Epinay, who would not be denied, became so pressing,
employed so many means, so many people to circumvent me, proceeding even so far as to gain over
Madam le Vasseur and her daughter, that at length she triumphed over all my resolutions. Renouncing
the idea of residing in my own country, I resolved, I promised, to inhabit the Hermitage; and, whilst the
building was drying, Madam D'Epinay took care to prepare furniture, so that everything was ready the
following spring.
  One thing which greatly aided me in determining, was the residence Voltaire had chosen near
Geneva; I easily comprehended this man would cause a revolution there, and that I should find in my
country the manners, which drove me from Paris; that I should be under the necessity of incessantly
struggling hard, and have no other alternative than that of being an unsupportable pedant, a poltroon, or
a bad citizen. The letter Voltaire wrote me on my last work, induced me to insinuate my fears in my
answer; and the effect this produced confirmed them. From that moment I considered Geneva as lost,
and I was not deceived. I perhaps ought to have met the storm, had I thought myself capable of
resisting it. But what could I have done alone, timid, and speaking badly, against a man, arrogant,
opulent, supported by the credit of the great, eloquent, and already the idol of the women and young
men? I was afraid of uselessly exposing myself to danger to no purpose. I listened to nothing but my
peaceful disposition, to my love of repose, which, if it then deceived me, still continues to deceive me
on the same subject. By retiring to Geneva, I should have avoided great misfortunes; but I have mydoubts whether, with all my ardent and patriotic zeal, I should have been able to effect anything great
and useful for my country.
  Tronchin, who about the same time went to reside at Geneva, came afterwards to Paris and brought
with him treasures. At his arrival he came to see me, with the Chevalier Jaucourt. Madam D'Epinay had
a strong desire to consult him in private, but this it was not easy to do. She addressed herself to me, and
I engaged Tronchin to go and see her. Thus under my auspices they began a connection, which was
afterwards increased at my expense. Such has ever been my destiny: the moment I had united two
friends who were separately mine, they never failed to combine against me. Although, in the conspiracy
then formed by the Tronchins, they must all have borne me a mortal hatred. He still continued friendly
to me: he even wrote me a letter after his return to Geneva, to propose to me the place of honorary
librarian. But I had taken my resolution, and the offer did not tempt me to depart from it.
  About this time I again visited M. d'Holbach. My visit was occasioned by the death of his wife,
which,  as  well  as  that  of  Madam  Francueil,  happened  whilst  I  was  at  Geneva.  Diderot,  when  he
communicated to me these melancholy events, spoke of the deep affliction of the husband. His grief
affected  my  heart.  I  myself  was  grieved  for  the  loss  of  that  excellent  woman,  and  wrote  to  M.
d'Holbach a letter of condolence. I forgot all the wrongs he had done me, and at my return from
Geneva,  and  after  he  had  made  the  tour  of  France  with  Grimm  and  other  friends  to  alleviate  his
affliction, I went to see him, and continued my visits until my departure for the Hermitage. As soon as
it was known in his circle that Madam D'Epinay was preparing me a habitation there, innumerable
sarcasms,  founded  upon  the  want  I  must  feel  of  the  flattery  and  amusement  of  the  city,  and  the
supposition of my not being able to support the solitude for a fortnight, were uttered against me.
Feeling within myself how I stood affected, I left him and his friends to say what they pleased, and
pursued my intention. M. d'Holbach rendered me some services in finding a place for the old Le
Vasseur, who was eighty years of age and a burden to his wife, from which she begged me to relieve
her.
  [This is an instance of the treachery of my memory. A long time after I had written what I have
stated  above,  I  learned,  in  conversing  with  my  wife,  that  it  was  not  M.  d'Holbach,  but  M.  de
Chenonceaux, then one of the administrators of the Hotel Dieu, who procured this place for her father. I
had so totally forgotten the circumstance, and the idea of M. d'Holbach's having done it was so strong
in my mind that I would have sworn it had been him.]
  He was put into a house of charity, where, almost as soon as he arrived there, age and the grief of
finding himself removed from his family sent him to the grave. His wife and all his children, except
Theresa,  did  not  much  regret  his  loss.  But  she,  who  loved  him  tenderly,  has  ever  since  been
inconsolable, and never forgiven herself for having suffered him, at so advanced an age, to end his days
in any other house than her own.
  Much about the same time I received a visit I little expected, although it was from a very old
acquaintance.  My  friend  Venture,  accompanied  by  another  man,  came  upon  me  one  morning  by
surprise. What a change did I discover in his person! Instead of his former gracefulness, he appeared
sottish and vulgar, which made me extremely reserved with him. My eyes deceived me, or either
debauchery had stupefied his mind, or all his first splendor was the effect of his youth, which was past.
I  saw  him  almost  with  indifference,  and  we  parted  rather  coolly.  But  when  he  was  gone,  the
remembrance of our former connection so strongly called to my recollection that of my younger days,
so charmingly, so prudently dedicated to that angelic woman (Madam de Warrens) who was not much
less changed than himself; the little anecdotes of that happy time, the romantic day of Toune passed
with so much innocence and enjoyment between those two charming girls, from whom a kiss of the
hand was the only favor, and which, notwithstanding its being so trifling, had left me such lively,
affecting and lasting regrets; and the ravishing delirium of a young heart, which I had just felt in all its
force,  and  of  which  I  thought  the  season  forever  past  for  me.  The  tender  remembrance  of  these
delightful circumstances made me shed tears over my faded youth and its transports for ever lost to me.
Ah! how many tears should I have shed over their tardy and fatal return had I foreseen the evils I hadyet to suffer from them.
  Before I left Paris, I enjoyed during the winter which preceded my retreat, a pleasure after my own
heart, and of which I tasted in all its purity. Palissot, academician of Nancy, known by a few dramatic
compositions, had just had one of them performed at Luneville before the King of Poland. He perhaps
thought to make his court by representing in his piece a man who had dared to enter into a literary
dispute with the king. Stanislaus, who was generous, and did not like satire, was filled with indignation
at the author's daring to be personal in his presence. The Comte de Tressan, by order of the prince,
wrote to M. d'Alembert, as well as to myself, to inform me that it was the intention of his majesty to
have Palissot expelled his academy. My answer was a strong solicitation in favor of Palissot, begging
M. de Tressan to intercede with the king in his behalf. His pardon was granted, and M. de Tressan,
when he communicated to me the information in the name of the monarch, added that the whole of
what had passed should be inserted in the register of the academy. I replied that this was less granting a
pardon than perpetuating a punishment. At length, after repeated solicitations, I obtained a promise, that
nothing relative to the affair should be inserted in the register, and that no public trace should remain of
it. The promise was accompanied, as well on the part of the king as on that of M. de Tressan, with
assurance of esteem and respect, with which I was extremely flattered; and I felt on this occasion that
the esteem of men who are themselves worthy of it, produced in the mind a sentiment infinitely more
noble  and  pleasing  than  that  of  vanity.  I  have  transcribed  into  my  collection  the  letters  of  M.  de
Tressan, with my answers to them: and the original of the former will be found amongst my other
papers.
I am perfectly aware that if ever these memoirs become public, I here perpetuate the remembrance
of a fact which I would wish to efface every trace; but I transmit many others as much against my
inclination. The grand object of my undertaking, constantly before my eyes, and the indispensable duty
of fulfilling it to its utmost extent, will not permit me to be turned aside by trifling considerations,
which would lead me from my purpose. In my strange and unparalleled situation, I owe too much to
truth to be further than this indebted to any person whatever. They who wish to know me well must be
acquainted  with  me  in  every  point  of  view,  in  every  relative  situation,  both  good  and  bad.  My
confessions are necessarily connected with those of many other people: I write both with the same
frankness in everything that relates to that which has befallen me; and am not obliged to spare any
person more than myself, although it is my wish to do it. I am determined always to be just and true, to
say of others all the good I can, never speaking of evil except when it relates to my own conduct, and
there is a necessity for my so doing. Who, in the situation in which the world has placed me, has a right
to require more at my hands? My confessions are not intended to appear during my lifetime, nor that of
those they may disagreeably affect. Were I master of my own destiny, and that of the book I am now
writing, it should never be made public until after my death and theirs. But the efforts which the dread
of truth obliges my powerful enemies to make to destroy every trace of it, render it necessary for me to
do everything, which the strictest right, and the most severe justice, will permit, to preserve what I have
written. Were the remembrance of me to be lost at my dissolution, rather than expose any person alive,
I would without a murmur suffer an unjust and momentary reproach. But since my name is to live, it is
my duty to endeavor to transmit with it to posterity the remembrance of the unfortunate man by whom
it was borne, such as he really was, and not such as his unjust enemies incessantly endeavored to
describe him.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK IX.
  My impatience to inhabit the Hermitage not permitting me to wait until the return of fine weather,
the moment my lodging was prepared I hastened to take possession of it, to the great amusement of the'Coterie Holbachaque', which publicly predicted I should not be able to support solitude for three
months, and that I should unsuccessfully return to Paris, and live there as they did. For my part, having
for fifteen years been out of my element, finding myself upon the eve of returning to it, I paid no
attention to their pleasantries. Since contrary to my inclinations, I have again entered the world, I have
incessantly regretted my dear Charmettes, and the agreeable life I led there. I felt a natural inclination to
retirement and the country: it was impossible for me to live happily elsewhere. At Venice, in the train
of public affairs, in the dignity of a kind of representation, in the pride of projects of advancement; at
Paris, in the vortex of the great world, in the luxury of suppers, in the brilliancy of spectacles, in the
rays  of  splendor;  my  groves,  rivulets,  and  solitary  walks,  constantly  presented  themselves  to  my
recollection, interrupted my thought, rendered me melancholy, and made me sigh with desire. All the
labor to which I had subjected myself, every project of ambition which by fits had animated my ardor,
all had for object this happy country retirement, which I now thought near at hand. Without having
acquired a genteel independence, which I had judged to be the only means of accomplishing my views,
I imagined myself, in my particular situation, to be able to do without it, and that I could obtain the
same end by a means quite opposite. I had no regular income; but I possessed some talents, and had
acquired  a  name.  My  wants  were  few,  and  I  had  freed  myself  from  all  those  which  were  most
expensive,  and  which  merely  depended  on  prejudice  and  opinion.  Besides  this,  although  naturally
indolent, I was laborious when I chose to be so. and my idleness was less that of an indolent man, than
that of an independent one who applies to business when it pleases him. My profession of a copyist of
music was neither splendid nor lucrative, but it was certain. The world gave me credit for the courage I
had shown in making choice of it. I might depend upon having sufficient employment to enable me to
live. Two thousand livres which remained of the produce of the 'Devin du Village', and my other
writings, were a sum which kept me from being straitened, and several works I had upon the stocks
promised me, without extorting money from the booksellers, supplies sufficient to enable me to work at
my ease without exhausting myself, even by turning to advantage the leisure of my walks. My little
family, consisting of three persons, all of whom were usefully employed, was not expensive to support.
Finally, from my resources, proportioned to my wants and desires, I might reasonably expect a happy
and permanent existence, in that manner of life which my inclination had induced me to adopt.
I might have taken the interested side of the question, and, instead of subjecting my pen to copying,
entirely devoted it to works which, from the elevation to which I had soared, and at which I found
myself capable of continuing, might have enabled me to live in the midst of abundance, nay, even of
opulence, had I been the least disposed to join the manoeuvres of an author to the care of publishing a
good book. But I felt that writing for bread would soon have extinguished my genius, and destroyed my
talents, which were less in my pen than in my heart, and solely proceeded from an elevated and noble
manner of thinking, by which alone they could be cherished and preserved. Nothing vigorous or great
can come from a pen totally venal. Necessity, nay, even avarice, perhaps, would have made me write
rather rapidly than well. If the desire of success had not led me into cabals, it might have made me
endeavor to publish fewer true and useful works than those which might be pleasing to the multitude;
and instead of a distinguished author, which I might possibly become, I should have been nothing more
than a scribbler. No: I have always felt that the profession of letters was illustrious in proportion as it
was less a trade. It is too difficult to think nobly when we think for a livelihood. To be able to dare even
to speak great truths, an author must be independent of success. I gave my books to the public with a
certainty of having written for the general good of mankind, without giving myself the least concern
about what was to follow. If the work was thrown aside, so much the worse for such as did not choose
to profit by it. Their approbation was not necessary to enable me to live, my profession was sufficient
to maintain me had not my works had a sale, for which reason alone they all sold.
  It was on the ninth of August, 1756, that I left cities, never to reside in them again: for I do not call
a residence the few days I afterwards remained in Paris, London, or other cities, always on the wing, or
contrary to my inclinations. Madam d'Epinay came and took us all three in her coach; her farmer carted
away my little baggage, and I was put into possession the same day. I found my little retreat simplyfurnished, but neatly, and with some taste. The hand which had lent its aid in this furnishing rendered it
inestimable in my eyes, and I thought it charming to be the guest of my female friend in a house I had
made choice of, and which she had caused to be built purposely for me.
  Although the weather was cold, and the ground lightly covered with snow, the earth began to
vegetate: violets and primroses already made their appearance, the trees began to bud, and the evening
of my arrival was distinguished by the song of the nightingale, which was heard almost under my
window, in a wood adjoining the house. After a light sleep, forgetting when I awoke my change of
abode, I still thought myself in the Rue Grenelle, when suddenly this warbling made me give a start,
and I exclaimed in my transport: "At length, all my wishes are accomplished!" The first thing I did was
to abandon myself to the impression of the rural objects with which I was surrounded. Instead of
beginning to set things in order in my new habitation, I began by doing it for my walks, and there was
not a path, a copse, a grove, nor a corner in the environs of my place of residence that I did not visit the
next day. The more I examined this charming retreat, the more I found it to my wishes. This solitary,
rather than savage, spot transported me in idea to the end of the world. It had striking beauties which
are but seldom found near cities, and never, if suddenly transported thither, could any person have
imagined himself within four leagues of Paris.
  After abandoning myself for a few days to this rural delirium, I began to arrange my papers, and
regulate my occupations. I set apart, as I had always done, my mornings to copying, and my afternoons
to walking, provided with my little paper book and a pencil, for never having been able to write and
think at my ease except 'sub dio', I had no inclination to depart from this method, and I was persuaded
the forest of Montmorency, which was almost at my door, would in future be my closet and study. I had
several works begun; these I cast my eye over. My mind was indeed fertile in great projects, but in the
noise of the city the execution of them had gone on but slowly. I proposed to myself to use more
diligence when I should be less interrupted. I am of opinion I have sufficiently fulfilled this intention;
and  for  a  man  frequently  ill,  often  at  La  Chevrette,  at  Epinay,  at  Raubonne,  at  the  castle  of
Montmorency, at other times interrupted by the indolent and curious, and always employed half the day
in copying, if what I produced during the six years I passed at the Hermitage and at Montmorency be
considered, I am persuaded it will appear that if, in this interval, I lost my time, it was not in idleness.
  Of the different works I had upon the stocks, that I had longest resolved in my mind which was
most to my taste; to which I destined a certain portion of my life, and which, in my opinion, was to
confirm the reputation I had acquired, was my 'Institutions Politiques. I had, fourteen years before,
when at Venice, where I had an opportunity of remarking the defects of that government so much
boasted of, conceived the first idea of them. Since that time my views had become much more extended
by the historical study of morality. I had perceived everything to be radically connected with politics,
and that, upon whatever principles these were founded, a people would never be more than that which
the nature of the government made them; therefore the great question of the best government possible
appeared to me to be reduced to this: What is the nature of a government the most proper to form the
most virtuous and enlightened, the wisest and best people, taking the last epithet in its most extensive
meaning? I thought this question was much if not quite of the same nature with that which follows:
What government is that which, by its nature, always maintains itself nearest to the laws, or least
deviates from the laws. Hence, what is the law? and a series of questions of similar importance. I
perceived these led to great truths, useful to the happiness of mankind, but more especially to that of
my country, wherein, in the journey I had just made to it, I had not found notions of laws and liberty
either  sufficiently  just  or  clear.  I  had  thought  this  indirect  manner  of  communicating  these  to  my
fellow-citizens would be least mortifying to their pride, and might obtain me forgiveness for having
seen a little further than themselves.
  Although I had already labored five or six years at the work, the progress I had made in it was not
considerable. Writings of this kind require meditation, leisure and tranquillity. I had besides written the
'Institutions Politiques', as the expression is, 'en bonne fortune', and had not communicated my project
to any person; not even to Diderot. I was afraid it would be thought too daring for the age and countryin which I wrote, and that the fears of my friends would restrain me from carrying it into execution.
  [It was more especially the wise severity of Duclos which inspired me with this fear; as for Diderot,
I know not by what means all my conferences with him tended to make me more satirical than my
natural disposition inclined me to be. This prevented me from consulting him upon an undertaking, in
which I wished to introduce nothing but the force of reasoning without the least appearance of ill
humor or partiality. The manner of this work may be judged of by that of the 'Contrat Social', which is
taken from it.]
I did not yet know that it would be finished in time, and in such a manner as to appear before my
decease. I wished fearlessly to give to my subject everything it required; fully persuaded that not being
of  a  satirical  turn,  and  never  wishing  to  be  personal,  I  should  in  equity  always  be  judged
irreprehensible. I undoubtedly wished fully to enjoy the right of thinking which I had by birth; but still
respecting the government under which I lived, without ever disobeying its laws, and very attentive not
to violate the rights of persons, I would not from fear renounce its advantages.
I confess, even that, as a stranger, and living in France, I found my situation very favorable in
daring to speak the truth; well knowing that continuing, as I was determined to do, not to print anything
in the kingdom without permission, I was not obliged to give to any person in it an account of my
maxims nor of their publication elsewhere. I should have been less independent even at Geneva, where,
in  whatever  place  my  books  might  have  been  printed,  the  magistrate  had  a  right  to  criticise  their
contents. This consideration had greatly contributed to make me yield to the solicitations of Madam
d'Epinay, and abandon the project of fixing my residence at Geneva. I felt, as I have remarked in my
Emilius, that unless an author be a man of intrigue, when he wishes to render his works really useful to
any country whatsoever, he must compose them in some other.
  What made me find my situation still more happy, was my being persuaded that the government of
France would, perhaps, without looking upon me with a very favorable eye, make it a point to protect
me, or at least not to disturb my tranquillity. It appeared to me a stroke of simple, yet dexterous policy,
to make a merit of tolerating that which there was no means of preventing; since, had I been driven
from France, which was all government had the right to do, my work would still have been written, and
perhaps with less reserve; whereas if I were left undisturbed, the author remained to answer for what he
wrote, and a prejudice, general throughout all Europe, would be destroyed by acquiring the reputation
of observing a proper respect for the rights of persons.
  They who, by the event, shall judge I was deceived, may perhaps be deceived in their turn. In the
storm which has since broken over my head, my books served as a pretence, but it was against my
person that every shaft was directed. My persecutors gave themselves but little concern about the
author, but they wished to ruin Jean Jacques; and the greatest evil they found in my writings was the
honor they might possibly do me. Let us not encroach upon the future. I do not know that this mystery,
which is still one to me, will hereafter be cleared up to my readers; but had my avowed principles been
of a nature to bring upon me the treatment I received, I should sooner have become their victim, since
the work in which these principles are manifested with most courage, not to call it audacity, seemed to
have had its effect previous to my retreat to the Hermitage, without I will not only say my having
received the least censure, but without any steps having been taken to prevent the publication of it in
France, where it was sold as publicly as in Holland. The New Eloisa afterwards appeared with the same
facility, I dare add; with the same applause: and, what seems incredible, the profession of faith of this
Eloisa at the point of death is exactly similar to that of the Savoyard vicar. Every strong idea in the
Social Contract had been before published in the discourse on Inequality; and every bold opinion in
Emilius previously found in Eloisa. This unrestrained freedom did not excite the least murmur against
the first two works; therefore it was not that which gave cause to it against the latter.
  Another  undertaking  much  of  the  same  kind,  but  of  which  the  project  was  more  recent,  then
engaged my attention: this was the extract of the works of the Abbe de Saint Pierre, of which, having
been led away by the thread of my narrative, I have not hitherto been able to speak. The idea was
suggested to me, after my return from Geneva, by the Abbe Malby, not immediately from himself, butby the interposition of Madam Dupin, who had some interest in engaging me to adopt it. She was one
of the three or four-pretty women of Paris, of whom the Abbe de Saint Pierre had been the spoiled
child, and although she had not decidedly had the preference, she had at least partaken of it with
Madam d'Aiguillon. She preserved for the memory of the good man a respect and an affection which
did honor to them both; and her self-love would have been flattered by seeing the still-born works of
her friend brought to life by her secretary. These works contained excellent things, but so badly told
that the reading of them was almost insupportable; and it is astonishing the Abbe de Saint Pierre, who
looked upon his readers as schoolboys, should nevertheless have spoken to them as men, by the little
care he took to induce them to give him a hearing. It was for this purpose that the work was proposed to
me as useful in itself, and very proper for a man laborious in manoeuvre, but idle as an author, who
finding the trouble of thinking very fatiguing, preferred, in things which pleased him, throwing a light
upon and extending the ideas of others, to producing any himself. Besides, not being confined to the
functions of a translator, I was at liberty sometimes to think for myself; and I had it in my power to give
such a form to my work, that many important truths would pass in it under the name of the Abbe de
Saint Pierre, much more safely than under mine. The undertaking also was not trifling; the business was
nothing less than to read and meditate twenty-three volumes, diffuse, confused, full of long narrations
and periods, repetitions, and false or little views, from amongst which it was necessary to select some
few that were good and useful, and sufficiently encouraging to enable me to support the painful labor. I
frequently wished to have given it up, and should have done so, could I have got it off my hands with a
great grace; but when I received the manuscripts of the abbe, which were given to me by his nephew,
the Comte de Saint Pierre, I had, by the solicitation of St. Lambert, in some measure engaged to make
use of them, which I must either have done, or have given them back. It was with the former intention I
had taken the manuscripts to the Hermitage, and this was the first work to which I proposed to dedicate
my leisure hours.
I had likewise in my own mind projected a third, the idea of which I owed to the observations I had
made upon myself and I felt the more disposed to undertake this work, as I had reason to hope I could
make it a truly useful one, and perhaps, the most so of any that could be offered to the world, were the
execution equal to the plan I had laid down. It has been remarked that most men are in the course of
their lives frequently unlike themselves, and seem to be transformed into others very different from
what they were. It was not to establish a thing so generally known that I wished to write a book; I had a
newer  and  more  important  object.  This  was  to  search  for  the  causes  of  these  variations,  and,  by
confining my observations to those which depend on ourselves, to demonstrate in what manner it might
be possible to direct them, in order to render us better and more certain of our dispositions. For it is
undoubtedly more painful to an honest man to resist desires already formed, and which it is his duty to
subdue, than to prevent, change, or modify the same desires in their source, were he capable of tracing
them to it. A man under temptation resists once because he has strength of mind, he yields another time
because this is overcome; had it been the same as before he would again have triumphed.
  By examining within myself, and searching in others what could be the cause of these different
manners of being, I discovered that, in a great measure they depended on the anterior impressions of
external objects; and that, continually modified by our senses and organs, we, without knowing it, bore
in our ideas, sentiments, and even actions, the effect of these modifications. The striking and numerous
observations I had collected were beyond all manner of dispute, and by their natural principle seemed
proper  to  furnish  an  exterior  regimen,  which  varied  according  to  circumstances,  might  place  and
support the mind in the state most favorable to virtue. From how many mistakes would reason be
preserved, how many vices would be stifled in their birth, were it possible to force animal economy to
favor moral order, which it so frequently disturbs! Climate, seasons, sounds, colors, light, darkness, the
elements, ailments, noise, silence, motion, rest, all act on the animal machine, and consequently on the
mind: all offer a thousand means, almost certain of directing in their origin the sentiments by which we
suffer ourselves to be governed. Such was the fundamental idea of which I had already made a sketch
upon paper, and whence I hoped for an effect the more certain, in favor of persons well disposed, who,sincerely loving virtue, were afraid of their own weakness, as it appeared to me easy to make of it a
book as agreeable to read as it was to compose. I have, however, applied myself but very little to this
work, the title of which was to have been 'Morale Sensitive' ou le Materialisme du Sage. --[Sensitive
Morality,  or  the  Materialism  of  the  Sage.]--Interruptions,  the  cause  of  which  will  soon  appear,
prevented me from continuing it, and the fate of the sketch, which is more connected with my own than
it may appear to be, will hereafter be seen.
  Besides  this,  I  had  for  some  time  meditated  a  system  of  education,  of  which  Madam  de
Chenonceaux, alarmed for her son by that of her husband, had desired me to consider. The authority of
friendship placed this object, although less in itself to my taste, nearer to my heart than any other. On
which account this subject, of all those of which I have just spoken, is the only one I carried to its
utmost extent. The end I proposed to myself in treating of it should, I think, have procured the author a
better fate. But I will not here anticipate this melancholy subject. I shall have too much reason to speak
of it in the course of my work.
  These different objects offered me subjects of meditation for my walks; for, as I believed I had
already observed, I am unable to reflect when I am not walking: the moment I stop, I think no more,
and as soon as I am again in motion my head resumes its workings. I had, however, provided myself
with a work for the closet upon rainy days. This was my dictionary of music, which my scattered,
mutilated, and unshapen materials made it necessary to rewrite almost entirely. I had with me some
books  necessary  to  this  purpose;  I  had  spent  two  months  in  making  extracts  from  others,  I  had
borrowed from the king's library, whence I was permitted to take several to the Hermitage. I was thus
provided with materials for composing in my apartment when the weather did not permit me to go out,
and my copying fatigued me. This arrangement was so convenient that it made it turn to advantage as
well at the Hermitage as at Montmorency, and afterwards even at Motiers, where I completed the work
whilst I was engaged in others, and constantly found a change of occupation to be a real relaxation.
  During a considerable time I exactly followed the distribution I had prescribed myself, and found it
very agreeable; but as soon as the fine weather brought Madam d'Epinay more frequently to Epinay, or
to  the  Chervette,  I  found  that  attentions,  in  the  first  instance  natural  to  me,  but  which  I  had  not
considered in my scheme, considerably deranged my projects. I have already observed that Madam
d'Epinay had many amiable qualities; she sincerely loved her friends; served them with zeal; and, not
sparing for them either time or pains, certainly deserved on their part every attention in return. I had
hitherto discharged this duty without considering it as one, but at length I found that I had given myself
a  chain  of  which  nothing  but  friendship  prevented  me  from  feeling  the  weight,  and  this  was  still
aggravated  by  my  dislike  to  numerous  societies.  Madam  d'  Epinay  took  advantage  of  these
circumstances to make me a proposition seemingly agreeable to me, but which was more so to herself;
this was to let me know when she was alone, or had but little company. I consented, without perceiving
to what a degree I engaged myself. The consequence was that I no longer visited her at my own hour --
but at hers, and that I never was certain of being master of myself for a day together. This constraint
considerably diminished the pleasure I had in going to see her. I found the liberty she had so frequently
promised was given me upon no other condition than that of my never enjoying it; and once or twice
when I wished to do this there were so many messages, notes, and alarms relative to my health, that I
perceived that I could have no excuse but being confined to my bed, for not immediately running to her
upon  the  first  intimation.  It  was  necessary  I  should  submit  to  this  yoke,  and  I  did  it,  even  more
voluntarily than could be expected from so great an enemy to dependence: the sincere attachment I had
to Madam D'Epinay preventing me, in a great measure, from feeling the inconvenience with which it
was accompanied. She, on her part, filled up, well or ill, the void which the absence of her usual circle
left in her amusements. This for her was but a very slender supplement, although preferable to absolute
solitude, which she could not support. She had the means of doing it much more at her ease after she
began with literature, and at all events to write novels, letters, comedies, tales, and other trash of the
same kind. But she was not so much amused in writing these as in reading them; and she never
scribbled over two or three pages--at one sitting--without being previously assured of having, at least,two or three benevolent auditors at the end of so much labor. I seldom had the honor of being one of the
chosen few except by means of another. When alone, I was, for the most part, considered as a cipher in
everything; and this not only in the company of Madam D'Epinay, but in that of M. d'Holbach, and in
every place where Grimm gave the 'ton'. This nullity was very convenient to me, except in a tete-a-tete,
when I knew not what countenance to put on, not daring to speak of literature, of which it was not for
me to say a word; nor of gallantry, being too timid, and fearing, more than death, the ridiculousness of
an old gallant; besides that, I never had such an idea when in the company of Madam D'Epinay, and
that it perhaps would never have occurred to me, had I passed my whole life with her; not that her
person was in the least disagreeable to me; on the contrary, I loved her perhaps too much as a friend to
do it as a lover. I felt a pleasure in seeing and speaking to her. Her conversation, although agreeable
enough in a mixed company, was uninteresting in private; mine, not more elegant or entertaining than
her own, was no great amusement to her. Ashamed of being long silent, I endeavored to enliven our
tete-a-tete and, although this frequently fatigued me, I was never disgusted with it. I was happy to show
her little attentions, and gave her little fraternal kisses, which seemed not to be more sensual to herself;
these were all. She was very thin, very pale, and had a bosom which resembled the back of her hand.
This defect alone would have been sufficient to moderate my most ardent desires; my heart never could
distinguish a woman in a person who had it; and besides other causes useless to mention, always made
me forget the sex of this lady.
  Having resolved to conform to an assiduity which was necessary, I immediately and voluntarily
entered upon it, and for the first year at least, found it less burthensome than I could have expected.
Madam d'Epinay, who commonly passed the summer in the country, continued there but a part of this;
whether she was more detained by her affairs in Paris, or that the absence of Grimm rendered the
residence of the Chevrette less agreeable to her, I know not. I took the advantage of the intervals of her
absence, or when the company with her was numerous, to enjoy my solitude with my good Theresa and
her mother, in such a manner as to taste all its charms. Although I had for several years passed been
frequently in the country, I seldom had enjoyed much of its pleasures; and these excursions, always
made in company with people who considered themselves as persons of consequence, and rendered
insipid by constraint, served to increase in me the natural desire I had for rustic pleasures. The want of
these was the more sensible to me as I had the image of them immediately before my eyes. I was so
tired of saloons, jets d'eau, groves, parterres, and of more fatiguing persons by whom they were shown;
so  exhausted  with  pamphlets,  harpsichords,  trios,  unravellings  of  plots,  stupid  bon  mots,  insipid
affections,  pitiful  storytellers,  and  great  suppers;  that  when  I  gave  a  side  glance  at  a  poor  simple
hawthorn bush, a hedge, a barn, or a meadow; when, in passing through a hamlet, I scented a good
chervil omelette, and heard at a distance the burden of a rustic song of the Bisquieres; I wished all
rouge, furbelows and amber at the d---l, and envying the dinner of the good housewife, and the wine of
her own vineyard, I heartily wished to give a slap on the chaps to Monsieur le Chef and Monsieur le
Maitre,  who  made  me  dine  at  the  hour  of  supper,  and  sup  when  I  should  have  been  asleep,  but
especially to Messieurs the lackeys, who devoured with their eyes the morsel I put into my mouth, and
upon pain of my dying with thirst, sold me the adulterated wine of their master, ten times dearer than
that of a better quality would have cost me at a public house.
  At length I was settled in an agreeable and solitary asylum, at liberty to pass there the remainder of
my days, in that peaceful, equal, and independent life for which I felt myself born. Before I relate the
effects this situation, so new to me, had upon my heart, it is proper I should recapitulate its secret
affections, that the reader may better follow in their causes the progress of these new modifications.
I have always considered the day on which I was united to Theresa as that which fixed my moral
existence. An attachment was necessary for me, since that which should have been sufficient to my
heart had been so cruelly broken. The thirst after happiness is never extinguished in the heart of man.
Mamma was advancing into years, and dishonored herself! I had proofs that she could never more be
happy here below; it therefore remained to me to seek my own happiness, having lost all hopes of
partaking of hers. I was sometimes irresolute, and fluctuated from one idea to another, and from projectto project. My journey to Venice would have thrown me into public life, had the man with whom,
almost against my inclination, I was connected there had common sense. I was easily discouraged,
especially in undertakings of length and difficulty. The ill success of this disgusted me with every
other; and, according to my old maxims, considering distant objects as deceitful allurements, I resolved
in  future  to  provide  for  immediate  wants,  seeing  nothing  in  life  which  could  tempt  me  to  make
extraordinary efforts.
  It was precisely at this time we became acquainted. The mild character of the good Theresa seemed
so fitted to my own, that I united myself to her with an attachment which neither time nor injuries have
been able to impair, and which has constantly been increased by everything by which it might have
been expected to be diminished. The force of this sentiment will hereafter appear when I come to speak
of the wounds she has given my heart in the height of my misery, without my ever having, until this
moment, once uttered a word of complaint to any person whatever.
  When it shall be known, that after having done everything, braved everything, not to separate from
her; that after passing with her twenty years in despite of fate and men; I have in my old age made her
my wife, without the least expectation or solicitation on her part, or promise or engagement on mine,
the world will think that love bordering upon madness, having from the first moment turned my head,
led me by degrees to the last act of extravagance; and this will no longer appear doubtful when the
strong and particular reasons which should forever have prevented me from taking such a step are made
known. What, therefore, will the reader think when I shall have told him, with all the truth he has ever
found in me, that, from the first moment in which I saw her, until that wherein I write, I have never felt
the least love for her, that I never desired to possess her more than I did to possess Madam de Warrens,
and that the physical wants which were satisfied with her person were, to me, solely those of the sex,
and by no means proceeding from the individual? He will think that, being of a constitution different
from that of other men, I was incapable of love, since this was not one of the sentiments which attached
me to women the most dear to my heart. Patience, O my dear reader! the fatal moment approaches in
which you will be but too much undeceived.
I fall into repetitions; I know it; and these are necessary. The first of my wants, the greatest,
strongest and most insatiable, was wholly in my heart; the want of an intimate connection, and as
intimate as it could possibly be: for this reason especially, a woman was more necessary to me than a
man, a female rather than a male friend. This singular want was such that the closest corporal union
was not sufficient: two souls would have been necessary to me in the same body, without which I
always felt a void. I thought I was upon the point of filling it up forever. This young person, amiable by
a thousand excellent qualities, and at that time by her form, without the shadow of art or coquetry,
would have confined within herself my whole existence, could hers, as I had hoped it would, have been
totally confined to me. I had nothing to fear from men; I am certain of being the only man she ever
really loved and her moderate passions seldom wanted another not even after I ceased in this respect to
be one to her. I had no family; she had one; and this family was composed of individuals whose
dispositions were so different from mine, that I could never make it my own. This was the first cause of
my unhappiness. What would I not have given to be the child of her mother? I did everything in my
power to become so, but could never succeed. I in vain attempted to unite all our interests: this was
impossible. She always created herself one different from mine, contrary to it, and to that even of her
daughter, which already was no longer separated from it. She, her other children, and grand-children,
became  so  many  leeches,  and  the  least  evil  these  did  to  Theresa  was  robbing  her.  The  poor  girl,
accustomed to submit, even to her nieces, suffered herself to be pilfered and governed without saying a
word; and I perceived with grief that by exhausting my purse, and giving her advice, I did nothing that
could be of any real advantage to her. I endeavored to detach her from her mother; but she constantly
resisted such a proposal. I could not but respect her resistance, and esteemed her the more for it; but her
refusal was not on this account less to the prejudice of us both. Abandoned to her mother and the rest of
her family, she was more their companion than mine, and rather at their command than mistress of
herself. Their avarice was less ruinous than their advice was pernicious to her; in fact, if, on account ofthe love she had for me, added to her good natural disposition, she was not quite their slave, she was
enough so to prevent in a great measure the effect of the good maxims I endeavored to instil into her,
and, notwithstanding all my efforts, to prevent our being united.
  Thus was it, that notwithstanding a sincere and reciprocal attachment, in which I had lavished all
the tenderness of my heart, the void in that heart was never completely filled. Children, by whom this
effect should have been produced, were brought into the world, but these only made things worse. I
trembled at the thought of intrusting them to a family ill brought up, to be still worse educated. The risk
of the education of the foundling hospital was much less. This reason for the resolution I took, much
stronger than all those I stated in my letter to Madam de Francueil, was, however, the only one with
which I dared not make her acquainted; I chose rather to appear less excusable than to expose to
reproach the family of a person I loved. But by the conduct of her wretched brother, notwithstanding all
that can be said in his defence, it will be judged whether or not I ought to have exposed my children to
an education similar to his.
  Not having it in my power to taste in all its plentitude the charms of that intimate connection of
which I felt the want, I sought for substitutes which did not fill up the void, yet they made it less
sensible. Not having a friend entirely devoted to me, I wanted others, whose impulse should overcome
my indolence; for this reason I cultivated and strengthened my connection with Diderot and the Abbe
de Condillac, formed with Grimm a new one still more intimate, till at length by the unfortunate
discourse, of which I have related some particulars, I unexpectedly found myself thrown back into a
literary circle which I thought I had quitted forever.
  My first steps conducted me by a new path to another intellectual world, the simple and noble
economy of which I cannot contemplate without enthusiasm. I reflected so much on the subject that I
soon saw nothing but error and folly in the doctrine of our sages, and oppression and misery in our
social order. In the illusion of my foolish pride, I thought myself capable of destroying all imposture;
and thinking that, to make myself listened to, it was necessary my conduct should agree with my
principles, I adopted the singular manner of life which I have not been permitted to continue, the
example of which my pretended friends have never forgiven me, which at first made me ridiculous, and
would at length have rendered me respectable, had it been possible for me to persevere.
  Until then I had been good; from that moment I became virtuous, or at least infatuated with virtue.
This infatuation had begun in my head, but afterwards passed into my heart. The most noble pride there
took root amongst the ruins of extirpated vanity. I affected nothing; I became what I appeared to be,
and during four years at least, whilst this effervescence continued at its greatest height, there is nothing
great and good that can enter the heart of man, of which I was not capable between heaven and myself.
Hence  flowed  my  sudden  eloquence;  hence,  in  my  first  writings,  that  fire  really  celestial,  which
consumed me, and whence during forty years not a single spark had escaped, because it was not yet
lighted up.
I was really transformed; my friends and acquaintance scarcely knew me. I was no longer that
timid, and rather bashful than modest man, who neither dared to present himself, nor utter a word;
whom a single pleasantry disconcerted, and whose face was covered with a blush the moment his eyes
met those of a woman. I became bold, haughty, intrepid, with a confidence the more firm, as it was
simple, and resided in my soul rather than in my manner. The contempt with which my profound
meditations had inspired me for the manners, maxims and prejudices of the age in which I lived,
rendered me proof against the raillery of those by whom they were possessed, and I crushed their little
pleasantries with a sentence, as I would have crushed an insect with my fingers.
  What a change! All Paris repeated the severe and acute sarcasms of the same man who, two years
before, and ten years afterwards, knew not how to find what he had to say, nor the word he ought to
employ. Let the situation in the world the most contrary to my natural disposition be sought after, and
this will be found. Let one of the short moments of my life in which I became another man, and ceased
to be myself, be recollected, this also will be found in the time of which I speak; but, instead of
continuing only six days, or six weeks, it lasted almost six years, and would perhaps still continue, butfor the particular circumstances which caused it to cease, and restored me to nature, above which I had,
wished to soar.
  The beginning of this change took place as soon as I had quitted Paris, and the sight of the vices of
that city no longer kept up the indignation with which it had inspired me. I no sooner had lost sight of
men than I ceased to despise them, and once removed from those who designed me evil, my hatred
against them no longer existed. My heart, little fitted for hatred, pitied their misery, and even their
wickedness. This situation, more pleasing but less sublime, soon allayed the ardent enthusiasm by
which I had so long been transported; and I insensibly, almost to myself even, again became fearful,
complaisant and timid; in a word, the same Jean Jacques I before had been.
  Had this resolution gone no further than restoring me to myself, all would have been well; but
unfortunately it rapidly carried me away to the other extreme. From that moment my mind in agitation
passed the line of repose, and its oscillations, continually renewed, have never permitted it to remain
here. I must enter into some detail of this second revolution; terrible and fatal era, of a fate unparalleled
amongst mortals.
  We  were  but  three  persons  in  our  retirement;  it  was  therefore  natural  our  intimacy  should  be
increased  by  leisure  and  solitude.  This  was  the  case  between  Theresa  and  myself.  We  passed  in
conversations in the shade the most charming and delightful hours, more so than any I had hitherto
enjoyed. She seemed to taste of this sweet intercourse more than I had until then observed her to do;
she opened her heart, and communicated to me, relative to her mother and family, things she had had
resolution  enough  to  conceal  for  a  great  length  of  time.  Both  had  received  from  Madam  Dupin
numerous presents, made them on my account, and mostly for me, but which the cunning old woman,
to prevent my being angry, had appropriated to her own use and that of her other children, without
suffering Theresa to have the least share, strongly forbidding her to say a word to me of the matter: an
order the poor girl had obeyed with an incredible exactness.
  But another thing which surprised me more than this had done, was the discovery that besides the
private conversations Diderot and Grimm had frequently had with both to endeavor to detach them
from me, in which, by means of the resistance of Theresa, they had not been able to succeed, they had
afterwards had frequent conferences with the mother, the subject of which was a secret to the daughter.
However, she knew little presents had been made, and that there were mysterious goings backward and
forward, the motive of which was entirely unknown to her. When we left Paris, Madam le Vasseur had
long been in the habit of going to see Grimm twice or thrice a month, and continuing with him for
hours together, in conversation so secret that the servant was always sent out of the room.
I judged this motive to be of the same nature with the project into which they had attempted to
make the daughter enter, by promising to procure her and her mother, by means of Madam d'Epinay, a
salt huckster's license, or snuff-shop; in a word, by tempting her with the allurements of gain. They had
been told that, as I was not in a situation to do anything for them, I could not, on their account, do
anything for myself. As in all this I saw nothing but good intentions, I was not absolutely displeased
with them for it. The mystery was the only thing which gave me pain, especially on the part of the old
woman, who moreover daily became more parasitical and flattering towards me. This, however, did not
prevent her from reproaching her daughter in private with telling me everything, and loving me too
much, observing to her she was a fool and would at length be made a dupe.
  This woman possessed, to a supreme degree, the art of multiplying the presents made her, by
concealing from one what she received from another, and from me what she received from all. I could
have pardoned her avarice, but it was impossible I should forgive her dissimulation. What could she
have to conceal from me whose happiness she knew principally consisted in that of herself and her
daughter? What I had done for the daughter I had done for myself, but the services I rendered the
mother merited on her part some acknowledgment. She ought, at least, to have thought herself obliged
for them to her daughter, and to have loved me for the sake of her by whom I was already beloved. I
had  raised  her  from  the  lowest  state  of  wretchedness;  she  received  from  my  hands  the  means  of
subsistence, and was indebted to me for her acquaintance with the persons from whom she foundmeans  to  reap  considerable  benefit.  Theresa  had  long  supported  her  by  her  industry,  and  now
maintained her with my bread. She owed everything to this daughter, for whom she had done nothing,
and her other children, to whom she had given marriage portions, and on whose account she had ruined
herself, far from giving her the least aid, devoured her substance and mine. I thought that in such a
situation she ought to consider me as her only friend and most sure protector, and that, far from making
of my own affairs a secret to me, and conspiring against me in my house, it was her duty faithfully to
acquaint me with everything in which I was interested, when this came to her knowledge before it did
to mine. In what light, therefore, could I consider her false and mysterious conduct? What could I think
of the sentiments with which she endeavored to inspire her daughter? What monstrous ingratitude was
hers, to endeavor to instil it into her from whom I expected my greatest consolation?
  These reflections at length alienated my affections from this woman, and to such a degree that I
could no longer look upon her but with contempt. I nevertheless continued to treat with respect the
mother of the friend of my bosom, and in everything to show her almost the reverence of a son; but I
must confess I could not remain long with her without pain, and that I never knew how to bear restraint.
  This is another short moment of my life, in which I approached near to happiness without being
able to attain it, and this by no fault of my own. Had the mother been of a good disposition we all three
should have been happy to the end of our days; the longest liver only would have been to be pitied.
Instead of which, the reader will see the course things took, and judge whether or not it was in my
power to change it.
  Madam le Vasseur, who perceived I had got more full possession of the heart of Theresa, and that
she had lost ground with her, endeavored to regain it; and instead of striving to restore herself to my
good opinion by the mediation of her daughter attempted to alienate her affections from me. One of the
means she employed was to call her family to her aid. I had begged Theresa not to invite any of her
relations to the Hermitage, and she had promised me she would not. These were sent for in my absence,
without consulting her, and she was afterwards prevailed upon to promise not to say anything of the
matter. After the first step was taken all the rest were easy. When once we make a secret of anything to
the person we love, we soon make little scruple of doing it in everything; the moment I was at the
Chevrette the Hermitage was full of people who sufficiently amused themselves. A mother has always
great power over a daughter of a mild disposition; yet notwithstanding all the old woman could do, she
was never able to prevail upon Theresa to enter into her views, nor to persuade her to join in the league
against me. For her part, she resolved upon doing it forever, and seeing on one side her daughter and
myself, who were in a situation to live, and that was all; on the other, Diderot, Grimm, D' Holbach and
Madam d'Epinay, who promised great things, and gave some little ones, she could not conceive it was
possible to be in the wrong with the wife of a farmer-general and baron. Had I been more clear sighted,
I  should  from  this  moment  have  perceived  I  nourished  a  serpent  in  my  bosom.  But  my  blind
confidence, which nothing had yet diminished, was such that I could not imagine she wished to injure
the person she ought to love. Though I saw numerous conspiracies formed on every side, all I complain
of was the tyranny of persons who called themselves my friends, and who, as it seemed, would force
me to be happy in the manner they should point out, and not in that I had chosen for myself.
  Although Theresa refused to join in the confederacy with her mother, she afterwards kept her secret.
For this her motive was commendable, although I will not determine whether she did it well or ill. Two
women, who have secrets between them, love to prattle together; this attracted them towards each
other, and Theresa, by dividing herself, sometimes let me feel I was alone; for I could no longer
consider as a society that which we all three formed.
I now felt the neglect I had been guilty of during the first years of our connection, in not taking
advantage  of  the  docility  with  which  her  love  inspired  her,  to  improve  her  talents  and  give  her
knowledge, which, by more closely connecting us in our retirement would agreeably have filled up her
time and my own, without once suffering us to perceive the length of a private conversation. Not that
this was ever exhausted between us, or that she seemed disgusted with our walks; but we had not a
sufficient  number  of  ideas  common  to  both  to  make  ourselves  a  great  store,  and  we  could  notincessantly talk of our future projects which were confined to those of enjoying the pleasures of life.
The  objects  around  us  inspired  me  with  reflections  beyond  the  reach  of  her  comprehension.  An
attachment of twelve years' standing had no longer need of words: we were too well acquainted with
each other to have any new knowledge to acquire in that respect. The resource of puns, jests, gossiping
and scandal, was all that remained. In solitude especially is it, that the advantage of living with a person
who knows how to think is particularly felt. I wanted not this resource to amuse myself with her; but
she would have stood in need of it to have always found amusement with me. The worst of all was our
being obliged to hold our conversations when we could; her mother, who become importunate, obliged
me  to  watch  for  opportunities  to  do  it.  I  was  under  constraint  in  my  own  house:  this  is  saying
everything; the air of love was prejudicial to good friendship. We had an intimate intercourse without
living in intimacy.
  The moment I thought I perceived that Theresa sometimes sought for a pretext to elude the walks I
proposed to her, I ceased to invite her to accompany me, without being displeased with her for not
finding in them so much amusement as I did. Pleasure is not a thing which depends upon the will. I was
sure of her heart, and the possession of this was all I desired. As long as my pleasures were hers, I
tasted of them with her; when this ceased to be the case I preferred her contentment to my own.
  In this manner it was that, half deceived in my expectation, leading a life after my own heart, in a
residence I had chosen with a person who was dear to me, I at length found myself almost alone. What
I  still  wanted  prevented  me  from  enjoying  what  I  had.  With  respect  to  happiness  and  enjoyment,
everything or nothing, was what was necessary to me. The reason of these observations will hereafter
appear. At present I return to the thread of my narrative.
I imagined that I possessed treasures in the manuscripts given me by the Comte de St. Pierre. On
examination I found they were a little more than the collection of the printed works of his uncle, with
notes and corrections by his own hand, and a few other trifling fragments which had not yet been
published. I confirmed myself by these moral writings in the idea I had conceived from some of his
letters, shown me by Madam de Crequi, that he had more sense and ingenuity than at first I had
imagined; but after a careful examination of his political works, I discerned nothing but superficial
notions, and projects that were useful but impracticable, in consequence of the idea from which the
author  never  could  depart,  that  men  conducted  themselves  by  their  sagacity  rather  than  by  their
passions. The high opinion he had of the knowledge of the moderns had made him adopt this false
principle of improved reason, the basis of all the institutions he proposed, and the source of his political
sophisms. This extraordinary man, an honor to the age in which he lived, and to the human species, and
perhaps  the  only  person,  since  the  creation  of  mankind,  whose  sole  passion  was  that  of  reason,
wandered in all his systems from error to error, by attempting to make men like himself, instead of
taking them as they were, are, and will continue to be. He labored for imaginary beings, while he
thought himself employed for the benefit of his contemporaries.
  All these things considered, I was rather embarrassed as to the form I should give to my work. To
suffer the author's visions to pass was doing nothing useful; fully to refute them would have been
unpolite,  as  the  care  of  revising  and  publishing  his  manuscripts,  which  I  had  accepted,  and  even
requested, had been intrusted to me; this trust had imposed on me the obligation of treating the author
honorably. I at length concluded upon that which to me appeared the most decent, judicious, and useful.
This was to give separately my own ideas and those of the author, and, for this purpose, to enter into his
views, to set them in a new light, to amplify, extend them, and spare nothing which might contribute to
present them in all their excellence.
  My work therefore was to be composed of two parts absolutely distinct: one, to explain, in the
manner I have just mentioned, the different projects of the author; in the other, which was not to appear
until the first had had its effect, I should have given my opinion upon these projects, which I confess
might sometimes have exposed them to the fate of the sonnet of the misanthrope. At the head of the
whole was to have been the life of the author. For this I had collected some good materials, and which I
flattered myself I should not spoil in making use of them. I had been a little acquainted with the Abbede St. Pierre, in his old age, and the veneration I had for his memory warranted to me, upon the whole,
that the comte would not be dissatisfied with the manner in which I should have treated his relation.
I made my first essay on the 'Perpetual Peace', the greatest and most elaborate of all the works
which composed the collection; and before I abandoned myself to my reflections I had the courage to
read  everything  the  abbe  had  written  upon  this  fine  subject,  without  once  suffering  myself  to  be
disgusted either by his slowness or his repetitions. The public has seen the extract, on which account I
have nothing to say upon the subject. My opinion of it has not been printed, nor do I know that it ever
will be; however, it was written at the same time the extract was made. From this I passed to the
'Polysynodie', or Plurality of Councils, a work written under the regent to favor the administration he
had chosen, and which caused the Abbe de Saint Pierre to be expelled from the academy, on account of
some remarks unfavorable to the preceding administration, and with which the Duchess of Maine and
the Cardinal de Polignac were displeased. I completed this work as I did the former, with an extract and
remarks; but I stopped here without intending to continue the undertaking which I ought never to have
begun.
  The reflection which induced me to give it up naturally presents itself, and it was astonishing I had
not made it sooner.
  Most  of  the  writings  of  the  Abbe  de  Saint  Pierre  were  either  observations,  or  contained
observations, on some parts of the government of France, and several of these were of so free a nature,
that it was happy for him he had made them with impunity. But in the offices of all the ministers of
state the Abbe de St. Pierre had ever been considered as a kind of preacher rather than a real politician,
and he was suffered to say what he pleased, because it appeared that nobody listened to him. Had I
procured him readers the case would have been different. He was a Frenchman, and I was not one; and
by repeating his censures, although in his own name, I exposed myself to be asked, rather rudely, but
without  injustice,  what  it  was  with  which  I  meddled.  Happily  before  I  proceeded  any  further,  I
perceived the hold I was about to give the government against me, and I immediately withdrew. I knew
that, living alone in the midst of men more powerful than myself, I never could by any means whatever
be sheltered from the injury they chose to do me. There was but one thing which depended upon my
own efforts: this was, to observe such a line of conduct that whenever they chose to make me feel the
weight of authority they could not do it without being unjust. The maxim which induced me to decline
proceeding with the works of the Abbe de Saint Pierre, has frequently made me give up projects I had
much more at heart. People who are always ready to construe adversity into a crime, would be much
surprised were they to know the pains I have taken, that during my misfortunes it might never with
truth be said of me, Thou hast deserved them.
  After having given up the manuscript, I remained some time without determining upon the work
which should succeed it, and this interval of inactivity was destructive; by permitting me to turn my
reflections on myself, for want of another object to engage my attention. I had no project for the future
which could amuse my imagination. It was not even possible to form any, as my situation was precisely
that in which all my desires were united. I had not another to conceive, and yet there was a void in my
heart. This state was the more cruel, as I saw no other that was to be preferred to it. I had fixed my most
tender affections upon a person who made me a return of her own. I lived with her without constraint,
and, so to speak, at discretion. Notwithstanding this, a secret grief of mind never quitted me for a
moment, either when she was present or absent. In possessing Theresa, I still perceived she wanted
something to her happiness; and the sole idea of my not being everything to her had such an effect upon
my mind that she was next to nothing to me.
I had friends of both sexes, to whom I was attached by the purest friendship and most perfect
esteem; I depended upon a real return on their part, and a doubt of their sincerity never entered my
mind; yet this friendship was more tormenting than agreeable to me, by their obstinate perseverance
and even by their affectation, in opposing my taste, inclinations and manner of living; and this to such a
degree, that the moment I seemed to desire a thing which interested myself only, and depended not
upon them, they immediately joined their efforts to oblige me to renounce it. This continued desire tocontrol me in all my wishes, the more unjust, as I did not so much as make myself acquainted with
theirs, became so cruelly oppressive, that I never received one of their letters without feeling a certain
terror as I opened it, and which was but too well justified by the contents. I thought being treated like a
child by persons younger than myself, and who, of themselves, stood in great need of the advice they so
prodigally bestowed on me, was too much: "Love me," said I to them, "as I love you, but, in every
other respect, let my affairs be as indifferent to you, as yours are to me: this is all I ask." If they granted
me one of these two requests, it was not the latter.
I had a retired residence in a charming solitude, was master of my own house, and could live in it in
the manner I thought proper, without being controlled by any person. This habitation imposed on me
duties agreeable to discharge, but which were indispensable. My liberty was precarious. In a greater
state of subjection than a person at the command of another, it was my duty to be so by inclination.
When I arose in the morning, I never could say to myself, I will employ this day as I think proper. And,
moreover, besides my being subject to obey the call of Madam d'Epinay, I was exposed to the still more
disagreeable importunities of the public and chance comers. The distance I was at from Paris did not
prevent crowds of idlers, not knowing how to spend their time, from daily breaking in upon me, and,
without the least scruple, freely disposing of mine. When I least expected visitors I was unmercifully
assailed by them, and I seldom made a plan for the agreeable employment of the day that was not
counteracted by the arrival of some stranger.
  In short, finding no real enjoyment in the midst of the pleasures I had been most desirous to obtain,
I, by sudden mental transitions, returned in imagination to the serene days of my youth, and sometimes
exclaimed with a sigh: "Ah! this is not Les Charmettes!"
  The recollection of the different periods of my life led me to reflect upon that at which I was
arrived, and I found I was already on the decline, a prey to painful disorders, and imagined I was
approaching the end of my days without having, tasted, in all its plentitude, scarcely anyone of the
pleasures after which my heart had so much thirsted, or having given scope to the lively sentiments I
felt it had in reserve. I had not favored even that intoxicating voluptuousness with which my mind was
richly stored, and which, for want of an object, was always compressed, an never exhaled but by signs.
  How was it possible that, with a mind naturally expansive, I, with whom to live was to love, should
not hitherto have found a friend entirely devoted to me; a real friend: I who felt myself so capable of
being such a friend to another? How can it be accounted for that with such warm affections, such
combustible senses, and a heart wholly made up of love, I had not once, at least, felt its flame for a
determinate object? Tormented by the want of loving, without ever having been able to satisfy it, I
perceived myself approaching the eve of old age, and hastening on to death without having lived.
  These melancholy but affecting recollections led me to others, which, although accompanied with
regret, were not wholly unsatisfactory. I thought something I had not yet received was still due to me
from destiny.
  To  what  end  was  I  born  with  exquisite  faculties?  To  suffer  them  to  remain  unemployed?  the
sentiment of conscious merit, which made me consider myself as suffering injustice, was some kind of
reparation, and caused me to shed tears which with pleasure I suffered to flow.
  These were my mediations during the finest season of the year, in the month of June, in cool
shades, to the songs of the nightingale, and the warbling of brooks. Everything concurred in plunging
me into that too seducing state of indolence for which I was born, and from which my austere manner,
proceeding from a long effervescence, should forever have delivered me. I unfortunately remembered
the dinner of the Chateau de Toune, and my meeting with the two charming girls in the same season, in
places much resembling that in which I then was. The remembrance of these circumstances, which the
innocence that accompanied them rendered to me still more dear, brought several others of the nature to
my recollection. I presently saw myself surrounded by all the objects which, in my youth, had given me
emotion. Mademoiselle Galley, Mademoiselle de Graffenried, Mademoiselle de Breil, Madam Basile,
Madam de Larnage, my pretty scholars, and even the bewitching Zulietta, whom my heart could not
forget. I found myself in the midst of a seraglio of houris of my old acquaintance, for whom the mostlively inclination was not new to me. My blood became inflamed, my head turned, notwithstanding my
hair was almost gray, and the grave citizen of Geneva, the austere Jean Jacques, at forty-five years of
age, again became the fond shepherd. The intoxication, with which my mind was seized, although
sudden and extravagant, was so strong and lasting, that, to enable me to recover from it, nothing less
than the unforeseen and terrible crisis it brought on was necessary.
  This intoxication, to whatever degree it was carried, went not so far as to make me forget my age
and situation, to flatter me that I could still inspire love, nor to make me attempt to communicate the
devouring flame by which ever since my youth I had felt my heart in vain consumed. For this I did not
hope; I did not even desire it. I knew the season of love was past; I knew too well in what contempt the
ridiculous pretensions of superannuated gallants were held, ever to add one to the number, and I was
not a man to become an impudent coxcomb in the decline of life, after having been so little such during
the flower of my age. Besides, as a friend to peace, I should have been apprehensive of domestic
dissensions; and I too sincerely loved Theresa to expose her to the mortification of seeing me entertain
for others more lively sentiments than those with which she inspired me for herself.
  What step did I take upon this occasion? My reader will already have guessed it, if he has taken the
trouble to pay the least attention to my narrative. The impossibility of attaining real beings threw me
into the regions of chimera, and seeing nothing in existence worthy of my delirium, I sought food for it
in  the  ideal  world,  which  my  imagination  quickly  peopled  with  beings  after  my  own  heart.  This
resource never came more apropos, nor was it ever so fertile. In my continual ecstasy I intoxicated my
mind with the most delicious sentiments that ever entered the heart of man. Entirely forgetting the
human species, I formed to myself societies of perfect beings, whose virtues were as celestial as their
beauty, tender and faithful friends, such as I never found here below. I became so fond of soaring in the
empyrean, in the midst of the charming objects with which I was surrounded, that I thus passed hours
and days without perceiving it; and, losing the remembrance of all other things, I scarcely had eaten a
morsel in haste before I was impatient to make my escape and run to regain my groves. When ready to
depart for the enchanted world, I saw arrive wretched mortals who came to detain me upon earth, I
could neither conceal nor moderate my vexation; and no longer master of myself, I gave them so
uncivil a reception, that it might justly be termed brutal. This tended to confirm my reputation as a
misanthrope, from the very cause which, could the world have read my heart, should have acquired me
one of a nature directly opposite.
  In the midst of my exultation I was pulled down like a paper kite, and restored to my proper place
by means of a smart attack of my disorder. I recurred to the only means that had before given me relief,
and thus made a truce with my angelic amours; for besides that it seldom happens that a man is
amorous when he suffers, my imagination, which is animated in the country and beneath the shade of
trees, languishes and becomes extinguished in a chamber, and under the joists of a ceiling. I frequently
regretted that there existed no dryads; it would certainly have been amongst these that I should have
fixed my attachment.
  Other domestic broils came at the same time to increase my chagrin. Madam le Vasseur, while
making  me  the  finest  compliments  in  the  world,  alienated  from  me  her  daughter  as  much  as  she
possibly could. I received letters from my late neighborhood, informing me that the good old lady had
secretly contracted several debts in the name of Theresa, to whom these became known, but of which
she had never mentioned to me a word. The debts to be paid hurt me much less than the secret that had
been made of them. How could she, for whom I had never had a secret, have one from me? Is it
possible to dissimulate with persons whom we love? The 'Coterie Holbachique', who found I never
made a journey to Paris, began seriously to be afraid I was happy and satisfied in the country, and
madman enough to reside there.
  Hence the cabals by which attempts were made to recall me indirectly to the city. Diderot, who did
not immediately wish to show himself, began by detaching from me De Leyre, whom I had brought
acquainted with him, and who received and transmitted to me the impressions Diderot chose to give
without suspecting to what end they were directed.  Everything seemed to concur in withdrawing me from my charming and mad reverie. I was not
recovered from the late attack I had when I received the copy of the poem on the destruction of Lisbon,
which I imagined to be sent by the author. This made it necessary I should write to him and speak of his
composition. I did so, and my letter was a long time afterwards printed without my consent, as I shall
hereafter have occasion to remark.
  Struck by seeing this poor man overwhelmed, if I may so speak, with prosperity and honor, bitterly
exclaiming against the miseries of this life, and finding everything to be wrong, I formed the mad
project of making him turn his attention to himself, and of proving to him that everything was right.
Voltaire, while he appeared to believe in God, never really believed in anything but the devil; since his
pretended deity is a malicious being, who, according to him, had no pleasure but in evil. The glaring
absurdity of this doctrine is particularly disgusting from a man enjoying the greatest prosperity; who,
from the bosom of happiness, endeavors, by the frightful and cruel image of all the calamities from
which he is exempt, to reduce his fellow creatures to despair. I, who had a better right than he to
calculate and weigh all the evils of human life, impartially examine them, and proved to him that of all
possible evils there was not one to be attributed to Providence, and which had not its source rather in
the abusive use man made of his faculties than in nature. I treated him, in this letter, with the greatest
respect and delicacy possible. Yet, knowing his self-love to be extremely irritable, I did not send the
letter immediately to himself, but to Doctor Tronchin, his physician and friend, with full power either to
give it him or destroy it. Voltaire informed me in a few lines that being ill, having likewise the care of a
sick  person,  he  postponed  his  answer  until  some  future  day,  and  said  not  a  word  on  the  subject.
Tronchin, when he sent me the letter, inclosed in it another, in which he expressed but very little esteem
for the person from whom he received it.
I have never published, nor even shown, either of these two letters, not liking to make a parade of
such little triumphs; but the originals are in my collections. Since that time Voltaire has published the
answer he promised me, but which I never received. This is the novel of 'Candide', of which I cannot
speak because I have not read it.
  All these interruptions ought to have cured me of my fantastic amours, and they were perhaps the
means offered me by Heaven to prevent their destructive consequences; but my evil genius prevailed,
and I had scarcely begun to go out before my heart, my head, and my feet returned to the same paths. I
say the same in certain respects; for my ideas, rather less exalted, remained this time upon earth, but yet
were busied in making so exquisite a choice of all that was to be found there amiable of every kind, that
it was not much less chimerical than the imaginary world I had abandoned.
I figured to myself love and friendship, the two idols of my heart, under the most ravishing images.
I amused myself in adorning them with all the charms of the sex I had always adored. I imagined two
female friends rather than two of my own sex, because, although the example be more rare, it is also
more amiable. I endowed them with different characters, but analogous to their connection, with two
faces, not perfectly beautiful, but according to my taste, and animated with benevolence and sensibility.
I made one brown and the other fair, one lively and the other languishing, one wise and the other weak,
but of so amiable a weakness that it seemed to add a charm to virtue. I gave to one of the two a lover, of
whom the other was the tender friend, and even something more, but I did not admit either rivalry,
quarrels, or jealousy: because every painful sentiment is painful for me to imagine, and I was unwilling
to tarnish this delightful picture by anything which was degrading to nature. Smitten with my two
charming models, I drew my own portrait in the lover and the friend, as much as it was possible to do
it; but I made him young and amiable, giving him, at the same time, the virtues and the defects which I
felt in myself.
  That I might place my characters in a residence proper for them, I successively passed in review the
most  beautiful  places  I  had  seen  in  my  travels.  But  I  found  no  grove  sufficiently  delightful,  no
landscape that pleased me. The valleys of Thessaly would have satisfied me had I but once had a sight
of them; but my imagination, fatigued with invention, wished for some real place which might serve it
as a point to rest upon, and create in me an illusion with respect to the real existence of the inhabitants Iintended to place there. I thought a good while upon the Boromean Islands, the delightful prospect of
which had transported me, but I found in them too much art and ornament for my lovers. I however
wanted a lake, and I concluded by making choice of that about which my heart has never ceased to
wander. I fixed myself upon that part of the banks of this lake where my wishes have long since placed
my residence in the imaginary happiness to which fate has confined me. The native place of my poor
mamma had still for me a charm. The contrast of the situations, the richness and variety of the sites, the
magnificence, the majesty of the whole, which ravishes the senses, affects, the heart, and elevates the
mind, determined me to give it the preference, and I placed my young pupils at Vervey. This is what I
imagined at the first sketch; the rest was not added until afterwards.
I for a long time confined myself to this vague plan, because it was sufficient to fill my imagination
with  agreeable  objects,  and  my  heart  with  sentiments  in  which  it  delighted.  These  fictions,  by
frequently presenting themselves, at length gained a consistence, and took in my mind a determined
form. I then had an inclination to express upon paper some of the situations fancy presented to me, and,
recollecting everything I had felt during my youth, thus, in some measure, gave an object to that desire
of loving, which I had never been able to satisfy, and by which I felt myself consumed.
I first wrote a few incoherent letters, and when I afterwards wished to give them connection, I
frequently found a difficulty in doing it. What is scarcely credible, although most strictly true, is my
having written the first two parts almost wholly in this manner, without having any plan formed, and
not foreseeing I should one day be tempted to make it a regular work. For this reason the two parts
afterwards  formed  of  materials  not  prepared  for  the  place  in  which  they  are  disposed,  are  full  of
unmeaning expressions not found in the others.
  In the midst of my reveries I had a visit from Madam d'Houdetot, the first she had ever made me,
but which unfortunately was not the last, as will hereafter appear. The Comtesse d'Houdetot was the
daughter of the late M. de Bellegarde, a farmer-general, sister to M. d'Epinay, and Messieurs de Lalive
and De la Briche, both of whom have since been introductors to ambassadors. I have spoken of the
acquaintance I made with her before she was married: since that event I had not seen her, except at the
fetes at La Chevrette, with Madam d'Epinay, her sister-in-law. Having frequently passed several days
with her, both at La Chevrette and Epinay, I always thought her amiable, and that she seemed to be my
well-wisher. She was fond of walking with me; we were both good walkers, and the conversation
between us was inexhaustible. However, I never went to see her in Paris, although she had several
times requested and solicited me to do it. Her connections with M. de St. Lambert, with whom I began
to be intimate, rendered her more interesting to me, and it was to bring me some account of that friend
who was, I believe, then at Mahon, that she came to see me at the Hermitage.
  This visit had something of the appearance of the beginning of a romance. She lost her way. Her
coachman, quitting the road, which turned to the right, attempted to cross straight over from the mill of
Clairvaux to the Hermitage: her carriage stuck in a quagmire in the bottom of the valley, and she got
out and walked the rest of the road. Her delicate shoes were soon worn through; she sunk into the dirt,
her servants had the greatest difficulty in extricating her, and she at length arrived at the Hermitage in
boots, making the place resound with her laughter, in which I most heartily joined. She had to change
everything. Theresa provided her with what was necessary, and I prevailed upon her to forget her
dignity and partake of a rustic collation, with which she seemed highly satisfied. It was late, and her
stay was short; but the interview was so mirthful that it pleased her, and she seemed disposed to return.
She did not however put this project into execution until the next year: but, alas! the delay was not
favorable to me in anything.
I  passed  the  autumn  in  an  employment  no  person  would  suspect  me  of  undertaking:  this  was
guarding the fruit of M. d'Epinay. The Hermitage was the reservoir of the waters of the park of the
Chevrette; there was a garden walled round and planted with espaliers and other trees, which produced
M. d'Epinay more fruit than his kitchen-garden at the Chevrette, although three-fourths of it were stolen
from him. That I might not be a guest entirely useless, I took upon myself the direction of the garden
and the inspection of the conduct of the gardener. Everything went on well until the fruit season, but asthis became ripe, I observed that it disappeared without knowing in what manner it was disposed of.
The gardener assured me it was the dormice which eat it all. I destroyed a great number of these
animals, notwithstanding which the fruit still diminished. I watched the gardener's motions so narrowly,
that I found he was the great dormouse. He lodged at Montmorency, whence he came in the night with
his wife and children to take away the fruit he had concealed in the daytime, and which he sold in the
market at Paris as publicly as if he had brought it from a garden of his own. The wretch whom I loaded
with kindness, whose children were clothed by Theresa, and whose father, who was a beggar, I almost
supported, robbed us with as much ease as effrontery, not one of the three being sufficiently vigilant to
prevent him: and one night he emptied my cellar.
  Whilst he seemed to address himself to me only, I suffered everything, but being desirous of giving
an account of the fruit, I was obliged to declare by whom a great part of it had been stolen. Madam
d'Epinay desired me to pay and discharge him, and look out for another; I did so. As this rascal rambled
about the Hermitage in the night, armed with a thick club staff with an iron ferrule, and accompanied
by other villains like himself, to relieve the governesses from their fears, I made his successor sleep in
the house with us; and this not being sufficient to remove their apprehensions, I sent to ask M. d'Epinay
for a musket, which I kept in the chamber of the gardener, with a charge not to make use of it except an
attempt was made to break open the door or scale the walls of the garden, and to fire nothing but
powder, meaning only to frighten the thieves. This was certainly the least precaution a man indisposed
could take for the common safety of himself and family, having to pass the winter in the midst of a
wood, with two timid women. I also procured a little dog to serve as a sentinel. De Leyre coming to see
me about this time, I related to him my situation, and we laughed together at my military apparatus. At
his  return  to  Paris  he  wished  to  amuse  Diderot  with  the  story,  and  by  this  means  the  'Coterie
d'Holbachique'  learned  that  I  was  seriously  resolved  to  pass  the  winter  at  the  Hermitage.  This
perseverance, of which they had not imagined me to be capable, disconcerted them, and, until they
could think of some other means of making my residence disagreeable to me, they sent back, by means
of Diderot, the same De Leyre, who, though at first he had thought my precautions quite natural, now
pretended  to  discover  that  they  were  inconsistent  with  my  principles,  and  styled  them  more  than
ridiculous in his letters, in which he overwhelmed me with pleasantries sufficiently bitter and satirical
to offend me had I been the least disposed to take offence. But at that time being full of tender and
affectionate sentiments, and not susceptible of any other, I perceived in his biting sarcasms nothing
more than a jest, and believed him only jocose when others would have thought him mad.
  By my care and vigilance I guarded the garden so well, that, although there had been but little fruit
that year the produce was triple that of the preceding years; it is true, I spared no pains to preserve it,
and I went so far as to escort what I sent to the Chevrette and to Epinay, and to carry baskets of it
myself. The aunt and I carried one of these, which was so heavy that we were obliged to rest at every
dozen steps, and which we arrived with it we were quite wet with perspiration.
  As soon as the bad season began to confine me to the house, I wished to return to my indolent
amusements, but this I found impossible. I had everywhere two charming female friends before my
eyes, their friend, everything by which they were surrounded, the country they inhabited, and the
objects created or embellished for them by my imagination. I was no longer myself for a moment, my
delirium never left me. After many useless efforts to banish all fictions from my mind, they at length
seduced me, and my future endeavors were confined to giving them order and coherence, for the
purpose of converting them into a species of novel.
  What embarrassed me most was, that I had contradicted myself so openly and fully. After the
severe principles I had just so publicly asserted, after the austere maxims I had so loudly preached, and
my violent invectives against books, which breathed nothing but effeminacy and love, could anything
be less expected or more extraordinary, than to see me, with my own hand, write my name in the list of
authors of those books I had so severely censured? I felt this incoherence in all its extent. I reproached
myself with it, I blushed at it and was vexed; but all this could not bring me back to reason. Completely
overcome, I was at all risks obliged to submit, and to resolve to brave the What will the world say of it?Except only deliberating afterwards whether or not I should show my work, for I did not yet suppose I
should ever determine to publish it.
  This resolution taken, I entirely abandoned myself to my reveries, and, by frequently resolving
these in my mind, formed with them the kind of plan of which the execution has been seen. This was
certainly the greatest advantage that could be drawn from my follies; the love of good which has never
once been effaced from my heart, turned them towards useful objects, the moral of which might have
produced its good effects. My voluptuous descriptions would have lost all their graces, had they been
devoid of the coloring of innocence.
  A weak girl is an object of pity, whom love may render interesting, and who frequently is not
therefore the less amiable; but who can see without indignation the manners of the age; and what is
more  disgusting  than  the  pride  of  an  unchaste  wife,  who,  openly  treading  under  foot  every  duty,
pretends that her husband ought to be grateful for her unwillingness to suffer herself to be taken in the
fact? Perfect beings are not in nature, and their examples are not near enough to us. But whoever says
that the description of a young person born with good dispositions, and a heart equally tender and
virtuous, who suffers herself, when a girl, to be overcome by love, and when a woman, has resolution
enough to conquer in her turn, is upon the whole scandalous and useless, is a liar and a hypocrite;
hearken not to him.
  Besides this object of morality and conjugal chastity which is radically connected with all social
order, I had in view one more secret in behalf of concord and public peace, a greater, and perhaps more
important object in itself, at least for the moment for which it was created. The storm brought on by the
'Encyclopedie', far from being appeased, was at the time at its height. Two parties exasperated against
each other to the last degree of fury soon resembled enraged wolves, set on for their mutual destruction,
rather than Christians and philosophers, who had a reciprocal wish to enlighten and convince each
other, and lead their brethren to the way of truth. Perhaps nothing more was wanting to each party than
a few turbulent chiefs, who possessed a little power, to make this quarrel terminate in a civil war; and
God only knows what a civil war of religion founded on each side upon the most cruel intolerance
would have produced. Naturally an enemy to all spirit of party, I had freely spoken severe truths to
each, of which they had not listened. I thought of another expedient, which, in my simplicity, appeared
to me admirable: this was to abate their reciprocal hatred by destroying their prejudices, and showing to
each party the virtue and merit which in the other was worthy of public esteem and respect. This
project, little remarkable for its wisdom, which supported sincerity in mankind, and whereby I fell into
the error with which I reproached the Abbe de Saint Pierre, had the success that was to be expected
from it: It drew together and united the parties for no other purpose than that of crushing the author.
Until experience made me discover my folly, I gave my attention to it with a zeal worthy of the motive
by which I was inspired; and I imagined the two characters of Wolmar and Julia in an ecstasy, which
made me hope to render them both amiable, and, what is still more, by means of each other.
  Satisfied with having made a rough sketch of my plan, I returned to the situations in detail, which I
had marked out; and from the arrangement I gave them resulted the first two parts of the Eloisa, which I
finished during the winter with inexpressible pleasure, procuring gilt-paper to receive a fair copy of
them, azure and silver powder to dry the writing, and blue narrow ribbon to tack my sheets together; in
a word, I thought nothing sufficiently elegant and delicate for my two charming girls, of whom, like
another Pygmalion, I became madly enamoured. Every evening, by the fireside, I read the two parts to
the governesses. The daughter, without saying a word, was like myself moved to tenderness, and we
mingled our sighs; her mother, finding there were no compliments, understood nothing of the matter,
remained unmoved, and at the intervals when I was silent always repeated: "Sir, that is very fine."
  Madam d'Epinay, uneasy at my being alone, in winter, in a solitary house, in the midst of woods,
often sent to inquire after my health. I never had such real proofs of her friendship for me, to which
mine never more fully answered. It would be wrong in me were not I, among these proofs, to make
special mention of her portrait, which she sent me, at the same time requesting instructions from me in
what manner she might have mine, painted by La Tour, and which had been shown at the exhibition. Iought equally to speak of another proof of her attention to me, which, although it be laughable, is a
feature in the history of my character, on account of the impression received from it. One day when it
froze to an extreme degree, in opening a packet she had sent me of several things I had desired her to
purchase for me, I found a little under-petticoat of English flannel, which she told me she had worn,
and desired I would make of it an under-waistcoat.
  This care, more than friendly, appeared to me so tender, and as if she had stripped herself to clothe
me, that in my emotion I repeatedly kissed, shedding tears at the same time, both the note and the
petticoat. Theresa thought me mad. It is singular that of all the marks of friendship Madam d'Epinay
ever showed me this touched me the most, and that ever since our rupture I have never recollected it
without being very sensibly affected. I for a long time preserved her little note, and it would still have
been in my possession had not it shared the fate of my other notes received at the same period.
  Although my disorder then gave me but little respite in winter, and a part of the interval was
employed  in  seeking  relief  from  pain,  this  was  still  upon  the  whole  the  season  which  since  my
residence in France I had passed with most pleasure and tranquillity. During four or five months, whilst
the bad weather sheltered me from the interruptions of importunate visits, I tasted to a greater degree
than I had ever yet or have since done, of that equal simple and independent life, the enjoyment of
which still made it more desirable to me; without any other company than the two governesses in
reality, and the two female cousins in idea. It was then especially that I daily congratulated myself upon
the resolution I had had the good sense to take, unmindful of the clamors of my friends, who were
vexed at seeing me delivered from their tyranny; and when I heard of the attempt of a madman, when
De Leyre and Madam d'Epinay spoke to me in letters of the trouble and agitation which reigned in
Paris, how thankful was I to Heaven for having placed me at a distance from all such spectacles of
horror and guilt. These would have been continued and increased the bilious humor which the sight of
public disorders had given me; whilst seeing nothing around me in my retirement but gay and pleasing
objects, my heart was wholly abandoned to sentiments which were amiable.
I remark here with pleasure the course of the last peaceful moments that were left me. The spring
succeeding to this winter, which had been so calm, developed the germ of the misfortunes I have yet to
describe; in the tissue of which, alike interval, wherein I had leisure to respite, will not be found.
I think however, I recollect, that during this interval of peace, and in the bosom of my solitude, I
was not quite undisturbed by the Holbachiens. Diderot stirred me up some strife, and I am much
deceived if it was not in the course of this winter that the 'Fils Naturel'--[Natural Son]--of which I shall
soon have occasion to speak, made its appearance. Independently of the causes which left me but few
papers relative to that period, those even which I have been able to preserve are not very exact with
respect to dates. Diderot never dated his letters--Madam d'Epinay and Madam d' Houdetot seldom
dated theirs except the day of the week, and De Leyre mostly confined himself to the same rules. When
I was desirous of putting these letters in order I was obliged to supply what was wanting by guessing at
dates, so uncertain that I cannot depend upon them. Unable therefore to fix with certainty the beginning
of these quarrels, I prefer relating in one subsequent article everything I can recollect concerning them.
  The return of spring had increased my amorous delirium, and in my melancholy, occasioned by the
excess of my transports, I had composed for the last parts of Eloisa several letters, wherein evident
marks of the rapture in which I wrote them are found. Amongst others I may quote those from the
Elysium, and the excursion upon the lake, which, if my memory does not deceive me, are at the end of
the fourth part. Whoever, in reading these letters, does not feel his heart soften and melt into the
tenderness by which they were dictated, ought to lay down the book: nature has refused him the means
of judging of sentiment.
  Precisely at the same time I received a second unforeseen visit from Madam d'Houdetot, in the
absence of her husband, who was captain of the Gendarmarie, and of her lover, who was also in the
service. She had come to Eaubonne, in the middle of the Valley of Montmorency, where she had taken
a pretty house, from thence she made a new excursion to the Hermitage. She came on horseback, and
dressed in men's clothes. Although I am not very fond of this kind of masquerade, I was struck with theromantic appearance she made, and, for once, it was with love. As this was the first and only time in all
my life, the consequence of which will forever render it terrible to my remembrance, I must take the
permission to enter into some particulars on the subject.
  The Countess d'Houdetot was nearly thirty years of age, and not handsome; her face was marked
with the smallpox, her complexion coarse, she was short-sighted, and her eyes were rather round; but
she  had  fine  long  black  hair,  which  hung  down  in  natural  curls  below  her  waist;  her  figure  was
agreeable, and she was at once both awkward and graceful in her motions; her wit was natural and
pleasing;  to  this  gayety,  heedlessness  and  ingenuousness  were  perfectly  suited:  she  abounded  in
charming sallies, after which she so little sought, that they sometimes escaped her lips in spite of
herself.  She  possessed  several  agreeable  talents,  played  the  harpsichord,  danced  well,  and  wrote
pleasing poetry. Her character was angelic--this was founded upon a sweetness of mind, and except
prudence and fortitude, contained in it every virtue. She was besides so much to be depended upon in
all intercourse, so faithful in society, even her enemies were not under the necessity of concealing from
her their secrets. I mean by her enemies the men, or rather the women, by whom she was not beloved;
for as to herself she had not a heart capable of hatred, and I am of opinion this conformity with mine
greatly contributed towards inspiring me with a passion for her. In confidence of the most intimate
friendship, I never heard her speak ill of persons who were absent, nor even of her sister-in-law. She
could neither conceal her thoughts from anyone, nor disguise any of her sentiments, and I am persuaded
she spoke of her lover to her husband, as she spoke of him to her friends and acquaintances, and to
everybody without distinction of persons. What proved, beyond all manner of doubt, the purity and
sincerity of her nature was, that subject to very extraordinary absences of mind, and the most laughable
inconsiderateness, she was often guilty of some very imprudent ones with respect to herself, but never
in the least offensive to any person whatsoever.
  She had been married very young and against her inclinations to the Comte d'Houdetot, a man of
fashion, and a good officer; but a man who loved play and chicane, who was not very amiable, and
whom she never loved. She found in M. de Saint Lambert all the merit of her husband, with more
ageeeable qualities of mind, joined with virtue and talents. If anything in the manners of the age can be
pardoned, it is an attachment which duration renders more pure, to which its effects do honor, and
which becomes cemented by reciprocal esteem. It was a little from inclination, as I am disposed to
think, but much more to please Saint Lambert, that she came to see me. He had requested her to do it,
and there was reason to believe the friendship which began to be established between us would render
this society agreeable to all three. She knew I was acquainted with their connection, and as she could
speak to me without restraint, it was natural she should find my conversation agreeable. She came; I
saw her; I was intoxicated with love without an object; this intoxication fascinated my eyes; the object
fixed  itself  upon  her.  I  saw  my  Julia  in  Madam  d'Houdetot,  and  I  soon  saw  nothing  but  Madam
d'Houdetot, but with all the perfections with which I had just adorned the idol of my heart. To complete
my delirium she spoke to me of Saint Lambert with a fondness of a passionate lover. Contagious force
of love! while listening to her, and finding myself near her, I was seized with a delicious trembling,
which I had never before experienced when near to any person whatsoever. She spoke, and I felt myself
affected; I thought I was nothing more than interested in her sentiments, when I perceived I possessed
those which were similar; I drank freely of the poisoned cup, of which I yet tasted nothing more than
the sweetness. Finally, imperceptibly to us both, she inspired me for herself with all she expressed for
her lover. Alas! it was very late in life, and cruel was it to consume with a passion not less violent than
unfortunate for a woman whose heart was already in the possession of another.
    Notwithstanding the extraordinary emotions I had felt when near to her, I did not at first perceive
what had happened to me; it was not until after her departure that, wishing to think of Julia, I was
struck with surprise at being unable to think of anything but Madam d' Houdetot. Then was it my eyes
were  opened:  I  felt  my  misfortune,  and  lamented  what  had  happened,  but  I  did  not  foresee  the
consequences.
I hesitated a long time on the manner in which I should conduct myself towards her, as if real loveleft behind it sufficient reason to deliberate and act accordingly. I had not yet determined upon this
when she unexpectedly returned and found me unprovided. It was this time, perfectly acquainted with
my situation, shame, the companion of evil, rendered me dumb, and made me tremble in her presence; I
neither dared to open my mouth or raise my eyes; I was in an inexpressible confusion which it was
impossible she should not perceive. I resolved to confess to her my troubled state of mind, and left her
to guess the cause whence it proceeded: this was telling her in terms sufficiently clear.
  Had I been young and amiable, and Madam d' Houdetot, afterwards weak, I should here blame her
conduct; but this was not the case, and I am obliged to applaud and admire it. The resolution she took
was equally prudent and generous. She could not suddenly break with me without giving her reasons
for it to Saint Lambert, who himself had desired her to come and see me; this would have exposed two
friends to a rupture, and perhaps a public one, which she wished to avoid. She had for me esteem and
good wishes; she pitied my folly without encouraging it, and endeavored to restore me to reason. She
was glad to preserve to her lover and herself a friend for whom she had some respect; and she spoke of
nothing with more pleasure than the intimate and agreeable society we might form between us three the
moment I should become reasonable. She did not always confine herself to these friendly exhortations,
and, in case of need, did not spare me more severe reproaches, which I had richly deserved.
I spared myself still less: the moment I was alone I began to recover; I was more calm after my
declaration--love, known to the person by whom it is inspired, becomes more supportable.
  The forcible manner in which I approached myself with mine, ought to have cured me of it had the
thing  been  possible.  What  powerful  motives  did  I  not  call  to  my  mind  to  stifle  it?  My  morals,
sentiments  and  principles;  the  shame,  the  treachery  and  crime,  of  abusing  what  was  confided  to
friendship, and the ridiculousness of burning, at my age, with the most extravagant passion for an
object whose heart was preengaged, and who could neither make me a return, nor least hope; moreover
with a passion which, far from having anything to gain by constancy, daily became less sufferable.
  We would imagine that the last consideration which ought to have added weight to all the others,
was that whereby I eluded them! What scruple, thought I, ought I to make of a folly prejudicial to
nobody but myself? Am I then a young man of whom Madam d'Houdetot ought to be afraid? Would
not it be said by my presumptive remorse that, by my gallantry, manner and dress, I was going to
seduce her? Poor Jean Jacques, love on at thy ease, in all safety of conscience, and be not afraid that thy
sighs will be prejudicial to Saint Lambert.
  It has been seen that I never was a coxcomb, not even in my youth. The manner of thinking, of
which I have spoken, was according to my turn of mind, it flattered my passions; this, was sufficient to
induce me to abandon myself to it without reserve, and to laugh even at the impertinent scruple I
thought I had made from vanity, rather than from reason. This is a great lesson for virtuous minds,
which vice never attacks openly; it finds means to surprise them by masking itself with sophisms, and
not unfrequently with a virtue.
  Guilty without remorse, I soon became so without measure; and I entreat it may be observed in
what manner my passion followed my nature, at length to plunge me into an abyss. In the first place, it
assumed the air of humility to encourage me; and to render me intrepid it carried this humility even to
mistrust. Madam d'Houdetot incessantly putting in mind of my duty, without once for a single moment
flattering my folly, treated me with the greatest mildness, and remained with me upon the footing of the
most tender friendship. This friendship would, I protest, have satisfied my wishes, had I thought it
sincere; but finding it too strong to be real, I took it into my head that love, so ill-suited to my age and
appearance, had rendered me contemptible in the eyes of Madam d'Houdetot; that this young mad
creature  only  wished  to  divert  herself  with  me  and  my  superannuated  passion;  that  she  had
communicated this to Saint Lambert; and that the indignation caused by my breach of friendship,
having made her lover enter into her views, they were agreed to turn my head and then to laugh at me.
This folly, which at twenty-six years of age, had made me guilty of some extravagant behavior to
Madam de Larnage, whom I did not know, would have been pardonable in me at forty-five with
Madam d' Houdetot had not I known that she and her lover were persons of too much uprightness toindulge themselves in such a barbarous amusement.
  Madam d' Houdetot continued her visits, which I delayed not to return. She, as well as myself, was
fond of walking, and we took long walks in an enchanting country. Satisfied with loving and daring to
say I loved, I should have been in the most agreeable situation had not my extravagance spoiled all the
charm of it. She, at first, could not comprehend the foolish pettishness with which I received her
attentions; but my heart, incapable of concealing what passed in it, did not long leave her ignorant of
my suspicions; she endeavored to laugh at them, but this expedient did not succeed; transports of rage
would  have  been  the  consequence,  and  she  changed  her  tone.  Her  compassionate  gentleness  was
invincible; she made me reproaches, which penetrated my heart; she expressed an inquietude at my
unjust fears, of which I took advantage. I required proofs of her being in earnest. She perceived there
was no other means of relieving me from my apprehensions. I became pressing: the step was delicate. It
is astonishing, and perhaps without example, that a woman having suffered herself to be brought to
hesitate should have got herself off so well. She refused me nothing the most tender friendship could
grant; yet she granted me nothing that rendered her unfaithful, and I had the mortification to see that the
disorder into which the most trifling favors had thrown all my senses had not the least effect upon hers.
I have somewhere said, that nothing should be granted to the senses, when we wished to refuse
them anything. To prove how false this maxim was relative to Madam d' Houdetot, and how far she
was right to depend upon her own strength of mind, it would be necessary to enter into the detail of our
long and frequent conversations, and follow them, in all their liveliness during the four months we
passed together in an intimacy almost without example between two friends of different sexes who
contain themselves within the bounds which we never exceeded. Ah! if I had lived so long without
feeling the power of real love, my heart and senses abundantly paid the arrears. What, therefore, are the
transports we feel with the object of our affections by whom we are beloved, since the passions of
which my idol did not partake inspired such as I felt?
  But I am wrong in saying Madam Houdetot did not partake of the passion of love; that which I felt
was in some measure confined to myself; yet love was equal on both sides, but not reciprocal. We were
both intoxicated with the passion, she for her lover, and I for herself; our sighs and delicious tears were
mingled together. Tender confidants of the secrets of each other, there was so great a similarity in our
sentiments that it was impossible they should not find some common point of union. In the midst of this
delicious intoxication, she never forgot herself for a moment, and I solemnly protest that, if ever, led
away  by  my  senses,  I  have  attempted  to  render  her  unfaithful,  I  was  never  really  desirous  of
succeeding. The vehemence itself of my passion restrained it within bounds. The duty of self-denial
had elevated my mind. The lustre of every virture adorned in my eyes the idol of my heart; to have
soiled their divine image would have been to destroy it. I might have committed the crime; it has been a
hundred times committed in my heart; but to dishonor my Sophia! Ah! was this ever possible? No! I
have told her a hundred times it was not. Had I had it in my power to satisfy my desires, had she
consented to commit herself to my discretion, I should, except in a few moments of delirium, have
refused to be happy at the price of her honor. I loved her too well to wish to possess her.
  The distance from the Hermitage to Raubonne is almost a league; in my frequent excursions to it I
have sometimes slept there. One evening after having supped tete-a-tete we went to walk in the garden
by a fine moonlight. At the bottom of the garden a considerable copse, through which we passed on our
way to a pretty grove ornamented with a cascade, of which I had given her the idea, and she had
procured it to be executed accordingly.
  Eternal remembrance of innocence and enjoyment! It was in this grove that, seated by her side upon
a seat of turf under an acacia in full bloom, I found for the emotions of my heart a language worthy of
them. It was the first and only time of my life; but I was sublime: if everything amiable and seducing
with which the most tender and ardent love can inspire the heart of man can be so called. What
intoxicating tears did I shed upon her knees! how many did I make her to shed involuntarily! At length
in an involuntary transport she exclaimed: "No, never was a man so amiable, nor ever was there one
who loved like you! But your friend Saint Lambert hears us, and my heart is incapable of loving twice."I exhausted myself with sighs; I embraced her--what an embrace! But this was all. She had lived alone
for the last six months, that is absent from her husband and lover; I had seen her almost every day
during three months, and love seldom failed to make a third. We had supped tete-a-tete, we were alone,
in the grove by moonlight, and after two hours of the most lively and tender conversation, she left this
grove at midnight, and the arms of her lover, as morally and physically pure as she had entered it.
Reader, weigh all these circumstances; I will add nothing more.
  Do not, however, imagine that in this situation my passions left me as undisturbed as I was with
Theresa and mamma. I have already observed I was this time inspired not only with love, but with love
and  all  its  energy  and  fury.  I  will  not  describe  either  the  agitations,  tremblings,  palpitations,
convulsionary emotions, nor faintings of the heart, I continually experienced; these may be judged of
by the effect her image alone made upon me. I have observed the distance from the Hermitage to
Eaubonne was considerable; I went by the hills of Andilly, which are delightful; I mused, as I walked,
on her whom I was going to see, the charming reception she would give me, and upon the kiss which
awaited me at my arrival. This single kiss, this pernicious embrace, even before I received it, inflamed
my blood to such a degree as to affect my head, my eyes were dazzled, my knees trembled, and were
unable to support me; I was obliged to stop and sit down; my whole frame was in inconceivable
disorder, and I was upon the point of fainting. Knowing the danger, I endeavored at setting out to divert
my attention from the object, and think of something else. I had not proceeded twenty steps before the
same recollection, and all that was the consequence of it, assailed me in such a manner that it was
impossible to avoid them, and in spite of all my efforts I do not believe I ever made this little excursion
alone with impunity. I arrived at Eaubonne, weak, exhausted, and scarcely able to support myself. The
moment  I  saw  her  everything  was  repaired;  all  I  felt  in  her  presence  was  the  importunity  of  an
inexhaustible and useless ardor. Upon the road to Raubonne there was a pleasant terrace called Mont
Olympe, at which we sometimes met. I arrived first, it was proper I should wait for her; but how dear
this waiting cost me! To divert my attention, I endeavored to write with my pencil billets, which I could
have written with the purest drops of my blood; I never could finish one which was eligible. When she
found  a  note  in  the  niche  upon  which  we  had  agreed,  all  she  learned  from  the  contents  was  the
deplorable state in which I was when I wrote it. This state and its continuation, during three months of
irritation and self-denial, so exhausted me, that I was several years before I recovered from it, and at the
end of these it left me an ailment which I shall carry with me, or which will carry me to the grave. Such
was the sole enjoyment of a man of the most combustible constitution, but who was, at the same time,
perhaps, one of the most timid mortals nature ever produced. Such were the last happy days I can
reckon upon earth; at the end of these began the long train of evils, in which there will be found but
little interruption.
  It has been seen that, during the whole course of my life, my heart, as transparent as crystal, has
never been capable of concealing for the space of a moment any sentiment in the least lively which had
taken refuge in it. It will therefore be judged whether or not it was possible for me long to conceal my
affection for Madam d'Houdetot. Our intimacy struck the eyes of everybody, we did not make of it
either a secret or a mystery. It was not of a nature to require any such precaution, and as Madam
d'Houdetot had for me the most tender friendship with which she did not reproach herself, and I for her
an esteem with the justice of which nobody was better acquainted than myself; she frank, absent,
heedless; I true, awkward, haughty, impatient and choleric; We exposed ourselves more in deceitful
security  than  we  should  have  done  had  we  been  culpable.  We  both  went  to  the  Chevrette;  we
sometimes met there by appointment. We lived there according to our accustomed manner; walking
together every day talking of our amours, our duties, our friend, and our innocent projects; all this in
the  park  opposite  the  apartment  of  Madam  d'Epinay,  under  her  windows,  whence  incessantly
examining us, and thinking herself braved, she by her eyes filled her heart with rage and indignation.
  Women have the art of concealing their anger, especially when it is great. Madam d'Epinay, violent
but deliberate, possessed this art to an eminent degree. She feigned not to see or suspect anything, and
at the same time that she doubled towards me her cares, attention, and allurements, she affected to loadher sister-in-law with incivilities and marks of disdain, which she seemingly wished to communicate to
me. It will easily be imagined she did not succeed; but I was on the rack. Torn by opposite passions, at
the same time that I was sensible of her caresses, I could scarcely contain my anger when I saw her
wanting in good manners to Madam d'Houdetot. The angelic sweetness of this lady made her endure
everything without complaint, or even without being offended.
  She was, in fact, so absent, and always so little attentive to these things, that half the time she did
not perceive them.
I was so taken up with my passion, that, seeing nothing but Sophia (one of the names of Madam
d'Houdetot),I did not perceive that I was become the laughing-stock of the whole house, and all those
who came to it. The Baron d'Holbach, who never, as I heard of, had been at the Chevrette, was one of
the latter. Had I at that time been as mistrustful as I am since become, I should strongly have suspected
Madam d'Epinay to have contrived this journey to give the baron the amusing spectacle of an amorous
citizen. But I was then so stupid that I saw not that even which was glaring to everybody. My stupidity
did not, however, prevent me from finding in the baron a more jovial and satisfied appearance than
ordinary. Instead of looking upon me with his usual moroseness, he said to me a hundred jocose things
without my knowing what he meant. Surprise was painted in my countenance, but I answered not a
word: Madam d'Epinay shook her sides with laughing; I knew not what possessed them. As nothing yet
passed the bounds of pleasantry, the best thing I could had done, had I been in the secret, would have
been to have humored the joke. It is true I perceived amid the rallying gayety of the baron, that his eyes
sparkled with a malicious joy, which could have given me pain had I then remarked it to the degree it
has since occurred to my recollection.
  One day when I went to see Madam d'Houdetot, at Eaubonne, after her return from one of her
journeys to Paris, I found her melancholy, and observed that she had been weeping. I was obliged to
put a restraint on myself, because Madam de Blainville, sister to her husband, was present; but the
moment I found an opportunity, I expressed to her my uneasiness. "Ah," said she, with a sigh, "I am
much afraid your follies will cost me the repose of the rest of my days. St. Lambert has been informed
of what has passed, and ill informed of it. He does me justice, but he is vexed; and what is still worse,
he conceals from me a part of his vexation. Fortunately I have not concealed from him anything relative
to our connection which was formed under his auspices. My letters, like my heart, were full of yourself;
I made him acquainted with everything, except your extravagant passion, of which I hoped to cure you;
and which he imputes to me as a crime. Somebody has done us ill offices. I have been injured, but what
does this signify? Either let us entirely break with each other, or do you be what you ought to be. I will
not in future have anything to conceal from my lover."
  This was the first moment in which I was sensible of the shame of feeling myself humbled by the
sentiment of my fault, in presence of a young woman of whose just reproaches I approved, and to
whom I ought to have been a mentor. The indignation I felt against myself would, perhaps, have been
sufficient to overcome my weakness, had not the tender passion inspired me by the victim of it, again
softened my heart. Alas! was this a moment to harden it when it was overflowed by the tears which
penetrated it in every part? This tenderness was soon changed into rage against the vile informers, who
had  seen  nothing  but  the  evil  of  a  criminal  but  involuntary  sentiment,  without  believing  or  even
imagining the sincere uprightness of heart by which it was counteracted. We did not remain long in
doubt about the hand by which the blow was directed.
  We both knew that Madam d'Epinay corresponded with St. Lambert. This was not the first storm
she had raised up against Madam d'Houdetot, from whom she had made a thousand efforts to detach
her lover, the success of some of which made the consequences to be dreaded. Besides, Grimm, who, I
think, had accompanied M. de Castries to the army, was in Westphalia, as well as Saint Lambert; they
sometimes visited. Grimm had made some attempts on Madam d'Houdetot, which had not succeeded,
and  being  extremely  piqued,  suddenly  discontinued  his  visits  to  her.  Let  it  be  judged  with  what
calmness, modest as he is known to be, he supposed she preferred to him a man older than himself, and
of whom, since he had frequented the great, he had never spoken but as a person whom he patronized.  My suspicions of Madam d'Epinay were changed into a certainty the moment I heard what had
passed in my own house. When I was at the Chevrette, Theresa frequently came there, either to bring
me letters or to pay me that attention which my ill state of health rendered necessary. Madam d'Epinay
had asked her if Madam d'Houdetot and I did not write to each other. Upon her answering in the
affirmative, Madam d'Epinay pressed her to give her the letters of Madam d'Houdetot, assuring her that
she would reseal them in such a manner as it should never be known. Theresa, without showing how
much she was shocked at the proposition, and without even putting me upon my guard, did nothing
more than seal the letters she brought me more carefully; a lucky precaution, for Madam d'Epinay had
her  watched  when  she  arrived,  and,  waiting  for  her  in  the  passage,  several  times  carried  her
audaciousness as far as to examine her tucker. She did more even than this: having one day invited
herself with M. de Margency to dinner at the Hermitage, for the first time since I resided there, she
seized the moment I was walking with Margency to go into my closet with the mother and daughter,
and to press them to show her the letters of Madam d'Houdetot. Had the mother known where the
letters were, they would have been given to her; fortunately, the daughter was the only person who was
in the secret, and denied my having preserved any one of them. A virtuous, faithful and generous
falsehood; whilst truth would have been a perfidy. Madam d' Epinay, perceiving Theresa was not to be
seduced, endeavored to irritate her by jealousy, reproaching her with her easy temper and blindness.
"How is it possible," said she to her, "you cannot perceive there is a criminal intercourse between them?
If besides what strikes your eyes you stand in need of other proofs, lend your assistance to obtain that
which may furnish them; you say he tears the letters from Madam d'Houdetot as soon as he has read
them. Well, carefully gather up the pieces and give them to me; I will take upon myself to put them
together."
  Such were the lessons my friend gave to the partner of my bed.
  Theresa had the discretion to conceal from me, for a considerable time, all these attempts; but
perceiving how much I was perplexed, she thought herself obliged to inform me of everything, to the
end  that  knowing  with  whom  I  had  to  do,  I  might  take  my  measures  accordingly.  My  rage  and
indignation are not to be described. Instead of dissembling with Madam d'Epinay, according to her own
example,  and  making  use  of  counterplots,  I  abandoned  myself  without  reserve  to  the  natural
impetuosity of my temper; and with my accustomed inconsiderateness came to an open rupture. My
imprudence  will  be  judged  of  by  the  following  letters,  which  sufficiently  show  the  manner  of
proceeding of both parties on this occasion:
  NOTE FROM MADAM D'EPINAY. "Why, my dear friend, do I not see you? You make me
uneasy. You have so often promised me to do nothing but go and come between this place and the
Hermitage! In this I have left you at liberty; and you have suffered a week to pass without coming. Had
not I been told you were well I should have imagined the contrary. I expected you either the day before
yesterday, or yesterday, but found myself disappointed. My God, what is the matter with you? You
have no business, nor can you have any uneasiness; for had this been the case, I flatter myself you
would have come and communicated it to me. You are, therefore, ill! Relieve me, I beseech you,
speedily from my fears. Adieu, my dear friend: let this adieu produce me a good-morning from you."
  ANSWER. "I cannot yet say anything to you. I wait to be better informed, and this I shall be sooner
or later. In the meantime be persuaded that innocence will find a defender sufficiently powerful to
cause some repentance in the slanderers, be they who they may."
  SECOND NOTE FROM THE SAME. "Do you know that your letter frightens me? What does it
mean? I have read it twenty times. In truth I do not understand what it means. All I can perceive is, that
you are uneasy and tormented, and that you wait until you are no longer so before you speak to me
upon the subject. Is this, my dear friend, what we agreed upon? What then is become of that friendship
and confidence, and by what means have I lost them? Is it with me or for me that you are angry?
However this may be, come to me this evening I conjure you; remember you promised me no longer
than  a  week  ago  to  let  nothing  remain  upon  your  mind,  but  immediately  to  communicate  to  me
whatever might make it uneasy. My dear friend, I live in that confidence--There--I have just read yourletter again; I do not understand the contents better, but they make me tremble. You seem to be cruelly
agitated. I could wish to calm your mind, but as I am ignorant of the cause whence your uneasiness
arises, I know not what to say, except that I am as wretched as yourself, and shall remain so until we
meet. If you are not here this evening at six o'clock, I set off to morrow for the Hermitage, let the
weather be how it will, and in whatever state of health I may be; for I can no longer support the
inquietude I now feel. Good day, my dear friend, at all risks I take the liberty to tell you, without
knowing whether or not you are in need of such advice, to endeavor to stop the progress uneasiness
makes in solitude. A fly be comes a monster. I have frequently experienced it."
  ANSWER. "I can neither come to see you nor receive your visit so long as my present inquietude
continues. The confidence of which you speak no longer exists, and it will be easy for you to recover it.
I see nothing more in your present anxiety than the desire of drawing from the confessions of others
some advantage agreeable to your views; and my heart, so ready to pour its overflowings into another
which opens itself to receive them, is shut against trick and cunning. I distinguish your ordinary address
in the difficulty you find in understanding my note. Do you think me dupe enough to believe you have
not  comprehended  what  it  meant?  No:  but  I  shall  know  how  to  overcome  your  subtleties  by  my
frankness. I will explain myself more clearly, that you may understand me still less.
  "Two lovers closely united and worthy of each other's love are dear to me; I expect you will not
know who I mean unless I name them. I presume attempts have been made to disunite them, and that I
have been made use of to inspire one of the two with jealousy. The choice was not judicious, but it
appeared convenient to the purposes of malice, and of this malice it is you whom I suspect to be guilty.
I hope this becomes more clear.
  "Thus the woman whom I most esteem would, with my knowledge, have been loaded with the
infamy of dividing her heart and person between two lovers, and I with that of being one of these
wretches. If I knew that, for a single moment in your life, you ever had thought this, either of her or
myself, I should hate you until my last hour. But it is with having said, and not with having thought it,
that I charge you. In this case, I cannot comprehend which of the three you wished to injure; but, if you
love peace of mind, tremble lest you should have succeeded. I have not concealed either from you or
her all the ill I think of certain connections, but I wish these to end by a means as virtuous as their
cause, and that an illegitimate love may be changed into an eternal friendship. Should I, who never do
ill to any person, be the innocent means of doing it to my friends? No, I should never forgive you; I
should become your irreconcilable enemy. Your secrets are all I should respect; for I will never be a
man without honor.
  "I do not apprehend my present perplexity will continue a long time. I shall soon know whether or
not I am deceived; I shall then perhaps have great injuries to repair, which I will do with as much
cheerfulness as that with which the most agreeable act of my life has been accompanied. But do you
know in what manner I will make amends for my faults during the short space of time I have to remain
near to you? By doing what nobody but myself would do; by telling you freely what the world thinks of
you, and the breaches you have to repair in your reputation. Notwithstanding all the pretended friends
by whom you are surrounded, the moment you see me depart you may bid adieu to truth, you will no
longer find any person who will tell it to you."
  THIRD LETTER FROM THE SAME.
  "I  did  not  understand  your  letter  of  this  morning;  this  I  told  you  because  it  was  the  case.  I
understand that of this evening; do not imagine I shall ever return an answer to it; I am too anxious to
forget what it contains; and although you excite my pity, I am not proof against the bitterness with
which it has filled my mind. I! descend to trick and cunning with you! I! accused of the blackest of all
infamies! Adieu, I regret your having the adieu. I know not what I say adieu: I shall be very anxious to
forgive you. You will come when you please; you will be better received than your suspicions deserve.
All I have to desire of you is not to trouble yourself about my reputation. The opinion of the world
concerning me is of but little importance in my esteem. My conduct is good, and this is sufficient for
me. Besides, I am ignorant of what has happened to the two persons who are dear to me as they are toyou."
  This last letter extricated me from a terrible embarrassment, and threw me into another of almost
the same magnitude. Although these letters and answers were sent and returned the same day with an
extreme rapidity, the interval had been sufficient to place another between my rage and transport, and
to give me time to reflect on the enormity of my imprudence. Madam d'Houdetot had not recommended
to me anything so much as to remain quiet, to leave her the care of extricating herself, and to avoid,
especially at that moment, all noise and rupture; and I, by the most open and atrocious insults, took the
properest means of carrying rage to its greatest height in the heart of a woman who was already but too
well disposed to it. I now could naturally expect nothing from her but an answer so haughty, disdainful,
and  expressive  of  contempt,  that  I  could  not,  without  the  utmost  meanness,  do  otherwise  than
immediately quit her house. Happily she, more adroit than I was furious, avoided, by the manner of her
answer, reducing me to that extremity. But it was necessary either to quit or immediately go and see
her; the alternative was inevitable; I resolved on the latter, though I foresaw how much I must be
embarrassed  in  the  explanation.  For  how  was  I  to  get  through  it  without  exposing  either  Madam
d'Houdetot  or  Theresa?  and  woe  to  her  whom  I  should  have  named!  There  was  nothing  that  the
vengeance of an implacable and an intriguing woman did not make me fear for the person who should
be the object of it. It was to prevent this misfortune that in my letter I had spoken of nothing but
suspicions, that I might not be under the necessity of producing my proofs. This, it is true, rendered my
transports less excusable; no simple suspicions being sufficient to authorize me to treat a woman, and
especially a friend, in the manner I had treated Madam d'Epinay. But here begins the noble task I
worthily fulfilled of expiating my faults and secret weaknesses by charging myself with such of the
former as I was incapable of committing, and which I never did commit.
I had not to bear the attack I had expected, and fear was the greatest evil I received from it. At my
approach,  Madam  d'  Epinay  threw  her  arms  about  my  neck,  bursting  into  tears.  This  unexpected
reception, and by an old friend, extremely affected me; I also shed many tears. I said to her a few words
which had not much meaning; she uttered others with still less, and everything ended here. Supper was
served; we sat down to table, where, in expectation of the explanation I imagined to be deferred until
supper was over, I made a very poor figure; for I am so overpowered by the most trifling inquietude of
mind that I cannot conceal it from persons the least clear-sighted. My embarrassed appearance must
have  given  her  courage,  yet  she  did  not  risk  anything  upon  that  foundation.  There  was  no  more
explanation  after  than  before  supper:  none  took  place  on  the  next  day,  and  our  little  tete-a-tete
conversations consisted of indifferent things, or some complimentary words on my part, by which,
while I informed her I could not say more relative to my suspicions, I asserted, with the greatest truth,
that, if they were ill-founded, my whole life should be employed in repairing the injustice. She did not
show the least curiosity to know precisely what they were, nor for what reason I had formed them, and
all our peacemaking consisted, on her part as well as on mine, in the embrace at our first meeting. Since
Madam d'Epinay was the only person offended, at least in form, I thought it was not for me to strive to
bring about an eclaircissement for which she herself did not seem anxious, and I returned as I had
come; continuing, besides, to live with her upon the same footing as before, I soon almost entirely
forgot the quarrel, and foolishly believed she had done the same, because she seemed not to remember
what had passed.
  This, it will soon appear, was not the only vexation caused me by weakness; but I had others not
less disagreeable which I had not brought upon myself. The only cause of these was a desire of forcing
me  from  my  solitude,  by  means  of  tormenting  me.  These  originated  from  Diderot  and  the
d'Holbachiens.
  [That is to take from it the old woman who was wanted in the conspiracy. It is astonishing that,
during this long quarrel, my stupid confidence presented me from comprehending that it was not me
but her whom they wanted in Paris.]
  Since I had resided at the Hermitage, Diderot incessantly harrassed me, either himself or by means
of De Leyre, and I soon perceived from the pleasantries of the latter upon my ramblings in the groves,with what pleasure he had travestied the hermit into the gallant shepherd. But this was not the question
in my quarrels with Diderot; the cause of these were more serious. After the publication of Fils Naturel
he had sent me a copy of it, which I had read with the interest and attention I ever bestowed on the
works of a friend. In reading the kind of poem annexed to it, I was surprised and rather grieved to find
in it, amongst several things, disobliging but supportable against men in solitude, this bitter and severe
sentence without the least softening: 'Il n'y a que le mechant qui fail feul.'--[The wicked only is alone.] -
-This sentence is equivocal, and seems to present a double meaning; the one true, the other false, since
it is impossible that a man who is determined to remain alone can do the least harm to anybody, and
consequently he cannot be wicked. The sentence in itself therefore required an interpretation; the more
so from an author who, when he sent it to the press, had a friend retired from the world. It appeared to
me shocking and uncivil, either to have forgotten that solitary friend, or, in remembering him, not to
have made from the general maxim the honorable and just exception which he owed, not only to his
friend, but to so many respectable sages, who, in all ages, have sought for peace and tranquillity in
retirement, and of whom, for the first time since the creation of the world, a writer took it into his head
indiscriminately to make so many villains.
I had a great affection and the most sincere esteem for Diderot, and fully depended upon his having
the same sentiments for me. But tired with his indefatigable obstinacy in continually opposing my
inclinations, taste, and manner of living, and everything which related to no person but myself; shocked
at seeing a man younger than I was wish, at all events, to govern me like a child; disgusted with his
facility in promising, and his negligence in performing; weary of so many appointments given by
himself, and capriciously broken, while new ones were again given only to be again broken; displeased
at uselessly waiting for him three or four times a month on the days he had assigned, and in dining
alone at night after having gone to Saint Denis to meet him, and waited the whole day for his coming;
my heart was already full of these multiplied injuries. This last appeared to me still more serious, and
gave me infinite pain. I wrote to complain of it, but in so mild and tender a manner that I moistened my
paper with my tears, and my letter was sufficiently affecting to have drawn others from himself. It
would be impossible to guess his answer on this subject: it was literally as follows: "I am glad my work
has pleased and affected you. You are not of my opinion relative to hermits. Say as much good of them
as you please, you will be the only one in the world of whom I shall think well: even on this there
would be much to say were it possible to speak to you without giving you offence. A woman eighty
years of age! etc. A phrase of a letter from the son of Madam d'Epinay which, if I know you well, must
have given you much pain, has been mentioned to me."
  The last two expressions of this letter want explanation.
  Soon after I went to reside at the Hermitage, Madam le Vasseur seemed dissatisfied with her
situation, and to think the habitation too retired. Having heard she had expressed her dislike to the
place, I offered to send her back to Paris, if that were more agreeable to her; to pay her lodging, and to
have the same care taken of her as if she remained with me. She rejected my offer, assured me she was
very well satisfied with the Hermitage, and that the country air was of service to her. This was evident,
for, if I may so speak, she seemed to become young again, and enjoyed better health than at Paris. Her
daughter told me her mother would, on the whole, had been very sorry to quit the Hermitage, which
was really a very delightful abode, being fond of the little amusements of the garden and the care of the
fruit of which she had the handling, but that she had said, what she had been desired to say, to induce
me to return to Paris.
  Failing in this attempt they endeavored to obtain by a scruple the effect which complaisance had not
produced, and construed into a crime my keeping the old woman at a distance from the succors of
which, at her age, she might be in need. They did not recollect that she, and many other old people,
whose lives were prolonged by the air of the country, might obtain these succors at Montmorency, near
to which I lived; as if there were no old people, except in Paris, and that it was impossible for them to
live in any other place. Madam le Vasseur who eat a great deal, and with extreme voracity, was subject
to overflowings of bile and to strong diarrhoeas, which lasted several days, and served her instead ofclysters. At Paris she neither did nor took anything for them, but left nature to itself. She observed the
same rule at the Hermitage, knowing it was the best thing she could do. No matter, since there were not
in the country either physicians or apothecaries, keeping her there must, no doubt, be with the desire of
putting an end to her existence, although she was in perfect health. Diderot should have determined at
what age, under pain of being punished for homicide, it is no longer permitted to let old people remain
out of Paris.
  This was one of the atrocious accusations from which he did not except me in his remark; that none
but the wicked were alone: and the meaning of his pathetic exclamation with the et cetera, which he had
benignantly added: A woman of eighty years of age, etc.
I thought the best answer that could be given to this reproach would be from Madam le Vasseur
herself. I desired her to write freely and naturally her sentiments to Madam d'Epinay. To relieve her
from all constraint I would not see her letter. I showed her that which I am going to transcribe. I wrote
it to Madam d'Epinay upon the subject of an answer I wish to return to a letter still more severe from
Diderot, and which she had prevented me from sending.
  Thursday.
  "My good friend. Madam le Vasseur is to write to you: I have desired her to tell you sincerely what
she thinks. To remove from her all constraint, I have intimated to her that I will not see what she writes,
and I beg of you not to communicate to me any part of the contents of her letter.
  "I will not send my letter because you do not choose I should; but, feeling myself grievously
offended, it would be baseness and falsehood, of either of which it is impossible for me to be guilty, to
acknowledge myself in the wrong. Holy writ commands him to whom a blow is given, to turn the other
cheek, but not to ask pardon. Do you remember the man in comedy who exclaims, while he is giving
another blows with his staff, 'This is the part of a philosopher!'
  "Do not flatter yourself that he will be prevented from coming by the bad weather we now have.
His rage will give him the time and strength which friendship refuses him, and it will be the first time in
his life he ever came upon the day he had appointed.
  "He will neglect nothing to come and repeat to me verbally the injuries with which he loads me in
his letters; I will endure them all with patience--he will return to Paris to be ill again; and, according to
custom, I shall be a very hateful man. What is to be done? Endure it all.
  "But do not you admire the wisdom of the man who would absolutely come to Saint Denis in a
hackney-coach  to  dine  there,  bring  me  home  in  a  hackney-coach,  and  whose  finances,  eight  days
afterwards, obliges him to come to the Hermitage on foot? It is not possible, to speak his own language,
that this should be the style of sincerity. But were this the case, strange changes of fortune must have
happened in the course of a week.
  "I join in your affliction for the illness of madam, your mother, but you will perceive your grief is
not equal to mine. We suffer less by seeing the persons we love ill than when they are unjust and cruel.
  "Adieu, my good friend, I shall never again mention to you this unhappy affair. You speak of going
to Paris with an unconcern, which, at any other time, would give me pleasure."
I wrote to Diderot, telling him what I had done, relative to Madam le Vasseur, upon the proposal of
Madam d'Epinay herself; and Madam le Vasseur having, as it may be imagined, chosen to remain at the
Hermitage, where she enjoyed a good state of health, always had company, and lived very agreeably,
Diderot, not knowing what else to attribute to me as a crime, construed my precaution into one, and
discovered another in Madam le Vasseur continuing to reside at the Hermitage, although this was by
her own choice; and though her going to Paris had depended, and still depended upon herself, where
she would continue to receive the same succors from me as I gave her in my house.
  This is the explanation of the first reproach in the letter of Diderot. That of the second is in the letter
which follows: "The learned man (a name given in a joke by Grimm to the son of Madam d'Epinay)
must have informed you there were upon the rampart twenty poor persons who were dying with cold
and hunger, and waiting for the farthing you customarily gave them. This is a specimen of our little
babbling.....And if you understand the rest it will amuse you perhap."  My answer to this terrible argument, of which Diderot seemed so proud, was in the following
words:
  "I think I answered the learned man; that is, the farmer-general, that I did not pity the poor whom he
had seen upon the rampart, waiting for my farthing; that he had probably amply made it up to them;
that I appointed him my substitute, that the poor of Paris would have no reason to complain of the
change; and that I should not easily find so good a one for the poor of Montmorency, who were in
much greater need of assistance. Here is a good and respectable old man, who, after having worked
hard all his lifetime, no longer being able to continue his labors, is in his old days dying with hunger.
My conscience is more satisfied with the two sous I give him every Monday, than with the hundred
farthings I should have distributed amongst all the beggars on the rampart. You are pleasant men, you
philosophers, while you consider the inhabitants of the cities as the only persons whom you ought to
befriend. It is in the country men learn how to love and serve humanity; all they learn in cities is to
despise it."
  Such were the singular scruples on which a man of sense had the folly to attribute to me as a crime
my retiring from Paris, and pretended to prove to me by my own example, that it was not possible to
live out of the capital without becoming a bad man. I cannot at present conceive how I could be guilty
of the folly of answering him, and of suffering myself to be angry instead of laughing in his fare.
However, the decisions of Madam d'Epinay and the clamors of the 'Cote in Holbachique' had so far
operated in her favor, that I was generally thought to be in the wrong; and the D'Houdetot herself, very
partial to Diderot, insisted upon my going to see him at Paris, and making all the advances towards an
accommodation which, full and sincere as it was on my part, was not of long duration. The victorious
argument by which she subdued my heart was, that at that moment Diderot was in distress. Besides the
storm excited against the 'Encyclopedie', he had then another violent one to make head against, relative
to his piece, which, notwithstanding the short history he had printed at the head of it, he was accused of
having  entirely  taken  from  Goldoni.  Diderot,  more  wounded  by  criticisms  than  Voltaire,  was
overwhelmed by them. Madam de Grasigny had been malicious enough to spread a report that I had
broken with him on this account. I thought it would be just and generous publicly to prove the contrary,
and I went to pass two days, not only with him, but at his lodgings. This, since I had taken up my abode
at the Hermitage, was my second journey to Paris. I had made the first to run to poor Gauffecourt, who
had had a stroke of apoplexy, from which he has never perfectly recovered: I did not quit the side of his
pillow until he was so far restored as to have no further need of my assistance.
  Diderot received me well. How many wrongs are effaced by the embraces of a friend! after these,
what  resentment  can  remain  in  the  heart?  We  came  to  but  little  explanation.  This  is  needless  for
reciprocal invectives. The only thing necessary is to know how to forget them. There had been no
underhand proceedings, none at least that had come to my knowledge: the case was not the same with
Madam d' Epinay. He showed me the plan of the 'Pere de Famille'. "This," said I to him, "is the best
defence to the 'Fils Naturel'. Be silent, give your attention to this piece, and then throw it at the head of
your enemies as the only answer you think proper to make them." He did so, and was satisfied with
what he had done.
I had six months before sent him the first two parts of my 'Eloisa' to have his opinion upon them.
He had not yet read the work over. We read a part of it together. He found this 'feuillet', that was his
term, by which he meant loaded with words and redundancies. I myself had already perceived it; but it
was the babbling of the fever: I have never been able to correct it. The last parts are not the same. The
fourth especially, and the sixth, are master-pieces of diction.
  The day after my arrival, he would absolutely take me to sup with M. d'Holbach. We were far from
agreeing on this point; for I wished even to get rid of the bargain for the manuscript on chemistry, for
which I was enraged to be obliged to that man. Diderot carried all before him. He swore D'Holbach
loved me with all his heart, said I must forgive him his manner, which was the same to everybody, and
more disagreeable to his friends than to others. He observed to me that, refusing the produce of this
manuscript, after having accepted it two years before, was an affront to the donor which he had notdeserved, and that my refusal might be interpreted into a secret reproach, for having waited so long to
conclude the bargain. "I see," added he, "D'Holbach every day, and know better than you do the nature
of his disposition. Had you reason to be dissatisfied with him, do you think your friend capable of
advising you to do a mean thing?" In short, with my accustomed weakness, I suffered myself to be
prevailed upon, and we went to sup with the baron, who received me as he usually had done. But his
wife  received  me  coldly  and  almost  uncivilly.  I  saw  nothing  in  her  which  resembled  the  amiable
Caroline, who, when a maid, expressed for me so many good wishes. I thought I had already perceived
that since Grimm had frequented the house of D'Aine, I had not met there so friendly a reception.
  Whilst I was at Paris, Saint Lambert arrived there from the army. As I was not acquainted with his
arrival, I did not see him until after my return to the country, first at the Chevrette, and afterwards at the
Hermitage; to which he came with Madam d'Houdetot, and invited himself to dinner with me. It may be
judged whether or not I received him with pleasure! But I felt one still greater at seeing the good
understanding between my guests. Satisfied with not having disturbed their happiness, I myself was
happy in being a witness to it, and I can safely assert that, during the whole of my mad passion, and
especially  at  the  moment  of  which  I  speak,  had  it  been  in  my  power  to  take  from  him  Madam
d'Houdetot I would not have done it, nor should I have so much as been tempted to undertake it. I found
her so amiable in her passion for Saint Lambert, that I could scarcely imagine she would have been as
much so had she loved me instead of him; and without wishing to disturb their union, all I really
desired of her was to permit herself to be loved. Finally, however violent my passion may have been for
this lady, I found it as agreeable to be the confidant, as the object of her amours, and I never for a
moment considered her lover as a rival, but always as my friend. It will be said this was not love: be it
so, but it was something more.
  As for Saint Lambert, he behaved like an honest and judicious man: as I was the only person
culpable, so was I the only one who was punished; this, however, was with the greatest indulgence. He
treated me severely, but in a friendly manner, and I perceived I had lost something in his esteem, but
not the least part of his friendship. For this I consoled myself, knowing it would be much more easy to
me to recover the one than the other, and that he had too much sense to confound an involuntary
weakness and a passion with a vice of character. If even I were in fault in all that had passed, I was but
very little so. Had I first sought after his mistress? Had not he himself sent her to me? Did not she come
in search of me? Could I avoid receiving her? What could I do? They themselves had done the evil, and
I was the person on whom it fell. In my situation they would have done as much as I did, and perhaps
more; for, however estimable and faithful Madam d'Houdetot might be, she was still a woman; her
lover was absent; opportunities were frequent; temptations strong; and it would have been very difficult
for her always to have defended herself with the same success against a more enterprising man. We
certainly had done a great deal in our situation, in placing boundaries beyond which we never permitted
ourselves to pass.
  Although at the bottom of my heart I found evidence sufficiently honorable in my favor, so many
appearances were against me, that the invincible shame always predominant in me, gave me in his
presence the appearance of guilt, and of this he took advantage for the purpose of humbling me: a
single circumstance will describe this reciprocal situation. I read to him, after dinner, the letter I had
written the preceding year to Voltaire, and of which Saint Lambert had heard speak. Whilst I was
reading he fell asleep, and I, lately so haughty, at present so foolish, dared not stop, and continued to
read whilst he continued to snore. Such were my indignities and such his revenge; but his generosity
never permitted him to exercise them; except between ourselves.
  After his return to the army, I found Madam d'Houdetot greatly changed in her manner with me. At
this I was as much surprised as if it had not been what I ought to have expected; it affected me more
than it ought to have done, and did me considerable harm. It seemed that everything from which I
expected a cure, still plunged deeper into my heart the dart, which I at length broke in rather than draw
out.
I was quite determined to conquer myself, and leave no means untried to change my foolish passioninto a pure and lasting friendship. For this purpose I had formed the finest projects in the world; for the
execution of which the concurrence of Madam d' Houdetot was necessary. When I wished to speak to
her  I  found  her  absent  and  embarrassed;  I  perceived  I  was  no  longer  agreeable  to  her,  and  that
something had passed which she would not communicate to me, and which I have never yet known.
This change, and the impossibility of knowing the reason of it, grieved me to the heart.
  She asked me for her letters; these I returned her with a fidelity of which she did me the insult to
doubt for a moment.
  This  doubt  was  another  wound  given  to  my  heart,  with  which  she  must  have  been  so  well
acquainted. She did me justice, but not immediately: I understood that an examination of the packet I
had sent her, made her perceive her error; I saw she reproached herself with it, by which I was a gainer
of something. She could not take back her letters without returning me mine. She told me she had burnt
them: of this I dared to doubt in my turn, and I confess I doubt of it at this moment. No, such letters as
mine to her were, are never thrown into the fire. Those of Eloisa have been found ardent.
  Heavens! what would have been said of these! No, No, she who can inspire a like passion, will
never have the courage to burn the proofs of it. But I am not afraid of her having made a bad use of
them: of this I do not think her capable; and besides I had taken proper measures to prevent it. The
foolish, but strong apprehension of raillery, had made me begin this correspondence in a manner to
secure my letters from all communication. I carried the familiarity I permitted myself with her in my
intoxication so far as to speak to her in the singular number: but what theeing and thouing! she certainly
could not be offended with it. Yet she several times complained, but this was always useless: her
complaints had no other effect than that of awakening my fears, and I besides could not suffer myself to
lose ground. If these letters be not yet destroyed, and should they ever be made public, the world will
see in what manner I have loved.
  The grief caused me by the coldness of Madam d'Houdetot, and the certainty of not having merited
it, made me take the singular resolution to complain of it to Saint Lambert himself. While waiting the
effect of the letter I wrote to him, I sought dissipations to which I ought sooner to have had recourse.
Fetes were given at the Chevrette for which I composed music. The pleasure of honoring myself in the
eyes of Madam d'Houdetot by a talent she loved, warmed my imagination, and another object still
contributed to give it animation, this was the desire the author of the 'Devin du Villaqe' had of showing
he understood music; for I had perceived some persons had, for a considerable time past, endeavored to
render this doubtful, at least with respect to composition. My beginning at Paris, the ordeal through
which I had several times passed there, both at the house of M. Dupin and that of M. de la Popliniere;
the quantity of music I had composed during fourteen years in the midst of the most celebrated masters
and before their eyes:--finally, the opera of the 'Muses Gallantes', and that even of the 'Devin'; a motet I
had composed for Mademoiselle Fel, and which she had sung at the spiritual concert; the frequent
conferences I had had upon this fine art with the first composers, all seemed to prevent or dissipate a
doubt of such a nature. This however existed even at the Chevrette, and in the mind of M. d'Epinay
himself. Without appearing to observe it, I undertook to compose him a motet for the dedication of the
chapel of the Chevrette, and I begged him to make choice of the words. He directed de Linant, the tutor
to his son, to furnish me with these. De Linant gave me words proper to the subject, and in a week after
I had received them the motet was finished. This time, spite was my Apollo, and never did better music
come from my hand. The words began with: 'Ecce sedes hic tonantis'. (I have since learned these were
by Santeuil, and that M. de Linant had without scruple appropriated them to himself.) The grandeur of
the opening is suitable to the words, and the rest of the motet is so elegantly harmonious that everyone
was struck with it. I had composed it for a great orchestra. D'Epinay procured the best performers.
Madam  Bruna,  an  Italian  singer,  sung  the  motet,  and  was  well  accompanied.  The  composition
succeeded so well that it was afterwards performed at the spiritual concert, where, in spite of secret
cabals, and notwithstanding it was badly executed, it was twice generally applauded. I gave for the
birthday of M. d'Epinay the idea of a kind of piece half dramatic and half pantomimical, of which I also
composed the music. Grimm, on his arrival, heard speak of my musical success. An hour afterwards nota word more was said on the subject; but there no longer remained a doubt, not at least that I know of,
of my knowledge of composition.
  Grimm was scarcely arrived at the Chevrette, where I already did not much amuse myself, before
he made it insupportable to me by airs I never before saw in any person, and of which I had no idea.
The evening before he came, I was dislodged from the chamber of favor, contiguous to that of Madam
d'Epinay; it was prepared for Grimm, and instead of it, I was put into another further off. "In this
manner," said I, laughingly, to Madam d'Epinay, "new-comers displace those which are established."
She seemed embarrassed. I was better acquainted the same evening with the reason for the change, in
learning that between her chamber and that I had quitted there was a private door which she had
thought needless to show me. Her intercourse with Grimm was not a secret either in her own house or
to the public, not even to her husband; yet, far from confessing it to me, the confidant of secrets more
important to her, and which was sure would be faithfully kept, she constantly denied it in the strongest
manner.  I  comprehended  this  reserve  proceeded  from  Grimm,  who,  though  intrusted  with  all  my
secrets, did not choose I should be with any of his.
  However prejudiced I was in favor of this man by former sentiments, which were not extinguished,
and by the real merit he had, all was not proof against the cares he took to destroy it. He received me
like the Comte de Tuffiere; he scarcely deigned to return my salute; he never once spoke to me, and
prevented my speaking to him by not making me any answer; he everywhere passed first, and took the
first place without ever paying me the least attention. All this would have been supportable had he not
accompanied it with a shocking affectation, which may be judged of by one example taken from a
hundred. One evening Madam d'Epinay, finding herself a little indisposed, ordered something for her
supper to be carried into her chamber, and went up stairs to sup by the side of the fire. She asked me to
go with her, which I did. Grimm came afterwards. The little table was already placed, and there were
but two covers. Supper was served; Madam d' Epinay took her place on one side of the fire, Grimm
took an armed chair, seated himself at the other, drew the little table between them, opened his napkin,
and prepared himself for eating without speaking to me a single word.
  Madam d' Epinay blushed at his behavior, and, to induce him to repair his rudeness, offered me her
place. He said nothing, nor did he ever look at me. Not being able to approach the fire, I walked about
the chamber until a cover was brought. Indisposed as I was, older than himself, longer acquainted in the
house than he had been, the person who had introduced him there, and to whom as a favorite of the lady
he ought to have done the honors of it, he suffered me to sup at the end of the table, at a distance from
the  fire,  without  showing  me  the  least  civility.  His  whole  behavior  to  me  corresponded  with  this
example of it. He did not treat me precisely as his inferior, but he looked upon me as a cipher. I could
scarcely recognize the same Grimm, who, to the house of the Prince de Saxe-Gotha, thought himself
honored when I cast my eyes upon him. I had still more difficulty in reconciling this profound silence
and insulting haughtiness with the tender friendship he possessed for me to those whom he knew to be
real friends. It is true the only proofs he gave of it was pitying my wretched fortune, of which I did not
complain;  compassionating  my  sad  fate,  with  which  I  was  satisfied;  and  lamenting  to  see  me
obstinately refuse the benevolent services he said, he wished to render me. Thus was it he artfully made
the  world  admire  his  affectionate  generosity,  blame  my  ungrateful  misanthropy,  and  insensibly
accustomed people to imagine there was nothing more between a protector like him and a wretch like
myself, than a connection founded upon benefactions on one part and obligations on the other, without
once thinking of a friendship between equals. For my part, I have vainly sought to discover in what I
was under an obligation to this new protector. I had lent him money, he had never lent me any; I had
attended him in his illness, he scarcely came to see me in mine; I had given him all my friends, he never
had given me any of his; I had said everything I could in his favor, and if ever he has spoken of me it
has been less publicly and in another manner. He has never either rendered or offered me the least
service of any kind. How, therefore, was he my Mecaenas? In what manner was I protected by him?
This was incomprehensible to me, and still remains so.
  It is true, he was more or less arrogant with everybody, but I was the only person with whom hewas brutally so. I remember Saint Lambert once ready to throw a plate at his head, upon his, in some
measure, giving him the lie at table by vulgarly saying, "That is not true." With his naturally imperious
manner  he  had  the  self-sufficiency  of  an  upstart,  and  became  ridiculous  by  being  extravagantly
impertinent. An intercourse with the great had so far intoxicated him that he gave himself airs which
none but the contemptible part of them ever assume. He never called his lackey but by "Eh!" as if
amongst the number of his servants my lord had not known which was in waiting. When he sent him to
buy anything, he threw the money upon the ground instead of putting it into his hand. In short, entirely
forgetting  he  was  a  man,  he  treated  him  with  such  shocking  contempt,  and  so  cruel  a  disdain  in
everything, that the poor lad, a very good creature, whom Madam d'Epinay had recommended, quitted
his service without any other complaint than that of the impossibility of enduring such treatment. This
was the la Fleur of this new presuming upstart.
  As  these  things  were  nothing  more  than  ridiculous,  but  quite  opposite  to  my  character,  they
contributed to render him suspicious to me. I could easily imagine that a man whose head was so much
deranged  could  not  have  a  heart  well  placed.  He  piqued  himself  upon  nothing  so  much  as  upon
sentiments.  How  could  this  agree  with  defects  which  are  peculiar  to  little  minds?  How  can  the
continued overflowings of a susceptible heart suffer it to be incessantly employed in so many little
cares relative to the person? He who feels his heart inflamed with this celestial fire strives to diffuse it,
and wishes to show what he internally is. He would wish to place his heart in his countenance, and
thinks not of other paint for his cheeks.
I remember the summary of his morality which Madam d'Epinay had mentioned to me and adopted.
This consisted in one single article; that the sole duty of man is to follow all the inclinations of his
heart. This morality, when I heard it mentioned, gave me great matter of reflection, although I at first
considered it solely as a play of wit. But I soon perceived it was a principle really the rule of his
conduct, and of which I afterwards had, at my own expense, but too many convincing proofs. It is the
interior doctrine Diderot has so frequently intimated to me, but which I never heard him explain.
I remember having several years before been frequently told that Grimm was false, that he had
nothing more than the appearance of sentiment, and particularly that he did not love me. I recollected
several little anecdotes which I had heard of him by M. de Francueil and Madam de Chenonceaux,
neither of whom esteemed him, and to whom he must have been known, as Madam de Chenonceaux
was daughter to Madam de Rochechouart, the intimate friend of the late Comte de Friese, and that M.
de Francueil, at that time very intimate with the Viscount de Polignac, had lived a good deal at the
Palais Royal precisely when Grimm began to introduce himself there. All Paris heard of his despair
after the death of the Comte de Friese. It was necessary to support the reputation he had acquired after
the rigors of Mademoiselle Fel, and of which I, more than any other person, should have seen the
imposture, had I been less blind. He was obliged to be dragged to the Hotel de Castries where he
worthily played his part, abandoned to the most mortal affliction. There, he every morning went into
the garden to weep at his ease, holding before his eyes his handkerchief moistened with tears, as long as
he was in sight of the hotel, but at the turning of a certain alley, people, of whom he little thought, saw
him instantly put his handkerchief in his pocket and take out of it a book. This observation, which was
repeatedly made, soon became public in Paris, and was almost as soon forgotten. I myself had forgotten
it; a circumstance in which I was concerned brought it to my recollection. I was at the point of death in
my bed, in the Rue de Grenelle, Grimm was in the country; he came one morning, quite out of breath,
to see me, saying, he had arrived in town that very instant; and a moment afterwards I learned he had
arrived the evening before, and had been seen at the theatre.
I heard many things of the same kind; but an observation, which I was surprised not to have made
sooner, struck me more than anything else. I had given to Grimm all my friends without exception, they
were become his. I was so inseparable from him, that I should have had some difficulty in continuing to
visit at a house where he was not received. Madam de Crequi was the only person who refused to admit
him into her company, and whom for that reason I have seldom since seen. Grimm on his part made
himself other friends, as well by his own means, as by those of the Comte de Friese. Of all these notone of them ever became my friend: he never said a word to induce me even to become acquainted with
them, and not one of those I sometimes met at his apartments ever showed me the least good will; the
Comte de Friese, in whose house he lived, and with whom it consequently would have been agreeable
to me to form some connection, not excepted, nor the Comte de Schomberg, his relation, with whom
Grimm was still more intimate.
  Add to this, my own friends, whom I made his, and who were all tenderly attached to me before this
acquaintance, were no longer so the moment it was made. He never gave me one of his. I gave him all
mine, and these he has taken from me. If these be the effects of friendship, what are those of enmity?
  Diderot  himself  told  me  several  times  at  the  beginning  that  Grimm  in  whom  I  had  so  much
confidence, was not my friend. He changed his language the moment he was no longer so himself.
  The manner in which I had disposed of my children wanted not the concurrence of any person. Yet
I informed some of my friends of it, solely to make it known to them, and that I might not in their eyes
appear better than I was. These friends were three in number: Diderot, Grimm, and Madam d'Epinay.
Duclos, the most worthy of my confidence, was the only real friend whom I did not inform of it. He
nevertheless knew what I had done. By whom? This I know not. It is not very probable the perfidy
came from Madam d'Epinay, who knew that by following her example, had I been capable of doing it, I
had in my power the means of a cruel revenge. It remains therefore between Grimm and Diderot, then
so much united, especially against me, and it is probable this crime was common to them both. I would
lay a wager that Duclos, to whom I never told my secret, and who consequently was at liberty to make
what use he pleased of his information, is the only person who has not spoken of it again.
  Grimm and Diderot, in their project to take from me the governesses, had used the greatest efforts
to make Duclos enter into their views; but this he refused to do with disdain. It was not until sometime
afterwards that I learned from him what had passed between them on the subject; but I learned at the
time from Theresa enough to perceive there was some secret design, and that they wished to dispose of
me, if not against my own consent, at least without my knowledge, or had an intention of making these
two persons serve as instruments of some project they had in view. This was far from upright conduct.
The opposition of Duclos is a convincing proof of it. They who think proper may believe it to be
friendship.
  This pretended friendship was as fatal to me at home as it was abroad. The long and frequent
conversations with Madam le Vasseur, for, several years past, had made a sensible change in this
woman's behavior to me, and the change was far from being in my favor. What was the subject of these
singular  conversations?  Why  such  a  profound  mystery?  Was  the  conversation  of  that  old  woman
agreeable enough to take her into favor, and of sufficient importance to make of it so great a secret?
During  the  two  or  three  years  these  colloquies  had,  from  time  to  time,  been  continued,  they  had
appeared  to  me  ridiculous;  but  when  I  thought  of  them  again,  they  began  to  astonish  me.  This
astonishment  would  have  been  carried  to  inquietude  had  I  then  known  what  the  old  creature  was
preparing for me.
    Notwithstanding the pretended zeal for my welfare of which Grimm made such a public boast,
difficult to reconcile with the airs he gave himself when we were together, I heard nothing of him from
any quarter the least to my advantage, and his feigned commiseration tended less to do me service than
to render me contemptible. He deprived me as much as he possibly could of the resource I found in the
employment I had chosen, by decrying me as a bad copyist. I confess he spoke the truth; but in this case
it was not for him to do it. He proved himself in earnest by employing another copyist, and prevailing
upon everybody he could, by whom I was engaged, to do the same. His intention might have been
supposed to be that of reducing me to a dependence upon him and his credit for a subsistence, and to
cut off the latter until I was brought to that degree of distress.
  All things considered, my reason imposed silence upon my former prejudice, which still pleaded in
his favor. I judged his character to be at least suspicious, and with respect to his friendship I positively
decided it to be false. I then resolved to see him no more, and informed Madam d'Epinay of the
resolution I had taken, supporting, it with several unanswerable facts, but which I have now forgotten.  She strongly combated my resolution without knowing how to reply to the reasons on which it was
founded. She had not concerted with him; but the next day, instead of explaining herself verbally, she,
with great address, gave me a letter they had drawn up together, and by which, without entering into a
detail of facts, she justified him by his concentrated character, attributed to me as a crime my having
suspected him of perfidy towards his friend, and exhorted me to come to an accommodation with him.
This letter staggered me. In a conversation we afterwards had together, and in which I found her better
prepared than she had been the first time, I suffered myself to be quite prevailed upon, and was inclined
to believe I might have judged erroneously. In this case I thought I really had done a friend a very
serious injury, which it was my duty to repair. In short, as I had already done several times with
Diderot,  and  the  Baron  d'Holbach,  half  from  inclination,  and  half  from  weakness,  I  made  all  the
advances I had a right to require; I went to M. Grimm, like another George Dandin, to make him my
apologies for the offence he had given me; still in the false persuasion, which, in the course of my life
has made me guilty of a thousand meannesses to my pretended friends, that there is no hatred which
may not be disarmed by mildness and proper behavior; whereas, on the contrary, the hatred of the
wicked becomes still more envenomed by the impossibility of finding anything to found it upon, and
the sentiment of their own injustice is another cause of offence against the person who is the object of
it. I have, without going further than my own history, a strong proof of this maxim in Grimm, and in
Tronchin; both became my implacable enemies from inclination, pleasure and fancy, without having
been able to charge me with having done either of them the most trifling injury, and whose rage, like
that of tigers, becomes daily more fierce by the facility of satiating it.
  [I did not give the surname of Jongleur only to the latter until a long time after his enmity had been
declared, and the persecutions he brought upon me at Geneva and elsewhere. I soon suppressed the
name the moment I perceived I was entirely his victim. Mean vengeance is unworthy of my heart, and
hatred never takes the least root in it.]
I expected that Grimm, confused by my condescension and advances, would receive me with open
arms, and the most tender friendship. He received me as a Roman Emperor would have done, and with
a haughtiness I never saw in any person but himself. I was by no means prepared for such a reception.
When, in the embarrassment of the part I had to act, and which was so unworthy of me, I had, in a few
words and with a timid air, fulfilled the object which had brought me to him; before he received me
into favor, he pronounced, with a deal of majesty, an harangue he had prepared, and which contained a
long enumeration of his rare virtues, and especially those connected with friendship. He laid great stress
upon a thing which at first struck me a great deal: this was his having always preserved the same
friends. Whilst he was yet speaking, I said to myself, it would be cruel for me to be the only exception
to this rule. He returned to the subject so frequently, and with such emphasis, that I thought, if in this he
followed nothing but the sentiments of his heart, he would be less struck with the maxim, and that he
made of it an art useful to his views by procuring the means of accomplishing them. Until then I had
been in the same situation; I had preserved all my first friends, those even from my tenderest infancy,
without having lost one of them except by death, and yet I had never before made the reflection: it was
not a maxim I had prescribed myself. Since, therefore, the advantage was common to both, why did he
boast of it in preference, if he had not previously intended to deprive me of the merit? He afterwards
endeavored to humble me by proofs of the preference our common friends gave to me. With this I was
as well acquainted as himself; the question was, by what means he had obtained it? whether it was by
merit  or  address?  by  exalting  himself,  or  endeavoring  to  abase  me?  At  last,  when  he  had  placed
between us all the distance that he could add to the value of the favor he was about to confer, he
granted me the kiss of peace, in a slight embrace which resembled the accolade which the king gives to
newmade knights. I was stupefied with surprise: I knew not what to say; not a word could I utter. The
whole scene had the appearance of the reprimand a preceptor gives to his pupil while he graciously
spares inflicting the rod. I never think of it without perceiving to what degree judgments, founded upon
appearances to which the vulgar give so much weight, are deceitful, and how frequently audaciousness
and pride are found in the guilty, and shame and embarrassment in the innocent.  We were reconciled: this was a relief to my heart, which every kind of quarrel fills with anguish. It
will naturally be supposed that a like reconciliation changed nothing in his manners; all it effected was
to  deprive  me  of  the  right  of  complaining  of  them.  For  this  reason  I  took  a  resolution  to  endure
everything, and for the future to say not a word.
  So many successive vexations overwhelmed me to such a degree as to leave me but little power
over my mind. Receiving no answer from Saint Lambert, neglected by Madam d'Houdetot, and no
longer daring to open my heart to any person, I began to be afraid that by making friendship my idol, I
should sacrifice my whole life to chimeras. After putting all those with whom I had been acquainted to
the test, there remained but two who had preserved my esteem, and in whom my heart could confide:
Duclos, of whom since my retreat to the Hermitage I had lost sight, and Saint Lambert. I thought the
only means of repairing the wrongs I had done the latter, was to open myself to him without reserve,
and I resolved to confess to him everything by which his mistress should not be exposed. I have no
doubt but this was another snare of my passions to keep me nearer to her person; but I should certainly
have had no reserve with her lover, entirely submitting to his direction, and carrying sincerity as far as
it was possible to do it. I was upon the point of writing to him a second letter, to which I was certain he
would have returned an answer, when I learned the melancholy cause of his silence relative to the first.
He had been unable to support until the end the fatigues of the campaign. Madam d'Epinay informed
me he had had an attack of the palsy, and Madam d'Houdetot, ill from affliction, wrote me two or three
days after from Paris, that he was going to Aix-la-Chapelle to take the benefit of the waters. I will not
say this melancholy circumstance afflicted me as it did her; but I am of opinion my grief of heart was as
painful  as  her  tears.  The  pain  of  knowing  him  to  be  in  such  a  state,  increased  by  the  fear  least
inquietude  should  have  contributed  to  occasion  it,  affected  me  more  than  anything  that  had  yet
happened, and I felt most cruelly a want of fortitude, which in my estimation was necessary to enable
me  to  support  so  many  misfortunes.  Happily  this  generous  friend  did  not  long  leave  me  so
overwhelmed with affliction; he did not forget me, notwithstanding his attack; and I soon learned from
himself that I had ill judged his sentiments, and been too much alarmed for his situation. It is now time
I should come to the grand revolution of my destiny, to the catastrophe which has divided my life in
two parts so different from each other, and, from a very trifling cause, produced such terrible effects.
  One day, little thinking of what was to happen, Madam d'Epinay sent for me to the Chevrette. The
moment I saw her I perceived in her eyes and whole countenance an appearance of uneasiness, which
struck me the more, as this was not customary, nobody knowing better than she did how to govern her
features and her movements. "My friend," said she to me, "I am immediately going to set off for
Geneva; my breast is in a bad state, and my health so deranged that I must go and consult Tronchin." I
was the more astonished at this resolution so suddenly taken, and at the beginning of the bad season of
the year, as thirty-six hours before she had not, when I left her, so much as thought of it. I asked her
who she would take with her. She said her son and M. de Linant; and afterwards carelessly added, "And
you, dear, will not you go also?" As I did not think she spoke seriously, knowing that at the season of
the year I was scarcely in a situation to go to my chamber, I joked upon the utility of the company, of
one sick person to another. She herself had not seemed to make the proposition seriously, and here the
matter dropped. The rest of our conversation ran upon the necessary preparations for her journey, about
which she immediately gave orders, being determined to set off within a fortnight. She lost nothing by
my refusal, having prevailed upon her husband to accompany her.
  A few days afterwards I received from Diderot the note I am going to transcribe. This note, simply
doubled up, so that the contents were easily read, was addressed to me at Madam d'Epinay's, and sent to
M. de Linant, tutor to the son, and confidant to the mother.
  NOTE FROM DIDEROT.
  "I am naturally disposed to love you, and am born to give you trouble. I am informed Madam
d'Epinay is going to Geneva, and do not hear you are to accompany her. My friend, you are satisfied
with Madam d'Epinay, you must go, with her; if dissatisfied you ought still less to hesitate. Do you find
the weight of the obligations you are under to her uneasy to you? This is an opportunity of discharginga part of them, and relieving your mind. Do you ever expect another opportunity like the present one, of
giving her proofs of your gratitude? She is going to a country where she will be quite a stranger. She is
ill, and will stand in need of amusement and dissipation. The winter season too! Consider, my friend.
Your ill state of health may be a much greater objection than I think it is; but are you now more
indisposed than you were a month ago, or than you will be at the beginning of spring? Will you three
months hence be in a situation to perform the journey more at your ease than at present? For my part I
cannot but observe to you that were I unable to bear the shaking of the carriage I would take my staff
and follow her. Have you no fears lest your conduct should be misinterpreted? You will be suspected of
ingratitude or of a secret motive. I well know, that let you do as you will you will have in your favor the
testimony of your conscience, but will this alone be sufficient, and is it permitted to neglect to a certain
degree that which is necessary to acquire the approbation of others? What I now write, my good friend,
is to acquit myself of what I think I owe to us both. Should my letter displease you, throw it into the fire
and let it be forgotten. I salute, love and embrace you."
  Although trembling and almost blind with rage whilst I read this epistle, I remarked the address
with which Diderot affected a milder and more polite language than he had done in his former ones,
wherein he never went further than "My dear," without ever deigning to add the name of friend. I easily
discovered the secondhand means by which the letter was conveyed to me; the subscription, manner
and form awkwardly betrayed the manoeuvre; for we commonly wrote to each other by post, or the
messenger of Montmorency, and this was the first and only time he sent me his letter by any other
conveyance.
  As soon as the first transports of my indignation permitted me to write, I, with great precipitation,
wrote him the following answer, which I immediately carried from the Hermitage, where I then was, to
Chevrette, to show it to Madam d' Epinay; to whom, in my blind rage, I read the contents, as well as the
letter from Diderot.
  "You cannot, my dear friend, either know the magnitude of the obligations I am under to Madam
d'Epinay, to what a degree I am bound by them, whether or not she is desirous of my accompanying
her, that this is possible, or the reasons I may have for my noncompliance. I have no objection to
discuss all these points with you; but you will in the meantime confess that prescribing to me so
positively  what  I  ought  to  do,  without  first  enabling  yourself  to  judge  of  the  matter,  is,  my  dear
philosopher, acting very inconsiderately. What is still worse, I perceive the opinion you give comes not
from yourself. Besides my being but little disposed to suffer myself to be led by the nose under your
name by any third or fourth person, I observe in this secondary advice certain underhand dealing, which
ill agrees with your candor, and from which you will on your account, as well as mine, do well in future
to abstain.
  "You are afraid my conduct should be misinterpreted; but I defy a heart like yours to think ill of
mine. Others would perhaps speak better of me if I resembled them more. God preserve me from
gaining their approbation! Let the vile and wicked watch over my conduct and misinterpret my actions,
Rousseau is not a man to be afraid of them, nor is Diderot to be prevailed upon to hearken to what they
say.
  "If I am displeased with your letter, you wish me to throw it into the fire, and pay no attention to the
contents. Do you imagine that anything coming from you can be forgotten in such a manner? You hold,
my dear friend, my tears as cheap in the pain you give me, as you do my life and health, in the cares
you exhort me to take. Could you but break yourself of this, your friendship would be more pleasing to
me, and I should be less to be pitied."
  On entering the chamber of Madam d'Epinay I found Grimm with her, with which I was highly
delighted. I read to them, in a loud and clear voice, the two letters, with an intrepidity of which I should
not have thought myself capable, and concluded with a few observations not in the least derogatory to
it.  At  this  unexpected  audacity  in  a  man  generally  timid,  they  were  struck  dumb  with  surprise;  I
perceived that arrogant man look down upon the ground, not daring to meet my eyes, which sparkled
with indignation; but in the bottom of his heart he from that instant resolved upon my destruction, and,with Madam d' Epinay, I am certain concerted measures to that effect before they separated.
  It was much about this time that I at length received, by Madam d'Houdetot, the answer from Saint
Lambert, dated from Wolfenbuttle, a few days after the accident had happened to him, to my letter
which had been long delayed upon the road. This answer gave me the consolation of which I then stood
so much in need; it was full of assurance of esteem and friendship, and these gave me strength and
courage to deserve them. From that moment I did my duty, but had Saint Lambert been less reasonable,
generous and honest, I was inevitably lost.
  The season became bad, and people began to quit the country. Madam d'Houdetot informed me of
the day on which she intended to come and bid adieu to the valley, and gave me a rendezvous at
Laubonne. This happened to be the same day on which Madam d'Epinay left the Chevrette to go to
Paris for the purpose of completing preparations for her journey. Fortunately she set off in the morning,
and I had still time to go and dine with her sister-in-law. I had the letter from Saint Lambert in my
pocket, and read it over several times as I walked along, This letter served me as a shield against my
weakness. I made and kept to the resolution of seeing nothing in Madam d'Houdetot but my friend and
the mistress of Saint Lambert; and I passed with her a tete-a-fete of four hours in a most delicious calm,
infinitely preferable, even with respect to enjoyment, to the paroxysms of a burning fever, which,
always, until that moment, I had had when in her presence. As she too well knew my heart not to be
changed, she was sensible of the efforts I made to conquer myself, and esteemed me the more for them,
and I had the pleasure of perceiving that her friendship for me was not extinguished. She announced to
me the approaching return of Saint Lambert, who, although well enough recovered from his attack, was
unable to bear the fatigues of war, and was quitting the service to come and live in peace with her. We
formed the charming project of an intimate connection between us three, and had reason to hope it
would be lasting, since it was founded on every sentiment by which honest and susceptible hearts could
be united; and we had moreover amongst us all the knowledge and talents necessary to be sufficient to
ourselves without the aid of any foreign supplement. Alas! in abandoning myself to the hope of so
agreeable a life I little suspected that which awaited me.
  We afterwards spoke of my situation with Madam d'Epinay. I showed her the letter from Diderot,
with my answer to it; I related to her everything that had passed upon the subject, and declared to her
my resolution of quitting the Hermitage.
  This she vehemently opposed, and by reasons all powerful over my heart. She expressed to me how
much she could have wished I had been of the party to Geneva, foreseeing she should inevitably be
considered as having caused the refusal, which the letter of Diderot seemed previously to announce.
However, as she was acquainted with my reasons, she did not insist upon this point, but conjured me to
avoid coming to an open rupture let it cost me what mortification it would, and to palliate my refusal by
reasons sufficiently plausible to put away all unjust suspicions of her having been the cause of it. I told
her the task she imposed on me was not easy; but that, resolved to expiate my faults at the expense of
my reputation, I would give the preference to hers in everything that honor permitted me to suffer. It
will soon be seen whether or not I fulfilled this engagement.
  My passion was so far from having lost any part of its force that I never in my life loved my Sophia
so ardently and tenderly as on that day, but such was the impression made upon me by the letter of
Saint Lambert, the sentiment of my duty and the horror in which I held perfidy, that during the whole
time of the interview my senses left me in peace, and I was not so much as tempted to kiss her hand. At
parting she embraced me before her servants. This embrace, so different from those I had sometimes
stolen from her under the foliage, proved I was become master of myself; and I am certain that had my
mind, undisturbed, had time to acquire more firmness, three months would have cured me radically.
  Here ends my personal connections with Madam d'Houdetot; connections of which each has been
able to judge by appearance according to the disposition of his own heart, but in which the passion
inspired me by that amiable woman, the most lively passion, perhaps, man ever felt, will be honorable
in our own eyes by the rare and painful sacrifice we both made to duty, honor, love, and friendship. We
each had too high an opinion of the other easily to suffer ourselves to do anything derogatory to ourdignity. We must have been unworthy of all esteem had we not set a proper value upon one like this,
and the energy of my sentiments which have rendered us culpable, was that which prevented us from
becoming so.
  Thus after a long friendship for one of these women, and the strongest affection for the other, I bade
them both adieu the same day, to one never to see her more, to the other to see her again twice, upon
occasions of which I shall hereafter speak.
  After  their  departure,  I  found  myself  much  embarrassed  to  fulfill  so  many  pressing  and
contradictory duties, the consequences of my imprudence; had I been in my natural situation, after the
proposition and refusal of the journey to Geneva, I had only to remain quiet, and everything was as it
should be. But I had foolishly made of it an affair which could not remain in the state it was, and an
explanation  was  absolutely  necessary,  unless  I  quitted  the  Hermitage,  which  I  had  just  promised
Madam d'Houdetot not to do, at least for the present. Moreover she had required me to make known the
reasons for my refusal to my pretended friends, that it might not be imputed to her. Yet I could not state
the true reason without doing an outrage to Madam d'Epinay, who certainly had a right to my gratitude
for what she had done for me. Everything well considered, I found myself reduced to the severe but
indispensable  necessity  of  failing  in  respect,  either  to  Madam  d'Upinay,  Madam  d'Houdetot  or  to
myself; and it was the last I resolved to make my victim. This I did without hesitation, openly and fully,
and with so much generosity as to make the act worthy of expiating the faults which had reduced me to
such an extremity. This sacrifice, taken advantage of by my enemies, and which they, perhaps, did not
expect, has ruined my reputation, and by their assiduity, deprived me of the esteem of the public; but it
has restored to me my own, and given me consolation in my misfortune. This, as it will hereafter
appear, is not the last time I made such a sacrifice, nor that advantages were taken of it to do me an
injury.
  Grimm was the only person who appeared to have taken no part in the affair, and it was to him I
determined to address myself. I wrote him a long letter, in which I set forth the ridiculousness of
considering it as my duty to accompany Madam d' Epinay to Geneva, the inutility of the measure, and
the embarrassment even it would have caused her, besides the inconvenience to myself. I could not
resist the temptation of letting him perceive in this letter how fully I was informed in what manner
things were arranged, and that to me it appeared singular I should be expected to undertake the journey
whilst he himself dispensed with it, and that his name was never mentioned. This letter, wherein, on
account of my not being able clearly to state my reasons, I was often obliged to wander from the text,
would have rendered me culpable in the eyes of the public, but it was a model of reservedness and
discretion for the people who, like Grimm, were fully acquainted with the things I forbore to mention,
and which justified my conduct. I did not even hesitate to raise another prejudice against myself in
attributing the advice of Diderot, to my other friends. This I did to insinuate that Madam d'Houdetot
had been in the same opinion as she really was, and in not mentioning that, upon the reasons I gave her,
she  thought  differently,  I  could  not  better  remove  the  suspicion  of  her  having  connived  at  my
proceedings than appearing dissatisfied with her behavior.
  This letter was concluded by an act of confidence which would have had an effect upon any other
man; for, in desiring Grimm to weigh my reasons and afterwards to give me his opinion, I informed
him that, let this be what it would, I should act accordingly, and such was my intention had he even
thought I ought to set off; for M. d'Epinay having appointed himself the conductor of his wife, my
going with them would then have had a different appearance; whereas it was I who, in the first place,
was asked to take upon me that employment, and he was out of the question until after my refusal.
  The answer from Grimm was slow incoming; it was singular enough, on which account I will here
transcribe it.
  "The departure of Madam d'Epinay is postponed; her son is ill, and it is necessary to wait until his
health is re-established. I will consider the contents of your letter. Remain quiet at your Hermitage. I
will send you my opinion as soon as this shall be necessary. As she will certainly not set off for some
days, there is no immediate occasion for it. In the meantime you may, if you think proper, make heryour offers, although this to me seems a matter of indifference. For, knowing your situation as well as
you do yourself, I doubt not of her returning to your offer such an answer as she ought to do; and all the
advantage which, in my opinion, can result from this, will be your having it in your power to say to
those by whom you may be importuned, that your not being of the travelling party was not for want of
having made your offers to that effect. Moreover, I do not see why you will absolutely have it that the
philosopher is the speaking-trumpet of all the world, nor because he is of opinion you ought to go, why
you should imagine all your friends think as he does? If you write to Madam d'Epinay, her answer will
be yours to all your friends, since you have it so much at heart to give them all an answer. Adieu. I
embrace Madam le Vasseur and the Criminal."
  [M. le Vasseur, whose wife governed him rather rudely, called her the Lieutenant Criminal. Grimm
in a joke gave the same name to the daughter, and by way of abridgment was pleased to retrench the
first word.]
  Struck with astonishment at reading this letter I vainly endeavored to find out what it meant. How!
instead of answering me with simplicity, he took time to consider of what I had written, as if the time
he had already taken was not sufficient! He intimates even the state of suspense in which he wishes to
keep me, as if a profound problem was to be resolved, or that it was of importance to his views to
deprive me of every means of comprehending his intentions until the moment he should think proper to
make them known. What therefore did he mean by these precautions, delays, and mysteries? Was this
manner  of  acting  consistent  with  honor  and  uprightness?  I  vainly  sought  for  some  favorable
interpretation of his conduct; it was impossible to find one. Whatever his design might be, were this
inimical to me, his situation facilitated the execution of it without its being possible for me in mine to
oppose the least obstacle. In favor in the house of a great prince, having an extensive acquaintance, and
giving the tone to common circles of which he was the oracle, he had it in his power, with his usual
address, to dispose everything in his favor; and I, alone in my Hermitage, far removed from all society,
without the benefit of advice, and having no communication with the world, had nothing to do but to
remain in peace. All I did was to write to Madam d'Epinay upon the illness of her son, as polite a letter
as could be written, but in which I did not fall into the snare of offering to accompany her to Geneva.
  After waiting for a long time in the most cruel uncertainty, into which that barbarous man had
plunged me, I learned, at the expiration of eight or ten days, that Madam d'Epinay was setoff, and
received from him a second letter. It contained not more than seven or eight lines which I did not
entirely read. It was a rupture, but in such terms as the most infernal hatred only can dictate, and these
became unmeaning by the excessive degree of acrimony with which he wished to charge them. He
forbade me his presence as he would have forbidden me his states. All that was wanting to his letter to
make it laughable, was to be read over with coolness. Without taking a copy of it, or reading the whole
of the contents, I returned it him immediately, accompanied by the following note:
  "I refused to admit the force of the just reasons I had of suspicion: I now, when it is too late, am
become sufficiently acquainted with your character.
  "This then is the letter upon which you took time to meditate: I return it to you, it is not for me. You
may show mine to the whole world and hate me openly; this on your part will be a falsehood the less."
  My telling he might show my preceding letter related to an article in his by which his profound
address throughout the whole affair will be judged of.
I have observed that my letter might inculpate me in the eyes of persons unacquainted with the
particulars of what had passed. This he was delighted to discover; but how was he to take advantage of
it without exposing himself? By showing the letter he ran the risk of being reproached with abusing the
confidence of his friend.
  To relieve himself from this embarrassment he resolved to break with me in the most violent
manner possible, and to set forth in his letter the favor he did me in not showing mine. He was certain
that in my indignation and anger I should refuse his feigned discretion, and permit him to show my
letter to everybody; this was what he wished for, and everything turned out as he expected it would. He
sent  my  letter  all  over  Paris,  with  his  own  commentaries  upon  it,  which,  however,  were  not  sosuccessful as he had expected them to be. It was not judged that the permission he had extorted to make
my letter public exempted him from the blame of having so lightly taken me at my word to do me an
injury. People continually asked what personal complaints he had against me to authorize so violent a
hatred. Finally, it was thought that if even my behavior had been such as to authorize him to break with
me, friendship, although extinguished, had rights which he ought to have respected. But unfortunately
the  inhabitants  of  Paris  are  frivolous;  remarks  of  the  moment  are  soon  forgotten;  the  absent  and
unfortunate are neglected; the man who prospers secures favor by his presence; the intriguing and
malicious support each other, renew their vile efforts, and the effects of these, incessantly succeeding
each other, efface everything by which they were preceded.
  Thus, after having so long deceived me, this man threw aside his mask; convinced that, in the state
to which he had brought things, he no longer stood in need of it. Relieved from the fear of being unjust
towards the wretch, I left him to his reflections, and thought no more of him. A week afterwards I
received an answer from Madam d'Epinay, dated from Geneva. I understood from the manner of her
letter, in which for the first time in her life, she put on airs of state with me, that both depending but
little upon the success of their measures, and considering me a man inevitably lost, their intentions were
to give themselves the pleasure of completing my destruction.
  In fact, my situation was deplorable. I perceived all my friends withdrew themselves from me
without knowing how or for why. Diderot, who boasted of the continuation of his attachment, and who,
for three months past, had promised me a visit, did not come. The winter began to make its appearance,
and brought with it my habitual disorders. My constitution, although vigorous, had been unequal to the
combat of so many opposite passions. I was so exhausted that I had neither strength nor courage
sufficient  to  resist  the  most  trifling  indisposition.  Had  my  engagements;  and  the  continued
remonstrances of Diderot and Madam de Houdetot then permitted me to quit the Hermitage, I knew not
where to go, nor in what manner to drag myself along. I remained stupid and immovable. The idea
alone of a step to take, a letter to write, or a word to say, made me tremble. I could not however do
otherwise than reply to the letter of Madam d'Epinay without acknowledging myself to be worthy of the
treatment with which she and her friend overwhelmed me. I determined upon notifying to her my
sentiments and resolutions, not doubting a moment that from humanity, generosity, propriety, and the
good manner of thinking, I imagined I had observed in her, notwithstanding her bad one, she would
immediately subscribe to them. My letter was as follows:
    HERMITAGE 23d NOV., 1757.
  "Were it possible to die of grief I should not now be alive.
  "But I have at length determined to triumph over everything. Friendship, madam, is extinguished
between us, but that which no longer exists still has its rights, and I respect them.
  "I have not forgotten your goodness to me, and you may, on my part, expect as much gratitude as it
is possible to have towards a person I no longer can love. All further explanation would be useless. I
have in my favor my own conscience, and I return you your letter.
  "I wished to quit the Hermitage, and I ought to have done it. My friends pretend I must stay there
until spring; and since my friends desire it I will remain there until that season if you will consent to my
stay."
  After writing and despatching this letter all I thought of was remaining quiet at the Hermitage and
taking care of my health; of endeavoring to recover my strength, and taking measures to remove in the
spring without noise or making the rupture public. But these were not the intentions either of Grimm or
Madam d'Epinay, as it will presently appear.
  A few days afterwards, I had the pleasure of receiving from Diderot the visit he had so frequently
promised, and in which he had as constantly failed. He could not have come more opportunely; he was
my oldest friend: almost the only one who remained to me; the pleasure I felt in seeing him, as things
were circumstanced, may easily be imagined. My heart was full, and I disclosed it to him. I explained
to him several facts which either had not come to his knowledge, or had been disguised or suppressed. I
informed him, as far as I could do it with propriety, of all that had passed. I did not affect to concealfrom him that with which he was but too well acquainted, that a passion equally unreasonable and
unfortunate, had been the cause of my destruction; but I never acknowledged that Madam d'Houdetot
had been made acquainted with it, or at least that I had declared it to her. I mentioned to him the
unworthy manoeuvres of Madam d' Epinay to intercept the innocent letters her sister-in-law wrote to
me. I was determined he should hear the particulars from the mouth of the persons whom she had
attempted to seduce. Theresa related them with great precision; but what was my astonishment when
the mother came to speak, and I heard her declare and maintain that nothing of this had come to her
knowledge? These were her words from which she would never depart. Not four days before she
herself had recited to me all the particulars Theresa had just stated, and in presence of my friend she
contradicted me to my face. This, to me, was decisive, and I then clearly saw my imprudence in having
so long a time kept such a woman near me. I made no use of invective; I scarcely deigned to speak to
her a few words of contempt. I felt what I owed to the daughter, whose steadfast uprightness was a
perfect contrast to the base monoeuvres of the mother. But from the instant my resolution was taken
relative to the old woman, and I waited for nothing but the moment to put it into execution.
  This presented itself sooner than I expected. On the 10th of December I received from Madam
d'Epinay the following answer to my preceding letter:
  GENEVA, 1st December, 1757.
  "After having for several years given you every possible mark of friendship all I can now do is to
pity  you.  You  are  very  unhappy.  I  wish  your  conscience  may  be  as  calm  as  mine.  This  may  be
necessary to the repose of your whole life.
  "Since you are determined to quit the Hermitage, and are persuaded that you ought to do it, I am
astonished your friends have prevailed upon you to stay there. For my part I never consult mine upon
my duty, and I have nothing further to say to you upon your own."
  Such an unforeseen dismission, and so fully pronounced, left me not a moment to hesitate. It was
necessary to quit immediately, let the weather and my health be in what state they might, although I
were to sleep in the woods and upon the snow, with which the ground was then covered, and in
defiance of everything Madam d'Houdetot might say; for I was willing to do everything to please her
except render myself infamous.
I never had been so embarrassed in my whole life as I then was; but my resolution was taken. I
swore, let what would happen, not to sleep at the Hermitage on the night of that day week. I began to
prepare for sending away my effects, resolving to leave them in the open field rather than not give up
the key in the course of the week: for I was determined everything should be done before a letter could
be written to Geneva, and an answer to it received. I never felt myself so inspired with courage: I had
recovered all my strength. Honor and indignation, upon which Madam d'Epinay had not calculated,
contributed to restore me to vigor. Fortune aided my audacity. M. Mathas, fiscal procurer, heard of my
embarrasament. He sent to offer me a little house he had in his garden of Mont Louis, at Montmorency.
I accepted it with eagerness and gratitude. The bargain was soon concluded: I immediately sent to
purchase a little furniture to add to that we already had. My effects I had carted away with a deal of
trouble, and a great expense: notwithstanding the ice and snow my removal was completed in a couple
of days, and on the fifteenth of December I gave up the keys of the Hermitage, after having paid the
wages of the gardener, not being able to pay my rent.
  With respect to Madam le Vasseur, I told her we must part; her daughter attempted to make me
renounce my resolution, but I was inflexible. I sent her off, to Paris in a carriage of the messenger with
all the furniture and effects she and her daughter had in common. I gave her some money, and engaged
to pay her lodging with her children, or elsewhere to provide for her subsistence as much as it should be
possible for me to do it, and never to let her want bread as long as I should have it myself.
  Finally the day after my arrival at Mont Louis, I wrote to Madam d'Epinay the following letter:
  MONTMORENCY, 17th December 1757.
  "Nothing, madam, is so natural and necessary as to leave your house the moment you no longer
approve of my remaining there. Upon you refusing your consent to my passing the rest of the winter atthe Hermitage I quitted it on the fifteenth of December. My destiny was to enter it in spite of myself
and to leave it the same. I thank you for the residence you prevailed upon me to make there, and I
would thank you still more had I paid for it less dear. You are right in believing me unhappy; nobody
upon earth knows better than yourself to what a degree I must be so. If being deceived in the choice of
our friends be a misfortune, it is another not less cruel to recover from so pleasing an error."
  Such is the faithful narrative of my residence at the Hermitage, and of the reasons which obliged me
to leave it. I could not break off the recital, it was necessary to continue it with the greatest exactness;
this  epoch  of  my  life  having  had  upon  the  rest  of  it  an  influence  which  will  extend  to  my  latest
remembrance.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK X.
  The  extraordinary  degree  of  strength  a  momentary  effervescence  had  given  me  to  quit  the
Hermitage, left me the moment I was out of it. I was scarcely established in my new habitation before I
frequently suffered from retentions, which were accompanied by a new complaint; that of a rupture,
from which I had for some time, without knowing what it was, felt great inconvenience. I soon was
reduced to the most cruel state. The physician Thieiry, my old friend, came to see me, and made me
acquainted  with  my  situation.  The  sight  of  all  the  apparatus  of  the  infirmities  of  years,  made  me
severely feel that when the body is no longer young, the heart is not so with impunity. The fine season
did not restore me, and I passed the whole year, 1758, in a state of languor, which made me think I was
almost at the end of my career. I saw, with impatience, the closing scene approach. Recovered from the
chimeras of friendship, and detached from everything which had rendered life desirable to me, I saw
nothing more in it that could make it agreeable; all I perceived was wretchedness and misery, which
prevented me from enjoying myself. I sighed after the moment when I was to be free and escape from
my enemies. But I must follow the order of events.
  My retreat to Montmorency seemed to disconcert Madam d'Epinay; probably she did not expect it.
My melancholy situation, the severity of the season, the general dereliction of me by my friends, all
made her and Grimm believe, that by driving me to the last extremity, they should oblige me to implore
mercy, and thus, by vile meanness, render myself contemptible, to be suffered to remain in an asylum
which honor commanded me to leave. I left it so suddenly that they had not time to prevent the step
from being taken, and they were reduced to the alternative of double or quit, to endeavor to ruin me
entirely, or to prevail upon me to return. Grimm chose the former; but I am of opinion Madam d'Epinay
would have preferred the latter, and this from her answer to my last letter, in which she seemed to have
laid  aside  the  airs  she  had  given  herself  in  the  preceding  ones,  and  to  give  an  opening  to  an
accommodation.  The  long  delay  of  this  answer,  for  which  she  made  me  wait  a  whole  month,
sufficiently indicates the difficulty she found in giving it a proper turn, and the deliberations by which it
was preceded. She could not make any further advances without exposing herself; but after her former
letters, and my sudden retreat from her house, it is impossible not to be struck with the care she takes in
this letter not to suffer an offensive expression to escape her. I will copy it at length to enable my reader
to judge of what she wrote:
  GENEVA, January 17, 1758.
  "SIR: I did not receive your letter of the 17th of December until yesterday. It was sent me in a box
filled with different things, and which has been all this time upon the road. I shall answer only the
postscript. You may recollect, sir, that we agreed the wages of the gardener of the Hermitage should
pass through your hands, the better to make him feel that he depended upon you, and to avoid the
ridiculous and indecent scenes which happened in the time of his predecessor. As a proof of this, the
first quarter of his wages were given to you, and a few days before my departure we agreed I shouldreimburse you what you had advanced. I know that of this you, at first, made some difficulty; but I had
desired you to make these advances; it was natural I should acquit myself towards you, and this we
concluded upon. Cahouet informs me that you refused to receive the money. There is certainly some
mistake in the matter. I have given orders that it may again be offered to you, and I see no reason for
your wishing to pay my gardener, notwithstanding our conventions, and beyond the term even of your
inhabiting the Hermitage. I therefore expect, sir, that recollecting everything I have the honor to state,
you will not refuse to be reimbursed for the sums you have been pleased to advance for me."
  After what had passed, not having the least confidence in Madam d' Epinay, I was unwilling to
renew my connection with her; I returned no answer to this letter, and there our correspondence ended.
Perceiving I had taken my resolution, she took hers; and, entering into all the views of Grimm and the
Coterie Holbachique, she united her efforts with theirs to accomplish my destruction. Whilst they
manoevured at Paris, she did the same at Geneva. Grimm, who afterwards went to her there, completed
what  she  had  begun.  Tronchin,  whom  they  had  no  difficulty  in  gaining  over,  seconded  them
powerfully, and became the most violent of my persecutors, without having against me, any more than
Grimm had, the least subject of complaint. They all three spread in silence that of which the effects
were seen there four years afterwards.
  They  had  more  trouble  at  Paris,  where  I  was  better  known  to  the  citizens,  whose  hearts,  less
disposed to hatred, less easily received its impressions. The better to direct their blow, they began by
giving out that it was I who had left them. Thence, still feigning to be my friends, they dexterously
spread their malignant accusations by complaining of the injustice of their friend. Their auditors, thus
thrown off their guard, listened more attentively to what was said of me, and were inclined to blame my
conduct. The secret accusations of perfidy and ingratitude were made with greater precaution, and by
that means with greater effect. I knew they imputed to me the most atrocious crimes without being able
to learn in what these consisted. All I could infer from public rumor was that this was founded upon the
four following capital offences: my retiring to the country; my passion for Madam d'Houdetot; my
refusing to accompany Madam d'Epinay to Geneva, and my leaving the Hermitage. If to these they
added other griefs, they took their measures so well that it has hitherto been impossible for me to learn
the subject of them.
  It is therefore at this period that I think I may fix the establishment of a system, since adopted by
those  by  whom  my  fate  has  been  determined,  and  which  has  made  such  a  progress  as  will  seem
miraculous to persons who know not with what facility everything which favors the malignity of man is
established. I will endeavor to explain in a few words what to me appeared visible in this profound and
obscure system.
  With a name already distinguished and known throughout all Europe, I had still preserved my
primitive  simplicity.  My  mortal  aversion  to  all  party  faction  and  cabal  had  kept  me  free  and
independent, without any other chain than the attachments of my heart. Alone, a stranger, without
family  or  fortune,  and  unconnected  with  everything  except  my  principles  and  duties,  I  intrepidly
followed the paths of uprightness, never flattering or favoring any person at the expense of truth and
justice. Besides, having lived for two years past in solitude, without observing the course of events, I
was unconnected with the affairs of the world, and not informed of what passed, nor desirous of being
acquainted  with  it.  I  lived  four  leagues  from  Paris  as  much  separated  from  that.  capital  by  my
negligence as I should have been in the Island of Tinian by the sea.
  Grimm, Diderot and D'Holbach were, on the contrary, in the centre of the vortex, lived in the great
world, and divided amongst them almost all the spheres of it. The great wits, men of letters, men of
long robe, and women, all listened to them when they chose to act in concert. The advantage three men
in this situation united must have over a fourth in mine, cannot but already appear. It is true Diderot and
D'Holbach were incapable, at least I think so, of forming black conspiracies; one of them was not base
enough, nor the other sufficiently able; but it was for this reason that the party was more united. Grimm
alone formed his plan in his own mind, and discovered more of it than was necessary to induce his
associates to concur in the execution. The ascendency he had gained over them made this quite easy,and the effect of the whole answered to the superiority of his talents.
  It was with these, which were of a superior kind, that, perceiving the advantage he might acquire
from our respective situations, he conceived the project of overturning my reputation, and, without
exposing himself, of giving me one of a nature quite opposite, by raising up about me an edifice of
obscurity which it was impossible for me to penetrate, and by that means throw a light upon his
manoevures and unmask him.
  This enterprise was difficult, because it was necessary to palliate the iniquity in the eyes of those of
whose assistance he stood in need. He had honest men to deceive, to alienate from me the good opinion
of everybody, and to deprive me of all my friends. What say I? He had to cut off all communication
with me, that not a single word of truth might reach my ears. Had a single man of generosity come and
said to me, "You assume the appearance of virtue, yet this is the manner in which you are treated, and
these the circumstances by which you are judged: what have you to say?" truth would have triumphed
and Grimm have been undone. Of this he was fully convinced; but he had examined his own heart and
estimated men according to their merit. I am sorry, for the honor of humanity, that he judged with so
much truth.
  In these dark and crooked paths his steps to be the more sure were necessarily slow. He has for
twelve years pursued his plan and the most difficult part of the execution of it is still to come; this is to
deceive the public entirely. He is afraid of this public, and dares not lay his conspiracy open.
  [Since this was written he has made the dangerous step with the fullest and most inconceivable
success. I am of opinion it was Tronchin who inspired him with courage, and supplied him with the
means.]
  But he has found the easy means of accompanying it with power, and this power has the disposal of
me. Thus supported he advances with less danger. The agents of power piquing themselves but little on
uprightness, and still less on candor, he has no longer the indiscretion of an honest man to fear. His
safety  is  in  my  being  enveloped  in  an  impenetrable  obscurity,  and  in  concealing  from  me  his
conspiracy, well knowing that with whatever art he may have formed it, I could by a single glance of
the eye discover the whole. His great address consists in appearing to favor whilst he defames me, and
in giving to his perfidy an air of generosity.
I felt the first effects of this system by the secret accusations of the Coterie Holbachiens without its
being possible for me to know in what the accusations consisted, or to form a probable conjecture as to
the nature of them. De Leyre informed me in his letters that heinous things were attributed to me.
Diderot more mysteriously told me the same thing, and when I came to an explanation with both, the
whole was reduced to the heads of accusation of which I have already spoken. I perceived a gradual
increase of coolness in the letters from Madam d'Houdetot. This I could not attribute to Saint Lambert;
he continued to write to me with the same friendship, and came to see me after his return. It was also
impossible to think myself the cause of it, as we had separated well satisfied with each other, and
nothing since that time had happened on my part, except my departure from the Hermitage, of which
she felt the necessity. Therefore, not knowing whence this coolness, which she refused to acknowledge,
although my heart was not to be deceived, could proceed, I was uneasy upon every account. I knew she
greatly favored her sister-in-law and Grimm, in consequence of their connections with Saint Lambert;
and  I  was  afraid  of  their  machinations.  This  agitation  opened  my  wounds,  and  rendered  my
correspondence so disagreeable as quite to disgust her with it. I saw, as at a distance, a thousand cruel
circumstances, without discovering anything distinctly. I was in a situation the most insupportable to a
man whose imagination is easily heated. Had I been quite retired from the world, and known nothing of
the matter I should have become more calm; but my heart still clung to attachments, by means of which
my enemies had great advantages over me; and the feeble rays which penetrated my asylum conveyed
to me nothing more than a knowledge of the blackness of the mysteries which were concealed from my
eyes.
I should have sunk, I have not a doubt of it, under these torments, too cruel and insupportable to my
open disposition, which, by the impossibility of concealing my sentiments, makes me fear everythingfrom those concealed from me, if fortunately objects sufficiently interesting to my heart to divert it
from others with which, in spite of myself, my imagination was filled, had not presented themselves. In
the  last  visit  Diderot  paid  me,  at  the  Hermitage,  he  had  spoken  of  the  article  'Geneva',  which
D'Alembert had inserted in the 'Encyclopedie'; he had informed me that this article, concerted with
people of the first consideration, had for object the establishment of a theatre at Geneva, that measures
had been taken accordingly, and that the establishment would soon take place. As Diderot seemed to
think all this very proper, and did not doubt of the success of the measure, and as I had besides to speak
to him upon too many other subjects to touch upon that article, I made him no answer: but scandalized
at these preparatives to corruption and licentiousness in my country, I waited with impatience for the
volume of the 'Encyclopedie', in which the article was inserted; to see whether or not it would be
possible  to  give  an  answer  which  might  ward  off  the  blow.  I  received  the  volume  soon  after  my
establishment at Mont Louis, and found the articles to be written with much art and address, and
worthy of the pen whence it proceeded. This, however, did not abate my desire to answer it, and
notwithstanding the dejection of spirits I then labored under, my griefs and pains, the severity of the
season, and the inconvenience of my new abode, in which I had not yet had time to arrange myself, I
set to work with a zeal which surmounted every obstacle.
  In a severe winter, in the month of February, and in the situation I have described, I went every day,
morning and evening, to pass a couple of hours in an open alcove which was at the bottom of the
garden in which my habitation stood. This alcove, which terminated an alley of a terrace, looked upon
the valley and the pond of Montmorency, and presented to me, as the closing point of a prospect, the
plain but respectable castle of St. Gratien, the retreat of the virtuous Catinat. It was in this place, then,
exposed to freezing cold, that without being sheltered from the wind and snow, and having no other fire
than that in my heart; I composed, in the space of three weeks, my letter to D'Alembert on theatres. It
was in this, for my 'Eloisa' was not then half written, that I found charms in philosophical labor. Until
then virtuous indignation had been a substitute to Apollo, tenderness and a gentleness of mind now
became so. The injustice I had been witness to had irritated me, that of which I became the object
rendered me melancholy; and this melancholy without bitterness was that of a heart too tender and
affectionate, and which, deceived by those in whom it had confided, was obliged to remain concentred.
Full of that which had befallen me, and still affected by so many violent emotions, my heart added the
sentiment of its sufferings to the ideas with which a meditation on my subject had inspired me; what I
wrote bore evident marks of this mixture. Without perceiving it I described the situation I was then in,
gave portraits of Grimm, Madam d'Epinay, Madam d' Houdetot, Saint Lambert and myself. What
delicious tears did I shed as I wrote! Alas! in these descriptions there are proofs but too evident that
love, the fatal love of which I made such efforts to cure myself, still remained in my heart. With all this
there was a certain sentiment of tenderness relative to myself; I thought I was dying, and imagined I bid
the public my last adieu. Far from fearing death, I joyfully saw it approach; but I felt some regret at
leaving my fellow creatures without their having perceived my real merit, and being convinced how
much I should have deserved their esteem had they known me better. These are the secret causes of the
singular manner in which this work, opposite to that of the work by which it was preceded, is written.--
[Discours sur l'Inegalite. Discourse on the Inequality of Mankind.]
I corrected and copied the letter, and was preparing to print it when, after a long silence, I received
one from Madam d'Houdetot, which brought upon me a new affliction more painful than any I had yet
suffered. She informed me that my passion for her was known to all Paris, that I had spoken of it to
persons who had made it public, that this rumor, having reached the ears of her lover, had nearly cost
him his life; yet he did her justice, and peace was restored between them; but on his account, as well as
on hers, and for the sake of her reputation, she thought it her duty to break off all correspondence with
me, at the same time assuring me that she and her friend were both interested in my welfare, that they
would defend me to the public, and that she herself would, from time to time, send to inquire after my
health.
  "And thou also, Diderot," exclaimed I, "unworthy friend!"I could not, however, yet resolve to condemn him. My weakness was known to others who might
have spoken of it. I wished to doubt, but this was soon out of my power. Saint Lambert shortly after
performed an action worthy of himself. Knowing my manner of thinking, he judged of the state in
which I must be; betrayed by one part of my friends and forsaken by the other. He came to see me. The
first time he had not many moments to spare. He came again. Unfortunately, not expecting him, I was
not at home. Theresa had with him a conversation of upwards of two hours, in which they informed
each other of facts of great importance to us all. The surprise with which I learned that nobody doubted
of my having lived with Madam d'Epinay, as Grimm then did, cannot be equalled, except by that of
Saint Lambert, when he was convinced that the rumor was false. He, to the great dissatisfaction of the
lady, was in the same situation with myself, and the eclaircissements resulting from the conversation
removed from me all regret, on account of my having broken with her forever. Relative to Madam
d'Houdetot, he mentioned several circumstances with which neither Theresa nor Madam d'Houdetot
herself were acquainted; these were known to me only in the first instance, and I had never mentioned
them except to Diderot, under the seal of friendship; and it was to Saint Lambert himself to whom he
had chosen to communicate them. This last step was sufficient to determine me. I resolved to break
with Diderot forever, and this without further deliberation, except on the manner of doing it; for I had
perceived secret ruptures turned to my prejudice, because they left the mask of friendship in possession
of my most cruel enemies.
  The rules of good breeding, established in the world on this head, seem to have been dictated by a
spirit of treachery and falsehood. To appear the friend of a man when in reality we are no longer so, is
to reserve to ourselves the means of doing him an injury by surprising honest men into an error. I
recollected that when the illustrious Montesquieu broke with Father de Tournemine, he immediately
said to everybody: "Listen neither to Father Tournemine nor myself, when we speak of each other, for
we are no longer friends." This open and generous proceeding was universally applauded. I resolved to
follow the example with Diderot; but what method was I to take to publish the rupture authentically
from my retreat, and yet without scandal? I concluded on inserting in the form of a note, in my work, a
passage from the book of Ecclesiasticus, which declared the rupture and even the subject of it, in terms
sufficiently clear to such as were acquainted with the previous circumstances, but could signify nothing
to the rest of the world. I determined not to speak in my work of the friend whom I renounced, except
with the honor always due to extinguished friendship. The whole may be seen in the work itself.
  There is nothing in this world but time and misfortune, and every act of courage seems to be a
crime  in  adversity.  For  that  which  has  been  admired  in  Montesquieu,  I  received  only  blame  and
reproach. As soon as my work was printed, and I had copies of it, I sent one to Saint Lambert, who, the
evening before, had written to me in his own name and that of Madam d' Houdetot, a note expressive of
the most tender friendship.
  The following is the letter he wrote to me when he returned the copy I had sent him.
  EAUBONNE, 10th October, 1758.
  "Indeed, sir, I cannot accept the present you have just made me. In that part of your preface where,
relative to Diderot, you quote a passage from Ecclesiastes (he mistakes, it is from Ecclesiasticus) the
book dropped from my hand. In the conversations we had together in the summer, you seemed to be
persuaded Diderot was not guilty of the pretended indiscretions you had imputed to him. You may, for
aught I know to the contrary, have reason to complain of him, but this does not give you a right to
insult him publicly. You are not unacquainted with the nature of the persecutions he suffers, and you
join the voice of an old friend to that of envy. I cannot refrain from telling you, sir, how much this
heinous act of yours has shocked me. I am not acquainted with Diderot, but I honor him, and I have a
lively sense of the pain you give to a man, whom, at least not in my hearing, you have never reproached
with anything more than a trifling weakness. You and I, sir, differ too much in our principles ever to be
agreeable to each other. Forget that I exist; this you will easily do. I have never done to men either good
or evil of a nature to be long remembered. I promise you, sir, to forget your person and to remember
nothing relative to you but your talents."  This letter filled me with indignation and affliction; and, in the excess of my pangs, feeling my
pride wounded, I answered him by the following note:
  MONTMORUNCY, 11th October, 1758.
  "SIR: While reading your letter, I did you the honor to be surprised at it, and had the weakness to
suffer it to affect me; but I find it unworthy of an answer.
  "I will no longer continue the copies of Madam d'Houdetot. If it be not agreeable to her to keep that
she has, she may sent it me back and I will return her money. If she keeps it, she must still send for the
rest of her paper and the money; and at the same time I beg she will return me the prospectus which she
has in her possession. Adieu, sir."
  Courage under misfortune irritates the hearts of cowards, but it is pleasing to generous minds. This
note seemed to make Saint Lambert reflect with himself and to regret his having been so violent; but
too haughty in his turn to make open advances, he seized and perhaps prepared, the opportunity of
palliating what he had done.
  A fortnight afterwards I received from Madam d'Epinay the following letter:
  Thursday, 26th.
  "SIR: I received the book you had the goodness to send me, and which I have read with much
pleasure. I have always experienced the same sentiment in reading all the works which have come from
your pen. Receive my thanks for the whole. I should have returned you these in person had my affairs
permitted me to remain any time in your neighborhood; but I was not this year long at the Chevrette.
M. and Madam Dupin come there on Sunday to dinner. I expect M. de Saint Lambert, M. de Francueil,
and Madam d'Houdetot will be of the party; you will do me much pleasure by making one also. All the
persons who are to dine with me, desire, and will, as well as myself, be delighted to pass with you a
part of the day. I have the honor to be with the most perfect consideration," etc.
  This  letter  made  my  heart  beat  violently;  after  having  for  a  year  past  been  the  subject  of
conversation of all Paris, the idea of presenting myself as a spectacle before Madam d'Houdetot, made
me tremble, and I had much difficulty to find sufficient courage to support that ceremony. Yet as she
and Saint Lambert were desirous of it, and Madam d'Epinay spoke in the name of her guests without
naming one whom I should not be glad to see, I did not think I should expose myself accepting a dinner
to which I was in some degree invited by all the persons who with myself were to partake of it. I
therefore promised to go: on Sunday the weather was bad, and Madam D'Epinay sent me her carriage.
  My arrival caused a sensation. I never met a better reception. An observer would have thought the
whole  company  felt  how  much  I  stood  in  need  of  encouragement.  None  but  French  hearts  are
susceptible of this kind of delicacy. However, I found more people than I expected to see. Amongst
others the Comte d' Houdetot, whom I did not know, and his sister Madam de Blainville, without whose
company I should have been as well pleased. She had the year before came several times to Eaubonne,
and her sister-in-law had left her in our solitary walks to wait until she thought proper to suffer her to
join us. She had harbored a resentment against me, which during this dinner she gratified at her ease.
The presence of the Comte d' Houdetot and Saint Lambert did not give me the laugh on my side, and it
may be judged that a man embarrassed in the most common conversations was not very brilliant in that
which then took place. I never suffered so much, appeared so awkward, or received more unexpected
mortifications. As soon as we had risen from table, I withdrew from that wicked woman; I had the
pleasure of seeing Saint Lambert and Madam de'Houdetot approach me, and we conversed together a
part of the afternoon, upon things very indifferent it is true, but with the same familiarity as before my
involuntary error. This friendly attention was not lost upon my heart, and could Saint Lambert have
read what passed there, he certainly would have been satisfied with it. I can safely assert that although
on my arrival the presence of Madam d'Houdetot gave me the most violent palpitations, on returning
from the house I scarcely thought of her; my mind was entirely taken up with Saint Lambert.
    Notwithstanding the malignant sarcasms of Madam de Blainville, the dinner was of great service to
me, and I congratulated myself upon not having refused the invitation. I not only discovered that the
intrigues  of  Grimm  and  the  Holbachiens  had  not  deprived  me  of  my  old  acquaintance,  but,  whatflattered  me  still  more,  that  Madam  d'Houdetot  and  Saint  Lambert  were  less  changed  than  I  had
imagined, and I at length understood that his keeping her at a distance from me proceeded more from
jealousy than from disesteem. [Such is the simplicity of my heart was my opinion when I wrote these
confessions.]
  This was a consolation to me, and calmed my mind. Certain of not being an object of contempt in
the eyes of persons whom I esteemed, I worked upon my own heart with greater courage and success. If
I did not quite extinguish in it a guilty and an unhappy passion, I at least so well regulated the remains
of it that they have never since that moment led me into the most trifling error. The copies of Madam d'
Houdetot, which she prevailed upon me to take again, and my works, which I continued to send her as
soon as they appeared, produced me from her a few notes and messages, indifferent but obliging. She
did still more, as will hereafter appear, and the reciprocal conduct of her lover and myself, after our
intercourse had ceased, may serve as an example of the manner in which persons of honor separate
when it is no longer agreeable to them to associate with each other.
  Another advantage this dinner procured me was its being spoken of in Paris, where it served as a
refutation of the rumor spread by my enemies, that I had quarrelled with every person who partook of
it, and especially with M. d'Epinay. When I left the Hermitage I had written him a very polite letter of
thanks, to which he answered not less politely, and mutual civilities had continued, as well between us
as between me and M. de la Lalive, his brother-in-law, who even came to see me at Montmorency, and
sent me some of his engravings. Excepting the two sisters-in-law of Madam d'Houdetot, I have never
been on bad terms with any person of the family.
  My letter to D'Alembert had great success. All my works had been very well received, but this was
more favorable to me. It taught the public to guard against the insinuations of the Coterie Holbachique.
When I went to the Hermitage, this Coterie predicted with its usual sufficiency, that I should not remain
there three months. When I had stayed there twenty months, and was obliged to leave it, I still fixed my
residence in the country. The Coterie insisted this was from a motive of pure obstinacy, and that I was
weary even to death of my retirement; but that, eaten up with pride, I chose rather to become a victim
of my stubbornness than to recover from it and return to Paris. The letter to D'Alembert breathed a
gentleness of mind which every one perceived not to be affected. Had I been dissatisfied with my
retreat, my style and manner would have borne evident marks of my ill-humor. This reigned in all the
works I had written in Paris; but in the first I wrote in the country not the least appearance of it was to
be found. To persons who knew how to distinguish, this remark was decisive. They perceived I was
returned to my element.
  Yet the same work, notwithstanding all the mildness it breathed, made me by a mistake of my own
and my usual ill-luck, another enemy amongst men of letters. I had become acquainted with Marmontel
at the house of M. de la Popliniere, and his acquaintance had been continued at that of the baron.
Marmontel at that time wrote the 'Mercure de France'. As I had too much pride to send my works to the
authors  of  periodical  publications,  and  wishing  to  send  him  this  without  his  imagining  it  was  in
consequence of that title, or being desirous he should speak of it in the Mercure, I wrote upon the book
that it was not for the author of the Mercure, but for M. Marmontel. I thought I paid him a fine
compliment; he mistook it for a cruel offence, and became my irreconcilable enemy. He wrote against
the letter with politeness, it is true, but with a bitterness easily perceptible, and since that time has never
lost  an  opportunity  of  injuring  me  in  society,  and  of  indirectly  ill-treating  me  in  his  works.  Such
difficulty is there in managing the irritable self-love of men of letters, and so careful ought every person
to be not to leave anything equivocal in the compliments they pay them.
  Having nothing more to disturb me, I took advantage of my leisure and independence to continue
my literary pursuits with more coherence. I this winter finished my Eloisa, and sent it to Rey, who had
it printed the year following. I was, however, interrupted in my projects by a circumstance sufficiently
disagreeable. I heard new preparations were making at the opera-house to give the 'Devin du Village'.
Enraged at seeing these people arrogantly dispose of my property, I again took up the memoir I had
sent  to  M.  D'Argenson,  to  which  no  answer  had  been  returned,  and  having  made  some  triflingalterations in it, I sent the manuscript by M. Sellon, resident from Geneva, and a letter with which he
was pleased to charge himself, to the Comte de St. Florentin, who had succeeded M. D'Argenson in the
opera  department.  Duclos,  to  whom  I  communicated  what  I  had  done,  mentioned  it  to  the  'petits
violons', who offered to restore me, not my opera, but my freedom of the theatre, which I was no longer
in a situation to enjoy. Perceiving I had not from any quarter the least justice to expect, I gave up the
affair;  and  the  directors  of  the  opera,  without  either  answering  or  listening  to  my  reasons,  have
continued to dispose as of their own property, and to turn to their profit, the Devin du Village, which
incontestably belong to nobody but myself.
  Since I had shaken off the yoke of my tyrants, I led a life sufficiently agreeable and peaceful;
deprived of the charm of too strong attachments I was delivered from the weight of their chains.
Disgusted with the friends who pretended to be my protectors, and wished absolutely to dispose of me
at will, and in spite of myself, to subject me to their pretended good services, I resolved in future to
have no other connections than those of simple benevolence. These, without the least constraint upon
liberty, constitute the pleasure of society, of which equality is the basis. I had of them as many as were
necessary to enable me to taste of the charm of liberty without being subject to the dependence of it;
and as soon as I had made an experiment of this manner of life, I felt it was the most proper to my age,
to end my days in peace, far removed from the agitations, quarrels and cavillings in which I had just
been half submerged.
  During my residence at the Hermitage, and after my settlement at Montmorency, I had made in the
neighborhood some agreeable acquaintance, and which did not subject me to any inconvenience. The
principal of these was young Loiseau de Mauleon, who, then beginning to plead at the bar, did not yet
know what rank he would one day hold there. I for my part was not in the least doubt about the matter.
I soon pointed out to him the illustrious career in the midst of which he is now seen, and predicted that,
if he laid down to himself rigid rules for the choice of causes, and never became the defender of
anything but virtue and justice, his genius, elevated by this sublime sentiment, would be equal to that of
the greatest orators. He followed my advice, and now feels the good effects of it. His defence of M. de
Portes is worthy of Demosthenes. He came every year within a quarter of a league of the Hermitage to
pass the vacation at St. Brice, in the fife of Mauleon, belonging to his mother, and where the great
Bossuet had formerly lodged. This is a fief, of which a like succession of proprietors would render
nobility difficult to support.
I had also for a neighbor in the same village of St. Brice, the bookseller Guerin, a man of wit,
learning, of an amiable disposition, and one of the first in his profession. He brought me acquainted
with Jean Neaulme, bookseller of Amsterdam, his friend and correspondent, who afterwards printed
Emilius.
I had another acquaintance still nearer than St. Brice, this was M. Maltor, vicar of Groslay, a man
better adapted for the functions of a statesman and a minister, than for those of the vicar of a village,
and to whom a diocese at least would have been given to govern if talents decided the disposal of
places. He had been secretary to the Comte de Luc, and was formerly intimately acquainted with Jean
Bapiste Rousseau. Holding in as much esteem the memory of that illustrious exile, as he held the villain
who ruined him in horror; he possessed curious anecdotes of both, which Segur had not inserted in the
life, still in manuscript, of the former, and he assured me that the Comte de Luc, far from ever having
had  reason  to  complain  of  his  conduct,  had  until  his  last  moment  preserved  for  him  the  warmest
friendship. M. Maltor, to whom M. de Vintimille gave this retreat after the death of his patron, had
formerly been employed in many affairs of which, although far advanced in years, he still preserved a
distinct remembrance, and reasoned upon them tolerably well. His conversation, equally amusing and
instructive, had nothing in it resembling that of a village pastor: he joined the manners of a man of the
world to the knowledge of one who passes his life in study. He, of all my permanent neighbors, was the
person whose society was the most agreeable to me.
I was also acquainted at Montmorency with several fathers of the oratory, and amongst others
Father  Berthier,  professor  of  natural  philosophy;  to  whom,  notwithstanding  some  little  tincture  ofpedantry, I become attached on account of a certain air of cordial good nature which I observed in him.
I had, however, some difficulty to reconcile this great simplicity with the desire and the art he had of
everywhere thrusting himself into the company of the great, as well as that of the women, devotees, and
philosophers. He knew how to accommodate himself to every one. I was greatly pleased with the man,
and spoke of my satisfaction to all my other acquaintances. Apparently what I said of him came to his
ear. He one day thanked me for having thought him a good-natured man. I observed something in his
forced smile which, in my eyes, totally changed his physiognomy, and which has since frequently
occurred to my mind. I cannot better compare this smile than to that of Panurge purchasing the Sheep
of Dindenaut. Our acquaintance had begun a little time after my arrival at the Hermitage, to which
place he frequently came to see me. I was already settled at Montmorency when he left it to go and
reside at Paris. He often saw Madam le Vasseur there. One day, when I least expected anything of the
kind, he wrote to me in behalf of that woman, informing me that Grimm offered to maintain her, and to
ask my permission to accept the offer. This I understood consisted in a pension of three hundred livres,
and that Madam le Vasseur was to come and live at Deuil, between the Chevrette and Montmorency. I
will not say what impression the application made on me. It would have been less surprising had
Grimm had ten thousand livres a year, or any relation more easy to comprehend with that woman, and
had not such a crime been made of my taking her to the country, where, as if she had become younger,
he was now pleased to think of placing her. I perceived the good old lady had no other reason for
asking my permission, which she might easily have done without, but the fear of losing what I already
gave her, should I think ill of the step she took. Although this charity appeared to be very extraordinary,
it  did  not  strike  me  so  much  then  as  afterwards.  But  had  I  known  even  everything  I  have  since
discovered, I should still as readily have given my consent as I did and was obliged to do, unless I had
exceeded the offer of M. Grimm. Father Berthier afterwards cured me a little of my opinion of his good
nature and cordiality, with which I had so unthinkingly charged him.
  This same Father Berthier was acquainted with two men, who, for what reason I know not, were to
become so with me; there was but little similarity between their taste and mine. They were the children
of  Melchisedec,  of  whom  neither  the  country  nor  the  family  was  known,  no  more  than,  in  all
probability, the real name. They were Jansenists, and passed for priests in disguise, perhaps on account
of their ridiculous manner of wearing long swords, to which they appeared to have been fastened. The
prodigious mystery in all their proceedings gave them the appearance of the heads of a party, and I
never  had  the  least  doubt  of  their  being  the  authors  of  the  'Gazette  Ecclesiastique'.  The  one,  tall,
smooth-tongued, and sharping, was named Ferrand; the other, short, squat, a sneerer, and punctilious,
was a M. Minard. They called each other cousin. They lodged at Paris with D'Alembert, in the house of
his  nurse  named  Madam  Rousseau,  and  had  taken  at  Montmorency  a  little  apartment  to  pass  the
summers there. They did everything for themselves, and had neither a servant nor runner; each had his
turn weekly to purchase provisions, do the business of the kitchen, and sweep the house. They managed
tolerably well, and we sometimes ate with each other. I know not for what reason they gave themselves
any concern about me: for my part, my only motive for beginning an acquaintance with them was their
playing at chess, and to make a poor little party I suffered four hours' fatigue. As they thrust themselves
into all companies, and wished to intermeddle in everything, Theresa called them the gossips, and by
this name they were long known at Montmorency.
  Such, with my host M. Mathas, who was a good man, were my principal country acquaintance. I
still had a sufficient number at Paris to live there agreeably whenever I chose it, out of the sphere of
men of letters, amongst whom Duclos, was the only friend I reckoned: for De Levre was still too
young, and although, after having been a witness to the manoeuvres of the philosophical tribe against
me, he had withdrawn from it, at least I thought so, I could not yet forget the facility with which he
made himself the mouthpiece of all the people of that description.
  In the first place I had my old and respectable friend Roguin. This was a good old-fashioned friend
for whom I was not indebted to my writings but to myself, and whom for that reason I have always
preserved. I had the good Lenieps, my countryman, and his daughter, then alive, Madam Lambert. I hada young Genevese, named Coindet, a good creature, careful, officious, zealous, who came to see me
soon after I had gone to reside at the Hermitage, and, without any other introducer than himself, had
made his way into my good graces. He had a taste for drawing, and was acquainted with artists. He was
of  service  to  me  relative  to  the  engravings  of  the  New  Eloisa;  he  undertook  the  direction  of  the
drawings and the plates, and acquitted himself well of the commission.
I had free access to the house of M. Dupin, which, less brilliant than in the young days of Madam
Dupin, was still, by the merit of the heads of the family, and the choice of company which assembled
there, one of the best houses in Paris. As I had not preferred anybody to them, and had separated myself
from their society to live free and independent, they had always received me in a friendly manner, and I
was always certain of being well received by Madam Dupin. I might even have counted her amongst
my country neighbors after her establishment at Clichy, to which place I sometimes went to pass a day
or two, and where I should have been more frequently had Madam Dupin and Madam de Chenonceaux
been upon better terms. But the difficulty of dividing my time in the same house between two women
whose manner of thinking was unfavorable to each other, made this disagreeable: however I had the
pleasure of seeing her more at my ease at Deuil, where, at a trifling distance from me, she had taken a
small house, and even at my own habitation, where she often came to see me.
I had likewise for a friend Madam de Crequi, who, having become devout, no longer received
D'Alembert,  Marmontel,  nor  a  single  man  of  letters,  except,  I  believe  the  Abbe  Trublet,  half  a
hypocrite, of whom she was weary. I, whose acquaintance she had sought lost neither her good wishes
nor intercourse. She sent me young fat pullets from Mons, and her intention was to come and see me
the year following had not a journey, upon which Madam de Luxembourg determined, prevented her. I
here owe her a place apart; she will always hold a distinguished one in my remembrance.
  In this list I should also place a man whom, except Roguin, I ought to have mentioned as the first
upon it; my old friend and brother politician, De Carrio, formerly titulary secretary to the embassy from
Spain to Venice, afterwards in Sweden, where he was charge des affaires, and at length really secretary
to the embassy from Spain at Paris. He came and surprised me at Montmorency when I least expected
him. He was decorated with the insignia of a Spanish order, the name of which I have forgotten, with a
fine cross in jewelry. He had been obliged, in his proofs of nobility, to add a letter to his name, and to
bear that of the Chevalier de Carrion. I found him still the same man, possessing the same excellent
heart, and his mind daily improving, and becoming more and more amiable. We would have renewed
our former intimacy had not Coindet interposed according to custom, taken advantage of the distance I
was  at  from  town  to  insinuate  himself  into  my  place,  and,  in  my  name,  into  his  confidence,  and
supplant me by the excess of his zeal to render me services.
  The remembrance of Carrion makes me recollect one of my country neighbors, of whom I should
be inexcusable not to speak, as I have to make confession of an unpardonable neglect of which I was
guilty towards him: this was the honest M. le Blond, who had done me a service at Venice, and, having
made an excursion to France with his family, had taken a house in the country, at Birche, not far from
Montmorency.
  [When I wrote this, full of my blind confidence, I was far from suspecting the real motive and the
effect of his journey to Paris.]
  As soon as I heard he was my neighbor, I, in the joy of my heart, and making it more a pleasure
than a duty, went to pay him a visit. I set off upon this errand the next day. I was met by people who
were coming to see me, and with whom I was obliged to return. Two days afterwards I set off again for
the same purpose: he had dined at Paris with all his family. A third time he was at home: I heard the
voice of women, and saw, at the door, a coach which alarmed me. I wished to see him, at least for the
first time, quite at my ease, that we might talk over what had passed during our former connection.
  In fine, I so often postponed my visit from day to day, that the shame of discharging a like duty so
late prevented me from doing it at all; after having dared to wait so long, I no longer dared to present
myself. This negligence, at which M. le Blond could not but be justly offended, gave, relative to him,
the appearance of ingratitude to my indolence, and yet I felt my heart so little culpable that, had it beenin my power to do M. le Blond the least service, even unknown to himself, I am certain he would not
have found me idle. But indolence, negligence and delay in little duties to be fulfilled have been more
prejudicial to me than great vices. My greatest faults have been omissions: I have seldom done what I
ought not to have done, and unfortunately it has still more rarely happened that I have done what I
ought.
  Since I am now upon the subject of my Venetian acquaintance, I must not forget one which I still
preserved  for  a  considerable  time  after  my  intercourse  with  the  rest  had  ceased.  This  was  M.  de
Joinville, who continued after his return from Genoa to show me much friendship. He was fond of
seeing me and of conversing with me upon the affairs of Italy, and the follies of M. de Montaigu, of
whom he of himself knew many anecdotes, by means of his acquaintance in the office for foreign
affairs in which he was much connected. I had also the pleasure of seeing at my house my old comrade
Dupont who had purchased a place in the province of which he was, and whose affairs had brought him
to Paris. M. de Joinville became by degrees so desirous of seeing me, that he in some measure laid me
under constraint; and, although our places of residence were at a great distance from each other, we had
a friendly quarrel when I let a week pass without going to dine with him. When he went to Joinville he
was always desirous of my accompanying him; but having once been there to pass a week I had not the
least desire to return. M. de Joinville was certainly an honest man, and even amiable in certain respects
but  his  understanding  was  beneath  mediocrity;  he  was  handsome,  rather  fond  of  his  person  and
tolerably fatiguing. He had one of the most singular collections perhaps in the world, to which he gave
much of his attention and endeavored to acquire it that of his friends, to whom it sometimes afforded
less amusement than it did to himself. This was a complete collection of songs of the court and Paris for
upwards of fifty years past, in which many anecdotes were to be found that would have been sought for
in vain elsewhere. These are memoirs for the history of France, which would scarcely be thought of in
any other country.
  One day, whilst we were still upon the very best terms, he received me so coldly and in a manner so
different from that which was customary to him, that after having given him an opportunity to explain,
and even having begged him to do it, I left his house with a resolution, in which I have persevered,
never to return to it again; for I am seldom seen where I have been once ill received, and in this case
there was no Diderot who pleaded for M. de Joinville. I vainly endeavored to discover what I had done
to offend him; I could not recollect a circumstance at which he could possibly have taken offence. I was
certain of never having spoken of him or his in any other than in the most honorable manner; for he had
acquired my friendship, and besides my having nothing but favorable things to say of him, my most
inviolable  maxim  has  been  that  of  never  speaking  but  in  an  honorable  manner  of  the  houses  I
frequented.
  At length, by continually ruminating. I formed the following conjecture: the last time we had seen
each other, I had supped with him at the apartment of some girls of his acquaintance, in company with
two or three clerks in the office of foreign affairs, very amiable men, and who had neither the manner
nor appearance of libertines; and on my part, I can assert that the whole evening passed in making
melancholy  reflections  on  the  wretched  fate  of  the  creatures  with  whom  we  were.  I  did  not  pay
anything, as M. de Joinville gave the supper, nor did I make the girls the least present, because I gave
them not the opportunity I had done to the padoana of establishing a claim to the trifle I might have
offered, We all came away together, cheerfully and upon very good terms. Without having made a
second visit to the girls, I went three or four days afterwards to dine with M. de Joinville, whom I had
not seen during that interval, and who gave me the reception of which I have spoken. Unable to
suppose any other cause for it than some misunderstanding relative to the supper, and perceiving he had
no inclination to explain, I resolved to visit him no longer, but I still continued to send him my works:
he frequently sent me his compliments, and one evening, meeting him in the green-room of the French
theatre, he obligingly reproached me with not having called to see him, which, however, did not induce
me to depart from my resolution. Therefore this affair had rather the appearance of a coolness than a
rupture. However, not having heard of nor seen him since that time, it would have been too late after anabsence of several years, to renew my acquaintance with him. It is for this reason M. de Joinville is not
named in my list, although I had for a considerable time frequented his house.
I will not swell my catalogue with the names of many other persons with whom I was or had
become less intimate, although I sometimes saw them in the country, either at my own house or that of
some neighbor, such for instance as the Abbes de Condillac and De Malby, M. de Mairan, De la Lalive,
De Boisgelou, Vatelet, Ancelet, and others. I will also pass lightly over that of M. de Margency,
gentleman in ordinary of the king, an ancient member of the 'Coterie Holbachique', which he had
quitted as well as myself, and the old friend of Madam d'Epinay from whom he had separated as I had
done; I likewise consider that of M. Desmahis, his friend, the celebrated but short-lived author of the
comedy of the Impertinent, of much the same importance. The first was my neighbor in the country, his
estate at Margency being near to Montmorency. We were old acquaintances, but the neighborhood and
a certain conformity of experience connected us still more. The last died soon afterwards. He had merit
and even wit, but he was in some degree the original of his comedy, and a little of a coxcomb with
women, by whom he was not much regretted.
I cannot, however, omit taking notice of a new correspondence I entered into at this period, which
has had too much influence over the rest of my life not to make it necessary for me to mark its origin.
The person in question is De Lamoignon de Malesherbes of the 'Cour des aides', then censor of books,
which office he exercised with equal intelligence and mildness, to the great satisfaction of men of
letters. I had not once been to see him at Paris; yet I had never received from him any other than the
most obliging condescensions relative to the censorship, and I knew that he had more than once very
severely reprimanded persons who had written against me. I had new proofs of his goodness upon the
subject of the edition of Eloisa. The proofs of so great a work being very expensive from Amsterdam
by post, he, to whom all letters were free, permitted these to be addressed to him, and sent them to me
under the countersign of the chancellor his father. When the work was printed he did not permit the sale
of it in the kingdom until, contrary to my wishes an edition had been sold for my benefit. As the profit
of this would on my part have been a theft committed upon Rey, to whom I had sold the manuscript, I
not only refused to accept the present intended me, without his consent, which he very generously gave,
but persisted upon dividing with him the hundred pistoles (a thousand livres--forty pounds), the amount
of it but of which he would not receive anything. For these hundred pistoles I had the mortification,
against which M. de Malesherbes had not guarded me, of seeing my work horribly mutilated, and the
sale of the good edition stopped until the bad one was entirely disposed of.
I have always considered M. de Malesherbes as a man whose uprightness was proof against every
temptation. Nothing that has happened has even made me doubt for a moment of his probity; but, as
weak as he is polite, he sometimes injures those he wishes to serve by the excess of his zeal to preserve
them from evil. He not only retrenched a hundred pages in the edition of Paris, but he made another
retrenchment, which no person but the author could permit himself to do, in the copy of the good
edition he sent to Madam de Pompadour. It is somewhere said in that work that the wife of a coal-
heaver is more respectable than the mistress of a prince. This phrase had occurred to me in the warmth
of composition without any application. In reading over the work I perceived it would be applied, yet in
consequence of the very imprudent maxim I had adopted of not suppressing anything, on account of the
application which might be made, when my conscience bore witness to me that I had not made them at
the time I wrote, I determined not to expunge the phrase, and contented myself with substituting the
word  Prince  to  King,  which  I  had  first  written.  This  softening  did  not  seem  sufficient  to  M.  de
Malesherbes: he retrenched the whole expression in a new sheet which he had printed on purpose and
stuck in between the other with as much exactness as possible in the copy of Madam de Pompadour.
She was not ignorant of this manoeuvre. Some good-natured people took the trouble to inform her of it.
For my part, it was not until a long time afterwards, and when I began to feel the consequences of it,
that the matter came to my knowledge.
  Is not this the origin of the concealed but implacable hatred of another lady who was in a like
situation, without my knowing it, or even being acquainted with her person when I wrote the passage?When the book was published the acquaintance was made, and I was very uneasy. I mentioned this to
the Chevalier de Lorenzy, who laughed at me, and said the lady was so little offended that she had not
even taken notice of the matter. I believed him, perhaps rather too lightly, and made myself easy when
there was much reason for my being otherwise.
  At the beginning of the winter I received an additional mark of the goodness of M. de Malesherbes
of which I was very sensible, although I did not think proper to take advantage of it. A place was vacant
in the 'Journal des Savans'. Margency wrote to me, proposing to me the place, as from himself. But I
easily perceived from the manner of the letter that he was dictated to and authorized; he afterwards told
me he had been desired to make me the offer. The occupations of this place were but trifling. All I
should have had to do would have been to make two abstracts a month, from the books brought to me
for  that  purpose,  without  being  under  the  necessity  of  going  once  to  Paris,  not  even  to  pay  the
magistrate a visit of thanks. By this employment I should have entered a society of men of letters of the
first merit; M. de Mairan, Clairaut, De Guignes and the Abbe Barthelemi, with the first two of whom I
had already made an acquaintance, and that of the two others was very desirable. In fine, for this trifling
employment, the duties of which I might so commodiously have discharged, there was a salary of eight
hundred livres (thirty-three pounds); I was for a few hours undecided, and this from a fear of making
Margency angry and displeasing M. de Malesherbes. But at length the insupportable constraint of not
having it in my power to work when I thought proper, and to be commanded by time; and moreover the
certainty  of  badly  performing  the  functions  with  which  I  was  to  charge  myself,  prevailed  over
everything, and determined me to refuse a place for which I was unfit. I knew that my whole talent
consisted in a certain warmth of mind with respect to the subjects of what I had to treat, and that
nothing but the love of that which was great, beautiful and sublime, could animate my genius. What
would the subjects of the extracts I should have had to make from books, or even the books themselves,
have signified to me? My indifference about them would have frozen my pen, and stupefied my mind.
People thought I could make a trade of writing, as most of the other men of letters did, instead of which
I never could write but from the warmth of imagination. This certainly was not necessary for the
'Journal des Savans'. I therefore wrote to Margency a letter of thanks, in the politest terms possible, and
so well explained to him my reasons, that it was not possible that either he or M. de Malesherbes could
imagine there was pride or ill-humor in my refusal. They both approved of it without receiving me less
politely, and the secret was so well kept that it was never known to the public.
  The proposition did not come in a favorable moment. I had some time before this formed the
project of quitting literature, and especially the trade of an author. I had been disgusted with men of
letters by everything that had lately befallen me, and had learned from experience that it was impossible
to  proceed  in  the  same  track  without  having  some  connections  with  them.  I  was  not  much  less
dissatisfied with men of the world, and in general with the mixed life I had lately led, half to myself and
half devoted to societies for which I was unfit. I felt more than ever, and by constant experience, that
every unequal association is disadvantageous to the weaker person. Living with opulent people, and in
a situation different from that I had chosen, without keeping a house as they did, I was obliged to
imitate them in many things; and little expenses, which were nothing to their fortunes, were for me not
less ruinous than indispensable. Another man in the country-house of a friend, is served by his own
servant, as well at table as in his chamber; he sends him to seek for everything he wants; having
nothing directly to do with the servants of the house, not even seeing them, he gives them what he
pleases, and when he thinks proper; but I, alone, and without a servant, was at the mercy of the servants
of the house, of whom it was necessary to gain the good graces, that I might not have much to suffer;
and being treated as the equal of their master, I was obliged to treat them accordingly, and better than
another would have done, because, in fact, I stood in greater need of their services. This, where there
are but few domestics, may be complied with; but in the houses I frequented there were a great number,
and the knaves so well understood their interests that they knew how to make me want the services of
them  all  successively.  The  women  of  Paris,  who  have  so  much  wit,  have  no  just  idea  of  this
inconvenience, and in their zeal to economize my purse they ruined me. If I supped in town, at anyconsiderable distance from my lodgings, instead of permitting me to send for a hackney coach, the
mistress of the house ordered her horses to be put to and sent me home in her carriage. She was very
glad to save me the twenty-four sous (shilling) for the fiacre, but never thought of the half-crown I gave
to her coachman and footman. If a lady wrote to me from Paris to the Hermit age or to Montmorency,
she regretted the four sous (two pence) the postage of the letter would have cost me, and sent it by one
of her servants, who came sweating on foot, and to whom I gave a dinner and half a crown, which he
certainly had well earned. If she proposed to me to pass with her a week or a fortnight at her country-
house, she still said to herself, "It will be a saving to the poor man; during that time his eating will cost
him nothing." She never recollected that I was the whole time idle, that the expenses of my family, my
rent, linen and clothes were still going on, that I paid my barber double that it cost me more being in
her  house  than  in  my  own,  and  although  I  confined  my  little  largesses  to  the  house  in  which  I
customarily lived, that these were still ruinous to me. I am certain I have paid upwards of twenty-five
crowns in the house of Madam d'Houdetot, at Raubonne, where I never slept more than four or five
times, and upwards of a thousand livres (forty pounds) as well at Epinay as at the Chevrette, during the
five or six years I was most assiduous there. These expenses are inevitable to a man like me, who
knows not how to provide anything for himself, and cannot support the sight of a lackey who grumbles
and serves him with a sour look. With Madam Dupin, even where I was one of the family, and in
whose house I rendered many services to the servants, I never received theirs but for my money. In
course  of  time  it  was  necessary  to  renounce  these  little  liberalities,  which  my  situation  no  longer
permitted me to bestow, and I felt still more severely the inconvenience of associating with people in a
situation different from my own.
  Had this manner of life been to my taste, I should have been consoled for a heavy expense, which I
dedicated  to  my  pleasures;  but  to  ruin  myself  at  the  same  time  that  I  fatigued  my  mind,  was
insupportable, and I had so felt the weight of this, that, profiting by the interval of liberty I then had, I
was determined to perpetuate it, and entirely to renounce great companies, the composition of books,
and all literary concerns, and for the remainder of my days to confine myself to the narrow and peaceful
sphere in which I felt I was born to move.
  The produce of this letter to D'Alembert, and of the New Elosia, had a little improved the state of
my finances, which had been considerably exhausted at the Hermitage. Emilius, to which, after I had
finished Eloisa, I had given great application, was in forwardness, and the produce of this could not be
less than the sum of which I was already in possession. I intended to place this money in such a manner
as to produce me a little annual income, which, with my copying, might be sufficient to my wants
without writing any more. I had two other works upon the stocks. The first of these was my 'Institutions
Politiques'. I examined the state of this work, and found it required several years' labor. I had not
courage enough to continue it, and to wait until it was finished before I carried my intentions into
execution. Therefore, laying the book aside, I determined to take from it all I could, and to burn the
rest; and continuing this with zeal without interrupting Emilius, I finished the 'Contrat Social'.
  The dictionary of music now remained. This was mechanical, and might be taken up at any time;
the object of it was entirely pecuniary. I reserved to myself the liberty of laying it aside, or of finishing
it at my ease, according as my other resources collected should render this necessary or superfluous.
With respect to the 'Morale Sensitive', of which I had made nothing more than a sketch, I entirely gave
it up.
  As my last project, if I found I could not entirely do without copying, was that of removing from
Paris, where the affluence of my visitors rendered my housekeeping expensive, and deprived me of the
time I should have turned to advantage to provide for it; to prevent in my retirement the state of
lassitude into which an author is said to fall when he has laid down his pen, I reserved to myself an
occupation which might fill up the void in my solitude without tempting me to print anything more. I
know not for what reason they had long tormented me to write the memoirs of my life. Although these
were not until that time interesting as to the facts, I felt they might become so by the candor with which
I was capable of giving them, and I determined to make of these the only work of the kind, by anunexampled veracity, that, for once at least, the world might see a man such as he internally was. I had
always laughed at the false ingenuousness of Montaigne, who, feigning to confess his faults, takes great
care not to give himself any, except such as are amiable; whilst I, who have ever thought, and still think
myself, considering everything, the best of men, felt there is no human being, however pure he maybe,
who does not internally conceal some odious vice. I knew I was described to the public very different
from what I really was, and so opposite, that notwithstanding my faults, all of which I was determined
to relate, I could not but be a gainer by showing myself in my proper colors. This, besides, not being to
be done without setting forth others also in theirs and the work for the same reason not being of a
nature to appear during my lifetime, and that of several other persons, I was the more encouraged to
make my confession, at which I should never have to blush before any person. I therefore resolved to
dedicate my leisure to the execution of this undertaking, and immediately began to collect such letters
and papers as might guide or assist my memory, greatly regretting the loss of all I had burned, mislaid
and destroyed.
  The project of absolute retirement, one of the most reasonable I had ever formed, was strongly
impressed upon my mind, and for the execution of it I was already taking measures, when Heaven,
which prepared me a different destiny, plunged me into a another vortex.
    Montmorency, the ancient and fine patrimony of the illustrious family of that name, was taken from
it by confiscation. It passed by the sister of Duke Henry, to the house of Conde, which has changed the
name of Montmorency to that of Enguien, and the duchy has no other castle than an old tower, where
the archives are kept, and to which the vassals come to do homage. But at Montmorency, or Enguien,
there is a private house, built by Crosat, called 'le pauvre', which having the magnificence of the most
superb chateaux, deserves and bears the name of a castle. The majestic appearance of this noble edifice,
the view from it, not equalled perhaps in any country; the spacious saloon, painted by the hand of a
master;  the  garden,  planted  by  the  celebrated  Le  Notre;  all  combined  to  form  a  whole  strikingly
majestic,  in  which  there  is  still  a  simplicity  that  enforces  admiration.  The  Marechal  Duke  de
Luxembourg who then inhabited this house, came every year into the neighborhood where formerly his
ancestors were the masters, to pass, at least, five or six weeks as a private inhabitant, but with a
splendor which did not degenerate from the ancient lustre of his family. On the first journey he made to
it  after  my  residing  at  Montmorency,  he  and  his  lady  sent  to  me  a  valet  de  chambre,  with  their
compliments, inviting me to sup with them as often as it should be agreeable to me; and at each time of
their coming they never failed to reiterate the same compliments and invitation. This called to my
recollection Madam Beuzenval sending me to dine in the servants' hall. Times were changed; but I was
still the same man. I did not choose to be sent to dine in the servants' hall, and was but little desirous of
appearing at the table of the great I should have been much better pleased had they left me as I was,
without caressing me and rendering me ridiculous. I answered politely and respectfully to Monsieur and
Madam de Luxembourg, but I did not accept their offers, and my indisposition and timidity, with my
embarrassment in speaking; making me tremble at the idea alone of appearing in an assembly of people
of  the  court.  I  did  not  even  go  to  the  castle  to  pay  a  visit  of  thanks,  although  I  sufficiently
comprehended this was all they desired, and that their eager politeness was rather a matter of curiosity
than benevolence.
  However, advances still were made, and even became more pressing. The Countess de Boufflers,
who was very intimate with the lady of the marechal, sent to inquire after my health, and to beg I would
go and see her. I returned her a proper answer, but did not stir from my house. At the journey of Easter,
the year following, 1759, the Chevalier de Lorenzy, who belonged to the court of the Prince of Conti,
and  was  intimate  with  Madam  de  Luxembourg,  came  several  times  to  see  me,  and  we  became
acquainted; he pressed me to go to the castle, but I refused to comply. At length, one afternoon, when I
least expected anything of the kind, I saw coming up to the house the Marechal de Luxembourg,
followed by five or six persons. There was now no longer any means of defence; and I could not,
without being arrogant and unmannerly, do otherwise than return this visit, and make my court to
Madam la Marechale, from whom the marechal had been the bearer of the most obliging complimentsto me. Thus, under unfortunate auspices, began the connections from which I could no longer preserve
myself, although a too well-founded foresight made me afraid of them until they were made.
I was excessively afraid of Madam de Luxembourg. I knew, she was amiable as to manner. I had
seen her several times at the theatre, and with the Duchess of Boufflers, and in the bloom of her beauty;
but she was said to be malignant; and this in a woman of her rank made me tremble. I had scarcely seen
her before I was subjugated. I thought her charming, with that charm proof against time and which had
the  most  powerful  action  upon  my  heart.  I  expected  to  find  her  conversation  satirical  and  full  of
pleasantries and points. It was not so; it was much better. The conversation of Madam de Luxembourg
is not remarkably full of wit; it has no sallies, nor even finesse; it is exquisitely delicate, never striking,
but  always  pleasing.  Her  flattery  is  the  more  intoxicating  as  it  is  natural;  it  seems  to  escape  her
involuntarily, and her heart to overflow because it is too full. I thought I perceived, on my first visit,
that notwithstanding my awkward manner and embarrassed expression, I was not displeasing to her. All
the women of the court know how to persuade us of this when they please, whether it be true or not, but
they do not all, like Madam de Luxembourg, possess the art of rendering that persuasion so agreeable
that we are no longer disposed ever to have a doubt remaining. From the first day my confidence in her
would have been as full as it soon afterwards became, had not the Duchess of Montmorency, her
daughter-in-law, young, giddy, and malicious also, taken it into her head to attack me, and in the midst
of the eulogiums of her mamma, and feigned allurements on her own account, made me suspect I was
only considered by them as a subject of ridicule.
  It would perhaps have been difficult to relieve me from this fear with these two ladies had not the
extreme goodness of the marechal confirmed me in the belief that theirs was not real. Nothing is more
surprising, considering my timidity, than the promptitude with which I took him at his word on the
footing of equality to which he would absolutely reduce himself with me, except it be that with which
he took me at mine with respect to the absolute independence in which I was determined to live. Both
persuaded I had reason to be content with my situation, and that I was unwilling to change it, neither he
nor Madam de Luxembourg seemed to think a moment of my purse or fortune; although I can have no
doubt of the tender concern they had for me, they never proposed to me a place nor offered me their
interest, except it were once, when Madam de Luxembourg seemed to wish me to become a member of
the French Academy. I alleged my religion; this she told me was no obstacle, or if it was one she
engaged to remove it. I answered, that however great the honor of becoming a member of so illustrious
a body might be, having refused M. de Tressan, and, in some measure, the King of Poland, to become a
member  of  the  Academy  at  Nancy,  I  could  not  with  propriety  enter  into  any  other.  Madam  de
Luxembourg did not insist, and nothing more was said upon the subject. This simplicity of intercourse
with persons of such rank, and who had the power of doing anything in my favor, M. de Luxembourg
being, and highly deserving to be, the particular friend of the king, affords a singular contrast with the
continual cares, equally importunate and officious, of the friends and protectors from whom I had just
separated, and who endeavored less to serve me than to render me contemptible.
  When the marechal came to see me at Mont Louis, I was uneasy at receiving him and his retinue in
my only chamber; not because I was obliged to make them all sit down in the midst of my dirty plates
and broken pots, but on account of the state of the floor, which was rotten and falling to ruin, and I was
afraid the weight of his attendants would entirely sink it. Less concerned on account of my own danger
than for that to which the affability of the marechal exposed him, I hastened to remove him from it by
conducting him, notwithstanding the coldness of the weather, to my alcove, which was quite open to
the air, and had no chimney. When he was there I told him my reason for having brought him to it; he
told it to his lady, and they both pressed me to accept, until the floor was repaired, a lodging of the
castle; or, if I preferred it, in a separate edifice called the Little Castle which was in the middle of the
park. This delightful abode deserves to be spoken of.
  The  park  or  garden  of  Montmorency  is  not  a  plain,  like  that  of  the  Chevrette.  It  is  uneven,
mountainous, raised by little hills and valleys, of which the able artist has taken advantage; and thereby
varied his groves, ornaments, waters, and points of view, and, if I may so speak, multiplied by art andgenius a space in itself rather narrow. This park is terminated at the top by a terrace and the castle; at
bottom it forms a narrow passage which opens and becomes wider towards the valley, the angle of
which is filled up with a large piece of water. Between the orangery, which is in this widening, and the
piece of water, the banks of which are agreeably decorated, stands the Little Castle of which I have
spoken.  This  edifice,  and  the  ground  about  it,  formerly  belonged  to  the  celebrated  Le  Brun,  who
amused himself in building and decorating it in the exquisite taste of architectual ornaments which that
great painter had formed to himself. The castle has since been rebuilt, but still, according to the plan
and design of its first master. It is little and simple, but elegant. As it stands in a hollow between the
orangery and the large piece of water, and consequently is liable to be damp, it is open in the middle by
a peristyle between two rows of columns, by which means the air circulating throughout the whole
edifice keeps it dry, notwithstanding its unfavorable situation. When the building is seen from the
opposite elevation, which is a point of view, it appears absolutely surrounded with water, and we
imagine we have before our eyes an enchanted island, or the most beautiful of the three Boromeans,
called Isola Bella, in the greater lake.
  In this solitary edifice I was offered the choice of four complete apartments it contains, besides the
ground floor, consisting of a dancing room, billiard room and a kitchen. I chose the smallest over the
kitchen, which also I had with it. It was charmingly neat, with blue and white furniture. In this profound
and delicious solitude, in the midst of the woods, the singing of birds of every kind, and the perfume of
orange flowers, I composed, in a continual ecstasy, the fifth book of Emilius, the coloring of which I
owe in a great measure to the lively impression I received from the place I inhabited.
  With what eagerness did I run every morning at sunrise to respire the perfumed air in the peristyle!
What excellent coffee I took there tete-a-tete with my Theresa. My cat and dog were our company. This
retinue alone would have been sufficient for me during my whole life, in which I should not have had
one weary moment. I was there in a terrestrial paradise; I lived in innocence and tasted of happiness.
  At the journey of July, M. and Madam de Luxembourg showed me so much attention, and were so
extremely kind, that, lodged in their house, and overwhelmed with their goodness, I could not do less
than make them a proper return in assiduous respect near their persons; I scarcely quitted them; I went
in the morning to pay my court to Madam la Marechale; after dinner I walked with the marechal; but
did not sup at the castle on account of the numerous guests, and because they supped too late for me.
Thus far everything was as it should be, and no harm would have been done could I have remained at
this point. But I have never known how to preserve a medium in my attachments, and simply fulfil the
duties of society. I have ever been everything or nothing. I was soon everything; and receiving the most
polite attention from persons of the highest rank, I passed the proper bounds, and conceived for them a
friendship not permitted except among equals. Of these I had all the familiarity in my manners, whilst
they still preserved in theirs the same politeness to which they had accustomed me. Yet I was never
quite at my ease with Madam de Luxembourg. Although I was not quite relieved from my fears relative
to her character, I apprehended less danger from it than from her wit. It was by this especially that she
impressed me with awe. I knew she was difficult as to conversation, and she had a right to be so. I
knew women, especially those of her rank, would absolutely be amused, that it was better to offend
than to weary them, and I judged by her commentaries upon what the people who went away had said
what she must think of my blunders. I thought of an expedient to spare me with her the embarrassment
of speaking; this was reading. She had heard of my Eloisa, and knew it was in the press; she expressed
a desire to see the work; I offered to read it to her, and she accepted my offer. I went to her every
morning at ten o'clock; M. de Luxembourg was present, and the door was shut. I read by the side of her
bed, and so well proportioned my readings that there would have been sufficient for the whole time she
had to stay, had they even not been interrupted.
  [The loss of a great battle, which much afflicted the King, obliged M. de Luxembourg precipitately
to return to court.]
  The success of this expedient surpassed my expectation. Madam de Luxembourg took a great liking
to Julia and the author; she spoke of nothing but me, thought of nothing else, said civil things to mefrom morning till night, and embraced me ten times a day. She insisted on me always having my place
by her side at table, and when any great lords wished it she told them it was mine, and made them sit
down somewhere else. The impression these charming manners made upon me, who was subjugated by
the least mark of affection, may easily be judged of. I became really attached to her in proportion to the
attachment  she  showed  me.  All  my  fear  in  perceiving  this  infatuation,  and  feeling  the  want  of
agreeableness in myself to support it, was that it would be changed into disgust; and unfortunately this
fear was but too well founded.
  There must have been a natural opposition between her turn of mind and mine, since, independently
of the numerous stupid things which at every instant escaped me in conversation, and even in my
letters, and when I was upon the best terms with her, there were certain other things with which she was
displeased without my being able to imagine the reason. I will quote one instance from among twenty.
She knew I was writing for Madam d'Houdetot a copy of the New Eloisa. She was desirous to have one
on the same footing. This I promised her, and thereby making her one of my customers, I wrote her a
polite  letter  upon  the  subject,  at  least  such  was  my  intention.  Her  answer,  which  was  as  follows,
stupefied me with surprise.
    VERSAILLES, Tuesday.
  "I am ravished, I am satisfied: your letter has given me infinite pleasure, and I take the earliest
moment to acquaint you with, and thank you for it.
  "These are the exact words of your letter: 'Although you are certainly a very good customer, I have
some pain in receiving your money: according to regular order I ought to pay for the pleasure I should
have in working for you.' I will say nothing more on the subject. I have to complain of your not
speaking of your state of health: nothing interests me more. I love you with all my heart: and be assured
that I write this to you in a very melancholy mood, for I should have much pleasure in telling it to you
myself. M. de Luxembourg loves and embraces you with all his heart.
  "On receiving the letter I hastened to answer it, reserving to myself more fully to examine the
matter, protesting against all disobliging interpretation, and after having given several days to this
examination with an inquietude which may easily be conceived, and still without being able to discover
in what I could have erred, what follows was my final answer on the subject.
    "MONTMORENCY, 8th December, 1759.
  "Since my last letter I have examined a hundred times the passage in question. I have considered it
in its proper and natural meaning, as well as in every other which may be given to it, and I confess to
you, madam, that I know not whether it be I who owe to you excuses, or you from whom they are due
to me."
  It is now ten years since these letters were written. I have since that time frequently thought of the
subject of them; and such is still my stupidity that I have hitherto been unable to discover what in the
passages, quoted from my letter, she could find offensive, or even displeasing.
I must here mention, relative to the manuscript copy of Eloisa Madam de Luxembourg wished to
have, in what manner I thought to give it some marked advantage which should distinguish it from all
others.  I  had  written  separately  the  adventures  of  Lord  Edward,  and  had  long  been  undetermined
whether I should insert them wholly, or in extracts, in the work in which they seemed to be wanting. I
at length determined to retrench them entirely, because, not being in the manner of the rest, they would
have spoiled the interesting simplicity, which was its principal merit. I had still a stronger reason when
I came to know Madam de Luxembourg: There was in these adventures a Roman marchioness, of a bad
character, some parts of which, without being applicable, might have been applied to her by those to
whom she was not particularly known. I was therefore, highly pleased with the determination to which
I had come, and resolved to abide by it. But in the ardent desire to enrich her copy with something
which was not in the other, what should I fall upon but these unfortunate adventures, and I concluded
on making an extract from them to add to the work; a project dictated by madness, of which the
extravagance is inexplicable, except by the blind fatality which led me on to destruction.
  'Quos vult perdere Jupiter dementet.'I was stupid enough to make this extract with the greatest care and pains, and to send it her as the
finest thing in the world; it is true, I at the same time informed her the original was burned, which was
really the case, that the extract was for her alone, and would never be seen, except by herself, unless she
chose to show it; which, far from proving, to her my prudence and discretion, as it was my intention to
do, clearly intimated what I thought of the application by which she might be offended. My stupidity
was such, that I had no doubt of her being delighted with what I had done. She did not make me the
compliment upon it which I expected, and, to my great surprise, never once mentioned the paper I had
sent her. I was so satisfied with myself, that it was not until a long time afterwards, I judged, from other
indications, of the effect it had produced.
I had still, in favor of her manuscript, another idea more reasonable, but which, by more distant
effects, has not been much less prejudicial to me; so much does everything concur with the work of
destiny, when that hurries on a man to misfortune. I thought of ornamenting the manuscript with the
engravings of the New Eloisa, which were of the same size. I asked Coindet for these engravings,
which belonged to me by every kind of title, and the more so as I had given him the produce of the
plates, which had a considerable sale. Coindet is as cunning as I am the contrary. By frequently asking
him for the engravings he came to the knowledge of the use I intended to make of them. He then, under
pretence of adding some new ornament, still kept them from me; and at length presented them himself.
  'Ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores.'
  This  gave  him  an  introduction  upon  a  certain  footing  to  the  Hotel  de  Luxembourg.  After  my
establishment at the little castle he came rather frequently to see me, and always in the morning,
especially when M. and Madam de Luxembourg were at Montmorency. Therefore that I might pass the
day with him, I did not go the castle. Reproaches were made me on account of my absence; I told the
reason of them. I was desired to bring with me M. Coindet; I did so. This was, what he had sought after.
Therefore, thanks to the excessive goodness M. and Madam de Luxembourg had for me, a clerk to M.
Thelusson, who was sometimes pleased to give him his table when he had nobody else to dine with
him, was suddenly placed at that of a marechal of France, with princes, duchesses, and persons of the
highest rank at court. I shall never forget, that one day being obliged to return early to Paris, the
marechal said, after dinner, to the company, "Let us take a walk upon the road to St. Denis, and we will
accompany M. Coindet." This was too much for the poor man; his head was quite turned. For my part,
my heart was so affected that I could not say a word. I followed the company, weeping like a child, and
having the strongest desire to kiss the foot of the good marechal; but the continuation of the history of
the manuscript has made me anticipate. I will go a little back, and, as far as my memory will permit,
mark each event in its proper order.
  As soon as the little house of Mont Louis was ready, I had it neatly furnished and again established
myself there. I could not break through the resolution I had made on quitting the Hermitage of always
having my apartment to myself; but I found a difficulty in resolving to quit the little castle. I kept the
key of it, and being delighted with the charming breakfasts of the peristyle, frequently went to the castle
to sleep, and stayed three or four days as at a country-house. I was at that time perhaps better and more
agreeably lodged than any private individual in Europe. My host, M. Mathas, one of the best men in the
world, had left me the absolute direction of the repairs at Mont Louis, and insisted upon my disposing
of his workmen without his interference. I therefore found the means of making of a single chamber
upon the first story, a complete set of apartments consisting of a chamber, antechamber, and a water
closet. Upon the ground-floor was the kitchen and the chamber of Theresa. The alcove served me for a
closet  by  means  of  a  glazed  partition  and  a  chimney  I  had  made  there.  After  my  return  to  this
habitation, I amused myself in decorating the terrace, which was already shaded by two rows of linden
trees; I added two others to make a cabinet of verdure, and placed in it a table and stone benches: I
surrounded it with lilies, syringa and woodbines, and had a beautiful border of flowers parallel with the
two rows of trees. This terrace, more elevated than that of the castle, from which the view was at least
as fine, and where I had tamed a great number of birds, was my drawing-room, in which I received M.
and Madam de Luxembourg, the Duke of Villeroy, the Prince of Tingry, the Marquis of Armentieres,the Duchess of Montmorency, the Duchess of Bouffiers, the Countess of Valentinois, the Countess of
Boufflers, and other persons of the first rank; who, from the castle disdained not to make, over a very
fatiguing mountain, the pilgrimage of Mont Louis. I owed all these visits to the favor of M. and Madam
de Luxembourg; this I felt, and my heart on that account did them all due homage. It was with the same
sentiment that I once said to M. de Luxembourg, embracing him: "Ah! Monsieur le Marechal, I hated
the great before I knew you, and I have hated them still more since you have shown me with what ease
they might acquire universal respect." Further than this I defy any person with whom I was then
acquainted, to say I was ever dazzled for an instant with splendor, or that the vapor of the incense I
received ever affected my head; that I was less uniform in my manner, less plain in my dress, less easy
of access to people of the lowest rank, less familiar with neighbors, or less ready to render service to
every person when I had it in my power so to do, without ever once being discouraged by the numerous
and frequently unreasonable importunities with which I was incessantly assailed.
  Although my heart led me to the castle of Montmorency, by my sincere attachment to those by
whom it was inhabited, it by the same means drew me back to the neighborhood of it, there to taste the
sweets of the equal and simple life, in which my only happiness consisted. Theresa had contracted a
friendship with the daughter of one of my neighbors, a mason of the name of Pilleu; I did the same with
the father, and after having dined at the castle, not without some constraint, to please Madam de
Luxembourg, with what eagerness did I return in the evening to sup with the good man Pilleu and his
family, sometimes at his own house and at others, at mine.
  Besides my two lodgings in the country, I soon had a third at the Hotel de Luxembourg, the
proprietors of which pressed me so much to go and see them there, that I consented, notwithstanding
my aversion to Paris, where, since my retiring to the Hermitage, I had been but twice, upon the two
occasions of which I have spoken. I did not now go there except on the days agreed upon, solely to
supper, and the next morning I returned to the country. I entered and came out by the garden which
faces the boulevard, so that I could with the greatest truth, say I had not set my foot upon the stones of
Paris.
  In the midst of this transient prosperity, a catastrophe, which was to be the conclusion of it, was
preparing at a distance. A short time after my return to Mont Louis, I made there, and as it was
customary, against my inclination, a new acquaintance, which makes another era in my private history.
Whether this be favorable or unfavorable, the reader will hereafter be able to judge. The person with
whom I became acquainted was the Marchioness of Verdelin, my neighbor, whose husband had just
bought a country-house at Soisy, near Montmorency. Mademoiselle d'Ars, daughter to the Comte d'Ars,
a man of fashion, but poor, had married M. de Verdelin, old, ugly, deaf, uncouth, brutal, jealous, with
gashes in his face, and blind of one eye, but, upon the whole, a good man when properly managed, and
in possession of a fortune of from fifteen to twenty thousand a year. This charming object, swearing,
roaring, scolding, storming, and making his wife cry all day long, ended by doing whatever she thought
proper, and this to set her in a rage, because she knew how to persuade him that it was he who would,
and she would not have it so. M. de Margency, of whom I have spoken, was the friend of madam, and
became that of monsieur. He had a few years before let them his castle of Margency, near Eaubonne
and Andilly, and they resided there precisely at the time of my passion for Madam d'Houdetot. Madam
d'Houdetot  and  Madam  de  Verdelin  became  acquainted  with  each  other,  by  means  of  Madam
d'Aubeterre their common friend; and as the garden of Margency was in the road by which Madam
d'Houdetot went to Mont Olympe, her favorite walk, Madam de Verdelin gave her a key that she might
pass through it. By means of this key I crossed it several times with her; but I did not like unexpected
meetings, and when Madam de Verdelin was by chance upon our way I left them together without
speaking to her, and went on before. This want of gallantry must have made on her an impression
unfavorable to me. Yet when she was at Soisy she was anxious to have my company. She came several
times to see me at Mont Louis, without finding me at home, and perceiving I did not return her visit,
took it into her head, as a means of forcing me to do it, to send me pots of flowers for my terrace. I was
under the necessity of going to thank her; this was all she wanted, and we thus became acquainted.  This connection, like every other I formed; or was led into contrary to my inclination, began rather
boisterously. There never reigned in it a real calm. The turn of mind of Madam de Verdelinwas too
opposite to mine. Malignant expressions and pointed sarcasms came from her with so much simplicity,
that a continual attention too fatiguing for me was necessary to perceive she was turning into ridicule
the  person  to  whom  she  spoke.  One  trivial  circumstance  which  occurs  to  my  recollection  will  be
sufficient to give an idea of her manner. Her brother had just obtained the command of a frigate
cruising against the English. I spoke of the manner of fitting out this frigate without diminishing its
swiftness of sailing. "Yes," replied she, in the most natural tone of voice, "no more cannon are taken
than are necessary for fighting." I seldom have heard her speak well of any of her absent friends
without letting slip something to their prejudice. What she did not see with an evil eye she looked upon
with one of ridicule, and her friend Margency was not excepted. What I found most insupportable in
her was the perpetual constraint proceeding from her little messages, presents and billets, to which it
was a labor for me to answer, and I had continual embarrassments either in thanking or refusing.
However, by frequently seeing this lady I became attached to her. She had her troubles as well as I had
mine. Reciprocal confidence rendered our conversations interesting. Nothing so cordially attaches two
persons as the satisfaction of weeping together. We sought the company of each other for our reciprocal
consolation, and the want of this has frequently made me pass over many things. I had been so severe
in my frankness with her, that after having sometimes shown so little esteem for her character, a great
deal was necessary to be able to believe she could sincerely forgive me.
  The following letter is a specimen of the epistles I sometimes wrote to her, and it is to be remarked
that she never once in any of her answers to them seemed to be in the least degree piqued.
  MONTMORENCY, 5th November, 1760.
  "You tell me, madam, you have not well explained yourself, in order to make me understand I have
explained myself ill. You speak of your pretended stupidity for the purpose of making me feel my own.
You boast of being nothing more than a good kind of woman, as if you were afraid to being taken at
your word, and you make me apologies to tell me I owe them to you. Yes, madam, I know it; it is I who
am a fool, a good kind of man; and, if it be possible, worse than all this; it is I who make a bad choice
of my expressions in the opinion of a fine French lady, who pays as much attention to words, and speak
as well as you do. But consider that I take them in the common meaning of the language without
knowing or troubling my head about the polite acceptations in which they are taken in the virtuous
societies  of  Paris.  If  my  expressions  are  sometimes  equivocal,  I  endeavored  by  my  conduct  to
determine their meaning," etc. The rest of the letter is much the same.
  Coindet, enterprising, bold, even to effrontery, and who was upon the watch after all my friends,
soon introduced himself in my name to the house of Madam de Verdelin, and, unknown to me, shortly
became there more familiar than myself. This Coindet was an extraordinary man. He presented himself
in my name in the houses of all my acquaintance, gained a footing in them, and eat there without
ceremony. Transported with zeal to do me service, he never mentioned my name without his eyes being
suffused with tears; but, when he came to see me, he kept the most profound silence on the subject of
all these connections, and especially on that in which he knew I must be interested. Instead of telling
me what he had heard, said, or seen, relative to my affairs, he waited for my speaking to him, and even
interrogated me. He never knew anything of what passed in Paris, except that which I told him: finally,
although everybody spoke to me of him, he never once spoke to me of any person; he was secret and
mysterious with his friend only; but I will for the present leave Coindet and Madam de Verdelin, and
return to them at a proper time.
  Sometime after my return to Mont Louis, La Tour, the painter, came to see me, and brought with
him my portrait in crayons, which a few years before he had exhibited at the salon. He wished to give
me this portrait, which I did not choose to accept. But Madam d'Epinay, who had given me hers, and
would have had this, prevailed upon me to ask him for it. He had taken some time to retouch the
features. In the interval happened my rupture with Madam d'Epinay; I returned her her portrait; and
giving her mine being no longer in question, I put it into my chamber, in the castle. M. de Luxembourgsaw it there, and found it a good one; I offered it him, he accepted it, and I sent it to the castle. He and
his lady comprehended I should be very glad to have theirs. They had them taken in miniature by a very
skilful hand, set in a box of rock crystal, mounted with gold, and in a very handsome manner, with
which I was delighted, made me a present of both. Madam de Luxenbourg would never consent that her
portrait should be on the upper part of the box. She had reproached me several times with loving M. de
Luxembourg better than I did her; I had not denied it because it was true. By this manner of placing her
portrait she showed very politely, but very clearly, she had not forgotten the preference.
  Much about this time I was guilty of a folly which did not contribute to preserve me to her good
graces. Although I had no knowledge of M. de Silhoutte, and was not much disposed to like him, I had
a great opinion of his administration. When he began to let his hand fall rather heavily upon financiers,
I perceived he did not begin his operation in a favorable moment, but he had my warmest wishes for his
success; and as soon as I heard he was displaced I wrote to him, in my intrepid, heedless manner, the
following letter, which I certainly do not undertake to justify.
  MONTMORENCY, 2d December, 1759.
  "Vouchsafe, sir, to receive the homage of a solitary man, who is not known to you, but who esteems
you for your talents, respects you for your administration, and who did you the honor to believe you
would not long remain in it. Unable to save the State, except at the expense of the capital by which it
has been ruined, you have braved the clamors of the gainers of money. When I saw you crush these
wretches, I envied you your place; and at seeing you quit it without departing from your system, I
admire you. Be satisfied with yourself, sir; the step you have taken will leave you an honor you will
long enjoy without a competitor. The malediction of knaves is the glory of an honest man."
  Madam de Luxembourg, who knew I had written this letter, spoke to me of it when she came into
the country at Easter. I showed it to her and she was desirous of a copy; this I gave her, but when I did
it I did not know she was interested in under-farms, and the displacing of M. de Silhoutte. By my
numerous follies any person would have imagined I wilfully endeavored to bring on myself the hatred
of an amiable woman who had power, and to whom, in truth, I daily became more attached, and was far
from  wishing  to  occasion  her  displeasure,  although  by  my  awkward  manner  of  proceeding,  I  did
everything proper for that purpose. I think it superfluous to remark here, that it is to her the history of
the opiate of M. Tronchin, of which I have spoken in the first part of my memoirs, relates; the other
lady was Madam de Mirepoix. They have never mentioned to me the circumstance, nor has either of
them, in the least, seemed to have preserved a remembrance of it; but to presume that Madam de
Luxembourg can possibly have forgotten it appears to me very difficult, and would still remain so, even
were the subsequent events entirely unknown. For my part, I fell into a deceitful security relative to the
effects  of  my  stupid  mistakes,  by  an  internal  evidence  of  my  not  having  taken  any  step  with  an
intention to offend; as if a woman could ever forgive what I had done, although she might be certain the
will had not the least part in the matter.
  Although she seemed not to see or feel anything, and that I did not immediately find either her
warmth of friendship diminished or the least change in her manner, the continuation and even increase
of  a  too  well  founded  foreboding  made  me  incessantly  tremble,  lest  disgust  should  succeed  to
infatuation. Was it possible for me to expect in a lady of such high rank, a constancy proof against my
want of address to support it? I was unable to conceal from her this secret foreboding, which made me
uneasy, and rendered me still more disagreeable. This will be judged of by the following letter, which
contains a very singular prediction.
  N. B. This letter, without date in my rough copy, was written in October, 1760, at latest.
  "How cruel is your goodness? Why disturb the peace of a solitary mortal who had renounced the
pleasures of life, that he might no longer suffer the fatigues of them. I have passed my days in vainly
searching for solid attachments. I have not been able to form any in the ranks to which I was equal; is it
in yours that I ought to seek for them? Neither ambition nor interest can tempt me: I am not vain, but
little fearful; I can resist everything except caresses. Why do you both attack me by a weakness which I
must overcome, because in the distance by which we are separated, the over-flowings of susceptiblehearts cannot bring mine near to you? Will gratitude be sufficient for a heart which knows not two
manners of bestowing its affections, and feels itself incapable of everything except friendship? Of
friendship, madam la marechale! Ah! there is my misfortune! It is good in you and the marechal to
make use of this expression; but I am mad when I take you at your word. You amuse yourselves, and I
become attached; and the end of this prepares for me new regrets. How I do hate all your titles, and pity
you on account of your being obliged to bear them? You seem to me to be so worthy of tasting the
charms of private life! Why do not you reside at Clarens? I would go there in search of happiness; but
the castle of Montmorency, and the Hotel de Luxembourg! Is it in these places Jean Jacques ought to be
seen? Is it there a friend to equality ought to carry the affections of a sensible heart, and who thus
paying the esteem in which he is held, thinks he returns as much as he receives? You are good and
susceptible also: this I know and have seen; I am sorry I was not sooner convinced of it; but in the rank
you hold, in the manner of living, nothing can make a lasting impression; a succession of new objects
efface each other so that not one of them remains. You will forget me, madam, after having made it
impossible for me to imitate, you. You have done a great deal to make me unhappy, to be inexcusable."
I joined with her the marechal, to render the compliment less severe; for I was moreover so sure of
him, that I never had a doubt in my mind of the continuation of his friendship. Nothing that intimidated
me in madam la marechale, ever for a moment extended to him. I never have had the least mistrust
relative to his character, which I knew to be feeble, but constant. I no more feared a coldness on his part
than I expected from him an heroic attachment. The simplicity and familiarity of our manners with each
other proved how far dependence was reciprocal. We were both always right: I shall ever honor and
hold dear the memory of this worthy man, and, notwithstanding everything that was done to detach him
from me, I am as certain of his having died my friend as if I had been present in his last moments.
  At the second journey to Montmorency, in the year 1760, the reading of Eloisa being finished, I had
recourse to that of Emilius, to support myself in the good graces of Madam de Luxembourg; but this,
whether the subject was less to her taste; or that so much reading at length fatigued her, did not succeed
so well. However, as she reproached me with suffering myself to be the dupe of booksellers, she
wished me to leave to her care the printing the work, that I might reap from it a greater advantage. I
consented to her doing it, on the express condition of its not being printed in France, on which we had
along  dispute;  I  affirming  that  it  was  impossible  to  obtain,  and  even  imprudent  to  solicit,  a  tacit
permission; and being unwilling to permit the impression upon any other terms in the kingdom; she,
that the censor could not make the least difficulty, according to the system government had adopted.
She found means to make M. de Malesherbes enter into her views. He wrote to me on the subject a long
letter with his own hand, to prove the profession of faith of the Savoyard vicar to be a composition
which must everywhere gain the approbation of its readers and that of the court, as things were then
circumstanced. I was surprised to see this magistrate, always so prudent, become so smooth in the
business, as the printing of a book was by that alone legal, I had no longer any objection to make to that
of the work. Yet, by an extraordinary scruple, I still required it should be printed in Holland, and by the
bookseller Neaulme, whom, not satisfied with indicating him, I informed of my wishes, consenting the
edition should be brought out for the profit of a French bookseller, and that as soon as it was ready it
should be sold at Paris, or wherever else it might be thought proper, as with this I had no manner of
concern. This is exactly what was agreed upon between Madam de Luxembourg and myself, after
which I gave her my manuscript.
  Madam  de  Luxembourg  was  this  time  accompanied  by  her  granddaughter  Mademoiselle  de
Boufflers, now Duchess of Lauzun. Her name was Amelia. She was a charming girl. She really had a
maiden beauty, mildness and timidity. Nothing could be more lovely than her person, nothing more
chaste and tender than the sentiments she inspired. She was, besides, still a child under eleven years of
age. Madam de Luxembourg, who thought her too timid, used every endeavor to animate her. She
permitted me several times to give her a kiss, which I did with my usual awkwardness. Instead of
saying flattering things to her, as any other person would have done, I remained silent and disconcerted,
and I know not which of the two, the little girl or myself, was most ashamed.I met her one day alone in the staircase of the little castle. She had been to see Theresa, with whom
her governess still was. Not knowing what else to say, I proposed to her a kiss, which, in the innocence
of  her  heart,  she  did  not  refuse;  having  in  the  morning  received  one  from  me  by  order  of  her
grandmother, and in her presence. The next day, while reading Emilius by the side of the bed of
Madam de Luxembourg, I came to a passage in which I justly censure that which I had done the
preceding evening. She thought the reflection extremely just, and said some very sensible things upon
the subject which made me blush. How was I enraged at my incredible stupidity, which has frequently
given me the appearance of guilt when I was nothing more than a fool and embarrassed! A stupidity,
which in a man known to be endowed with some wit, is considered as a false excuse. I can safely swear
that in this kiss, as well as in the others, the heart and thoughts of Mademoiselle Amelia were not more
pure than my own, and that if I could have avoided meeting her I should have done it; not that I had not
great pleasure in seeing her, but from the embarrassment of not finding a word proper to say. Whence
comes it that even a child can intimidate a man, whom the power of kings has never inspired with fear?
What is to be done? How, without presence of mind, am I to act? If I strive to speak to the persons I
meet, I certainly say some stupid thing to them; if I remain silent, I am a misanthrope, an unsociable
animal, a bear. Total imbecility would have been more favorable to me; but the talents which I have
failed to improve in the world have become the instruments of my destruction, and of that of the talents
I possessed.
  At the latter end of this journey, Madam de Luxembourg did a good action in which I had some
share.  Diderot  having  very  imprudently  offended  the  Princess  of  Robeck,  daughter  of  M.  de
Luxembourg, Palissot, whom she protected, took up the quarrel, and revenged her by the comedy of
'The Philosophers', in which I was ridiculed, and Diderot very roughly handled. The author treated me
with more gentleness, less, I am of opinion, on account of the obligation he was under to me, than from
the fear of displeasing the father of his protectress, by whom he knew I was beloved. The bookseller
Duchesne, with whom I was not at that time acquainted, sent me the comedy when it was printed, and
this I suspect was by the order of Palissot, who, perhaps, thought I should have a pleasure in seeing a
man with whom I was no longer connected defamed. He was greatly deceived. When I broke with
Diderot, whom I thought less ill-natured than weak and indiscreet, I still always preserved for his
person an attachment, an esteem even, and a respect for our ancient friendship, which I know was for a
long time as sincere on his part as on mine. The case was quite different with Grimm; a man false by
nature, who never loved me, who is not even capable of friendship, and a person who, without the least
subject of complaint, and solely to satisfy his gloomy jealousy, became, under the mask of friendship,
my most cruel calumniator. This man is to me a cipher; the other will always be my old friend.
  My very bowels yearned at the sight of this odious piece: the reading of it was insupportable to me,
and, without going through the whole, I returned the copy to Duchesne with the following letter:
  MONTMORENCY, 21st, May, 1760.
  "In casting my eyes over the piece you sent me, I trembled at seeing myself well spoken of in it. I
do not accept the horrid present. I am persuaded that in sending it me, you did not intend an insult; but
you do not know, or have forgotten, that I have the honor to be the friend of a respectable man, who is
shamefully defamed and calumniated in this libel."
  Duchense showed the letter. Diderot, upon whom it ought to have had an effect quite contrary, was
vexed at it. His pride could not forgive me the superiority of a generous action, and I was informed his
wife everywhere inveighed against me with a bitterness with which I was not in the least affected, as I
knew she was known to everybody to be a noisy babbler.
  Diderot in his turn found an avenger in the Abbe Morrellet, who wrote against Palissot a little work,
imitated  from  the  'Petit  Prophete',  and  entitled  the  Vision.  In  this  production  he  very  imprudently
offended Madam de Robeck, whose friends got him sent to the Bastile; though she, not naturally
vindictive, and at that time in a dying state, I am certain had nothing to do with the affair.
  D'Alembert, who was very intimately connected with Morrellet, wrote me a letter, desiring I would
beg  of  Madam  de  Luxembourg  to  solicit  his  liberty,  promising  her  in  return  encomiums  in  the'Encyclopedie'; my answer to this letter was as follows:
  "I did not wait the receipt of your letter before I expressed to Madam de Luxembourg the pain the
confinement of the Abbe Morrellet gave me. She knows my concern, and shall be made acquainted
with yours, and her knowing that the abbe is a man of merit will be sufficient to make her interest
herself in his behalf. However, although she and the marechal honor me with a benevolence which is
my greatest consolation, and that the name of your friend be to them a recommendation in favor of the
Abbe Morrellet, I know not how far, on this occasion, it may be proper for them to employ the credit
attached to the rank they hold, and the consideration due to their persons. I am not even convinced that
the vengeance in question relates to the Princess Robeck so much as you seem to imagine; and were
this  even  the  case,  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  pleasure  of  vengeance  belongs  to  philosophers
exclusively, and that when they choose to become women, women will become philosophers.
  "I will communicate to you whatever Madam de Luxembourg may say to me after having shown
her your letter. In the meantime, I think I know her well enough to assure you that, should she have the
pleasure of contributing to the enlargement of the Abbe Morrellet, she will not accept the tribute of
acknowledgment you promise her in the Encyclopedie, although she might think herself honored by it,
because she does not do good in the expectation of praise, but from the dictates of her heart."
I made every effort to excite the zeal and commiseration of Madam de Luxembourg in favor of the
poor captive, and succeeded to my wishes. She went to Versailles on purpose to speak to M. de St.
Florentin, and this journey shortened the residence at Montmorency, which the marechal was obliged to
quit at the same time to go to Rouen, whither the king sent him as governor of Normandy, on account
of  the  motions  of  the  parliament,  which  government  wished  to  keep  within  bounds.  Madam  de
Luxembourg wrote me the following letter the day after her departure:
    VERSAILLES, Wednesday.
  "M. de Luxembourg set off yesterday morning at six o'clock. I do not yet know that I shall follow
him. I wait until he writes to me, as he is not yet certain of the stay it will be necessary for him to make.
I have seen M. de St. Florentin, who is as favorably disposed as possible towards the Abbe Morrellet;
but he finds some obstacles to his wishes which however, he is in hopes of removing the first time he
has to do business with the king, which will be next week. I have also desired as a favor that he might
not be exiled, because this was intended; he was to be sent to Nancy. This, sir, is what I have been able
to obtain; but I promise you I will not let M. de St. Florentin rest until the affair is terminated in the
manner you desire. Let me now express to you how sorry I am on account of my being obliged to leave
you so soon, of which I flatter myself you have not the least doubt. I love you with all my heart, and
shall do so for my whole life."
  A few days afterwards I received the following note from D'Alembert, which gave me real joy.
  August 1st.
  "Thanks to your cares, my dear philosopher, the abbe has left the Bastile, and his imprisonment will
have no other consequence. He is setting off for the country, and, as well as myself, returns you a
thousand thanks and compliments. 'Vale et me ama'."
  The abbe also wrote to me a few days afterwards a letter of thanks, which did not, in my opinion,
seem to breathe a certain effusion of the heart, and in which he seemed in some measure to extenuate
the service I had rendered him. Some time afterwards, I found that he and D'Alembert had, to a certain
degree, I will not say supplanted, but succeeded me in the good graces of Madam de Luxembourg, and
that I Had lost in them all they had gained. However, I am far from suspecting the Abbe Morrellet of
having contributed to my disgrace; I have too much esteem for him to harbor any such suspicion. With
respect to D'Alembert, I shall at present leave him out of the question, and hereafter say of him what
may seem necessary.
I had, at the same time, another affair which occasioned the last letter I wrote to Voltaire; a letter
against which he vehemently exclaimed, as an abominable insult, although he never showed it to any
person. I will here supply the want of that which he refused to do.
  The Abbe Trublet, with whom I had a slight acquaintance, but whom I had but seldom seen, wroteto me on the 13th of June, 1760, informing me that M. Formey, his friend and correspondent, had
printed in his journal my letter to Voltaire upon the disaster at Lisbon. The abbe wished to know how
the letter came to be printed, and in his jesuitical manner, asked me my opinion, without giving me his
own on the necessity of reprinting it. As I most sovereignly hate this kind of artifice and strategem, I
returned such thanks as were proper, but in a manner so reserved as to make him feel it, although this
did not prevent him from wheedling me in two or three other letters until he had gathered all he wished
to know.
I clearly understood that, not withstanding all Trublet could say, Formey had not found the letter
printed, and that the first impression of it came from himself. I knew him to be an impudent pilferer,
who, without ceremony, made himself a revenue by the works of others. Although he had not yet had
the incredible effrontery to take from a book already published the name of the author, to put his own in
the place of it, and to sell the book for his own profit.
  [In this manner he afterwards appropriated to himself Emilius.]
  But by what means had this manuscript fallen into his hands? That was a question not easy to
resolve,  but  by  which  I  had  the  weakness  to  be  embarrassed.  Although  Voltaire  was  excessively
honored by the letter, as in fact, notwithstanding his rude proceedings, he would have had a right to
complain had I had it printed without his consent, I resolved to write to him upon the subject. The
second letter was as follows, to which he returned no answer, and giving greater scope to his brutality,
he feigned to be irritated to fury.
  MONTMORENCY, 17th June, 1760.
  "I did not think, sir, I should ever have occasion to correspond with you. But learning the letter I
wrote to you in 1756 had been printed at Berlin, I owe you an account of my conduct in that respect,
and will fulfil this duty with truth and simplicity.
  "The letter having really been addressed to you was not intended to be printed. I communicated the
contents of it, on certain conditions, to three persons, to whom the right of friendship did not permit me
to refuse anything of the kind, and whom the same rights still less permitted to abuse my confidence by
betraying their promise. These persons are Madam de Chenonceaux, daughter-in-law to Madam Dupin,
the Comtesse d'Houdetot, and a German of the name of Grimm. Madam de Chenonceaux was desirous
the letter should be printed, and asked my consent. I told her that depended upon yours. This was asked
of you which you refused, and the matter dropped.
  "However, the Abbe Trublet, with whom I have not the least connection, has just written to me
from a motive of the most polite attention that having received the papers of the journal of M. Formey,
he found in them this same letter with an advertisement, dated on the 23d of October, 1759, in which
the editor states that he had a few weeks before found it in the shops of the booksellers of Berlin, and,
as it is one of those loose sheets which shortly disappear, he thought proper to give it a place in his
journal.
  "This, sir, is all I know of the matter. It is certain the letter had not until lately been heard of at
Paris. It is also as certain that the copy, either in manuscript or print, fallen into the hands of M. de
Formey, could never have reached them except by your means (which is not probable) or of those of
one of the three persons I have mentioned. Finally, it is well known the two ladies are incapable of such
a perfidy. I cannot, in my retirement learn more relative to the affair. You have a correspondence by
means of which you may, if you think it worth the trouble, go back to the source and verify the fact.
  "In the same letter the Abbe' Trublet informs me that he keeps the paper in reserve, and will not
lend it without my consent, which most assuredly I will not give. But it is possible this copy may not be
the only one in Paris. I wish, sir, the letter may not be printed there, and I will do all in my power to
prevent this from happening; but if I cannot succeed, and that, timely perceiving it, I can have the
preference, I will not then hesitate to have it immediately printed. This to me appears just and natural.
  "With respect to your answer to the same letter, it has not been communicated to anyone, and you
may be assured it shall not be printed without your consent, which I certainly shall not be indiscreet
enough to ask of you, well knowing that what one man writes to another is not written to the public.But should you choose to write one you wish to have published, and address it to me, I promise you
faithfully to add to it my letter and not to make to it a single word of reply.
  "I love you not, sir; you have done me, your disciple and enthusiastic admirer; injuries which might
have caused me the most exquisite pain. You have ruined Geneva, in return for the asylum it has
afforded you; you have alienated from me my fellow-citizens, in return for eulogiums I made of you
amongst them; it is you who render to me the residence of my own country insupportable; it is you who
will oblige me to die in a foreign land, deprived of all the consolations usually administered to a dying
person; and cause me, instead of receiving funeral rites, to be thrown to the dogs, whilst all the honors a
man can expect will accompany you in my country. Finally I hate you because you have been desirous
I should but I hate you as a man more worthy of loving you had you chosen it. Of all the sentiments
with which my heart was penetrated for you, admiration, which cannot be refused your fine genius, and
a partiality to your writings, are those you have not effaced. If I can honor nothing in you except your
talents, the fault is not mine. I shall never be wanting in the respect due to them, nor in that which this
respect requires."
  In the midst of these little literary cavillings, which still fortified my resolution, I received the
greatest honor letters ever acquired me, and of which I was the most sensible, in the two visits the
Prince of Conti deigned to make to me, one at the Little Castle and the other at Mont Louis. He chose
the time for both of these when M. de Luxembourg was not at Montmorency, in order to render it more
manifest that he came there solely on my account. I have never had a doubt of my owing the first
condescensions of this prince to Madam de Luxembourg and Madam de Boufflers; but I am of opinion
I owe to his own sentiments and to myself those with which he has since that time continually honored
me.
  [Remark the perseverance of this blind and stupid confidence in the midst of all the treatment which
should soonest have undeceived me. It continued until my return to Paris in 1770.]
  My apartments at Mont Louis being small, and the situation of the alcove charming, I conducted the
prince to it, where, to complete the condescension he was pleased to show me, he chose I should have
the honor of playing with him a game of chess. I knew he beat the Chevalier de Lorenzy, who played
better than I did. However, notwithstanding the signs and grimace of the chevalier and the spectators,
which I feigned not to see, I won the two games we played: When they were ended, I said to him in a
respectful but very grave manner: "My lord, I honor your serene highness too much not to beat you
always at chess." This great prince, who had real wit, sense, and knowledge, and so was worthy not to
be treated with mean adulation, felt in fact, at least I think so, that I was the only person present who
treated him like a man, and I have every reason to believe he was not displeased with me for it.
  Had this even been the case, I should not have reproached myself with having been unwilling to
deceive him in anything, and I certainly cannot do it with having in my heart made an ill return for his
goodness, but solely with having sometimes done it with an ill grace, whilst he himself accompanied
with infinite gracefulness the manner in which he showed me the marks of it. A few days afterwards he
ordered  a  hamper  of  game  to  be  sent  me,  which  I  received  as  I  ought.  This  in  a  little  time  was
succeeded by another, and one of his gamekeepers wrote me, by order of his highness, that the game it
contained had been shot by the prince himself. I received this second hamper, but I wrote to Madam de
Boufflers  that  I  would  not  receive  a  third.  This  letter  was  generally  blamed,  and  deservedly  so.
Refusing to accept presents of game from a prince of the blood, who moreover sends it in so polite a
manner, is less the delicacy of a haughty man, who wishes to preserve his independence, than the
rusticity of a clown, who does not know himself. I have never read this letter in my collection without
blushing and reproaching myself for having written it. But I have not undertaken my Confession with
an intention of concealing my faults, and that of which I have just spoken is too shocking in my own
eyes to suffer me to pass it over in silence.
  If I were not guilty of the offence of becoming his rival I was very near doing it; for Madam de
Boufflers was still his mistress, and I knew nothing of the matter. She came rather frequently to see me
with the Chevalier de Lorenzy. She was yet young and beautiful, affected to be whimsical, and mymind was always romantic, which was much of the same nature. I was near being laid hold of; I believe
she perceived it; the chevalier saw it also, at least he spoke to me upon the subject, and in a manner not
discouraging. But I was this time reasonable, and at the age of fifty it was time I should be so. Full of
the doctrine I had just preached to graybeards in my letter to D'Alembert, I should have been ashamed
of not profiting by it myself; besides, coming to the knowledge of that of which I had been ignorant, I
must have been mad to have carried my pretensions so far as to expose myself to such an illustrious
rivalry. Finally, ill cured perhaps of my passion for Madam de Houdetot, I felt nothing could replace it
in my heart, and I bade adieu to love for the rest of my life. I have this moment just withstood the
dangerous allurements of a young woman who had her views; and if she feigned to forget my twelve
lustres I remember them. After having thus withdrawn myself from danger, I am no longer afraid of a
fall, and I answer for myself for the rest of my days.
  Madam de Boufflers, perceiving the emotion she caused in me, might also observe I had triumphed
over it. I am neither mad nor vain enough to believe I was at my age capable of inspiring her with the
same feelings; but, from certain words which she let drop to Theresa, I thought I had inspired her with a
curiosity; if this be the case, and that she has not forgiven me the disappointment she met with, it must
be confessed I was born to be the victim of my weaknesses, since triumphant love was so prejudicial to
me, and love triumphed over not less so.
  Here finishes the collection of letters which has served me as a guide in the last two books. My
steps will in future be directed by memory only; but this is of such a nature, relative to the period to
which I am now come, and the strong impression of objects has remained so perfectly upon my mind,
that  lost  in  the  immense  sea  of  my  misfortunes,  I  cannot  forget  the  detail  of  my  first  shipwreck,
although the consequences present to me but a confused remembrance. I therefore shall be able to
proceed in the succeeding book with sufficient confidence. If I go further it will be groping in the dark.
 
 
 
 
 
  BOOK XI.
  Although Eloisa, which for a long time had been in the press, did not yet, at the end of the year,
1760, appear, the work already began to make a great noise. Madam de Luxembourg had spoken of it at
court, and Madam de Houdetot at Paris. The latter had obtained from me permission for Saint Lambert
to read the manuscript to the King of Poland, who had been delighted with it. Duclos, to whom I had
also given the perusal of the work, had spoken of it at the academy. All Paris was impatient to see the
novel; the booksellers of the Rue Saint Jacques, and that of the Palais Royal, were beset with people
who came to inquire when it was to be published. It was at length brought out, and the success it had,
answered, contrary to custom, to the impatience with which it had been expected. The dauphiness, who
was one of the first who read it, spoke of it to, M. de Luxembourg as a ravishing performance. The
opinions of men of letters differed from each other, but in those of any other class approbation was
general, especially with the women, who became so intoxicated with the book and the author, that there
was not one in high life with whom I might not have succeeded had I undertaken to do it. Of this I have
such proofs as I will not commit to paper, and which without the aid of experience, authorized my
opinion. It is singular that the book should have succeeded better in France than in the rest of Europe,
although the French, both men and women, are severely treated in it. Contrary to my expectation it was
least successful in Switzerland, and most so in Paris. Do friendship, love and virtue reign in this capital
more than elsewhere? Certainly not; but there reigns in it an exquisite sensibility which transports the
heart to their image, and makes us cherish in others the pure, tender and virtuous sentiments we no
longer possess. Corruption is everywhere the same; virtue and morality no longer exist in Europe; but if
the least love of them still remains, it is in Paris that this will be found.--[I wrote this in 1769.]
  In the midst of so many prejudices and feigned passions, the real sentiments of nature are not to bedistinguished from others, unless we well know to analyze the human heart. A very nice discrimination,
not to be acquired except by the education of the world, is necessary to feel the finesses of the heart, if I
dare use the expression, with which this work abounds. I do not hesitate to place the fourth part of it
upon an equality with the Princess of Cleves; nor to assert that had these two works been read nowhere
but  in  the  provinces,  their  merit  would  never  have  been  discovered.  It  must  not,  therefore,  be
considered as a matter of astonishment, that the greatest success of my work was at court. It abounds
with lively but veiled touches of the pencil, which could not but give pleasure there, because the
persons  who  frequent  it  are  more  accustomed  than  others  to  discover  them.  A  distinction  must,
however, be made. The work is by no means proper for the species of men of wit who have nothing but
cunning, who possess no other kind of discernment than that which penetrates evil, and see nothing
where good only is to be found. If, for instance, Eloisa had been published in a certain country, I am
convinced it would not have been read through by a single person, and the work would have been
stifled in its birth.
I have collected most of the letters written to me on the subject of this publication, and deposited
them, tied up together, in the hands of Madam de Nadillac. Should this collection ever be given to the
world, very singular things will be seen, and an opposition of opinion, which shows what it is to have to
do with the public. The thing least kept in view, and which will ever distinguish it from every other
work, is the simplicity of the subject and the continuation of the interest, which, confined to three
persons, is kept up throughout six volumes, without episode, romantic adventure, or anything malicious
either in the persons or actions. Diderot complimented Richardson on the prodigious variety of his
portraits  and  the  multiplicity  of  his  persons.  In  fact,  Richardson  has  the  merit  of  having  well
characterized them all; but with respect to their number, he has that in common with the most insipid
writers of novels who attempt to make up for the sterility of their ideas by multiplying persons and
adventures. It is easy to awaken the attention by incessantly presenting unheard of adventures and new
faces, which pass before the imagination as the figures in a magic lanthorn do before the eye; but to
keep up that attention to the same objects, and without the aid of the wonderful, is certainly more
difficult; and if, everything else being equal, the simplicity of the subject adds to the beauty of the
work, the novels of Richardson, superior in so many other respects, cannot in this be compared to mine.
I know it is already forgotten, and the cause of its being so; but it will be taken up again. All my fear
was that, by an extreme simplicity, the narrative would be fatiguing, and that it was not sufficiently
interesting to engage the attention throughout the whole. I was relieved from this apprehension by a
circumstance which alone was more flattering to my pride than all the compliments made me upon the
work.
  It appeared at the beginning of the carnival; a hawker carried it to the Princess of Talmont--[It was
not the princess, but some other lady, whose name I do not know.]--on the evening of a ball night at the
opera. After supper the Princess dressed herself for the ball, and until the hour of going there, took up
the new novel. At midnight she ordered the horses to be put into the carriage, and continued to read.
The servant returned to tell her the horses were put to; she made no answer. Her people perceiving she
forgot herself, came to tell her it was two o'clock. "There is yet no hurry," replied the princess, still
reading on. Some time afterwards, her watch having stopped, she rang to know the hour. She was told it
was four o'clock. "That being the case," she said, "it is too late to go to the ball; let the horses be taken
off." She undressed herself and passed the rest of the night in reading.
  Ever since I came to the knowledge of this circumstance, I have had a constant desire to see the
lady, not only to know from herself whether or not what I have related be exactly true, but because I
have always thought it impossible to be interested in so lively a manner in the happiness of Julia,
without having that sixth and moral sense with which so few hearts are endowed, and without which no
person whatever can understand the sentiments of mine.
  What rendered the women so favorable to me was, their being persuaded that I had written my own
history, and was myself the hero of the romance. This opinion was so firmly established, that Madam
de Polignac wrote to Madam de Verdelin, begging she would prevail upon me to show her the portraitof Julia. Everybody thought it was impossible so strongly to express sentiments without having felt
them, or thus to describe the transports of love, unless immediately from the feelings of the heart. This
was true, and I certainly wrote the novel during the time my imagination was inflamed to ecstasy; but
they who thought real objects necessary to this effect were deceived, and far from conceiving to what a
degree I can at will produce it for imaginary beings. Without Madam d'Houdetot, and the recollection
of a few circumstances in my youth, the amours I have felt and described would have been with fairy
nymphs. I was unwilling either to confirm or destroy an error which was advantageous to me. The
reader may see in the preface a dialogue, which I had printed separately, in what manner I left the
public in suspense. Rigorous people say, I ought to have explicity declared the truth. For my part I see
no reason for this, nor anything that could oblige me to it, and am of opinion there would have been
more folly than candor in the declaration without necessity.
  Much about the same time the 'Paix Perpetuelle' made its appearance, of this I had the year before
given the manuscript to a certain M. de Bastide, the author of a journal called Le Monde, into which he
would at all events cram all my manuscripts. He was known to M. Duclos, and came in his name to beg
I would help him to fill the Monde. He had heard speak of Eloisa, and would have me put this into his
journal; he was also desirous of making the same use of Emilius; he would have asked me for the
Social Contract for the same purpose, had he suspected it to be written. At length, fatigued with his
importunities, I resolved upon letting him have the Paix Perpetuelle, which I gave him for twelve louis.
Our agreement was, that he should print it in his journal; but as soon as he became the proprietor of the
manuscript,  he  thought  proper  to  print  it  separately,  with  a  few  retrenchments,  which  the  censor
required him to make. What would have happened had I joined to the work my opinion of it, which
fortunately I did not communicate to M. de Bastide, nor was it comprehended in our agreement? This
remains still in manuscript amongst my papers. If ever it be made public, the world will see how much
the pleasantries and self-sufficient manner of M. de Voltaire on the subject must have made me, who
was so well acquainted with the short-sightedness of this poor man in political matters, of which he
took it into his head to speak, shake my sides with laughter.
  In the midst of my success with the women and the public, I felt I lost ground at the Hotel de
Luxembourg, not with the marechal, whose goodness to me seemed daily to increase, but with his lady.
Since I had had nothing more to read to her, the door of her apartment was not so frequently open to
me, and during her stay at Montmorency, although I regularly presented myself, I seldom saw her
except at table. My place even there was not distinctly marked out as usual. As she no longer offered
me that by her side, and spoke to me but seldom, not having on my part much to say to her, I was well
satisfied with another, where I was more at my ease, especially in the evening; for I mechanically
contracted the habit of placing myself nearer and nearer to the marechal.
  Apropos of the evening: I recollect having said I did not sup at the castle, and this was true, at the
beginning of my acquaintance there; but as M. de Luxembourg did not dine, nor even sit down to table,
it happened that I was for several months, and already very familiar in the family, without ever having
eaten with him. This he had the goodness to remark, upon which I determined to sup there from time to
time, when the company was not numerous; I did so, and found the suppers very agreeable, as the
dinners were taken almost standing; whereas the former were long, everybody remaining seated with
pleasure after a long walk; and very good and agreeable, because M. de Luxembourg loved good
eating, and the honors of them were done in a charming manner by madam de marechale. Without this
explanation it would be difficult to understand the end of a letter from M. de Luxembourg, in which he
says he recollects our walks with the greatest pleasure; especially, adds he, when in the evening we
entered the court and did not find there the traces of carriages. The rake being every morning drawn
over the gravel to efface the marks left by the coach wheels, I judged by the number of ruts of that of
the persons who had arrived in the afternoon.
  This year, 1761, completed the heavy losses this good man had suffered since I had had the honor
of being known to him. As if it had been ordained that the evils prepared for me by destiny should
begin by the man to whom I was most attached, and who was the most worthy of esteem. The first yearhe lost his sister, the Duchess of Villeroy; the second, his daughter, the Princess of Robeck; the third,
he lost in the Duke of Montmorency his only son; and in the Comte de Luxembourg, his grandson, the
last two supporters of the branch of which he was, and of his name. He supported all these losses with
apparent courage, but his heart incessantly bled in secret during the rest of his life, and his health was
ever after upon the decline. The unexpected and tragical death of his son must have afflicted him the
more, as it happened immediately after the king had granted him for his child, and given him the
promise for his grandson, the reversion of the commission he himself then held of the captain of the
Gardes de Corps. He had the mortification to see the last, a most promising young man, perish by
degrees from the blind confidence of the mother in the physician, who giving the unhappy youth
medicines for food, suffered him to die of inanition. Alas! had my advice been taken, the grandfather
and the grandson would both still have been alive. What did not I say and write to the marechal, what
remonstrances did I make to Madam de Montmorency, upon the more than severe regimen, which,
upon the faith of physicians, she made her son observe! Madam de Luxembourg, who thought as I did,
would not usurp the authority of the mother; M. de Luxembourg, a man of mild and easy character, did
not like to contradict her. Madam de Montmorency had in Borden a confidence to which her son at
length became a victim. How delighted was the poor creature when he could obtain permission to come
to Mont Louis with Madam de Boufflers, to ask Theresa for some victuals for his famished stomach!
How did I secretly deplore the miseries of greatness in seeing this only heir to a immense fortune, a
great name, and so many dignified titles, devour with the greediness of a beggar a wretched morsel of
bread! At length, notwithstanding all I could say and do, the physician triumphed, and the child died of
hunger.
  The same confidence in quacks, which destroyed the grandson, hastened the dissolution of the
grandfather, and to this he added the pusillanimity of wishing to dissimulate the infirmities of age. M.
de Luxembourg had at intervals a pain in the great toe; he was seized with it at Montmorency, which
deprived him of sleep, and brought on slight fever. I had courage enough to pronounce the word gout.
Madam  de  Luxembourg  gave  me  a  reprimand.  The  surgeon,  valet  de  chambre  of  the  marechal,
maintained it was not the gout, and dressed the suffering part with beaume tranquille. Unfortunately the
pain subsided, and when it returned the same remedy was had recourse to. The constitution of the
marechal was weakened, and his disorder increased, as did his remedies in the same proportion. Madam
de Luxembourg, who at length perceived the primary disorder to be the gout, objected to the dangerous
manner of treating it. Things were afterwards concealed from her, and M. de Luxembourg in a few
years lost his life in consequence of his obstinate adherence to what he imagined to be a method of
cure. But let me not anticipate misfortune: how many others have I to relate before I come to this!
  It is singular with what fatality everything I could say and do seemed of a nature to displease
Madam de Luxembourg, even when I had it most at heart to preserve her friendship. The repeated
afflictions which fell upon M. de Luxembourg still attached me to him the more, and consequently to
Madam de Luxembourg; for they always seemed to me to be so sincerely united, that the sentiments in
favor of the one necessarily extended to the other. The marechal grew old. His assiduity at court, the
cares this brought on, continually hunting, fatigue, and especially that of the service during the quarter
he was in waiting, required the vigor of a young man, and I did not perceive anything that could
support his in that course of life; since, besides after his death, his dignities were to be dispersed and his
name extinct, it was by no means necessary for him to continue a laborious life of which the principal
object had been to dispose the prince favorably to his children. One day when we three were together,
and he complained of the fatigues of the court, as a man who had been discouraged by his losses, I took
the liberty to speak of retirement, and to give him the advice Cyneas gave to Pyrrhus. He sighed, and
returned no positive answer. But the moment Madam de Luxembourg found me alone she reprimanded
me severely for what I had said, at which she seemed to be alarmed. She made a remark of which I so
strongly felt the justness that I determined never again to touch upon the subject: this was, that the long
habit of living at court made that life necessary, that it was become a matter of amusement for M. de
Luxembourg, and that the retirement I proposed to him would be less a relaxation from care than anexile, in which inactivity, weariness and melancholy would soon put an end to his existence. Although
she must have perceived I was convinced, and ought to have relied upon the promise I made her, and
which I faithfully kept, she still seemed to doubt of it; and I recollect that the conversations I afterwards
had with the marechal were less frequent and almost always interrupted.
  Whilst my stupidity and awkwardness injured me in her opinion, persons whom she frequently saw
and most loved, were far from being disposed to aid me in gaining what I had lost. The Abbe de
Boufflers especially, a young man as lofty as it was possible for a man to be, never seemed well
disposed towards me; and besides his being the only person of the society of Madam de Luxembourg
who never showed me the least attention, I thought I perceived I lost something with her every time he
came to the castle. It is true that without his wishing this to be the case, his presence alone was
sufficient to produce the effect; so much did his graceful and elegant manner render still more dull my
stupid propositi. During the first two years he seldom came to Montmorency, and by the indulgence of
Madam de Luxembourg I had tolerably supported myself, but as soon as his visits began to be regular I
was irretrievably lost. I wished to take refuge under his wing, and gain his friendship; but the same
awkwardness  which  made  it  necessary  I  should  please  him  prevented  me  from  succeeding  in  the
attempt I made to do it, and what I did with that intention entirely lost me with Madam de Luxembourg,
without being of the least service to me with the abbe. With his understanding he might have succeeded
in  anything,  but  the  impossibility  of  applying  himself,  and  his  turn  for  dissipation,  prevented  his
acquiring a perfect knowledge of any subject. His talents are however various, and this is sufficient for
the circles in which he wishes to distinguish himself. He writes light poetry and fashionable letters,
strums on the cithern, and pretends to draw with crayon. He took it into his head to attempt the portrait
of Madam de Luxembourg; the sketch he produced was horrid. She said it did not in the least resemble
her and this was true. The traitorous abbe consulted me, and I like a fool and a liar, said there was a
likeness. I wished to flatter the abbe, but I did not please the lady who noted down what I had said, and
the abbe, having obtained what he wanted, laughed at me in his turn. I perceived by the ill success of
this my late beginning the necessity of making another attempt to flatter 'invita Minerva'.
  My talent was that of telling men useful but severe truths with energy and courage; to this it was
necessary to confine myself. Not only I was not born to flatter, but I knew not how to commend. The
awkwardness of the manner in which I have sometimes bestowed eulogium has done me more harm
than the severity of my censure. Of this I have to adduce one terrible instance, the consequences of
which have not only fixed my fate for the rest of my life, but will perhaps decide on my reputation
throughout all posterity.
  During the residence of M. de Luxembourg at Montmorency, M. de Choiseul sometimes came to
supper at the castle. He arrived there one day after I had left it. My name was mentioned, and M. de
Luxembourg related to him what had happened at Venice between me and M. de Montaigu. M. de
Choiseul said it was a pity I had quitted that track, and that if I chose to enter it again he would most
willingly give me employment. M. de Luxembourg told me what had passed. Of this I was the more
sensible as I was not accustomed to be spoiled by ministers, and had I been in a better state of health it
is not certain that I should not have been guilty of a new folly. Ambition never had power over my
mind except during the short intervals in which every other passion left me at liberty; but one of these
intervals would have been sufficient to determine me. This good intention of M. de Choiseul gained
him  my  attachment  and  increased  the  esteem  which,  in  consequence  of  some  operations  in  his
administration, I had conceived for his talents; and the family compact in particular had appeared to me
to evince a statesman of the first order. He moreover gained ground in my estimation by the little
respect  I  entertained  for  his  predecessors,  not  even  excepting  Madam  de  Pompadour,  whom  I
considered as a species of prime minister, and when it was reported that one of these two would expel
the other, I thought I offered up prayers for the honor of France when I wished that M. de Choiseul
might triumph. I had always felt an antipathy to Madam de Pompadour, even before her preferment; I
had seen her with Madam de la Popliniere when her name was still Madam d'Etioles. I was afterwards
dissatisfied with her silence on the subject of Diderot, and with her proceedings relative to myself, aswell on the subject of the 'Muses Galantes', as on that of the 'Devin du Village', which had not in any
manner produced me advantages proportioned to its success; and on all occasions I had found her but
little disposed to serve me. This however did not prevent the Chevalier de Lorenzy from proposing to
me to write something in praise of that lady, insinuating that I might acquire some advantage by it. The
proposition excited my indignation, the more as I perceived it did not come from himself, knowing that,
passive  as  he  was,  he  thought  and  acted  according  to  the  impulsion  he  received.  I  am  so  little
accustomed to constraint that it was impossible for me to conceal from him my disdain, nor from
anybody the moderate opinion I had of the favorite; this I am sure she knew, and thus my own interest
was added to my natural inclination in the wishes I formed for M. de Choiseul. Having a great esteem
for his talents, which was all I knew of him, full of gratitude for his kind intentions, and moreover
unacquainted in my retirement with his taste and manner of living, I already considered him as the
avenger of the public and myself; and being at that time writing the conclusion of my Social Contract, I
stated in it, in a single passage, what I thought of preceding ministers, and of him by whom they began
to be eclipsed. On this occasion I acted contrary to my most constant maxim; and besides, I did not
recollect  that,  in  bestowing  praise  and  strongly  censuring  in  the  same  article,  without  naming  the
persons, the language must be so appropriated to those to whom it is applicable, that the most ticklish
pride cannot find in it the least thing equivocal. I was in this respect in such an imprudent security, that
I never once thought it was possible any one should make a false application. It will soon appear
whether or not I was right.
  One of my misfortunes was always to be connected with some female author. This I thought I might
avoid amongst the great. I was deceived; it still pursued me. Madam de Luxembourg was not, however;
at least that I know of, attacked with the mania of writing; but Madam de Boufflers was. She wrote a
tragedy in prose, which, in the first place, was read, handed about, and highly spoken of in the society
of  the  Prince  Conti,  and  upon  which,  not  satisfied  with  the  encomiums  she  received,  she  would
absolutely consult me for the purpose of having mine. This she obtained, but with that moderation
which the work deserved. She besides had with it the information I thought it my duty to give her, that
her piece, entitled 'L'Esclave Genereux', greatly resembled the English tragedy of 'Oroonoko', but little
known in France, although translated into the French language. Madam de Bouffiers thanked me for the
remark, but, however, assured me there was not the least resemblance between her piece and the other.
I never spoke of the plagiarisms except to herself, and I did it to discharge a duty she had imposed on
me; but this has not since prevented me from frequently recollecting the consequences of the sincerity
of Gil Blas to the preaching archbishop.
  Besides the Abbe de Bouffiers, by whom I was not beloved, and Madam de Bouffiers, in whose
opinion I was guilty of that which neither women nor authors ever pardon, the other friends of Madam
de Luxembourg never seemed much disposed to become mine, particularly the President Henault, who,
enrolled  amongst  authors,  was  not  exempt  from  their  weaknesses;  also  Madam  du  Deffand,  and
Mademoiselle de Lespinasse, both intimate with Voltaire and the friends of D'Alembert, with whom the
latter at length lived, however upon an honorable footing, for it cannot be understood I mean otherwise.
I first began to interest myself for Madam du Deffand, whom the loss of her eyes made an object of
commiseration in mine; but her manner of living so contrary to my own, that her hour of going to bed
was almost mine for rising; her unbounded passion for low wit, the importance she gave to every kind
of printed trash, either complimentary or abusive, the despotism and transports of her oracles, her
excessive admiration or dislike of everything, which did not permit her to speak upon any subject
without convulsions, her inconceivable prejudices, invincible obstinacy, and the enthusiasm of folly to
which this carried her in her passionate judgments; all disgusted me and diminished the attention I
wished to pay her. I neglected her and she perceived it; this was enough to set her in a rage, and,
although I was sufficiently aware how much a woman of her character was to be feared, I preferred
exposing myself to the scourge of her hatred rather than to that of her friendship.
  My having so few friends in the society of Madam de Luxembourg would not have been in the least
dangerous had I had no enemies in the family. Of these I had but one, who, in my then situation, was aspowerful as a hundred. It certainly was not M. de Villeroy, her brother; for he not only came to see me,
but had several times invited me to Villeroy; and as I had answered to the invitation with all possible
politeness and respect, he had taken my vague manner of doing it as a consent, and arranged with
Madam de Luxembourg a journey of a fortnight, in which it was proposed to me to make one of the
party. As the cares my health then required did not permit me to go from home without risk, I prayed
Madam de Luxembourg to have the goodness to make my apologies. Her answer proves this was done
with all possible ease, and M. de Villeroy still continued to show me his usual marks of goodness. His
nephew and heir, the young Marquis of Villeroy, had not for me the same benevolence, nor had I for
him the respect I had for his uncle. His harebrained manner rendered him insupportable to me, and my
coldness drew upon me his aversion. He insultingly attacked me one evening at table, and I had the
worst of it because I am a fool, without presence of mind; and because anger, instead of rendering my
wit more poignant, deprives me of the little I have. I had a dog which had been given me when he was
quite young, soon after my arrival at the Hermitage, and which I had called Duke. This dog, not
handsome, but rare of his kind, of which I had made my companion and friend, a title which he
certainly merited much more than most of the persons by whom it was taken, became in great request at
the castle of Montmorency for his good nature and fondness, and the attachment we had for each other;
but from a foolish pusillanimity I had changed his name to Turk, as if there were not many dogs called
Marquis, without giving the least offence to any marquis whatsoever. The Marquis of Villeroy, who
knew of the change of name, attacked me in such a manner that I was obliged openly at table to relate
what I had done. Whatever there might be offensive in the name of duke, it was not in my having given
but in my having taken it away. The worst of it all was, there were many dukes present, amongst others
M. de Luxembourg and his son; and the Marquis de Villeroy, who was one day to have, and now has
the title, enjoyed in the most cruel manner the embarrassment into which he had thrown me. I was told
the next day his aunt had severely reprimanded him, and it may be judged whether or not, supposing
her to have been serious, this put me upon better terms with him.
  To enable me to support his enmity I had no person, neither at the Hotel de Luxembourg nor at the
Temple, except the Chevalier de Lorenzy, who professed himself my friend; but he was more that of
D'Alembert, under whose protection he passed with women for a great geometrician. He was more,
over the cicisbe, or rather the complaisant chevalier of the Countess of Boufflers, a great friend also to
D'Alembert, and the Chevalier de Lorenzy was the most passive instrument in her hands. Thus, far
from having in that circle any counter-balance to my inaptitude, to keep me in the good graces of
Madam de Luxembourg, everybody who approached her seemed to concur in injuring me in her good
opinion. Yet, besides Emilius, with which she charged herself, she gave me at the same time another
mark of her benevolence, which made me imagine that, although wearied with my conversation, she
would still preserve for me the friendship she had so many times promised me for life.
  As soon as I thought I could depend upon this, I began to ease my heart, by confessing to her all my
faults, having made it an inviolable maxim to show myself to my friends such as I really was, neither
better nor worse. I had declared to her my connection with Theresa, and everything that had resulted
from it, without concealing the manner in which I had disposed of my children. She had received my
confessions favorably, and even too much so, since she spared me the censures I so much merited; and
what made the greatest impression upon me was her goodness to Theresa, making her presents, sending
for her, and begging her to come and see her, receiving her with caresses, and often embracing her in
public. This poor girl was in transports of joy and gratitude, of which I certainly partook; the friendship
Madam de Luxembourg showed me in her condescensions to Theresa affected me much more than if
they had been made immediately to myself.
  Things remained in this state for a considerable time; but at length Madam de Luxembourg carried
her goodness so far as to have a desire to take one of my children from the hospital. She knew I had put
a cipher into the swaddling clothes of the eldest; she asked me for the counterpart of the cipher, and I
gave it to her. In this research she employed La Roche, her valet de chambre and confidential servant,
who made vain inquiries, although after only about twelve or fourteen years, had the registers of thefoundling hospital been in order, or the search properly made, the original cipher ought to have been
found. However this may be, I was less sorry for his want of success than I should have been had I
from time to time continued to see the child from its birth until that moment. If by the aid of the
indications given, another child had been presented as my own, the doubt of its being so in fact, and the
fear of having one thus substituted for it, would have contracted my affections, and I should not have
tasted  of  the  charm  of  the  real  sentiment  of  nature.  This  during  infancy  stands  in  need  of  being
supported by habit. The long absence of a child whom the father has seen but for an instant, weakens,
and at length annihilates paternal sentiment, and parents will never love a child sent to nurse, like that
which is brought up under their eyes. This reflection may extenuate my faults in their effects, but it
must aggravate them in their source.
  It may not perhaps be useless to remark that by the means of Theresa, the same La Roche became
acquainted with Madam le Vasseur, whom Grimm still kept at Deuil, near La Chevrette, and not far
from Montmorency.
  After my departure it was by means of La Roche that I continued to send this woman the money I
had constantly sent her at stated times, and I am of opinion he often carried her presents from Madam
de Luxembourg; therefore she certainly was not to be pitied, although she constantly complained. With
respect to Grimm, as I am not fond of speaking of persons whom I ought to hate, I never mentioned his
name to Madam de Luxembourg, except when I could not avoid it; but she frequently made him the
subject of conversation, without telling me what she thought of the man, or letting me discover whether
or not he was of her acquaintance. Reserve with people I love and who are open with me being contrary
to my nature, especially in things relating to themselves, I have since that time frequently thought of
that of Madam de Luxembourg; but never, except when other events rendered the recollection natural.
  Having waited a long time without hearing speak of Emilius, after I had given it to Madam de
Luxembourg, I at last heard the agreement was made at Paris, with the bookseller Duchesne, and by
him with Neaulme, of Amsterdam. Madam de Luxembourg sent me the original and the duplicate of
my agreement with Duchesne, that I might sign them. I discovered the writing to be by the same hand
as that of the letters of M. de Malesherbes, which he himself did not write. The certainty that my
agreement was made by the consent, and under the eye of that magistrate, made me sign without
hesitation. Duchesne gave me for the manuscript six thousand livres(two hundred and fifty pounds),
half in specie, and one or two hundred copies. After having signed the two parts, I sent them both to
Madam de Luxembourg, according to her desire; she gave one to Duchesne, and instead of returning
the other kept it herself, so that I never saw it afterwards.
  My acquaintance with M. and Madam de Luxembourg, though it diverted me a little from my plan
of retirement, did not make me entirely renounce it. Even at the time I was most in favor with Madam
de Luxembourg, I always felt that nothing but my sincere attachment to the marechal and herself could
render to me supportable the people with whom they were connected, and all the difficulty I had was in
conciliating this attachment with a manner of life more agreeable to my inclination, and less contrary to
my health, which constraint and late suppers continually deranged, notwithstanding all the care taken to
prevent it; for in this, as in everything else, attention was carried as far as possible; thus, for instance,
every  evening  after  supper  the  marechal,  who  went  early  to  bed,  never  failed,  notwithstanding
everything that could be said to the contrary, to make me withdraw at the same time. It was not until
some little time before my catastrophe that, for what reason I know not, he ceased to pay me that
attention. Before I perceived the coolness of Madam de Luxembourg, I was desirous, that I might not
expose myself to it, to execute my old project; but not having the means to that effect, I was obliged to
wait for the conclusion of the agreement for 'Emilius', and in the time I finished the 'Social Contract',
and sent it to Rey, fixing the price of the manuscript at a thousand livres (forty-one pounds), which he
paid me.
I ought not perhaps to omit a trifling circumstance relative to this manuscript. I gave it, well sealed
up, to Du Voisin, a minister in the pays de Vaud and chaplain at the Hotel de Hollande, who sometimes
came to see me, and took upon himself to send the packet to Rey, with whom he was connected. Themanuscript, written in a small letter, was but very trifling, and did not fill his pocket. Yet, in passing the
barriere, the packet fell, I know not by what means, into the hands of the Commis, who opened and
examined it, and afterwards returned it to him, when he had reclaimed it in the name of the ambassador.
This gave him an opportunity of reading it himself, which he ingeniously wrote me he had done,
speaking  highly  of  the  work,  without  suffering  a  word  of  criticism  or  censure  to  escape  him;
undoubtedly reserving to himself to become the avenger of Christianity as soon as the work should
appear. He resealed the packet and sent it to Rey. Such is the substance of his narrative in the letter in
which he gave an account of the affair, and is all I ever knew of the matter.
  Besides these two books and my dictionary of music, at which I still did something as opportunity
offered, I had other works of less importance ready to make their appearance, and which I proposed to
publish either separately or in my general collection, should I ever undertake it. The principal of these
works, most of which are still in manuscript in the hands of De Peyrou, was an essay on the origin of
Languages, which I had read to M. de Malesherbes and the Chevalier de Lorenzy, who spoke favorably
of it. I expected all the productions together would produce me a net capital of from eight to ten
thousand livres (three to four hundred pounds), which I intended to sink in annuities for my life and
that of Theresa; after which, our design, as I have already mentioned, was to go and live together in the
midst of some province, without further troubling the public about me, or myself with any other project
than that of peacefully ending my days and still continuing to do in my neighborhood all the good in
my power, and to write at leisure the memoirs which I intended.
  Such was my intention, and the execution of it was facilitated by an act of generosity in Rey, upon
which I cannot be silent. This bookseller, of whom so many unfavorable things were told me in Paris,
is, notwithstanding, the only one with whom I have always had reason to be satisfied. It is true, we
frequently disagreed as to the execution of my works. He was heedless and I was choleric; but in
matters of interest which related to them, although I never made with him an agreement in form, I
always found in him great exactness and probity. He is also the only person of his profession who
frankly confessed to me he gained largely by my means; and he frequently, when he offered me a part
of his fortune, told me I was the author of it all. Not finding the means of exercising his gratitude
immediately upon myself, he wished at least to give me proofs of it in the person of my governante,
upon whom he settled an annuity of three hundred livres (twelve pounds), expressing in the deed that it
was an acknowledgment for the advantages I had procured him. This he did between himself and me,
without ostentation, pretension, or noise, and had not I spoken of it to anybody, not a single person
would ever have known anything of the matter. I was so pleased with this action that I became attached
to Rey, and conceived for him a real friendship. Sometime afterwards he desired I would become
godfather to one of his children; I consented, and a part of my regret in the situation to which I am
reduced, is my being deprived of the means of rendering in future my attachment of my goddaughter
useful  to  her  and  her  parents.  Why  am  I,  who  am  so  sensible  of  the  modest  generosity  of  this
bookseller, so little so of the noisy eagerness of many persons of the highest rank, who pompously fill
the world with accounts of the services they say they wished to render me, but the good effects of
which I never felt? Is it their fault or mine? Are they nothing more than vain; is my insensibility purely
ingratitude? Intelligent reader weigh and determine; for my part I say no more.
  This pension was a great resource to Theresa and considerable alleviation to me, although I was far
from receiving from it a direct advantage, any more than from the presents that were made her.
  She herself has always disposed of everything. When I kept her money I gave her a faithful account
of it, without ever applying any part of the deposit to our common expenses, not even when she was
richer than myself. "What is mine is ours," said I to her; "and what is thine is thine." I never departed
from this maxim. They who have had the baseness to accuse me of receiving by her hands that which I
refused to take with mine, undoubtedly judged of my heart by their own, and knew but little of me. I
would willingly eat with her the bread she should have earned, but not that she should have had given
her. For a proof of this I appeal to herself, both now and hereafter, when, according to the course of
nature, she shall have survived me. Unfortunately, she understands but little of economy in any respect,and is, besides, careless and extravagant, not from vanity nor gluttony, but solely from negligence. No
creature  is  perfect  here  below,  and  since  the  excellent  qualities  must  be  accompanied  with  some
detects; I prefer these to vices; although her defects are more prejudicial to us both. The efforts I have
made, as formerly I did for mamma, to accumulate something in advance which might some day be to
her a never-failing resource, are not to be conceived; but my cares were always ineffectual.
  Neither of these women ever called themselves to an account, and, notwithstanding all my efforts,
everything  I  acquired  was  dissipated  as  fast  as  it  came.  Notwithstanding  the  great  simplicity  of
Theresa's dress, the pension from Rey has never been sufficient to buy her clothes, and I have every
year been under the necessity of adding something to it for that purpose. We are neither of us born to be
rich, and this I certainly do not reckon amongst our misfortunes.
  The 'Social Contract' was soon printed. This was not the case with 'Emilius', for the publication of
which I waited to go into the retirement I meditated. Duchesne, from time to time, sent me specimens
of impression to choose from; when I had made my choice, instead of beginning he sent me others.
When, at length, we were fully determined on the size and letter, and several sheets were already
printed off, on some trifling alteration I made in a proof, he began the whole again; and at the end of six
months  we  were  in  less  forwardness  than  on  the  first  day.  During  all  these  experiments  I  clearly
perceived the work was printing in France as well as in Holland, and that two editions of it were
preparing at the same time. What could I do? The manuscript was no longer mine. Far from having
anything  to  do  with  the  edition  in  France,  I  was  always  against  it;  but  since,  at  length,  this  was
preparing in spite of all opposition, and was to serve as a model to the other, it was necessary I should
cast my eyes over it and examine the proofs, that my work might not be mutilated. It was, besides,
printed so much by the consent of the magistrate, that it was he who, in some measure, directed the
undertaking; he likewise wrote to me frequently, and once came to see me and converse on the subject
upon an occasion of which I am going to speak.
  Whilst Duchesne crept like a snail, Neaulme, whom he withheld, scarcely moved at all. The sheets
were not regularly sent him as they were printed. He thought there was some trick in the manoeuvre of
Duchesne, that is, of Guy who acted for him; and perceiving the terms of the agreement to be departed
from, he wrote me letter after letter full of complaints, and it was less possible for me to remove the
subject of them than that of those I myself had to make. His friend Guerin, who at that time came
frequently to see my house, never ceased speaking to me about the work, but always with the greatest
reserve. He knew and he did not know that it was printing in France, and that the magistrate had a hand
in it. In expressing his concern for my embarrassment, he seemed to accuse me of imprudence without
ever  saying  in  what  this  consisted;  he  incessantly  equivocated,  and  seemed  to  speak  for  no  other
purpose than to hear what I had to say. I thought myself so secure that I laughed at his mystery and
circumspection as at a habit he had contracted with ministers and magistrates whose offices he much
frequented. Certain of having conformed to every rule with the work, and strongly persuaded that I had
not only the consent and protection of the magistrate, but that the book merited and had obtained the
favor of the minister, I congratulated myself upon my courage in doing good, and laughed at my
pusillanimous friends who seemed uneasy on my account. Duclos was one of these, and I confess my
confidence in his understanding and uprightness might have alarmed me, had I had less in the utility of
the work and in the probity of those by whom it was patronized. He came from the house of M. Baille
to see me whilst 'Emilius' was in the press; he spoke to me concerning it; I read to him the 'Profession
of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar', to which he listened attentively and, as it seemed to me with pleasure.
When I had finished he said: "What! citizen, this is a part of a work now printing in Paris?"--"Yes,"
answered I, and it ought to be printed at the Louvre by order of the king."--I confess it," replied he; "but
pray do not mention to anybody your having read to me this fragment."
  This striking manner of expressing himself surprised without alarming me. I knew Duclos was
intimate with M. de Malesherbes, and I could not conceive how it was possible he should think so
differently from him upon the same subject.
I had lived at Montmorency for the last four years without ever having had there one day of goodhealth. Although the air is excellent, the water is bad, and this may possibly be one of the causes which
contributed to increase my habitual complaints. Towards the end of the autumn of 1767, I fell quite ill,
and passed the whole winter in suffering almost without intermission. The physical ill, augmented by a
thousand inquietudes, rendered these terrible. For some time past my mind had been disturbed by
melancholy forebodings without my knowing to what these directly tended. I received anonymous
letters of an extraordinary nature, and others, that were signed, much of the same import. I received one
from a counsellor of the parliament of Paris, who, dissatisfied with the present constitution of things,
and foreseeing nothing but disagreeable events, consulted me upon the choice of an asylum at Geneva
or in Switzerland, to retire to with his family. An other was brought me from M. de -----, 'president a
mortier' of the parliament of -----, who proposed to me to draw up for this Parliament, which was then
at  variance  with  the  court,  memoirs  and  remonstrances,  and  offering  to  furnish  me  with  all  the
documents and materials necessary for that purpose.
  When I suffer I am subject to ill humor. This was the case when I received these letters, and my
answers to them, in which I flatly refused everything that was asked of me, bore strong marks of the
effect they had had upon my mind. I do not however reproach myself with this refusal, as the letters
might  be  so  many  snares  laid  by  my  enemies,  and  what  was  required  of  me  was  contrary  to  the
principles from which I was less willing than ever to swerve. But having it within my power to refuse
with politeness I did it with rudeness, and in this consists my error.
  [I  knew,  for  instance,  the  President  de  -----  to  be  connected  with  the  Encyclopedists  and  the
Holbachiens]
  The two letters of which I have just spoken will be found amongst my papers. The letter from the
chancellor did not absolutely surprise me, because I agreed with him in opinion, and with many others,
that the declining constitution of France threatened an approaching destruction. The disasters of an
unsuccessful war, all of which proceeded from a fault in the government; the incredible confusion in
the finances; the perpetual drawings upon the treasury by the administration, which was then divided
between two or three ministers, amongst whom reigned nothing but discord, and who, to counteract the
operations of each other, let the kingdom go to ruin; the discontent of the people, and of every other
rank of subjects; the obstinacy of a woman who, constantly sacrificing her judgment, if she indeed
possessed any, to her inclinations, kept from public employment persons capable of discharging the
duties of them, to place in them such as pleased her best; everything occurred in justifying the foresight
of the counsellor, that of the public, and my own. This, made me several times consider whether or not
I myself should seek an asylum out of the kingdom before it was torn by the dissensions by which it
seemed to be threatened; but relieved from my fears by my insignificance, and the peacefulness of my
disposition,  I  thought  that  in  the  state  of  solitude  in  which  I  was  determined  to  live,  no  public
commotion could reach me. I was sorry only that, in this state of things, M. de Luxembourg should
accept commissions which tended to injure him in the opinion of the persons of the place of which he
was governor. I could have wished he had prepared himself a retreat there, in case the great machine
had fallen in pieces, which seemed much to be apprehended; and still appears to me beyond a doubt,
that if the reins of government had not fallen into a single hand, the French monarchy would now be at
the last gasp.
  Whilst my situation became worse the printing of 'Emilius' went on more slowly, and was at length
suspended without my being able to learn the reason why; Guy did not deign to answer my letter of
inquiry,  and  I  could  obtain  no  information  from  any  person  of  what  was  going  forward.  M.  de
Malesherbes being then in the country. A misfortune never makes me uneasy provided I know in what
it consists; but it is my nature to be afraid of darkness, I tremble at the appearance of it; mystery always
gives  me  inquietude,  it  is  too  opposite  to  my  natural  disposition,  in  which  there  is  an  openness
bordering on imprudence. The sight of the most hideous monster would, I am of opinion, alarm me but
little; but if by night I were to see a figure in a white sheet I should be afraid of it. My imagination,
wrought upon by this long silence, was now employed in creating phantoms. I tormented myself the
more in endeavoring to discover the impediment to the printing of my last and best production, as I hadthe publication of it much at heart; and as I always carried everything to an extreme, I imagined that I
perceived in the suspension the suppression of the work. Yet, being unable to discover either the cause
or manner of it, I remained in the most cruel state of suspense. I wrote letter after letter to Guy, to M. de
Malesherbes and to Madam de Luxembourg, and not receiving answers, at least when I expected them,
my head became so affected that I was not far from a delirium. I unfortunately heard that Father Griffet,
a Jesuit, had spoken of 'Emilius' and repeated from it some passages. My imagination instantly unveiled
to me the mystery of iniquity; I saw the whole progress of it as clearly as if it had been revealed to me. I
figured to myself that the Jesuits, furious on account of the contemptuous manner in which I had
spoken of colleges, were in possession of my work; that it was they who had delayed the publication;
that, informed by their friend Guerin of my situation, and foreseeing my approaching dissolution, of
which I myself had no manner of doubt, they wished to delay the appearance of the work until after that
event, with an intention to curtail and mutilate it, and in favor of their own views, to attribute to me
sentiments  not  my  own.  The  number  of  facts  and  circumstances  which  occurred  to  my  mind,  in
confirmation of this silly proposition, and gave it an appearance of truth supported by evidence and
demonstration, is astonishing. I knew Guerin to be entirely in the interest of the Jesuits. I attributed to
them all the friendly advances he had made me; I was persuaded he had, by their entreaties, pressed me
to engage with Neaulme, who had given them the first sheets of my work; that they had afterwards
found means to stop the printing of it by Duchesne, and perhaps to get possession of the manuscript to
make such alterations in it as they should think proper, that after my death they might publish it
disguised  in  their  own  manner.  I  had  always  perceived,  notwithstanding  the  wheedling  of  Father
Berthier, that the Jesuits did not like me, not only as an Encyclopedist, but because all my principles
were more in opposition to their maxims and influence than the incredulity of my colleagues, since
atheistical and devout fanaticism, approaching each other by their common enmity to toleration, may
become united; a proof of which is seen in China, and in the cabal against myself; whereas religion,
both reasonable and moral, taking away all power over the conscience, deprives those who assume that
power of every resource. I knew the chancellor was a great friend to the Jesuits, and I had my fears less
the son, intimidated by the father, should find himself under the necessity of abandoning the work he
had protected. I besides imagined that I perceived this to be the case in the chicanery employed against
me relative to the first two volumes, in which alterations were required for reasons of which I could not
feel the force; whilst the other two volumes were known to contain things of such a nature as, had the
censor objected to them in the manner he did to the passages he thought exceptionable in the others,
would have required their being entirely written over again. I also understood, and M. de Malesherbes
himself told me of it, that the Abbe de Grave, whom he had charged with the inspection of this edition,
was another partisan of the Jesuits. I saw nothing but Jesuits, without considering that, upon the point
of being suppressed, and wholly taken up in making their defence, they had something which interested
them much more than the cavillings relative to a work in which they were not in question. I am wrong,
however, in saying this did not occur to me; for I really thought of it, and M. de Malesherbes took care
to make the observation to me the moment he heard of my extravagant suspicions. But by another of
those absurdities of a man, who, from the bosom of obscurity, will absolutely judge of the secret of
great affairs, with which he is totally unacquainted. I never could bring myself to believe the Jesuits
were in danger, and I considered the rumor of their suppression as an artful manoeuvre of their own to
deceive their adversaries. Their past successes, which had been uninterrupted, gave me so terrible an
idea of the power, that I already was grieved at the overthrow of the parliament. I knew M. de Choiseul
had prosecuted his studies under the Jesuits, that Madam de Pompadour was not upon bad terms with
them, and that their league with favorites and ministers had constantly appeared advantageous to their
order against their common enemies. The court seemed to remain neuter, and persuaded as I was that
should the society receive a severe check it would not come from the parliament, I saw in the inaction
of government the ground of their confidence and the omen of their triumph.
  In fine, perceiving in the rumors of the day nothing more than art and dissimulation on their part,
and thinking they, in their state of security, had time to watch over all their interests, I had had not theleast doubt of their shortly crushing Jansenism, the parliament and the Encyclopedists, with every other
association which should not submit to their yoke; and that if they ever suffered my work to appear,
this would not happen until it should be so transformed as to favor their pretensions, and thus make use
of my name the better to deceive my readers.
I felt my health and strength decline; and such was the horror with which my mind was filled, at the
idea of dishonor to my memory in the work most worthy of myself, that I am surprised so many
extravagant ideas did not occasion a speedy end to my existence. I never was so much afraid of death as
at this time, and had I died with the apprehensions I then had upon my mind, I should have died in
despair. At present, although I perceived no obstacle to the execution of the blackest and most dreadful
conspiracy ever formed against the memory of a man, I shall die much more in peace, certain of leaving
in my writings a testimony in my favor, and one which, sooner or later, will triumph over the calumnies
of mankind.
  M. de Malesherbes, who discovered the agitation of my mind, and to whom I acknowledged it, used
such endeavors to restore me to tranquility as proved his excessive goodness of heart. Madam de
Luxembourg aided him in his good work, and several times went to Duchesne to know in what state the
edition was. At length the impression was again begun, and the progress of it became more rapid than
ever, without my knowing for what reason it had been suspended. M. de Malesherbes took the trouble
to come to Montmorency to calm my mind; in this he succeeded, and the full confidence I had in his
uprightness having overcome the derangement of my poor head, gave efficacy to the endeavors he
made to restore it. After what he had seen of my anguish and delirium, it was natural he should think I
was to be pitied; and he really commiserated my situation. The expressions, incessantly repeated, of the
philosophical cabal by which he was surrounded, occurred to his memory. When I went to live at the
Hermitage, they, as I have already remarked, said I should not remain there long. When they saw I
persevered, they charged me with obstinacy and pride, proceeding from a want of courage to retract,
and  insisted  that  my  life  was  there  a  burden  to  me;  in  short,  that  I  was  very  wretched.  M.  de
Malesherbes believed this really to be the case, and wrote to me upon the subject. This error in a man
for whom I had so much esteem gave me some pain, and I wrote to him four letters successively, in
which I stated the real motives of my conduct, and made him fully acquainted with my taste, inclination
and character, and with the most interior sentiments of my heart. These letters, written hastily, almost
without taking pen from paper, and which I neither copied, corrected, nor even read, are perhaps the
only things I ever wrote with facility, which, in the midst of my sufferings, was, I think, astonishing. I
sighed, as I felt myself declining, at the thought of leaving in the midst of honest men an opinion of me
so far from truth; and by the sketch hastily given in my four letters, I endeavored, in some measure, to
substitute them to the memoirs I had proposed to write. They are expressive of my grief to M. de
Malesherbes, who showed them in Paris, and are, besides, a kind of summary of what I here give in
detail, and, on this account, merit preservation. The copy I begged of them some years afterwards will
be found amongst my papers.
  The only thing which continued to give me pain, in the idea of my approaching dissolution, was my
not having a man of letters for a friend, to whom I could confide my papers, that after my death he
might take a proper choice of such as were worthy of publication.
  After my journey to Geneva, I conceived a friendship for Moulton; this young man pleased me, and
I could have wished him to receive my last breath. I expressed to him this desire, and am of opinion he
would readily have complied with it, had not his affairs prevented him from so doing. Deprived of this
consolation, I still wished to give him a mark of my confidence by sending him the 'Profession of Faith
of the Savoyard Vicar' before it was published. He was pleased with the work, but did not in his answer
seem so fully to expect from it the effect of which I had but little doubt. He wished to receive from me
some fragment which I had not given to anybody else. I sent him the funeral oration of the late Duke of
Orleans; this I had written for the Abbe Darty, who had not pronounced it, because, contrary to his
expectation, another person was appointed to perform that ceremony.
  The printing of Emilius, after having been again taken in hand, was continued and completedwithout much difficulty; and I remarked this singularity, that after the curtailings so much insisted upon
in the first two volumes, the last two were passed over without an objection, and their contents did not
delay the publication for a moment. I had, however, some uneasiness which I must not pass over in
silence. After having been afraid of the Jesuits, I begun to fear the Jansenists and philosophers. An
enemy to party, faction and cabal, I never heard the least good of parties concerned in them. The
gossips had quitted their old abode and taken up their residence by the side of me, so that in their
chamber, everything said in mine, and upon the terrace, was distinctly heard; and from their garden it
would have been easy to scale the low wall by which it was separated from my alcove. This was
become my study; my table was covered with proofsheets of Emilius and the Social Contract and
stitching these sheets as they were sent to me, I had all my volumes a long time before they were
published. My negligence and the confidence I had in M. Mathas, in whose garden I was shut up,
frequently made me forget to lock the door at night, and in the morning I several times found it wide
open; this, however, would not have given me the least inquietude had I not thought my papers seemed
to have been deranged. After having several times made the same remark, I became more careful, and
locked the door. The lock was a bad one, and the key turned in it no more than half round. As I became
more attentive, I found my papers in a much greater confusion than they were when I left everything
open. At length I missed one of my volumes without knowing what was become of it until the morning
of the third day, when I again found it upon the table. I never suspected either M. Mathas or his nephew
M. du Moulin, knowing myself to be beloved by both, and my confidence in them was unbounded.
That I had in the gossips began to diminish. Although they were Jansenists, I knew them to have some
connection with D' Alembert, and moreover they all three lodged in the same house. This gave me
some uneasiness, and put me more upon my guard. I removed my papers from the alcove to my
chamber, and dropped my acquaintance with these people, having learned they had shown in several
houses the first volume of 'Emilius', which I had been imprudent enough to lend them. Although they
continued  until  my  departure  to  be  my  neighbors  I  never,  after  my  first  suspicions,  had  the  least
communication with them. The 'Social Contract' appeared a month or two before 'Emilius'. Rey, whom
I had desired never secretly to introduce into France any of my books, applied to the magistrate for
leave to send this book by Rouen, to which place he sent his package by sea. He received no answer,
and his bales, after remaining at Rouen several months, were returned to him, but not until an attempt
had been made to confiscate them; this, probably, would have been done had not he made a great
clamor. Several persons, whose curiosity the work had excited, sent to Amsterdam for copies, which
were circulated without being much noticed. Maulion, who had heard of this, and had, I believe, seen
the work, spoke to me on the subject with an air of mystery which surprised me, and would likewise
have made me uneasy if, certain of having conformed to every rule, I had not by virtue of my grand
maxim, kept my mind calm. I moreover had no doubt but M. de Choiseul, already well disposed
towards me, and sensible of the eulogium of his administration, which my esteem for him had induced
me to make in the work, would support me against the malevolence of Madam de Pompadour.
I certainly had then as much reason as ever to hope for the goodness of M. de Luxembourg, and
even for his assistance in case of need; for he never at any time had given me more frequent and more
pointed marks of his friendship. At the journey of Easter, my melancholy state no longer permitting me
to go to the castle, he never suffered a day to pass without coming to see me, and at length, perceiving
my sufferings to be incessant, he prevailed upon me to determine to see Friar Come. He immediately
sent for him, came with him, and had the courage, uncommon to a man of his rank, to remain with me
during the operation which was cruel and tedious. Upon the first examination, Come thought he found a
great stone, and told me so; at the second, he could not find it again. After having made a third attempt
with so much care and circumspection that I thought the time long, he declared there was no stone, but
that the prostate gland was schirrous and considerably thickened. He besides added, that I had a great
deal to suffer, and should live a long time. Should the second prediction be as fully accomplished as the
first, my sufferings are far from being at an end.
  It was thus I learned after having been so many years treated for disorders which I never had, thatmy incurable disease, without being mortal, would last as long as myself. My imagination, repressed by
this information, no longer presented to me in prospective a cruel death in the agonies of the stone.
  Delivered from imaginary evils, more cruel to me than those which were real, I more patiently
suffered the latter. It is certain I have since suffered less from my disorder than I had done before, and
every time I recollect that I owe this alleviation to M. de Luxembourg, his memory becomes more dear
to me.
  Restored, as I may say, to life, and more than ever occupied with the plan according to which I was
determined to pass the rest of my days, all the obstacle to the immediate execution of my design was
the publication of 'Emilius'. I thought of Touraine where I had already been and which pleased me
much, as well on account of the mildness of the climate, as on that of the character of the inhabitants.
  'La terra molle lieta a dilettosa Simile a se l'habitator produce.'
I had already spoken of my project to M. de Luxembourg, who endeavored to dissuade me from it; I
mentioned it to him a second time as a thing resolved upon. He then offered me the castle of Merlon,
fifteen leagues from Paris, as an asylum which might be agreeable to me, and where he and Madam de
Luxembourg  would  have  a  real  pleasure  in  seeing  me  settled.  The  proposition  made  a  pleasing
impression on my mind. But the first thing necessary was to see the place, and we agreed upon a day
when the marechal was to send his valet de chambre with a carriage to take me to it. On the day
appointed, I was much indisposed; the journey was postponed, and different circumstances prevented
me from ever making it. I have since learned the estate of Merlou did not belong to the marechal but to
his lady, on which account I was the less sorry I had not gone to live there.
  'Emilius' was at length given to the public, without my having heard further of retrenchments or
difficulties. Previous to the publication, the marechal asked me for all the letters M. de Malesherbes had
written to me on the subject of the work. My great confidence in both, and the perfect security in which
I  felt  myself,  prevented  me  from  reflecting  upon  this  extraordinary  and  even  alarming  request.  I
returned all the letters excepting one or two which, from inattention, were left between the leaves of a
book. A little time before this, M. de Malesherbes told me he should withdraw the letters I had written
to Duchesne during my alarm relative to the Jesuits, and, it must be confessed, these letters did no great
honor to my reason. But in my answer I assured him I would not in anything pass for being better than I
was, and that he might leave the letters where they were. I know not what he resolved upon.
  The publication of this work was not succeeded by the applause which had followed that of all my
other writings. No work was ever more highly spoken of in private, nor had any literary production
ever had less public approbation. What was said and written to me upon the subject by persons most
capable of judging, confirmed me in my opinion that it was the best, as well as the most important of all
the works I had produced. But everything favorable was said with an air of the most extraordinary
mystery, as if there had been a necessity of keeping it a secret. Madam de Boufflers, who wrote to me
that the author of the work merited a statue, and the homage of mankind, at the end of her letter desired
it might be returned to her. D'Alembert, who in his note said the work gave me a decided superiority,
and ought to place me at the head of men of letters, did not sign what he wrote, although he had signed
every note I had before received from him. Duclos, a sure friend, a man of veracity, but circumspect,
although he had a good opinion of the work, avoided mentioning it in his letters to me. La Condomine
fell upon the Confession of Faith, and wandered from the subject. Clairaut confined himself to the same
part; but he was not afraid of expressing to me the emotion which the reading of it had caused in him,
and in the most direct terms wrote to me that it had warmed his old imagination: of all those to whom I
had sent my book, he was the only person who spoke freely what he thought of it.
  Mathas, to whom I also had given a copy before the publication, lent it to M. de Blaire, counsellor
in the parliament of Strasbourg. M. de Blaire had a country-house at St. Gratien, and Mathas, his old
acquaintance, sometimes went to see him there. He made him read Emilius before it was published.
When  he  returned  it  to  him,  M.  de  Blaire  expressed  himself  in  the  following  terms,  which  were
repeated to me the same day: "M. Mathas, this is a very fine work, but it will in a short time be spoken
of more than, for the author might be wished." I laughed at the prediction, and saw in it nothing morethan the importance of a man of the robe, who treats everything with an air of mystery. All the alarming
observations  repeated  to  me  made  no  impression  upon  my  mind,  and,  far  from  foreseeing  the
catastrophe so near at hand, certain of the utility and excellence of my work, and that I had in every
respect conformed to established rules; convinced, as I thought I was that I should be supported by all
the credit of M. de Luxembourg and the favor of the ministry, I was satisfied with myself for the
resolution I had taken to retire in the midst of my triumphs, and at my return to crush those by whom I
was envied.
  One thing in the publication of the work alarmed me, less on account of my safety than for the
unburdening of my mind. At the Hermitage and at Montmorency I had seen with indignation the
vexations  which  the  jealous  care  of  the  pleasures  of  princes  causes  to  be  exercised  on  wretched
peasants, forced to suffer the havoc made by game in their fields, without daring to take any other
measure to prevent this devastation than that of making a noise, passing the night amongst the beans
and peas, with drums, kettles and bells, to keep off the wild boars. As I had been a witness to the
barbarous cruelty with which the Comte de Charolois treated these poor people, I had toward the end of
Emilius exclaimed against it. This was another infraction of my maxims, which has not remained
unpunished. I was informed that the people of the Prince of Conti were but little less severe upon his,
estates; I trembled less that prince, for whom I was penetrated with respect and gratitude, should take to
his own account what shocked humanity had made me say on that of others, and feel himself offended.
Yet, as my conscience fully acquitted me upon this article, I made myself easy, and by so doing acted
wisely: at least, I have not heard that this great prince took notice of the passage, which, besides, was
written long before I had the honor of being known to him.
  A few days either before or after the publication of my work, for I do not exactly recollect the time,
there appeared another work upon the same subject, taken verbatim from my first volume, except a few
stupid things which were joined to the extract. The book bore the name of a Genevese, one Balexsert,
and, according to the title-page, had gained the premium in the Academy of Harlem. I easily imagined
the academy and the premium to be newly founded, the better to conceal the plagiarism from the eyes
of the public; but I further perceived there was some prior intrigue which I could not unravel; either by
the lending of my manuscript, without which the theft could not have been committed, or for the
purpose  of  forging  the  story  of  the  pretended  premium,  to  which  it  was  necessary  to  give  some
foundation.  It  was  not  until  several  years  afterwards,  that  by  a  word  which  escaped  D'Ivernois,  I
penetrated the mystery and discovered those by whom Balexsert had been brought forward.
  The low murmurings which precede a storm began to be heard, and men of penetration clearly saw
there was something gathering, relative to me and my book, which would shortly break over my head.
For my part my stupidity was such, that, far from foreseeing my misfortune, I did not suspect even the
cause of it after I had felt its effect. It was artfully given out that while the Jesuits were treated with
severity,  no  indulgence  could  be  shown  to  books  nor  the  authors  of  them  in  which  religion  was
attacked. I was reproached with having put my name to Emilius, as if I had not put it to all my other
works of which nothing was said. Government seemed to fear it should be obliged to take some steps
which circumstances rendered necessary on account of my imprudence. Rumors to this effect reached
my ears, but gave me not much uneasiness: it never even came into my head, that there could be the
least thing in the whole affair which related to me personally, so perfectly irreproachable and well
supported  did  I  think  myself;  having  besides  conformed  to  every  ministerial  regulation,  I  did  not
apprehend Madam de Luxembourg would leave me in difficulties for an error, which, if it existed,
proceeded entirely from herself. But knowing the manner of proceeding in like cases, and that it was
customary to punish booksellers while authors were favored; I had some uneasiness on account of poor
Duchesne, whom I saw exposed to danger, should M. de Malesherbes abandon him.
  My tranquility still continued. Rumors increased and soon changed their nature. The public, and
especially the parliament, seemed irritated by my composure. In a few days the fermentation became
terrible, and the object of the menaces being changed, these were immediately addressed to me. The
parliamentarians were heard to declare that burning books was of no effect, the authors also should beburned with them; not a word was said of the booksellers. The first time these expressions, more
worthy of an inquisitor of Goa than a senator, were related to me, I had no doubt of their coming from
the Holbachiques with an intention to alarm me and drive me from France. I laughed at their puerile
manoeuvre, and said they would, had they known the real state of things, have thought of some other
means of inspiring me with fear; but the rumor at length became such that I perceived the matter was
serious. M. and Madam de Luxembourg had this year come to Montmorency in the month of June,
which, for their second journey, was more early than common. I heard but little there of my new books,
notwithstanding the noise they made in Paris; neither the marechal nor his lady said a single word to me
on the subject. However, one morning, when M. de Luxembourg and I were together, he asked me if, in
the 'Social Contract', I had spoken ill of M. de Choiseul. "I?" said I, retreating a few steps with surprise;
"no, I swear to you I have not; but on the contrary, I have made on him, and with a pen not given to
praise, the finest eulogium a minister ever received." I then showed him the passage. "And in Emilius?"
replied he. "Not a word," said I; "there is not in it a single word which relates to him."--"Ah!" said he,
with more vivacity than was common to him, "you should have taken the same care in the other book,
or  have  expressed  yourself  more  clearly!"  "I  thought,"  replied  I,  "what  I  wrote  could  not  be
misconstrued; my esteem for him was such as to make me extremely cautious not to be equivocal."
  He was again going to speak; I perceived him ready to open his mind: he stopped short and held his
tongue. Wretched policy of a courtier, which in the best of hearts, subjugates friendship itself!
  This conversation although short, explained to me my situation, at least in certain respects, and gave
me to understand that it was against myself the anger of administration was raised. The unheard of
fatality, which turned to my prejudice all the good I did and wrote, afflicted my heart. Yet, feeling
myself shielded in this affair by Madam de Luxembourg and M. de Malesherbes, I did not perceive in
what  my  persecutors  could  deprive  me  of  their  protection.  However,  I,  from  that  moment  was
convinced equity and judgment were no longer in question, and that no pains would be spared in
examining whether or not I was culpable. The storm became still more menacing. Neaulme himself
expressed to me, in the excess of his babbling, how much he repented having had anything to do in the
business, and his certainty of the fate with which the book and the author were threatened. One thing,
however,  alleviated  my  fears:  Madam  de  Luxembourg  was  so  calm,  satisfied  and  cheerful,  that  I
concluded she must necessarily be certain of the sufficiency of her credit, especially if she did not seem
to  have  the  least  apprehension  on  my  account;  moreover,  she  said  not  to  me  a  word  either  of
consolation or apology, and saw the turn the affair took with as much unconcern as if she had nothing
to do with it or anything else that related to me. What surprised me most was her silence. I thought she
should have said something on the subject. Madam de Boufflers seemed rather uneasy. She appeared
agitated, strained herself a good deal, assured me the Prince of Conti was taking great pains to ward off
the blow about to be directed against my person, and which she attributed to the nature of present
circumstances, in which it was of importance to the parliament not to leave the Jesuits an opening
whereby they might bring an accusation against it as being indifferent with respect to religion. She did
not, however, seem to depend much either upon the success of her own efforts or even those of the
prince. Her conversations, more alarming than consolatory, all tended to persuade me to leave the
kingdom and go to England, where she offered me an introduction to many of her friends, amongst
others one to the celebrated Hume, with whom she had long been upon a footing of intimate friendship.
Seeing  me  still  unshaken,  she  had  recourse  to  other  arguments  more  capable  of  disturbing  my
tranquillity. She intimated that, in case I was arrested and interrogated, I should be under the necessity
of  naming  Madam  de  Luxembourg,  and  that  her  friendship  for  me  required,  on  my  part,  such
precautions as were necessary to prevent her being exposed. My answer was, that should what she
seemed to apprehend come to pass, she need not be alarmed; that I should do nothing by which the lady
she mentioned might become a sufferer. She said such a resolution was more easily taken than adhered
to, and in this she was right, especially with respect to me, determined as I always have been neither to
prejudice myself nor lie before judges, whatever danger there might be in speaking the truth.
  Perceiving this observation had made some impression upon my mind, without however inducingme to resolve upon evasion, she spoke of the Bastile for a few weeks, as a means of placing me beyond
the reach of the jurisdiction of the parliament, which has nothing to do with prisoners of state. I had no
objection to this singular favor, provided it were not solicited in my name. As she never spoke of it a
second time, I afterwards thought her proposition was made to sound me, and that the party did not
think proper to have recourse to an expedient which would have put an end to everything.
  A few days afterwards the marechal received from the Cure de Dueil, the friend of Grimm and
Madam d'Epinay, a letter informing him, as from good authority, that the parliament was to proceed
against me with the greatest severity, and that, on a day which he mentioned, an order was to be given
to arrest me. I imagined this was fabricated by the Holbachiques; I knew the parliament to be very
attentive to forms, and that on this occasion, beginning by arresting me before it was juridically known
I avowed myself the author of the book was violating them all. I observed to Madam de Boufflers that
none  but  persons  accused  of  crimes  which  tend  to  endanger  the  public  safety  were,  on  a  simple
information ordered to be arrested lest they should escape punishment. But when government wish to
punish a crime like mine, which merits honor and recompense, the proceedings are directed against the
book, and the author is as much as possible left out of the question.
  Upon this she made some subtle distinction, which I have forgotten, to prove that ordering me to be
arrested instead of summoning me to be heard was a matter of favor. The next day I received a letter
from Guy, who informed me that having in the morning been with the attorney-general, he had seen in
his office a rough draft of a requisition against Emilius and the author. Guy, it is to be remembered, was
the partner of Duchesne, who had printed the work, and without apprehensions on his own account,
charitably gave this information to the author. The credit I gave to him maybe judged of.
  It was, no doubt, a very probable story, that a bookseller, admitted to an audience by the attorney-
general, should read at ease scattered rough drafts in the office of that magistrate! Madam de Boufflers
and others confirmed what he had said. By the absurdities which were incessantly rung in my ears, I
was almost tempted to believe that everybody I heard speak had lost their senses.
  Clearly perceiving that there was some mystery, which no one thought proper to explain to me, I
patiently awaited the event, depending upon my integrity and innocence, and thinking myself happy, let
the persecution which awaited me be what it would, to be called to the honor of suffering in the cause
of truth. Far from being afraid and concealing myself, I went every day to the castle, and in the
afternoon took my usual walk. On the eighth of June, the evening before the order was concluded on, I
walked in company with two professors of the oratory, Father Alamanni and Father Mandard. We
carried to Champeaux a little collation, which we ate with a keen appetite. We had forgotten to bring
glasses, and supplied the want of them by stalks of rye, through which we sucked up the wine from the
bottle, piquing ourselves upon the choice of large tubes to vie with each other in pumping up what we
drank. I never was more cheerful in my life.
I have related in what manner I lost my sleep during my youth. I had since that time contracted a
habit of reading every night in my bed, until I found my eyes begin to grow heavy. I then extinguished
my wax taper, and endeavored to slumber for a few moments, which were in general very short. The
book I commonly read at night was the Bible, which, in this manner I read five or six times from the
beginning to the end. This evening, finding myself less disposed to sleep than ordinary, I continued my
reading beyond the usual hour, and read the whole book which finishes at the Levite of Ephraim, the
Book of judges, if I mistake not, for since that time I have never once seen it. This history affected me
exceedingly, and, in a kind of a dream, my imagination still ran on it, when suddenly I was roused from
my stupor by a noise and light. Theresa carrying a candle, lighted M. la Roche, who perceiving me
hastily raise myself up, said: "Do not be alarmed; I come from Madam de Luxembourg, who, in her
letter incloses you another from the Prince of Conti." In fact, in the letter of Madam de Luxembourg I
found another, which an express from the prince had brought her, stating that, notwithstanding all his
efforts, it was determined to proceed against me with the utmost rigor. "The fermentation," said he, "is
extreme;  nothing  can  ward  off  the  blow;  the  court  requires  it,  and  the  parliament  will  absolutely
proceed;  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  an  order  will  be  made  to  arrest  him,  and  persons  willimmediately be sent to execute it. I have obtained a promise that he shall not be pursued if he makes his
escape; but if he persists in exposing himself to be taken this will immediately happen." La Roche
conjured me in behalf of Madam de Luxembourg to rise and go and speak to her. It was two o'clock
and she had just retired to bed. "She expects you," added he, "and will not go to sleep without speaking
to you." I dressed myself in haste and ran to her.
  She appeared to be agitated; this was for the first time. Her distress affected me. In this moment of
surprise and in the night, I myself was not free from emotion; but on seeing her I forgot my own
situation, and thought of nothing but the melancholy part she would have to act should I suffer myself
to be arrested; for feeling I had sufficient courage strictly to adhere to truth, although I might be certain
of its being prejudicial or even destructive to me, I was convinced I had not presence of mind, address,
nor perhaps firmness enough, not to expose her should I be closely pressed. This determined me to
sacrifice my reputation to her tranquillity, and to do for her that which nothing could have prevailed
upon me to do for myself. The moment I had come to this resolution, I declared it, wishing not to
diminish the magnitude of the sacrifice by giving her the least trouble to obtain it. I am sure she could
not mistake my motive, although she said not a word, which proved to me she was sensible of it. I was
so much shocked at her indifference that I, for a moment, thought of retracting; but the marechal came
in, and Madam de Bouffiers arrived from Paris a few moments afterwards. They did what Madam de
Luxembourg ought to have done. I suffered myself to be flattered; I was ashamed to retract; and the
only  thing  that  remained  to  be  determined  upon  was  the  place  of  my  retreat  and  the  time  of  my
departure. M. de Luxembourg proposed to me to remain incognito a few days at the castle, that we
might deliberate at leisure, and take such measures as should seem most proper; to this I would not
consent, no more than to go secretly to the temple. I was determined to set off the same day rather than
remain concealed in any place whatever.
  Knowing  I  had  secret  and  powerful  enemies  in  the  kingdom,  I  thought,  notwithstanding  my
attachment to France, I ought to quit it, the better to insure my future tranquillity. My first intention was
to retire to Geneva, but a moment of reflection was sufficient to dissuade me from committing that act
of folly; I knew the ministry of France, more powerful at Geneva than at Paris, would not leave me
more at peace in one of these cities than in the other, were a resolution taken to torment me. I was also
convinced the 'Discourse upon Inequality' had excited against me in the council a hatred the more
dangerous as the council dared not make it manifest. I had also learned, that when the New Eloisa
appeared, the same council had immediately forbidden the sale of that work, upon the solicitation of
Doctor Tronchin; but perceiving the example not to be imitated, even in Paris, the members were
ashamed of what they had done, and withdrew the prohibition.
I had no doubt that, finding in the present case a more favorable opportunity, they would be very
careful to take advantage of it. Notwithstanding exterior appearances, I knew there reigned against me
in the heart of every Genevese a secret jealousy, which, in the first favorable moment, would publicly
show itself. Nevertheless, the love of my country called me to it, and could I have flattered myself I
should there have lived in peace, I should not have hesitated; but neither honor nor reason permitting
me to take refuge as a fugitive in a place of which I was a citizen, I resolved to approach it only, and to
wait in Switzerland until something relative to me should be determined upon in Geneva. This state of
uncertainty did not, as it will soon appear, continue long.
  Madam de Boufflers highly disapproved this resolution, and renewed her efforts to induce me to go
to England, but all she could say was of no effect; I had never loved England nor the English, and the
eloquence of Madam de Boufflers, far from conquering my repugnancy, seemed to increase it without
my  knowing  why.  Determined  to  set  off  the  same  day,  I  was  from  the  morning  inaccessible  to
everybody, and La Roche, whom I sent to fetch my papers, would not tell Theresa whether or not I was
gone. Since I had determined to write my own memoirs, I had collected a great number of letters and
other papers, so that he was obliged to return several times. A part of these papers, already selected,
were laid aside, and I employed the morning in sorting the rest, that I might take with me such only as
were necessary and destroy what remained.  M. de Luxembourg, was kind enough to assist me in this business, which we could not finish before
it was necessary I should set off, and I had not time to burn a single paper. The marechal offered to take
upon himself to sort what I should leave behind me, and throw into the fire every sheet that he found
useless, without trusting to any person whomsoever, and to send me those of which he should make
choice. I accepted his offer, very glad to be delivered from that care, that I might pass the few hours I
had to remain with persons so dear to me, from whom I was going to separate forever. He took the key
of the chamber in which I had left these papers; and, at my earnest solicitation, sent for my poor aunt,
who, not knowing what had become of me, or what was to become of herself, and in momentary
expectation of the arrival of the officers of justice, without knowing how to act or what to answer them,
was miserable to an extreme. La Roche accompanied her to the castle in silence; she thought I was
already far from Montmorency; on perceiving me, she made the place resound with her cries, and threw
herself into my arms. Oh, friendship, affinity of sentiment, habit and intimacy.
  In this pleasing yet cruel moment, the remembrance of so many days of happiness, tenderness and
peace, passed together augmented the grief of a first separation after an union of seventeen years during
which we had scarcely lost sight of each other for a single day.
  The  marechal  who  saw  this  embrace,  could  not  suppress  his  tears.  He  withdrew.  Theresa
determined  never  more  to  leave  me  out  of  her  sight.  I  made  her  feel  the  inconvenience  of
accompanying me at that moment, and the necessity of her remaining to take care of my effects and
collect my money. When an order is made to arrest a man, it is customary to seize his papers and put a
seal upon his effects, or to make an inventory of them and appoint a guardian to whose care they are
intrusted. It was necessary Theresa should remain to observe what passed, and get everything settled in
the most advantageous manner possible. I promised her she should shortly come to me; the marechal
confirmed my promise; but I did not choose to tell her to what place I was going, that, in case of being
interrogated by the persons who came to take me into custody, she might with truth plead ignorance
upon that head. In embracing her the moment before we separated I felt within me a most extraordinary
emotion, and I said to her with an agitation which, alas! was but too prophetic: "My dear girl, you must
arm yourself with courage. You have partaken of my prosperity; it now remains to you, since you have
chosen it, to partake of my misery. Expect nothing in future but insult and calamity in following me.
The destiny begun for me by this melancholy day will pursue me until my latest hour."
I had now nothing to think of but my departure. The officers were to arrive at ten o'clock. It was
four in the afternoon when I set off, and they were not yet come. It was determined I should take post. I
had no carriage, The marechal made me a present of a cabriolet, and lent me horses and a postillion the
first stage, where, in consequence of the measures he had taken, I had no difficulty in procuring others.
  As I had not dined at table, nor made my appearance in the castle, the ladies came to bid me adieu
in the entresol where I had passed the day. Madam de Luxembourg embraced me several times with a
melancholy air; but I did not in these embraces feel the pressing I had done in those she had lavished
upon me two or three years before. Madam de Boufflers also embraced me, and said to me many civil
things. An embrace which surprised me more than all the rest had done was one from Madam de
Mirepoix, for she also was at the castle. Madam la Marechale de Mirepoix is a person extremely cold,
decent, and reserved, and did not, at least as she appeared to me, seem quite exempt from the natural
haughtiness of the house of Lorraine. She had never shown me much attention. Whether, flattered by an
honor I had not expected, I endeavored to enhance the value of it; or that there really was in the
embrace a little of that commiseration natural to generous hearts, I found in her manner and look
something energetical which penetrated me. I have since that time frequently thought that, acquainted
with my destiny, she could not refrain from a momentary concern for my fate.
  The marechal did not open his mouth; he was as pale as death. He would absolutely accompany me
to the carriage which waited at the watering place. We crossed the garden without uttering a single
word. I had a key of the park with which I opened the gate, and instead of putting it again into my
pocket, I held it out to the marechal without saying a word. He took it with a vivacity which surprised
me, and which has since frequently intruded itself upon my thoughts.I have not in my whole life had a more bitter moment than that of this separation. Our embrace was
long and silent: we both felt that this was our last adieu.
  Between Barre and Montmorency I met, in a hired carriage, four men in black, who saluted me
smilingly. According to what Theresa has since told me of the officers of justice, the hour of their
arrival and their manner of behavior, I have no doubt, that they were the persons I met, especially as the
order to arrest me, instead of being made out at seven o'clock, as I had been told it would, had not been
given till noon. I had to go through Paris. A person in a cabriolet is not much concealed. I saw several
persons in the streets who saluted me with an air of familiarity but I did not know one of them. The
same  evening  I  changed  my  route  to  pass  Villeroy.  At  Lyons  the  couriers  were  conducted  to  the
commandant. This might have been embarrassing to a man unwilling either to lie or change his name. I
went with a letter from Madam de Luxembourg to beg M. de Villeroy would spare me this disagreeable
ceremony. M. de Villeroy gave me a letter of which I made no use, because I did not go through Lyons.
This letter still remains sealed up amongst my papers. The duke pressed me to sleep at Villeroy, but I
preferred returning to the great road, which I did, and travelled two more stages the same evening.
  My carriage was inconvenient and uncomfortable, and I was too much indisposed to go far in a day.
My appearance besides was not sufficiently distinguished for me to be well served, and in France post-
horses feel the whip in proportion to the favorable opinion the postillion has of his temporary master.
By paying the guides generously thought I should make up for my shabby appearance: this was still
worse. They took me for a worthless fellow who was carrying orders, and, for the first time in my life,
travelling post. From that moment I had nothing but worn-out hacks, and I became the sport of the
postillions. I ended as I should have begun by being patient, holding my tongue, and suffering myself to
be driven as my conductors thought proper.
I had sufficient matter of reflection to prevent me from being weary on the road, employing myself
in the recollection of that which had just happened; but this was neither my turn of mind nor the
inclination of my heart. The facility with which I forget past evils, however recent they may be, is
astonishing. The remembrance of them becomes feeble, and, sooner or later, effaced, in the inverse
proportion  to  the  greater  degree  of  fear  with  which  the  approach  of  them  inspires  me.  My  cruel
imagination, incessantly tormented by the apprehension of evils still at a distance, diverts my attention,
and prevents me from recollecting those which are past. Caution is needless after the evil has happened,
and it is time lost to give it a thought. I, in some measure, put a period to my misfortunes before they
happen: the more I have suffered at their approach the greater is the facility with which I forget them;
whilst, on the contrary, incessantly recollecting my past happiness, I, if I may so speak, enjoy it a
second time at pleasure. It is to this happy disposition I am indebted for an exemption from that ill
humor which ferments in a vindictive mind, by the continual remembrance of injuries received, and
torments it with all the evil it wishes to do its enemy. Naturally choleric, I have felt all the force of
anger, which in the first moments has sometimes been carried to fury, but a desire of vengeance never
took root within me. I think too little of the offence to give myself much trouble about the offender. I
think of the injury I have received from him on account of that he may do me a second time, but were I
certain he would never do me another the first would be instantly forgotten. Pardon of offences is
continually preached to us. I knew not whether or not my heart would be capable of overcoming its
hatred, for it never yet felt that passion, and I give myself too little concern about my enemies to have
the merit of pardoning them. I will not say to what a degree, in order to torment me, they torment
themselves. I am at their mercy, they have unbounded power, and make of it what use they please.
There is but one thing in which I set them at defiance: which is in tormenting themselves about me, to
force me to give myself the least trouble about them.
  The day after my departure I had so perfectly forgotten what had passed, the parliament, Madam de
Pompadour, M. de Choiseul, Grimm, and D'Alembert, with their conspiracies, that had not it been for
the necessary precautions during the journey I should have thought no more of them. The remembrance
of one thing which supplied the place of all these was what I had read the evening before my departure.
I recollect, also, the pastorals of Gessner, which his translator Hubert had sent me a little time before.These two ideas occurred to me so strongly, and were connected in such a manner in my mind, that I
was determined to endeavor to unite them by treating after the manner of Gessner, the subject of the
Levite of Ephraim. His pastoral and simple style appeared to me but little fitted to so horrid a subject,
and it was not to be presumed the situation I was then in would furnish me with such ideas as would
enliven it. However, I attempted the thing, solely to amuse myself in my cabriolet, and without the least
hope of success. I had no sooner begun than I was astonished at the liveliness of my ideas, and the
facility with which I expressed them. In three days I composed the first three cantos of the little poem I
finished at Motiers, and I am certain of not having done anything in my life in which there is a more
interesting mildness of manners, a greater brilliancy of coloring, more simple delineations, greater
exactness of proportion, or more antique simplicity in general, notwithstanding the horror of the subject
which in itself is abominable, so that besides every other merit I had still that of a difficulty conquered.
If the Levite of Ephraim be not the best of my works, it will ever be that most esteemed. I have never
read, nor shall I ever read it again without feeling interiorly the applause of a heart without acrimony,
which, far from being embittered by misfortunes, is susceptible of consolation in the midst of them, and
finds within itself a resource by which they are counterbalanced. Assemble the great philosophers, so
superior in their books to adversity which they do not suffer, place them in a situation similar to mine,
and, in the first moments of the indignation of their injured honor, give them a like work to compose,
and it will be seen in what manner they will acquit themselves of the task.
  When I set of from Montmorency to go into Switzerland, I had resolved to stop at Yverdon, at the
house of my old friend Roguin, who had several years before retired to that place, and had invited me
to go and see him. I was told Lyons was not the direct road, for which reason I avoided going through
it. But I was obliged to pass through Besancon, a fortified town, and consequently subject to the same
inconvenience. I took it into my head to turn about and to go to Salins, under the pretense of going to
see M. de Marian, the nephew of M. Dupin, who had an employment at the salt-works, and formerly
had given me many invitations to his house. The expedition succeeded: M. de Marian was not in the
way, and, happily, not being obliged to stop, I continued my journey without being spoken to by
anybody.
  The moment I was within the territory of Berne, I ordered the postillion to stop; I got out of my
carriage,  prostrated  myself,  kissed  the  ground,  and  exclaimed  in  a  transport  of  joy:  "Heaven,  the
protector of virtue be praised, I touch a land of liberty!" Thus blind and unsuspecting in my hopes, have
I ever been passionately attached to that which was to make me unhappy. The man thought me mad. I
got into the carriage, and a few hours afterwards I had the pure and lively satisfaction of feeling myself
pressed within the arms of the respectable Rougin. Ah! let me breathe for a moment with this worthy
host! It is necessary I should gain strength and courage before I proceed further. I shall soon find that in
my way which will give employment to them both. It is not without reason that I have been diffuse in
the recital of all the circumstances I have been able to recollect. Although they may seem uninteresting,
yet, when once the thread of the conspiracy is got hold of, they may throw some light upon the progress
of it; and, for instance, without giving the first idea of the problem I am going to propose, afford some
aid in solving it.
  Suppose that, for the execution of the conspiracy of which I was the object, my absence was
absolutely necessary, everything tending to that effect could not have happened otherwise than it did;
but if without suffering myself to be alarmed by the nocturnal embassy of Madam de Luxembourg, I
had continued to hold out, and, instead of remaining at the castle, had returned to my bed and quietly
slept until morning, should I have equally had an order of arrest made out against me? This is a great
question upon which the solution of many others depends, and for the examination of it, the hour of the
comminatory decree of arrest, and that of the real decree may be remarked to advantage. A rude but
sensible example of the importance of the least detail in the exposition of facts, of which the secret
causes are sought for to discover them by induction.
 
  
 
 
  BOOK XII.
  With this book begins the work of darkness, in which I have for the last eight years been enveloped,
though it has not by any means been possible for me to penetrate the dreadful obscurity. In the abyss of
evil into which I am plunged, I feel the blows reach me, without perceiving the hand by which they are
directed or the means it employs. Shame and misfortune seem of themselves to fall upon me. When in
the affliction of my heart I suffer a groan to escape me, I have the appearance of a man who complains
without reason, and the authors of my ruin have the inconceivable art of rendering the public unknown
to itself, or without its perceiving the effects of it, accomplice in their conspiracy. Therefore, in my
narrative of circumstances relative to myself, of the treatment I have received, and all that has happened
to me, I shall not be able to indicate the hand by which the whole has been directed, nor assign the
causes,  while  I  state  the  effect.  The  primitive  causes  are  all  given  in  the  preceding  books;  and
everything in which I am interested, and all the secret motives pointed out. But it is impossible for me
to explain, even by conjecture, that in which the different causes are combined to operate the strange
events of my life. If amongst my readers one even of them should be generous enough to wish to
examine the mystery to the bottom, and discover the truth, let him carefully read over a second time the
three preceding books, afterwards at each fact he shall find stated in the books which follow, let him
gain such information as is within his reach, and go back from intrigue to intrigue, and from agent to
agent, until he comes to the first mover of all. I know where his researches will terminate; but in the
meantime I lose myself in the crooked and obscure subterraneous path through which his steps must be
directed.
  During my stay at Yverdon, I became acquainted with all the family of my friend Roguin, and
amongst others with his niece, Madam Boy de la Tour, and her daughters, whose father, as I think I
have already observed, I formerly knew at Lyons. She was at Yverdon, upon a visit to her uncle and his
sister; her eldest daughter, about fifteen years of age, delighted me by her fine understanding and
excellent disposition. I conceived the most tender friendship for the mother and the daughter. The latter
was destined by M. Rougin to the colonel, his nephew, a man already verging towards the decline of
life, and who showed me marks of great esteem and affection; but although the heart of the uncle was
set upon this marriage, which was much wished for by the nephew also, and I was greatly desirous to
promote the satisfaction of both, the great disproportion of age, and the extreme repugnancy of the
young lady, made me join with the mother in postponing the ceremony, and the affair was at length
broken off. The colonel has since married Mademoiselle Dillan, his relation, beautiful, and amiable as
my heart could wish, and who has made him the happiest of husbands and fathers. However, M.
Rougin has not yet forgotten my opposition to his wishes. My consolation is in the certainty of having
discharged to him, and his family, the duty of the most pure friendship, which does not always consist
in being agreeable, but in advising for the best.
I did not remain long in doubt about the reception which awaited me at Geneva, had I chosen to
return to that city. My book was burned there, and on the 18th of June, nine days after an order to arrest
me had been given at Paris, another to the same effect was determined upon by the republic. So many
incredible absurdities were stated in this second decree, in which the ecclesiastical edict was formally
violated, that I refused to believe the first accounts I heard of it, and when these were well confirmed, I
trembled lest so manifest an infraction of every law, beginning with that of common-sense, should
create the greatest confusion in the city. I was, however, relieved from my fears; everything remained
quiet. If there was any rumor amongst the populace, it was unfavorable to me, and I was publicly
treated by all the gossips and pedants like a scholar threatened with a flogging for not having said his
catechism.
  These two decrees were the signal for the cry of malediction, raised against me with unexampled
fury in every part of Europe. All the gazettes, journals and pamphlets, rang the alarm-bell. The Frenchespecially,  that  mild,  generous,  and  polished  people,  who  so  much  pique  themselves  upon  their
attention  and  proper  condescension  to  the  unfortunate,  instantly  forgetting  their  favorite  virtues,
signalized themselves by the number and violence of the outrages with which, while each seemed to
strive who should afflict me most, they overwhelmed me. I was impious, an atheist, a madman, a wild
beast, a wolf. The continuator of the Journal of Trevoux was guilty of a piece of extravagance in
attacking my pretended Lycanthropy, which was by no means proof of his own. A stranger would have
thought an author in Paris was afraid of incurring the animadversion of the police, by publishing a work
of any kind without cramming into it some insult to me. I sought in vain the cause of this unanimous
animosity, and was almost tempted to believe the world was gone mad. What! said I to myself, the
editor of the 'Perpetual Peace', spread discord; the author of the 'Confession of the Savoyard Vicar',
impious; the writer of the 'New Eloisa', a wolf; the author of 'Emilius', a madman! Gracious God! what
then should I have been had I published the 'Treatise de l'Esprit', or any similar work? And yet, in the
storm raised against the author of that book, the public, far from joining the cry of his persecutors,
revenged him of them by eulogium. Let his book and mine, the receptions the two works met with, and
the  treatment  of  the  two  authors  in  the  different  countries  of  Europe,  be  compared;  and  for  the
difference let causes satisfactory to, a man of sense be found, and I will ask no more.
I found the residence of Yverdon so agreeable that I resolved to yield to the solicitations of M.
Roguin and his family, who, were desirous of keeping me there. M. de Moiry de Gingins, bailiff of that
city, encouraged me by his goodness to remain within his jurisdiction. The colonel pressed me so much
to accept for my habitation a little pavilion he had in his house between the court and the garden, that I
complied with his request, and he immediately furnished it with everything necessary for my little
household establishment.
  The banneret Roguin, one of the persons who showed me the most assiduous attention, did not
leave me for an instant during the whole day. I was much flattered by his civilities, but they sometimes
importuned me. The day on which I was to take possession of my new habitation was already fixed,
and I had written to Theresa to come to me, when suddenly a storm was raised against me in Berne,
which was attributed to the devotees, but I have never been able to learn the cause of it. The senate,
excited against me, without my knowing by whom, did not seem disposed to suffer me to remain
undisturbed in my retreat. The moment the bailiff was informed of the new fermentation, he wrote in
my favor to several of the members of the government, reproaching them with their blind intolerance,
and telling them it was shameful to refuse to a man of merit, under oppression, the asylum which such a
numerous banditti found in their states. Sensible people were of opinion the warmth of his reproaches
had rather embittered than softened the minds of the magistrates. However this may be, neither his
influence nor eloquence could ward off the blow. Having received an intimation of the order he was to
signify to me, he gave me a previous communication of it; and that I might wait its arrival, I resolved to
set off the next day. The difficulty was to know where to go, finding myself shut out from Geneva and
all France, and foreseeing that in the affair each state would be anxious to imitate its neighbor.
  Madam Boy de la Tour proposed to me to go and reside in an uninhabited but completely furnished
house, which belonged to her son in the village of Motiers, in the Val de Travers, in the county of
Neuchatel. I had only a mountain to cross to arrive at it. The offer came the more opportunely, as in the
states of the King of Prussia I should naturally be sheltered from all persecution, at least religion could
not serve as a pretext for it. But a secret difficulty: improper for me at that moment to divulge, had in it
that which was very sufficient to make me hesitate. The innnate love of justice, to which my heart was
constantly subject, added to my secret inclination to France, had inspired me with an aversion to the
King of Prussia, who by his maxims and conduct, seemed to tread under foot all respect for natural law
and every duty of humanity. Amongst the framed engravings, with which I had decorated my alcove at
Montmorency, was a portrait of this prince, and under it a distich, the last line of which was as follows:
  Il pense en philosophe, et se conduit en roi.
  [He thinks like a philosopher, and acts like a king.]
  This  verse,  which  from  any  other  pen  would  have  been  a  fine  eulogium,  from  mine  had  anunequivocal meaning, and too clearly explained the verse by which it was preceded. The distich had
been, read by everybody who came to see me, and my visitors were numerous. The Chevalier de
Lorenzy had even written it down to give it to D'Alembert, and I had no doubt but D' Alembert had
taken care to make my court with it to the prince. I had also aggravated this first fault by a passage in
'Emilius', where under the name of Adrastus, king of the Daunians, it was clearly seen whom I had in
view, and the remark had not escaped critics, because Madam de Boufflers had several times mentioned
the subject to me. I was, therefore, certain of being inscribed in red ink in the registers of the King of
Prussia, and besides, supposing his majesty to have the principles I had dared to attribute to him, he, for
that reason, could not but be displeased with my writings and their author; for everybody knows the
worthless part of mankind, and tyrants have never failed to conceive the most mortal hatred against me,
solely on reading my works, without being acquainted with my person.
  However, I had presumption enough to depend upon his mercy, and was far from thinking I ran
much risk. I knew none but weak men were slaves to the base passions, and that these had but little
power over strong minds, such as I had always thought his to be. According to his art of reigning, I
thought he could not but show himself magnanimous on this occasion, and that being so in fact was not
above his character. I thought a mean and easy vengeance would not for a moment counterbalance his
love of glory, and putting myself in his place, his taking advantage of circumstances to overwhelm with
the weight of his generosity a man who had dared to think ill of him, did not appear to me impossible. I
therefore went to settle at Motiers, with a confidence of which I imagined he would feel all the value,
and said to myself: When Jean Jacques rises to the elevation of Coriolanus, will Frederick sink below
the General of the Volsci?
  Colonel Roguin insisted on crossing the mountain with me, and installing me at Moiters. A sister-
in-law to Madam Boy de la Tour, named Madam Girardier, to whom the house in which I was going to
live was very convenient, did not see me arrive there with pleasure; however, she with a good grace put
me in possession of my lodgings, and I eat with her until Theresa came, and my little establishment was
formed.
  Perceiving at my departure from Montmorency I should in future be a fugitive upon the earth, I
hesitated about permitting her to come to me and partake of the wandering life to which I saw myself
condemned. I felt the nature of our relation to each other was about to change, and that what until then
had on my part been favor and friendship, would in future become so on hers. If her attachment was
proof against my misfortunes, to this I knew she must become a victim, and that her grief would add to
my pain. Should my disgrace weaken her affections, she would make me consider her constancy as a
sacrifice, and instead of feeling the pleasure I had in dividing with her my last morsel of bread, she
would see nothing but her own merit in following me wherever I was driven by fate.
I must say everything; I have never concealed the vices either of my poor mamma or myself; I
cannot be more favorable to Theresa, and whatever pleasure I may have in doing honor to a person who
is dear to me, I will not disguise the truth, although it may discover in her an error, if an involuntary
change of the affections of the heart be one. I had long perceived hers to grow cooler towards me, and
that she was no longer for me what she had been in our younger days. Of this I was the more sensible,
as for her I was what I had always been. I fell into the same inconvenience as that of which I had felt
the effect with mamma, and this effect was the same now I was with Theresa. Let us not seek for
perfection,  which  nature  never  produces;  it  would  be  the  same  thing  with  any  other  woman.  The
manner in which I had disposed of my children, however reasonable it had appeared to me, had not
always left my heart at ease. While writing my 'Treatise on Education', I felt I had neglected duties with
which it was not possible to dispense. Remorse at length became so strong that it almost forced from
me a public confession of my fault at the beginning of my 'Emilius', and the passage is so clear, that it
is astonishing any person should, after reading it, have had the courage to reproach me with my error.
My situation was however still the same, or something worse, by the animosity of my enemies, who
sought to find me in a fault. I feared a relapse, and unwilling to run the risk, I preferred abstinence to
exposing Theresa to a similar mortification. I had besides remarked that a connection with women wasprejudicial to my health; this double reason made me form resolutions to which I had but sometimes
badly kept, but for the last three or four years I had more constantly adhered to them. It was in this
interval I had remarked Theresa's coolness; she had the same attachment to me from duty, but not the
least from love. Our intercourse naturally became less agreeable, and I imagined that, certain of the
continuation of my cares wherever she might be, she would choose to stay at Paris rather than to
wander with me. Yet she had given such signs of grief at our parting, had required of me such positive
promises that we should meet again, and, since my departure, had expressed to the Prince de Conti and
M.  de  Luxembourg  so  strong  a  desire  of  it,  that,  far  from  having  the  courage  to  speak  to  her  of
separation, I scarcely had enough to think of it myself; and after having felt in my heart how impossible
it was for me to do without her, all I thought of afterwards was to recall her to me as soon as possible. I
wrote to her to this effect, and she came. It was scarcely two months since I had quitted her; but it was
our first separation after a union of so many years. We had both of us felt it most cruelly. What emotion
in our first embrace! O how delightful are the tears of tenderness and joy! How does my heart drink
them up! Why have I not had reason to shed them more frequently?
  On  my  arrival  at  Motiers  I  had  written  to  Lord  Keith,  marshal  of  Scotland  and  governor  of
Neuchatel, informing him of my retreat into the states of his Prussian majesty, and requesting of him
his protection. He answered me with his well-known generosity, and in the manner I had expected from
him. He invited me to his house. I went with M. Martinet, lord of the manor of Val de Travers, who
was  in  great  favor  with  his  excellency.  The  venerable  appearance  of  this  illustrious  and  virtuous
Scotchman, powerfully affected my heart, and from that instant began between him and me the strong
attachment, which on my part still remains the same, and would be so on his, had not the traitors, who
have deprived me of all the consolation of life, taken advantage of my absence to deceive his old age
and depreciate me in his esteem.
  George Keith, hereditary marshal of Scotland, and brother to the famous General Keith, who lived
gloriously and died in the bed of honor, had quitted his country at a very early age, and was proscribed
on  account  of  his  attachment  to  the  house  of  Stuart.  With  that  house,  however,  he  soon  became
disgusted with the unjust and tyrannical spirit he remarked in the ruling character of the Stuart family.
He lived a long time in Spain, the climate of which pleased him exceedingly, and at length attached
himself, as his brother had done, to the service of the King of Prussia, who knew men and gave them
the  reception  they  merited.  His  majesty  received  a  great  return  for  this  reception,  in  the  services
rendered him by Marshal Keith, and by what was infinitely more precious, the sincere friendship of his
lordship. The great mind of this worthy man, haughty and republican, could stoop to no other yoke than
that of friendship, but to this it was so obedient, that with very different maxims he saw nothing but
Frederic  the  moment  he  became  attached  to  him.  The  king  charged  the  marshal  with  affairs  of
importance, sent him to Paris, to Spain, and at length, seeing he was already advanced in years, let him
retire with the government of Neuchatel, and the delightful employment of passing there the remainder
of his life in rendering the inhabitants happy.
  The people of Neuchatel, whose manners are trivial, know not how to distinguish solid merit, and
suppose wit to consist in long discourses. When they saw a sedate man of simple manners appear
amongst them, they mistook his simplicity for haughtiness, his candor for rusticity, his laconism for
stupidity, and rejected his benevolent cares, because, wishing to be useful, and not being a sycophant,
he knew not how to flatter people he did not esteem. In the ridiculous affair of the minister Petitpierre,
who was displaced by his colleagues, for having been unwilling they should be eternally damned, my
lord, opposing the usurpations of the ministers, saw the whole country of which he took the part, rise up
against him, and when I arrived there the stupid murmur had not entirely subsided. He passed for a man
influenced by the prejudices with which he was inspired by others, and of all the imputations brought
against him it was the most devoid of truth. My first sentiment on seeing this venerable old man, was
that of tender commiseration, on account of his extreme leanness of body, years having already left him
little else but skin and bone; but when I raised my eyes to his animated, open, noble countenance, I felt
a respect, mingled with confidence, which absorbed every other sentiment. He answered the very shortcompliment I made him when I first came into his presence by speaking of something else, as if I had
already been a week in his house. He did not bid us sit down. The stupid chatelain, the lord of the
manor, remained standing. For my part I at first sight saw in the fine and piercing eye of his lordship
something so conciliating that, feeling myself entirely at ease, I without ceremony, took my seat by his
side upon the sofa. By the familiarity of his manner I immediately perceived the liberty I took gave him
pleasure, and that he said to himself: This is not a Neuchatelois.
  Singular effect of the similarity of characters! At an age when the heart loses its natural warmth,
that of this good old man grew warm by his attachment to me to a degree which surprised everybody.
He came to see me at Motiers under the pretence of quail shooting, and stayed there two days without
touching a gun. We conceived such a friendship for each other that we knew not how to live separate;
the castle of Colombier, where he passed the summer, was six leagues from Motiers; I went there at
least once a fortnight, and made a stay of twenty-four hours, and then returned like a pilgrim with my
heart full of affection for my host. The emotion I had formerly experienced in my journeys from the
Hermitage to Raubonne was certainly very different, but it was not more pleasing than that with which
I approached Columbier.
  What  tears  of  tenderness  have  I  shed  when  on  the  road  to  it,  while  thinking  of  the  paternal
goodness, amiable virtues, and charming philosophy of this respectable old man! I called him father,
and he called me son. These affectionate names give, in some measure, an idea of the attachment by
which we were united, but by no means that of the want we felt of each other, nor of our continual
desire to be together. He would absolutely give me an apartment at the castle of Columbier, and for a
long time pressed me to take up my residence in that in which I lodged during my visits. I at length told
him I was more free and at my ease in my own house, and that I had rather continue until the end of my
life to come and see him. He approved of my candor, and never afterwards spoke to me on the subject.
Oh, my good lord! Oh, my worthy father! How is my heart still moved when I think of your goodness?
Ah, barbarous wretches! how deeply did they wound me when they deprived me of your friendship?
But no, great man, you are and ever will be the same for me, who am still the same. You have been
deceived, but you are not changed. My lord marechal is not without faults; he is a man of wisdom, but
he  is  still  a  man.  With  the  greatest  penetration,  the  nicest  discrimination,  and  the  most  profound
knowledge of men, he sometimes suffers himself to be deceived, and never recovers his error. His
temper is very singular and foreign to his general turn of mind. He seems to forget the people he sees
every day, and thinks of them in a moment when they least expect it; his attention seems ill-timed; his
presents are dictated by caprice and not by propriety. He gives or sends in an instant whatever comes
into his head, be the value of it ever so small. A young Genevese, desirous of entering into the service
of Prussia, made a personal application to him; his lordship, instead of giving him a letter, gave him a
little bag of peas, which he desired him to carry to the king. On receiving this singular recommendation
his majesty gave a commission to the bearer of it. These elevated geniuses have between themselves a
language  which  the  vulgar  will  never  understand.  The  whimsical  manner  of  my  lord  marechal,
something like the caprice of a fine woman, rendered him still more interesting to me. I was certain,
and afterwards had proofs, that it had not the least influence over his sentiments, nor did it affect the
cares prescribed by friendship on serious occasions, yet in his manner of obliging there is the same
singularity as in his manners in general. Of this I will give one instance relative to a matter of no great
importance. The journey from Motiers to Colombier being too long for me to perform in one day, I
commonly divided it by setting off after dinner and sleeping at Brot, which is half way. The landlord of
the house where I stopped, named Sandoz, having to solicit at Berlin a favor of importance to him,
begged I would request his excellency to ask it in his behalf. "Most willingly," said I, and took him
with me. I left him in the antechamber, and mentioned the matter to his lordship, who returned me no
answer. After passing with him the whole morning, I saw as I crossed the hall to go to dinner, poor
Sandoz, who was fatigued to death with waiting. Thinking the governor had forgotten what I had said
to him, I again spoke of the business before we sat down to table, but still received no answer. I thought
this manner of making me feel I was importunate rather severe, and, pitying the poor man in waiting,held my tongue. On my return the next day I was much surprised at the thanks he returned me for the
good  dinner  his  excellency  had  given  him  after  receiving  his  paper.  Three  weeks  afterwards  his
lordship sent him the rescript he had solicited, dispatched by the minister, and signed by the king, and
this without having said a word either to myself or Sandoz concerning the business, about which I
thought he did not wish to give himself the least concern.
I could wish incessantly to speak of George Keith; from him proceeds my recollection of the last
happy moments I have enjoyed: the rest of my life, since our separation, has been passed in affliction
and grief of heart. The remembrance of this is so melancholy and confused that it was impossible for
me to observe the least order in what I write, so that in future I shall be under the necessity of stating
facts without giving them a regular arrangement.
I was soon relieved from my inquietude arising from the uncertainty of my asylum, by the answer
from his majesty to the lord marshal, in whom, as it will readily be believed, I had found an able
advocate.  The  king  not  only  approved  of  what  he  had  done,  but  desired  him,  for  I  must  relate
everything, to give me twelve louis. The good old man, rather embarrassed by the commission, and not
knowing how to execute it properly, endeavored to soften the insult by transforming the money into
provisions, and writing to me that he had received orders to furnish me with wood and coal to begin my
little establishment; he moreover added, and perhaps from himself, that his majesty would willingly
build me a little house, such a one as I should choose to have, provided I would fix upon the ground. I
was extremely sensible of the kindness of the last offer, which made me forget the weakness of the
other. Without accepting either, I considered Frederic as my benefactor and protector, and became so
sincerely attached to him, that from that moment I interested myself as much in his glory as until then I
had  thought  his  successes  unjust.  At  the  peace  he  made  soon  after,  I  expressed  my  joy  by  an
illumination in a very good taste: it was a string of garlands, with which I decorated the house I
inhabited, and in which, it is true, I had the vindictive haughtiness to spend almost as much money as
he had wished to give me. The peace ratified, I thought as he was at the highest pinnacle of military and
political  fame,  he  would  think  of  acquiring  that  of  another  nature,  by  reanimating  his  states,
encouraging in them commerce and agriculture, creating a new soil, covering it with a new people,
maintaining peace amongst his neighbors, and becoming the arbitrator, after having been the terror, of
Europe. He was in a situation to sheath his sword without danger, certain that no sovereign would
oblige him again to draw it. Perceiving he did not disarm, I was afraid he would profit but little by the
advantages he had gained, and that he would be great only by halves. I dared to write to him upon the
subject, and with a familiarity of a nature to please men of his character, conveying to him the sacred
voice of truth, which but few kings are worthy to hear. The liberty I took was a secret between him and
myself. I did not communicate it even to the lord marshal, to whom I sent my letter to the king sealed
up. His lordship forwarded my dispatch without asking what it contained. His majesty returned me no
answer and the marshal going soon after to Berlin, the king told him he had received from me a
scolding. By this I understood my letter had been ill received, and the frankness of my zeal had been
mistaken for the rusticity of a pedant. In fact, this might possibly be the case; perhaps I did not say what
was necessary, nor in the manner proper to the occasion. All I can answer for is the sentiment which
induced me to take up the pen.
  Shortly after my establishment at Motiers, Travers having every possible assurance that I should be
suffered to remain there in peace, I took the Armenian habit. This was not the first time I had thought of
doing it. I had formerly had the same intention, particularly at Montmorency, where the frequent use of
probes often obliging me to keep my chamber, made me more clearly perceive the advantages of a long
robe.  The  convenience  of  an  Armenian  tailor,  who  frequently  came  to  see  a  relation  he  had  at
Montmorency, almost tempted me to determine on taking this new dress, troubling myself but little
about what the world would say of it. Yet, before I concluded about the matter, I wished to take the
opinion of M. de Luxembourg, who immediately advised me to follow my inclination. I therefore
procured a little Armenian wardrobe, but on account of the storm raised against me, I was induced to
postpone making use of it until I should enjoy tranquillity, and it was not until some months afterwardsthat, forced by new attacks of my disorder, I thought I could properly, and without the least risk, put on
my new dress at Motiers, especially after having consulted the pastor of the place, who told me I might
wear it even in the temple without indecency. I then adopted the waistcoat, caffetan, fur bonnet, and
girdle; and after having in this dress attended divine service, I saw no impropriety in going in it to visit
his lordship. His excellency in seeing me clothed in this manner made me no other compliment than
that  which  consisted  in  saying  "Salaam  aliakum,"  i.e.,  "Peace  be  with  you;"  the  common  Turkish
salutation; after which nothing more was said upon the subject, and I continued to wear my new dress.
  Having  quite  abandoned  literature,  all  I  now  thought  of  was  leading  a  quiet  life,  and  one  as
agreeable as I could make it. When alone, I have never felt weariness of mind, not even in complete
inaction; my imagination filling up every void, was sufficient to keep up my attention. The inactive
babbling of a private circle, where, seated opposite to each other, they who speak move nothing but the
tongue, is the only thing I have ever been unable to support. When walking and rambling about there is
some satisfaction in conversation; the feet and eyes do something; but to hear people with their arms
across speak of the weather, of the biting of flies, or what is still worse, compliment each other, is to me
an insupportable torment. That I might not live like a savage, I took it into my head to learn to make
laces. Like the women, I carried my cushion with me, when I went to make visits, or sat down to work
at my door, and chatted with passers-by. This made me the better support the emptiness of babbling,
and enabled me to pass my time with my female neighbors without weariness. Several of these were
very amiable and not devoid of wit. One in particular, Isabella d'Ivernois, daughter of the attorney-
general of Neuchatel, I found so estimable as to induce me to enter with her into terms of particular
friendship, from which she derived some advantage by the useful advice I gave her, and the services
she received from me on occasions of importance, so that now a worthy and virtuous mother of a
family, she is perhaps indebted to me for her reason, her husband, her life, and happiness. On my part, I
received from her gentle consolation, particularly during a melancholy winter, through out the whole of
which when my sufferings were most cruel, she came to pass with Theresa and me long evenings,
which she made very short for us by her agreeable conversation, and our mutual openness of heart. She
called me papa, and I called her daughter, and these names, which we still give to each other, will, I
hope, continue to be as dear to her as they are to me. That my laces might be of some utility, I gave
them to my young female friends at their marriages, upon condition of their suckling their children;
Isabella's eldest sister had one upon these terms, and well deserved it by her observance of them;
Isabella herself also received another, which, by intention she as fully merited. She has not been happy
enough to be able to pursue her inclination. When I sent the laces to the two sisters, I wrote each of
them a letter; the first has been shown about in the world; the second has not the same celebrity:
friendship proceeds with less noise.
  Amongst the connections I made in my neighborhood, of which I will not enter into a detail, I must
mention that with Colonel Pury, who had a house upon the mountain, where he came to pass the
summer. I was not anxious to become acquainted with him, because I knew he was upon bad terms at
court, and with the lord marshal, whom he did not visit. Yet, as he came to see me, and showed me
much attention, I was under the necessity of returning his visit; this was repeated, and we sometimes
dined  with  each  other.  At  his  house  I  became  acquainted  with  M.  du  Perou,  and  afterwards  too
intimately connected with him to pass his name over in silence.
  M.  du  Perou  was  an  American,  son  to  a  commandant  of  Surinam,  whose  successor,  M.  le
Chambrier, of Neuchatel, married his widow. Left a widow a second time, she came with her son to
live in the country of her second husband.
  Du Perou, an only son, very rich, and tenderly beloved by his mother, had been carefully brought
up, and his education was not lost upon him. He had acquired much knowledge, a taste for the arts, and
piqued  himself  upon  his  having  cultivated  his  rational  faculty:  his  Dutch  appearance,  yellow
complexion, and silent and close disposition, favored this opinion. Although young, he was already
deaf and gouty. This rendered his motions deliberate and very grave, and although he was fond of
disputing, he in general spoke but little because his hearing was bad. I was struck with his exterior, andsaid to myself, this is a thinker, a man of wisdom, such a one as anybody would be happy to have for a
friend.  He  frequently  addressed  himself  to  me  without  paying  the  least  compliment,  and  this
strengthened the favorable opinion I had already formed of him. He said but little to me of myself or
my books, and still less of himself; he was not destitute of ideas, and what he said was just. This
justness and equality attracted my regard. He had neither the elevation of mind, nor the discrimination
of the lord marshal, but he had all his simplicity: this was still representing him in something. I did not
become infatuated with him, but he acquired my attachment from esteem; and by degrees this esteem
led to friendship, and I totally forgot the objection I made to the Baron Holbach: that he was too rich.
  For a long time I saw but little of Du Perou, because I did not go to Neuchatel, and he came but
once a year to the mountain of Colonel Pury. Why did I not go to Neuchatel? This proceeded from a
childishness upon which I must not be silent.
  Although protected by the King of Prussia and the lord marshal, while I avoided persecution in my
asylum, I did not avoid the murmurs of the public, of municipal magistrates and ministers. After what
had happened in France it became fashionable to insult me; these people would have been afraid to
seem to disapprove of what my persecutors had done by not imitating them. The 'classe' of Neuchatel,
that is, the ministers of that city, gave the impulse, by endeavoring to move the council of state against
me. This attempt not having succeeded, the ministers addressed themselves to the municipal magistrate,
who immediately prohibited my book, treating me on all occasions with but little civility, and saying,
that had I wished to reside in the city I should not have been suffered to do it. They filled their Mercury
with absurdities and the most stupid hypocrisy, which, although, it makes every man of sense laugh,
animated the people against me. This, however, did not prevent them from setting forth that I ought to
be very grateful for their permitting me to live at Motiers, where they had no authority; they would
willingly have measured me the air by the pint, provided I had paid for it a dear price. They would have
it  that  I  was  obliged  to  them  for  the  protection  the  king  granted  me  in  spite  of  the  efforts  they
incessantly made to deprive me of it. Finally, failing of success, after having done me all the injury they
could, and defamed me to the utmost of their power, they made a merit of their impotence, by boasting
of their goodness in suffering me to stay in their country. I ought to have laughed at their vain efforts,
but I was foolish enough to be vexed at them, and had the weakness to be unwilling to go to Neuchatel,
to which I yielded for almost two years, as if it was not doing too much honor to such wretches, to pay
attention to their proceedings, which, good or bad, could not be imputed to them, because they never
act but from a foreign impulse. Besides, minds without sense or knowledge, whose objects of esteem
are influence, power and money, and far from imagining even that some respect is due to talents, and
that it is dishonorable to injure and insult them.
  A certain mayor of a village, who from sundry malversations had been deprived of his office, said
to the lieutenant of Val de Travers, the husband of Isabella: "I am told this Rousseau has great wit,--
bring him to me that I may see whether he has or not." The disapprobation of such a man ought
certainly to have no effect upon those on whom it falls.
  After the treatment I had received at Paris, Geneva, Berne, and even at Neuchatel, I expected no
favor from the pastor of this place. I had, however, been recommended to him by Madam Boy de la
Tour,  and  he  had  given  me  a  good  reception;  but  in  that  country  where  every  new-comer  is
indiscriminately flattered, civilities signify but little. Yet, after my solemn union with the reformed
church, and living in a Protestant country, I could not, without failing in my engagements, as well as in
the duty of a citizen, neglect the public profession of the religion into which I had entered; I therefore
attended divine service. On the other hand, had I gone to the holy table, I was afraid of exposing myself
to a refusal, and it was by no means probable, that after the tumult excited at Geneva by the council,
and  at  Neuchatel  by  the  classe  (the  ministers),  he  would,  without  difficulty  administer  to  me  the
sacrament in his church. The time of communion approaching, I wrote to M. de Montmollin, the
minister, to prove to him my desire of communicating, and declaring myself heartily united to the
Protestant church; I also told him, in order to avoid disputing upon articles of faith, that I would not
hearken to any particular explanation of the point of doctrine. After taking these steps I made myselfeasy, not doubting but M. de Montmollin would refuse to admit me without the preliminary discussion
to which I refused to consent, and that in this manner everything would be at an end without any fault
of mine. I was deceived: when I least expected anything of the kind, M. de Montmollin came to declare
to me not only that he admitted me to the communion under the condition which I had proposed, but
that he and the elders thought themselves much honored by my being one of their flock. I never in my
whole  life  felt  greater  surprise  or  received  from  it  more  consolation.  Living  always  alone  and
unconnected, appeared to me a melancholy destiny, especially in adversity. In the midst of so many
proscriptions and persecutions, I found it extremely agreeable to be able to say to myself: I am at least
amongst my brethren; and I went to the communion with an emotion of heart, and my eyes suffused
with tears of tenderness, which perhaps were the most agreeable preparation to Him to whose table I
was drawing near.
  Sometime  afterwards  his  lordship  sent  me  a  letter  from  Madam  de  Boufflers,  which  he  had
received, at least I presumed so, by means of D'Alembert, who was acquainted with the marechal. In
this letter, the first this lady had written to me after my departure from Montmorency, she rebuked me
severely for having written to M. de Montmollin, and especially for having communicated. I the less
understood what she meant by her reproof, as after my journey to Geneva, I had constantly declared
myself a Protestant, and had gone publicly to the Hotel de Hollande without incurring the least censure
from anybody. It appeared to me diverting enough, that Madam de Boufflers should wish to direct my
conscience in matters of religion. However, as I had no doubt of the purity of her intention, I was not
offended by this singular sally, and I answered her without anger, stating to her my reasons.
  Calumnies  in  print  were  still  industriously  circulated,  and  their  benign  authors  reproached  the
different powers with treating me too mildly. For my part, I let them say and write what they pleased,
without giving myself the least concern about the matter. I was told there was a censure from the
Sorbonne, but this I could not believe. What could the Sorbonne have to do in the matter? Did the
doctors wish to know to a certainty that I was not a Catholic? Everybody already knew I was not one.
Were they desirous of proving I was not a good Calvinist? Of what consequence was this to them? It
was taking upon themselves a singular care, and becoming the substitutes of our ministers. Before I saw
this publication I thought it was distributed in the name of the Sorbonne, by way of mockery: and when
I had read it I was convinced this was the case. But when at length there was not a doubt of its
authenticity, all I could bring myself to believe was, that the learned doctors would have been better
placed in a madhouse than they were in the college.
I was more affected by another publication, because it came from a man for whom I always had an
esteem, and whose constancy I admired, though I pitied his blindness. I mean the mandatory letter
against me by the archbishop of Paris. I thought to return an answer to it was a duty I owed myself.
This I felt I could do without derogating from my dignity; the case was something similar to that of the
King of Poland. I had always detested brutal disputes, after the manner of Voltaire. I never combat but
with dignity, and before I deign to defend myself I must be certain that he by whom I am attacked will
not dishonor my retort. I had no doubt but this letter was fabricated by the Jesuits, and although they
were at that time in distress, I discovered in it their old principle of crushing the wretched. I was
therefore at liberty to follow my ancient maxim, by honoring the titulary author, and refuting the work
which I think I did completely.
I found my residence at Motiers very agreeable, and nothing was wanting to determine me to end
my days there, but a certainty of the means of subsistence. Living is dear in that neighborhood, and all
my  old  projects  had  been  overturned  by  the  dissolution  of  my  household  arrangements  at
Montmorency, the establishment of others, the sale or squandering of my furniture, and the expenses
incurred since my departure. The little capital which remained to me daily diminished. Two or three
years were sufficient to consume the remainder without my having the means of renewing it, except by
again engaging in literary pursuits: a pernicious profession which I had already abandoned. Persuaded
that everything which concerned me would change, and that the public, recovered from its frenzy,
would make my persecutors blush, all my endeavors tended to prolong my resources until this happyrevolution should take place, after which I should more at my ease choose a resource from amongst
those which might offer themselves. To this effect I took up my Dictionary of Music, which ten years'
labor had so far advanced as to leave nothing wanting to it but the last corrections. My books which I
had lately received, enabled me to finish this work; my papers sent me by the same conveyance,
furnished me with the means of beginning my memoirs to which I was determined to give my whole
attention. I began by transcribing the letters into a book, by which my memory might be guided in the
order of fact and time. I had already selected those I intended to keep for this purpose, and for ten years
the series was not interrupted. However, in preparing them for copying I found an interruption at which
I was surprised. This was for almost six months, from October, 1756, to March following. I recollected
having put into my selection a number of letters from Diderot, De Leyre, Madam d' Epinay, Madam de
Chenonceaux, etc., which filled up the void and were missing. What was become of them? Had any
person laid their hands upon my papers whilst they remained in the Hotel de Luxembourg? This was
not  conceivable,  and  I  had  seen  M.  de  Luxembourg  take  the  key  of  the  chamber  in  which  I  had
deposited them. Many letters from different ladies, and all those from Diderot, were without date, on
which account I had been under the necessity of dating them from memory before they could be put in
order, and thinking I might have committed errors, I again looked them over for the purpose of seeing
whether or not I could find those which ought to fill up the void. This experiment did not succeed. I
perceived the vacancy to be real, and that the letters had certainly been taken away. By whom and for
what purpose? This was what I could not comprehend. These letters, written prior to my great quarrels,
and at the time of my first enthusiasm in the composition of 'Eloisa', could not be interesting to any
person. They contained nothing more than cavillings by Diderot, jeerings from De Leyre, assurances of
friendship from M. de Chenonceaux, and even Madam d'Epinay, with whom I was then upon the best
of terms. To whom were these letters of consequence? To what use were they to be put? It was not until
seven years afterwards that I suspected the nature of the theft. The deficiency being no longer doubtful,
I looked over my rough drafts to see whether or not it was the only one. I found several, which on
account of the badness of my memory, made me suppose others in the multitude of my papers. Those I
remarked were that of the 'Morale Sensitive', and the extract of the adventures of Lord Edward. The
last, I confess, made me suspect Madam de Luxembourg. La Roche, her valet de chambre, had sent me
the papers, and I could think of nobody but herself to whom this fragment could be of consequence; but
what concern could the other give her, any more than the rest of the letters missing, with which, even
with evil intentions, nothing to my prejudice could be done, unless they were falsified? As for the
marechal, with whose friendship for me, and invariable integrity, I was perfectly acquainted, I never
could suspect him for a moment. The most reasonable supposition, after long tormenting my mind in
endeavoring to discover the author of the theft, that which imputed it to D'Alembert, who, having thrust
himself into the company of Madam de Luxembourg, might have found means to turn over these
papers, and take from amongst them such manuscripts and letters as he might have thought proper,
either for the purpose of endeavoring to embroil me with the writer of them, or to appropriate those he
should  find  useful  to  his  own  private  purposes.  I  imagined  that,  deceived  by  the  title  of  Morale
Sensitive, he might have supposed it to be the plan of a real treatise upon materialism, with which he
would have armed himself against me in a manner easy to be imagined. Certain that he would soon be
undeceived by reading the sketch and determined to quit all literary pursuits, these larcenies gave me
but little concern. They besides were not the first the same hand had committed upon me without
having complained of these pilferings.
  [I had found in his 'Elemens de Musique' (Elements of Music) several things taken from what I had
written for the 'Encyclopedie', and which were given to him several years before the publication of his
elements. I know not what he may have had to do with a book entitled 'Dictionaire des Beaux Arts'
(Dictionary of the Fine Arts) but I found in it articles transcribed word for word from mine, and this
long before the same articles were printed in the Encyclopedie.]
  In a very little time I thought no more of the trick that had been played me than if nothing had
happened, and began to collect the materials I had left for the purpose of undertaking my projectedconfessions.
I had long thought the company of ministers, or at least the citizens and burgesses of Geneva,
would  remonstrate  against  the  infraction  of  the  edict  in  the  decree  made  against  me.  Everything
remained quiet, at least to all exterior appearance; for discontent was general, and ready, on the first
opportunity, openly to manifest itself. My friends, or persons calling themselves such, wrote letter after
letter exhorting me to come and put myself at their head, assuring me of public separation from the
council. The fear of the disturbance and troubles which might be caused by my presence, prevented me
from acquiescing with their desires, and, faithful to the oath I had formerly made, never to take the least
part in any civil dissension in my country, I chose rather to let the offence remain as it was, and banish
myself forever from the country, than to return to it by means which were violent and dangerous. It is
true, I expected the burgesses would make legal remonstrances against an infraction in which their
interests  were  deeply  concerned;  but  no  such  steps  were  taken.  They  who  conducted  the  body  of
citizens sought less the real redress of grievances than an opportunity to render themselves necessary.
They caballed but were silent, and suffered me to be bespattered by the gossips and hypocrites set on to
render me odious in the eyes of the populace, and pass upon them their boistering for a zeal in favor of
religion.
  After having, during a whole year, vainly expected that some one would remonstrate against an
illegal proceeding, and seeing myself abandoned by my fellow-citizens, I determined to renounce my
ungrateful country in which I never had lived, from which I had not received either inheritance or
services, and by which, in return for the honor I had endeavored to do it, I saw myself so unworthily
treated by unanimous consent, since they, who should have spoken, had remained silent. I therefore
wrote to the first syndic for that year, to M. Favre, if I remember right, a letter in which I solemnly gave
up my freedom of the city of Geneva, carefully observing in it, however, that decency and moderation,
from which I have never departed in the acts of haughtiness which, in my misfortunes, the cruelty of
my enemies have frequently forced upon me,
  This step opened the eyes of the citizens, who feeling they had neglected their own interests by
abandoning my defence, took my part when it was too late. They had wrongs of their own which they
joined  to  mine,  and  made  these  the  subject  of  several  well-reasoned  representations,  which  they
strengthened and extended, as the refusal of the council, supported by the ministry of France, made
them more clearly perceive the project formed to impose on them a yoke. These altercations produced
several pamphlets which were undecisive, until that appeared entitled 'Lettres ecrites de la Campagne',
a work written in favor of the council, with infinite art, and by which the remonstrating party, reduced
to silence, was crushed for a time. This production, a lasting monument of the rare talents of its author,
came from the Attorney-General Tronchin, a man of wit and an enlightened understanding, well versed
in the laws and government of the republic. 'Siluit terra'.
  The remonstrators, recovered from their first overthrow, undertook to give an answer, and in time
produced one which brought them off tolerably well. But they all looked to me, as the only person
capable of combating a like adversary with hope of success. I confess I was of their opinion, and
excited by my former fellow-citizens, who thought it was my duty to aid them with my pen, as I had
been the cause of their embarrassment, I undertook to refute the 'Lettres ecrites de la Campagne', and
parodied the title of them by that of 'Lettres ecrites de la Montagne,' which I gave to mine. I wrote this
answer so secretly, that at a meeting I had at Thonon, with the chiefs of the malcontents to talk of their
affairs, and where they showed me a sketch of their answer, I said not a word of mine, which was quite
ready,  fearing  obstacles  might  arise  relative  to  the  impression  of  it,  should  the  magistrate  or  my
enemies hear of what I had done. This work was, however known in France before the publication; but
government chose rather to let it appear, than to suffer me to guess at the means by which my secret
had been discovered. Concerning this I will state what I know, which is but trifling: what I have
conjectured shall remain with myself.
I received, at Motiers, almost as many visits as at the Hermitage and Montmorency; but these, for
the most part were a different kind. They who had formerly come to see me were people who, havingtaste, talents, and principles, something similar to mine, alleged them as the causes of their visits, and
introduced subjects on which I could converse. At Motiers the case was different, especially with the
visitors who came from France. They were officers or other persons who had no taste for literature, nor
had many of them read my works, although, according to their own accounts, they had travelled thirty,
forty, sixty, and even a hundred leagues to come and see me, and admire the illustrious man, the very
celebrated, the great man, etc. For from the time of my settling at Motiers, I received the most impudent
flattery, from which the esteem of those with whom I associated had formerly sheltered me. As but few
of my new visitors deigned to tell me who or what they were, and as they had neither read nor cast their
eye over my works, nor had their researches and mine been directed to the same objects, I knew not
what to speak to them upon: I waited for what they had to say, because it was for them to know and tell
me the purpose of their visit. It will naturally be imagined this did not produce conversations very
interesting to me, although they, perhaps, were so to my visitors, according to the information they
might wish to acquire; for as I was without suspicion, I answered without reserve, to every question
they thought proper to ask me, and they commonly went away as well informed as myself of the
particulars of my situation.
I was, for example, visited in this manner by M. de Feins, equerry to the queen, and captain of
cavalry, who had the patience to pass several days at Motiers, and to follow me on foot even to La
Ferriere,  leading  his  horse  by  the  bridle,  without  having  with  me  any  point  of  union,  except  our
acquaintance with Mademoiselle Fel, and that we both played at 'bilboquet'. [A kind of cup and ball.]
  Before this I had received another visit much more extraordinary. Two men arrived on foot, each
leading a mule loaded with his little baggage, lodging at the inn, taking care of their mules and asking
to  see  me.  By  the  equipage  of  these  muleteers  they  were  taken  for  smugglers,  and  the  news  that
smugglers were come to see me was instantly spread. Their manner of addressing me sufficiently
showed  they  were  persons  of  another  description;  but  without  being  smugglers  they  might  be
adventurers, and this doubt kept me for some time on my guard. They soon removed my apprehensions.
One was M. de Montauban, who had the title of Comte de la Tour du Pin, gentleman to the dauphin;
the other, M. Dastier de Carpentras, an old officer who had his cross of St. Louis in his pocket, because
he could not display it. These gentlemen, both very amiable, were men of sense, and their manner of
travelling, so much to my own taste, and but little like that of French gentlemen, in some measure
gained them my attachment, which an intercourse with them served to improve. Our acquaintance did
not end with the visit; it is still kept up, and they have since been several times to see me, not on foot,
that was very well for the first time; but the more I have seen of these gentlemen the less similarity
have I found between their taste and mine; I have not discovered their maxims to be such as I have ever
observed, that my writings are familiar to them, or that there is any real sympathy between them and
myself. What, therefore, did they want with me? Why came they to see me with such an equipage?
Why repeat their visit? Why were they so desirous of having me for their host? I did not at that time
propose to myself these questions; but they have sometimes occurred to me since.
  Won by their advances, my heart abandoned itself without reserve, especially to M. Dastier, with
whose open countenance I was more particularly pleased. I even corresponded with him, and when I
determined to print the 'Letters from the Mountains', I thought of addressing myself to him, to deceive
those by whom my packet was waited for upon the road to Holland. He had spoken to me a good deal,
and perhaps purposely, upon the liberty of the press at Avignon; he offered me his services should I
have anything to print there: I took advantage of the offer and sent him successively by the post my
first sheets. After having kept these for some time, he sent them back to me, "Because," said he, "no
bookseller dared to sell them;" and I was obliged to have recourse to Rey taking care to send my
papers,  one  after  the  other,  and  not  to  part  with  those  which  succeeded  until  I  had  advice  of  the
reception of those already sent. Before the work was published, I found it had been seen in the office of
the ministers, and D'Escherny, of Neuchatel, spoke to me of the book, entitled 'Del' Homme de la
Monlagne', which D'Holbach had told him was by me. I assured him, and it was true, that I never had
written a book which bore that title. When the letters appeared he became furious, and accused me offalsehood; although I had told him truth. By this means I was certain my manuscript had been read; as I
could not doubt the fidelity of Rey, the most rational conjecture seemed to be, that my packets had been
opened at the post-house.
  Another acquaintance I made much about the same time, but which was begun by letters, was that
with M. Laliand of Nimes, who wrote to me from Paris, begging I would send him my profile; he said
he was in want of it for my bust in marble, which Le Moine was making for him to be placed in his
library. If this was a pretence invented to deceive me, it fully succeeded. I imagined that a man who
wished to have my bust in marble in his library had his head full of my works, consequently of my
principles, and that he loved me because his mind was in unison with mine. It was natural this idea
should seduce me. I have since seen M. Laliand. I found him very ready to render me many trifling
services, and to concern himself in my little affairs, but I have my doubts of his having, in the few
books he ever read, fallen upon any one of those I have written. I do not know that he has a library, or
that such a thing is of any use to him; and for the bust he has a bad figure in plaster, by Le Moine, from
which has been engraved a hideous portrait that bears my name, as if it bore to me some resemblance.
  The only Frenchman who seemed to come to see me, on account of my sentiments, and his taste for
my works, was a young officer of the regiment of Limousin, named Seguier de St. Brisson. He made a
figure in Paris, where he still perhaps distinguishes himself by his pleasing talents and wit. He came
once to Montmorency, the winter which preceded my catastrophe. I was pleased with his vivacity. He
afterwards wrote to me at Motiers, and whether he wished to flatter me, or that his head was turned
with Emilius, he informed me he was about to quit the service to live independently, and had begun to
learn the trade of a carpenter. He had an elder brother, a captain in the same regiment, the favorite of
the mother, who, a devotee to excess, and directed by I know not what hypocrite, did not treat the
youngest son well, accusing him of irreligion, and what was still worse, of the unpardonable crime of
being connected with me. These were the grievances, on account of which he was determined to break
with his mother, and adopt the manner of life of which I have just spoken, all to play the part of the
young Emilius. Alarmed at his petulance, I immediately wrote to him, endeavoring to make him change
his resolution, and my exhortations were as strong as I could make them. They had their effect. He
returned to his duty, to his mother, and took back the resignation he had given the colonel, who had
been prudent enough to make no use of it, that the young man might have time to reflect upon what he
had done. St. Brisson, cured of these follies, was guilty of another less alarming, but, to me, not less
disagreeable than the rest: he became an author. He successively published two or three pamphlets
which  announced  a  man  not  devoid  of  talents,  but  I  have  not  to  reproach  myself  with  having
encouraged him by my praises to continue to write.
  Some time afterwards he came to see me, and we made together a pilgrimage to the island of St.
Pierre. During this journey I found him different from what I saw of him at Montmorency. He had, in
his manner, something affected, which at first did not much disgust me, although I have since thought
of it to his disadvantage. He once visited me at the hotel de St. Simon, as I passed through Paris on my
way to England. I learned there what he had not told me, that he lived in the great world, and often
visited Madam de Luxembourg. Whilst I was at Trie, I never heard from him, nor did he so much as
make inquiry after me, by means of his relation Mademoiselle Seguier, my neighbor. This lady never
seemed favorably disposed towards me. In a word, the infatuation of M. de St. Brisson ended suddenly,
like  the  connection  of  M.  de  Feins:  but  this  man  owed  me  nothing,  and  the  former  was  under
obligations  to  me,  unless  the  follies  I  prevented  him  from  committing  were  nothing  more  than
affectation; which might very possibly be the case.
I had visits from Geneva also. The Delucs, father and son, successively chose me for their attendant
in sickness. The father was taken ill on the road, the son was already sick when he left Geneva; they
both came to my house. Ministers, relations, hypocrites, and persons of every description came from
Geneva and Switzerland, not like those from France, to laugh at and admire me, but to rebuke and
catechise me. The only person amongst them, who gave me pleasure, was Moultou, who passed with
me three or four days, and whom I wished to remain much longer; the most persevering of all, the mostobstinate, and who conquered me by importunity, was a M. d'Ivernois, a merchant at Geneva, a French
refugee, and related to the attorney-general of Neuchatel. This man came from Geneva to Motiers twice
a  year,  on  purpose  to  see  me,  remained  with  me  several  days  together  from  morning  to  night,
accompanied me in my walks, brought me a thousand little presents, insinuated himself in spite of me
into my confidence, and intermeddled in all my affairs, notwithstanding there was not between him and
myself the least similarity of ideas, inclination, sentiment, or knowledge. I do not believe he ever read a
book of any kind throughout, or that he knows upon what subject mine are written. When I began to
herbalize,  he  followed  me  in  my  botanical  rambles,  without  taste  for  that  amusement,  or  having
anything to say to me or I to him. He had the patience to pass with me three days in a public house at
Goumoins, whence, by wearying him and making him feel how much he wearied me, I was in hopes of
driving him away. I could not, however, shake his incredible perseverance, nor by any means discover
the motive of it.
  Amongst these connections, made and continued by force, I must not omit the only one that was
agreeable  to  me,  and  in  which  my  heart  was  really  interested:  this  was  that  I  had  with  a  young
Hungarian who came to live at Neuchatel, and from that place to Motiers, a few months after I had
taken up my residence there. He was called by the people of the country the Baron de Sauttern, by
which  name  he  had  been  recommended  from  Zurich.  He  was  tall,  well  made,  had  an  agreeable
countenance, and mild and social qualities. He told everybody, and gave me also to understand that he
came to Neuchatel for no other purpose, than that of forming his youth to virtue, by his intercourse with
me. His physiognomy, manner, and behavior, seemed well suited to his conversation, and I should have
thought I failed in one of the greatest duties had I turned my back upon a young man in whom I
perceived  nothing  but  what  was  amiable,  and  who  sought  my  acquaintance  from  so  respectable  a
motive. My heart knows not how to connect itself by halves. He soon acquired my friendship, and all
my confidence, and we were presently inseparable. He accompanied me in all my walks, and become
fond of them. I took him to the marechal, who received him with the utmost kindness. As he was yet
unable to explain himself in French, he spoke and wrote to me in Latin, I answered in French, and this
mingling of the two languages did not make our conversations either less smooth or lively. He spoke of
his family, his affairs, his adventures, and of the court of Vienna, with the domestic details of which he
seemed well acquainted. In fine, during two years which we passed in the greatest intimacy, I found in
him  a  mildness  of  character  proof  against  everything,  manners  not  only  polite  but  elegant,  great
neatness of person, an extreme decency in his conversation, in a word, all the marks of a man born and
educated a gentleman, and which rendered him in my eyes too estimable not to make him dear to me.
  At the time we were upon the most intimate and friendly terms, D' Ivernois wrote to me from
Geneva, putting me upon my guard against the young Hungarian who had taken up his residence in my
neighborhood;  telling  me  he  was  a  spy  whom  the  minister  of  France  had  appointed  to  watch  my
proceedings. This information was of a nature to alarm me the more, as everybody advised me to guard
against the machinations of persons who were employed to keep an eye upon my actions, and to entice
me into France for the purpose of betraying me. To shut the mouths, once for all, of these foolish
advisers,  I  proposed  to  Sauttern,  without  giving  him  the  least  intimation  of  the  information  I  had
received, a journey on foot to Pontarlier, to which he consented. As soon as we arrived there I put the
letter from D'Ivernois into his hands, and after giving him an ardent embrace, I said: "Sauttern has no
need of a proof of my confidence in him, but it is necessary I should prove to the public that I know in
whom to place it." This embrace was accompanied with a pleasure which persecutors can neither feel
themselves, nor take away from the oppressed.
I will never believe Sauttern was a spy, nor that he betrayed me: but I was deceived by him. When I
opened to him my heart without reserve, he constantly kept his own shut, and abused me by lies. He
invented I know not what kind of story, to prove to me his presence was necessary in his own country. I
exhorted him to return to it as soon as possible. He setoff, and when I thought he was in Hungary, I
learned he was at Strasbourgh. This was not the first time he had been there. He had caused some
disorder in a family in that city; and the husband knowing I received him in my house, wrote to me. Iused every effort to bring the young woman back to the paths of virtue, and Sauttern to his duty.
  When I thought they were perfectly detached from each other, they renewed their acquaintance, and
the husband had the complaisance to receive the young man at his house; from that moment I had
nothing more to say. I found the pretended baron had imposed upon me by a great number of lies. His
name was not Sauttern, but Sauttersheim. With respect to the title of baron, given him in Switzerland, I
could not reproach him with the impropriety, because he had never taken it; but I have not a doubt of
his  being  a  gentleman,  and  the  marshal,  who  knew  mankind,  and  had  been  in  Hungary,  always
considered and treated him as such.
  He had no sooner left my neighborhood, than the girl at the inn where he eat, at Motiers, declared
herself with child by him. She was so dirty a creature, and Sauttern, generally esteemed in the country
for his conduct and purity of morals, piqued himself so much upon cleanliness, that everybody was
shocked  at  this  impudent  pretension.  The  most  amiable  women  of  the  country,  who  had  vainly
displayed to him their charms, were furious: I myself was almost choked with indignation. I used every
effort to get the tongue of this impudent woman stopped, offering to pay all expenses, and to give
security for Sauttersheim. I wrote to him in the fullest persuasion, not only that this pregnancy could
not relate to him, but that it was feigned, and the whole a machination of his enemies and mine. I
wished  him  to  return  and  confound  the  strumpet,  and  those  by  whom  she  was  dictated  to.  The
pusillanimity of his answer surprised me. He wrote to the master of the parish to which the creature
belonged, and endeavored to stifle the matter. Perceiving this, I concerned myself no more about it, but
I was astonished that a man who could stoop so low should have been sufficiently master of himself to
deceive me by his reserve in the closest familiarity.
  From Strasbourgh, Sauttersheim went to seek his fortune in Paris, and found there nothing but
misery. He wrote to me acknowledging his error. My compassion was excited by the recollection of our
former friendship, and I sent him a sum of money. The year following, as I passed through Paris, I saw
him much in the same situation; but he was the intimate friend of M. de Laliand, and I could not learn
by what means he had formed this acquaintance, or whether it was recent or of long standing. Two
years afterwards Sauttersheim returned to Strasbourgh, whence he wrote to me and where he died. This,
in a few words, is the history of our connection, and what I know of his adventures; but while I mourn
the  fate  of  the  unhappy  young  man,  I  still,  and  ever  shall,  believe  he  was  the  son  of  people  of
distinction, and the impropriety of his conduct was the effect of the situations to which he was reduced.
  Such were the connections and acquaintance I acquired at Motiers. How many of these would have
been necessary to compensate the cruel losses I suffered at the same time.
  The first of these was that of M. de Luxembourg, who, after having been long tormented by the
physicians,  at  length  became  their  victim,  by  being  treated  for  the  gout  which  they  would  not
acknowledge him to have, as for a disorder they thought they could cure.
  According to what La Roche, the confidential servant of Madam de Luxembourg, wrote to me
relative to what had happened, it is by this cruel and memorable example that the miseries of greatness
are to be deplored.
  The loss of this good nobleman afflicted me the more, as he was the only real friend I had in
France, and the mildness of his character was such as to make me quite forget his rank, and attach
myself to him as his equal. Our connection was not broken off on account of my having quitted the
kingdom; he continued to write to me as usual.
I nevertheless thought I perceived that absence, or my misfortune, had cooled his affection for me.
It is difficult to a courtier to preserve the same attachment to a person whom he knows to be in disgrace
with courts. I moreover suspected the great ascendancy Madam de Luxembourg had over his mind, had
been unfavorable to me, and that she had taken advantage of our separation to injure me in his esteem.
For her part, notwithstanding a few affected marks of regard, which daily became less frequent, she less
concealed the change in her friendship. She wrote to me four or five times into Switzerland, after which
she never wrote to me again, and nothing but my prejudice, confidence and blindness, could have
prevented my discovering in her something more than a coolness towards me.  Guy the bookseller, partner with Duchesne, who, after I had left Montmorency, frequently went to
the hotel de Luxembourg, wrote to me that my name was in the will of the marechal. There was nothing
in  this  either  incredible  or  extraordinary,  on  which  account  I  had  no  doubt  of  the  truth  of  the
information. I deliberated within myself whether or not I should receive the legacy. Everything well
considered, I determined to accept it, whatever it might be, and to do that honor to the memory of an
honest man, who, in a rank in which friendship is seldom found, had had a real one for me. I had not
this duty to fulfill. I heard no more of the legacy, whether it were true or false; and in truth I should
have felt some pain in offending against one of the great maxims of my system of morality, in profiting
by anything at the death of a person whom I had once held dear. During the last illness of our friend
Mussard, Leneips proposed to me to take advantage of the grateful sense he expressed for our cares, to
insinuate  to  him  dispositions  in  our  favor.  "Ah!  my  dear  Leneips,"  said  I,  "let  us  not  pollute  by
interested ideas the sad but sacred duties we discharge towards our dying friend. I hope my name will
never be found in the testament of any person, at least not in that of a friend." It was about this time that
my lord marshal spoke to me of his, of what he intended to do in it for me, and that I made him the
answer of which I have spoken in the first part of my memoirs.
  My second loss, still more afflicting and irreparable, was that of the best of women and mothers,
who, already weighed down with years, and overburthened with infirmities and misery, quitted this
vale of tears for the abode of the blessed, where the amiable remembrance of the good we have done
here below is the eternal reward of our benevolence. Go, gentle and beneficent shade, to those of
Fenelon, Berneg, Catinat, and others, who in a more humble state have, like them, opened their hearts
to pure charity; go and taste of the fruit of your own benevolence, and prepare for your son the place he
hopes to fill by your side. Happy in your misfortunes that Heaven, in putting to them a period, has
spared you the cruel spectacle of his! Fearing, lest I should fill her heart with sorrow by the recital of
my first disasters, I had not written to her since my arrival in Switzerland; but I wrote to M. de Conzie,
to inquire after her situation, and it was from him I learned she had ceased to alleviate the sufferings of
the afflicted, and that her own were at an end. I myself shall not suffer long; but if I thought I should
not see her again in the life to come, my feeble imagination would less delight in the idea of the perfect
happiness I there hope to enjoy.
  My third and last loss, for since that time I have not had a friend to lose, was that of the lord
marshal. He did not die but tired of serving the ungratful, he left Neuchatel, and I have never seen him
since. He still lives, and will, I hope, survive me: he is alive, and thanks to him all my attachments on
earth are not destroyed. There is one man still worthy of my friendship; for the real value of this
consists more in what we feel than in that which we inspire; but I have lost the pleasure I enjoyed in
his, and can rank him in the number of those only whom I love, but with whom I am no longer
connected. He went to England to receive the pardon of the king, and acquired the possession of the
property which formerly had been confiscated. We did not separate without an intention of again being
united, the idea of which seemed to give him as much pleasure as I received from it. He determined to
reside at Keith Hall, near Aberdeen, and I was to join him as soon as he was settled there: but this
project was too flattering to my hopes to give me any of its success. He did not remain in Scotland. The
affectionate solicitations of the King of Prussia induced him to return to Berlin, and the reason of my
not going to him there will presently appear.
  Before this departure, foreseeing the storm which my enemies began to raise against me, he of his
own accord sent me letters of naturalization, which seemed to be a certain means of preventing me
from being driven from the country. The community of the Convent of Val de Travers followed the
example of the governor, and gave me letters of Communion, gratis, as they were the first. Thus, in
every respect, become a citizen, I was sheltered from legal expulsion, even by the prince; but it has
never been by legitimate means, that the man who, of all others, has shown the greatest respect for the
laws, has been persecuted. I do not think I ought to enumerate, amongst the number of my losses at this
time,  that  of  the  Abbe  Malby.  Having  lived  sometime  at  the  house  of  his  mother,  I  have  been
acquainted  with  the  abbe,  but  not  very  intimately,  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  the  nature  of  hissentiments with respect to me changed after I acquired a greater celebrity than he already had. But the
first time I discovered his insincerity was immediately after the publication of the 'Letters from the
Mountain'. A letter attributed to him, addressed to Madam Saladin, was handed about in Geneva, in
which he spoke of this work as the seditious clamors of a furious demagogue.
  The esteem I had for the Abbe Malby, and my great opinion of his understanding, did not permit me
to believe this extravagant letter was written by him. I acted in this business with my usual candor. I
sent him a copy of the letter, informing him he was said to be the author of it. He returned me no
answer. This silence astonished me: but what was my surprise when by a letter I received from Madam
de Chenonceaux, I learned the Abbe was really the author of that which was attributed to him, and
found himself greatly embarrassed by mine. For even supposing for a moment that what he stated was
true, how could he justify so public an attack, wantonly made, without obligation or necessity, for the
sole purpose of overwhelming in the midst of his greatest misfortunes, a man to whom he had shown
himself a well-wisher, and who had not done anything that could excite his enmity? In a short time
afterwards the 'Dialogues of Phocion', in which I perceived nothing but a compilation, without shame
or restraint, from my writings, made their appearance.
  In reading this book I perceived the author had not the least regard for me, and that in future I must
number him among my most bitter enemies. I do not believe he has ever pardoned me for the Social
Contract, far superior to his abilities, or the Perpetual Peace; and I am, besides, of opinion that the
desire he expressed that I should make an extract from the Abby de St. Pierre, proceeded from a
supposition in him that I should not acquit myself of it so well.
  The  further  I  advance  in  my  narrative,  the  less  order  I  feel  myself  capable  of  observing.  The
agitation of the rest of my life has deranged in my ideas the succession of events. These are too
numerous, confused, and disagreeable to be recited in due order. The only strong impression they have
left upon my mind is that of the horrid mystery by which the cause of them is concealed, and of the
deplorable state to which they have reduced me. My narrative will in future be irregular, and according
to the events which, without order, may occur to my recollection. I remember about the time to which I
refer,  full  of  the  idea  of  my  confessions,  I  very  imprudently  spoke  of  them  to  everybody,  never
imagining it could be the wish or interest, much less within the power of any person whatsoever, to
throw an obstacle in the way of this undertaking, and had I suspected it, even this would not have
rendered me more discreet, as from the nature of my disposition it is totally impossible for me to
conceal either my thoughts or feelings. The knowledge of this enterprise was, as far as I can judge, the
cause of the storm that was raised to drive me from Switzerland, and deliver me into the hands of those
by whom I might be prevented from executing it.
I had another project in contemplation which was not looked upon with a more favorable eye by
those who were afraid of the first: this was a general edition of my works. I thought this edition of them
necessary to ascertain what books, amongst those to which my name was affixed, were really written
by me, and to furnish the public with the means of distinguishing them from the writings falsely
attributed to me by my enemies, to bring me to dishonor and contempt. This was besides a simple and
an honorable means of insuring to myself a livelihood, and the only one that remained to me. As I had
renounced the profession of an author, my memoirs not being of a nature to appear during my lifetime;
as I no longer gained a farthing in any manner whatsoever, and constantly lived at a certain expense, I
saw the end of my resources in that of the produce of the last things I had written. This reason had
induced me to hasten the finishing of my Dictionary of Music, which still was incomplete. I had
received for it a hundred louis(guineas) and a life annuity of three hundred livres; but a hundred louis
could not last long in the hands of a man who annually expended upwards of sixty, and three-hundred
livres (twelve guineas) a year was but a trifling sum to one upon whom parasites and beggarly visitors
lighted like a swarm of flies.
  A company of merchants from Neuchatel came to undertake the general edition, and a printer or
bookseller of the name of Reguillat, from Lyons, thrust himself, I know not by what means, amongst
them to direct it. The agreement was made upon reasonable terms, and sufficient to accomplish myobject. I had in print and manuscript, matter for six volumes in quarto. I moreover agreed to give my
assistance in bringing out the edition. The merchants were, on their part, to pay me a thousand crowns
(one hundred and twenty-five pounds) down, and to assign me an annuity of sixteen hundred livres
(sixty-six pounds) for life.
  The agreement was concluded but not signed, when the Letters from the Mountain appeared. The
terrible explosion caused by this infernal work, and its abominable author, terrified the company, and
the undertaking was at an end.
I would compare the effect of this last production to that of the Letter on French Music, had not that
letter, while it brought upon me hatred, and exposed me to danger, acquired me respect and esteem. But
after the appearance of the last work, it was a matter of astonishment at Geneva and Versailles that such
a monster as the author of it should be suffered to exist. The little council, excited by Resident de
France, and directed by the attorney-general, made a declaration against my work, by which, in the
most severe terms, it was declared to be unworthy of being burned by the hands of the hangman,
adding, with an address which bordered upon the burlesque, there was no possibility of speaking of or
answering  it  without  dishonor.  I  would  here  transcribe  the  curious.  piece  of  composition,  but
unfortunately I have it not by me. I ardently wish some of my readers, animated by the zeal of truth and
equity,  would  read  over  the  Letters  from  the  Mountain:  they  will,  I  dare  hope,  feel  the  stoical
moderation which reigns throughout the whole, after all the cruel outrages with which the author was
loaded. But unable to answer the abuse, because no part of it could be called by that name nor to the
reasons because these were unanswerable, my enemies pretended to appear too much enraged to reply:
and it is true, if they took the invincible arguments it contains, for abuse, they must have felt themselves
roughly treated.
  The remonstrating party, far from complaining of the odious declaration, acted according to the
spirit of it, and instead of making a trophy of the Letters from the Mountain, which they veiled to make
them serve as a shield, were pusillanimous enough not to do justice or honor to that work, written to
defend them, and at their own solicitation. They did not either quote or mention the letters, although
they tacitly drew from them all their arguments, and by exactly following the advice with which they
conclude, made them the sole cause of their safety and triumph. They had imposed on me this duty: I
had fulfilled it, and unto the end had served their cause and the country. I begged of them to abandon
me, and in their quarrels to think of nobody but themselves. They took me at my word, and I concerned
myself no more about their affairs, further than constantly to exhort them to peace, not doubting, should
they continue to be obstinate, of their being crushed by France; this however did not happen; I know
the reason why it did not, but this is not the place to explain what I mean.
  The effect produced at Neuchatel by the Letters from the Mountain was at first very mild. I sent a
copy  of  them  to  M.  de  Montmollin,  who  received  it  favorably,  and  read  it  without  making  any
objection. He was ill as well as myself; as soon as he recovered he came in a friendly manner to see me,
and conversed on general subjects. A rumor was however begun; the book was burned I know not
where.  From  Geneva,  Berne,  and  perhaps  from  Versailles,  the  effervescence  quickly  passed  to
Neuchatel, and especially to Val de Travers, where, before even the ministers had taken any apparent
Steps, an attempt was secretly made to stir up the people, I ought, I dare assert, to have been beloved by
the people of that country in which I have lived, giving alms in abundance, not leaving about me an
indigent person without assistance, never refusing to do any service in my power, and which was
consistent with justice, making myself perhaps too familiar with everybody, and avoiding, as far as it
was possible for me to do it, all distinction which might excite the least jealousy. This, however, did not
prevent the populace, secretly stirred up against me, by I know not whom, from being by degrees
irritated against me, even to fury, nor from publicly insulting me, not only in the country and upon the
road, but in the street. Those to whom I had rendered the greatest services became most irritated against
me, and even people who still continued to receive my benefactions, not daring to appear, excited
others, and seemed to wish thus to be revenged of me for their humiliation, by the obligations they were
under for the favors I had conferred upon them. Montmollin seemed to pay no attention to what waspassing, and did not yet come forward. But as the time of communion approached, he came to advise
me not to present myself at the holy table, assuring me, however, he was not my enemy, and that he
would leave me undisturbed. I found this compliment whimsical enough; it brought to my recollection
the letter from Madam de Boufflers, and I could not conceive to whom it could be a matter of such
importance whether I communicated or not. Considering this condescension on my part as an act of
cowardice, and moreover, being unwilling to give to the people a new pretext under which they might
charge me with impiety, I refused the request of the minister, and he went away dissatisfied, giving me
to understand I should repent of my obstinacy.
  He could not of his own authority forbid me the communion: that of the Consistory, by which I had
been admitted to it, was necessary, and as long as there was no objection from that body I might present
myself  without  the  fear  of  being  refused.  Montmollin  procured  from  the  Classe  (the  ministers)  a
commission to summon me to the Consistory, there to give an account of the articles of my faith, and to
excommunicate me should I refuse to comply. This excommunication could not be pronounced without
the aid of the Consistory also, and a majority of the voices. But the peasants, who under the appellation
of elders, composed this assembly, presided over and governed by their minister, might naturally be
expected to adopt his opinion, especially in matters of the clergy, which they still less understood than
he did. I was therefore summoned, and I resolved to appear.
  What a happy circumstance and triumph would this have been to me could I have spoken, and had
I, if I may so speak, had my pen in my mouth! With what superiority, with what facility even, should I
have overthrown this poor minister in the midst of his six peasants! The thirst after power having made
the Protestant clergy forget all the principles of the reformation, all I had to do to recall these to their
recollection and to reduce them to silence, was to make comments upon my first 'Letters from the
Mountain', upon which they had the folly to animadvert.
  My text was ready, and I had only to enlarge on it, and my adversary was confounded. I should not
have been weak enough to remain on the defensive; it was easy to me to become an assailant without
his even perceiving it, or being able to shelter himself from my attack. The contemptible priests of the
Classe, equally careless and ignorant, had of themselves placed me in the most favorable situation I
could desire to crush them at pleasure. But what of this? It was necessary I should speak without
hesitation, and find ideas, turn of expression, and words at will, preserving a presence of mind, and
keeping myself collected, without once suffering even a momentary confusion. For what could I hope,
feeling as I did, my want of aptitude to express myself with ease? I had been reduced to the most
mortifying silence at Geneva, before an assembly which was favorable to me, and previously resolved
to  approve  of  everything  I  should  say.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  I  had  to  do  with  a  cavalier  who,
substituting cunning to knowledge, would spread for me a hundred snares before I could perceive one
of them, and was resolutely determined to catch me in an error let the consequence be what it would.
The more I examined the situation in which I stood, the greater danger I perceived myself exposed to,
and feeling the impossibility of successfully withdrawing from it, I thought of another expedient. I
meditated a discourse which I intended to pronounce before the Consistory, to exempt myself from the
necessity of answering. The thing was easy. I wrote the discourse and began to learn it by memory,
with an inconceivable ardor. Theresa laughed at hearing me mutter and incessantly repeat the same
phrases, while endeavoring to cram them into my head. I hoped, at length, to remember what I had
written: I knew the chatelain as an officer attached to the service of the prince, would be present at the
Consistory, and that notwithstanding the manoeuvres and bottles of Montmollin, most of the elders
were well disposed towards me. I had, moreover, in my favor, reason, truth, and justice, with the
protection of the king, the authority of the council of state, and the good wishes of every real patriot, to
whom  the  establishment  of  this  inquisition  was  threatening.  In  fine,  everything  contributed  to
encourage me.
  On the eve of the day appointed, I had my discourse by rote, and recited it without missing a word.
I had it in my head all night: in the morning I had forgotten it. I hesitated at every word, thought myself
before the assembly, became confused, stammered, and lost my presence of mind. In fine, when thetime to make my appearance was almost at hand, my courage totally failed me. I remained at home and
wrote to the Consistory, hastily stating my reasons, and pleaded my disorder, which really, in the state
to which apprehension had reduced me, would scarcely have permitted me to stay out the whole sitting.
  The minister, embarrassed by my letter, adjourned the Consistory. In the interval, he of himself, and
by his creatures, made a thousand efforts to seduce the elders, who, following the dictates of their
consciences, rather than those they received from him, did not vote according to his wishes, or those of
the class. Whatever power his arguments drawn from his cellar might have over this kind of people, he
could not gain one of them, more than the two or three who were already devoted to his will, and who
were called his 'ames damnees'.--[damned souls]--The officer of the prince, and the Colonel Pury, who,
in this affair, acted with great zeal, kept the rest to their duty, and when Montmollin wished to proceed
to excommunication, his Consistory, by a majority of voices, flatly refused to authorize him to do it.
Thus reduced to the last expedient, that of stirring up the people against me, he, his colleagues, and
other persons, set about it openly, and were so successful, that not-withstanding the strong and frequent
rescripts of the king, and the orders of the council of state, I was at length obliged to quit the country,
that I might not expose the officer of the king to be himself assassinated while he protected me.
  The recollection of the whole of this affair is so confused, that it is impossible for me to reduce to or
connect the circumstances of it. I remember a kind of negotiation had been entered into with the class,
in which Montmollin was the mediator. He feigned to believe it was feared I should, by my writings,
disturb the peace of the country, in which case, the liberty I had of writing would be blamed. He had
given me to understand that if I consented to lay down my pen, what was past would be forgotten. I had
already entered into this engagement with myself, and did not hesitate in doing it with the class, but
conditionally and solely in matters of religion. He found means to have a duplicate of the agreement
upon some change necessary to be made in it. The condition having been rejected by the class; I
demanded back the writing, which was returned to me, but he kept the duplicate, pretending it was lost.
After this, the people, openly excited by the ministers, laughed at the rescripts of the king, and the
orders of the council of state, and shook off all restraint. I was declaimed against from the pulpit, called
antichrist, and pursued in the country like a mad wolf. My Armenian dress discovered me to the
populace; of this I felt the cruel inconvenience, but to quit it in such circumstances, appeared to me an
act of cowardice. I could not prevail upon myself to do it, and I quietly walked through the country
with my caffetan and fur bonnet in the midst of the hootings of the dregs of the people, and sometimes
through a shower of stones. Several times as I passed before houses, I heard those by whom they were
inhabited call out: "Bring me my gun that I may fire at him." As I did not on this account hasten my
pace, my calmness increased their fury, but they never went further than threats, at least with respect to
firearms.
  During the fermentation I received from two circumstances the most sensible pleasure. The first
was my having it in my power to prove my gratitude by means of the lord marshal. The honest part of
the inhabitants of Neuchatel, full of indignation at the treatment I received, and the manoeuvres of
which I was the victim, held the ministers in execration, clearly perceiving they were obedient to a
foreign impulse, and the vile agents of people, who, in making them act, kept themselves concealed;
they were moreover afraid my case would have dangerous consequences, and be made a precedent for
the purpose of establishing a real inquisition.
  The magistrates, and especially M. Meuron, who had succeeded M. d' Ivernois in the office of
attorney-general, made every effort to defend me. Colonel Pury, although a private individual, did more
and  succeeded  better.  It  was  the  colonel  who  found  means  to  make  Montmollin  submit  in  his
Consistory, by keeping the elders to their duty. He had credit, and employed it to stop the sedition; but
he had nothing more than the authority of the laws, and the aid of justice and reason, to oppose to that
of money and wine: the combat was unequal, and in this point Montmollin was triumphant. However,
thankful for his zeal and cares, I wished to have it in my power to make him a return of good offices,
and in some measure discharge a part of the obligations I was under to him. I knew he was very
desirous of being named a counsellor of state; but having displeased the court by his conduct in theaffair of the minister Petitpierre, he was in disgrace with the prince and governor. I however undertook,
at all risks, to write to the lord marshal in his favor: I went so far as even to mention the employment of
which he was desirous, and my application was so well received that, contrary to the expectations of his
most ardent well wishers, it was almost instantly conferred upon him by the king. In this manner fate,
which has constantly raised me to too great an elevation, or plunged me into an abyss of adversity,
continued to toss me from one extreme to another, and whilst the populace covered me with mud I was
able to make a counsellor of state.
  The other pleasing circumstance was a visit I received from Madam de Verdelin with her daughter,
with whom she had been at the baths of Bourbonne, whence they came to Motiers and stayed with me
two or three days. By her attention and cares, she at length conquered my long repugnancy; and my
heart, won by her endearing manner, made her a return of all the friendship of which she had long
given me proofs. This journey made me extremely sensible of her kindness: my situation rendered the
consolations of friendship highly necessary to support me under my sufferings. I was afraid she would
be too much affected by the insults I received from the populace, and could have wished to conceal
them from her that her feelings might not be hurt, but this was impossible; and although her presence
was some check upon the insolent populace in our walks, she saw enough of their brutality to enable
her to judge of what passed when I was alone. During the short residence she made at Motiers, I was
still attacked in my habitation. One morning her chambermaid found my window blocked up with
stones, which had been thrown at it during the night. A very heavy bench placed in the street by the
side of the house, and strongly fastened down, was taken up and reared against the door in such a
manner as, had it not been perceived from the window, to have knocked down the first person who
should  have  opened  the  door  to  go  out.  Madam  de  Verdelin  was  acquainted  with  everything  that
passed; for, besides what she herself was witness to, her confidential servant went into many houses in
the village, spoke to everybody, and was seen in conversation with Montmollin. She did not, however,
seem to pay the least attention to that which happened to me, nor never mentioned Montmollin nor any
other person, and answered in a few words to what I said to her of him. Persuaded that a residence in
England would be more agreeable to me than any other, she frequently spoke of Mr. Hume who was
then at Paris, of his friendship for me, and the desire he had of being of service to me in his own
country. It is time I should say something of Hume.
  He  had  acquired  a  great  reputation  in  France  amongst  the  Encyclopedists  by  his  essays  on
commerce and politics, and in the last place by his history of the House of Stuart, the only one of his
writings of which I had read a part, in the translation of the Abbe Prevot. For want of being acquainted
with his other works, I was persuaded, according to what I heard of him, that Mr. Hume joined a very
republican mind to the English Paradoxes in favor of luxury. In this opinion I considered his whole
apology of Charles I. as a prodigy of impartiality, and I had as great an idea of his virtue as of his
genius. The desire of being acquainted with this great man, and of obtaining his friendship, had greatly
strengthened the inclination I felt to go to England, induced by the solicitations of Madam de Boufflers,
the intimate friend of Hume. After my arrival in Switzerland, I received from him, by means of this
lady, a letter extremely flattering; in which, to the highest encomiums on my genius, he subjoined a
pressing invitation to induce me to go to England, and the offer of all his interest, and that of his
friends, to make my residence there agreeable. I found in the country to which I had retired, the lord
marshal, the countryman and friend of Hume, who confirmed my good opinion of him, and from whom
I learned a literary anecdote, which did him great honor in the opinion of his lordship and had the same
effect in mine. Wallace, who had written against Hume upon the subject of the population of the
ancients, was absent whilst his work was in the press. Hume took upon himself to examine the proofs,
and to do the needful to the edition. This manner of acting was according to my way of thinking. I had
sold at six sous (three pence) a piece, the copies of a song written against myself. I was, therefore,
strongly  prejudiced  in  favor  of  Hume,  when  Madam  de  Verdelin  came  and  mentioned  the  lively
friendship  he  expressed  for  me,  and  his  anxiety  to  do  me  the  honors  of  England;  such  was  her
expression. She pressed me a good deal to take advantage of this zeal and to write to him. As I had notnaturally an inclination to England, and did not intend to go there until the last extremity, I refused to
write or make any promise; but I left her at liberty to do whatever she should think necessary to keep
Mr. Hume favorably disposed towards me. When she went from Motiers, she left me in the persuasion,
by everything she had said to me of that illustrious man, that he was my friend, and she herself still
more his.
  After her departure, Montmollin carried on his manoeuvres with more vigor, and the populace
threw off all restraint. Yet I still continued to walk quietly amidst the hootings of the vulgar; and a taste
for botany, which I had begun to contract with Doctor d'Ivernois, making my rambling more amusing, I
went through the country herbalising, without being affected by the clamors of this scum of the earth,
whose fury was still augmented by my calmness. What affected me most was, seeing families of my
friends, or of persons who gave themselves that name, openly join the league of my persecutors; such
as the D'Ivernois, without excepting the father and brother of my Isabel le Boy de la Tour, a relation to
the friend in whose house I lodged, and Madam Girardier, her sister-in-law.
  [This fatality had begun with my residence at, Yverdon; the banneret Roguin dying a year or two
after my departure from that city, the old papa Roguin had the candor to inform me with grief, as he
said, that in he papers of his relation, proofs had been found of his having been concerned in the
conspiracy to expel me from Yverdon and the state of Berne. This clearly proved the conspiracy not to
be, as some people pretended to believe, an affair of hypocrisy since the banneret, far from being a
devotee, carried materialism and incredulity to intolerance and fanaticism. Besides, nobody at Yverdon
had shown me more constant attention, nor had so prodigally bestowed upon me praises and flattery as
this banneret. He faithfully followed the favorite plan of my persecutors.]
  This Peter Boy was such a brute; so stupid, and behaved so uncouthly, that, to prevent my mind
from being disturbed, I took the liberty to ridicule him; and after the manner of the 'Petit Prophete', I
wrote a pamphlet of a few pages, entitled, 'la Vision de Pierre de la Montagne dit le Voyant,--[The
vision of Peter of the Mountain called the Seer.]--in which I found means to be diverting enough on the
miracles which then served as the great pretext for my persecution. Du Peyrou had this scrap printed at
Geneva, but its success in the country was but moderate; the Neuchatelois with all their wit, taste but
weakly attic salt or pleasantry when these are a little refined.
  In the midst of decrees and persecutions, the Genevese had distinguished themselves by setting up a
hue and cry with all their might; and my friend Vernes amongst others, with an heroical generosity,
chose that moment precisely to publish against me letters in which he pretended to prove I was not a
Christian. These letters, written with an air of self-sufficiency were not the better for it, although it was
positively  said  the  celebrated  Bonnet  had  given  them  some  correction:  for  this  man,  although  a
materialist, has an intolerant orthodoxy the moment I am in question. There certainly was nothing in
this work which could tempt me to answer it; but having an opportunity of saying a few words upon it
in my 'Letters from the Mountain', I inserted in them a short note sufficiently expressive of disdain to
render Vernes furious. He filled Geneva with his furious exclamations, and D'Ivernois wrote me word
he had quite lost his senses. Sometime afterwards appeared an anonymous sheet, which instead of ink
seemed to be written with water of Phelethon. In this letter I was accused of having exposed my
children in the streets, of taking about with me a soldier's trull, of being worn out with debaucheries...,
and other fine things of a like nature. It was not difficult for me to discover the author. My first idea on
reading  this  libel,  was  to  reduce  to  its  real  value  everything  the  world  calls  fame  and  reputation
amongst men; seeing thus a man who was never in a brothel in his life, and whose greatest defect was
in being as timid and shy as a virgin, treated as a frequenter of places of that description; and in finding
myself charged with being......, I, who not only never had the least taint of such disorder, but, according
to the faculty, was so constructed as to make it almost impossible for me to contract it. Everything well
considered, I thought I could not better refute this libel than by having it printed in the city in which I
longest resided, and with this intention I sent it to Duchesne to print it as it was with an advertisement
in which I named M. Vernes and a few short notes by way of eclaircissement. Not satisfied with
printing it only, I sent copies to several persons, and amongst others one copy to the Prince Louis ofWirtemberg, who had made me polite advances and with whom I was in correspondence. The prince,
Du Peyrou, and others, seemed to have their doubts about the author of the libel, and blamed me for
having named Vernes upon so slight a foundation. Their remarks produced in me some scruples, and I
wrote to Duchesne to suppress the paper. Guy wrote to me he had suppressed it: this may or may not be
the case; I have been deceived on so many occasions that there would be nothing extraordinary in my
being so on this, and from the time of which I speak, was so enveloped in profound darkness that it was
impossible for me to come at any kind of truth.
  M.  Vernes  bore  the  imputation  with  a  moderation  more  than  astonishing  in  a  man  who  was
supposed not to have deserved it, and after the fury with which he was seized on former occasions. He
wrote me two or three letters in very guarded terms, with a view, as it appeared to me, to endeavor by
my answers to discover how far I was certain of his being the author of the paper, and whether or not I
had any proofs against him. I wrote him two short answers, severe in the sense, but politely expressed,
and with which he was not displeased. To his third letter, perceiving he wished to form with me a kind
of correspondence, I returned no answer, and he got D'Ivernois to speak to me. Madam Cramer wrote to
Du Peyrou, telling him she was certain the libel was not by Vernes. This however, did not make me
change my opinion. But as it was possible I might be deceived, and as it is certain that if I were, I owed
Vernes an explicit reparation, I sent him word by D'Ivernois that I would make him such a one as he
should think proper, provided he would name to me the real author of the libel, or at least prove that he
himself was not so. I went further: feeling that, after all, were he not culpable, I had no right to call
upon him for proofs of any kind, I stated in a memoir of considerable length, the reasons whence I had
inferred my conclusion, and determined to submit them to the judgment of an arbitrator, against whom
Vernes could not except. But few people would guess the arbitrator of whom I made choice. I declared
at the end of the memoir, that if, after having examined it, and made such inquiries as should seem
necessary, the council pronounced M. Vernes not to be the author of the libel, from that moment I
should be fully persuaded he was not, and would immediately go and throw myself at his feet, and ask
his pardon until I had obtained it. I can say with the greatest truth that my ardent zeal for equity, the
uprightness and generosity of my heart, and my confidence in the love of justice innate in every mind
never appeared more fully and perceptible than in this wise and interesting memoir, in which I took,
without hesitation, my most implacable enemies for arbitrators between a calumniator and myself. I
read to Du Peyrou what I had written: he advised me to suppress it, and I did so. He wished me to wait
for the proofs Vernes promised, and I am still waiting for them: he thought it best that I should in the
meantime be silent, and I held my tongue, and shall do so the rest of my life, censured as I am for
having brought against Vernes a heavy imputation, false and unsupportable by proof, although I am
still fully persuaded, nay, as convinced as I am of my existence, that he is the author of the libel. My
memoir is in the hands of Du Peyrou. Should it ever be published my reasons will be found in it, and
the heart of Jean Jacques, with which my contemporaries would not be acquainted, will I hope be
known.
I have now to proceed to my catastrophe at Motiers, and to my departure from Val de Travers, after
a residence of two years and a half, and an eight months suffering with unshaken constancy of the most
unworthy treatment. It is impossible for me clearly to recollect the circumstances of this disagreeable
period, but a detail of them will be found in a publication to that effect by Du Peyrou, of which I shall
hereafter have occasion to speak.
  After the departure of Madam de Verdelin the fermentation increased, and, notwithstanding the
reiterated rescripts of the king, the frequent orders of the council of state, and the cares of the chatelain
and magistrates of the place, the people, seriously considering me as antichrist, and perceiving all their
clamors to be of no effect, seemed at length determined to proceed to violence; stones were already
thrown after me in the roads, but I was however in general at too great a distance to receive any harm
from them. At last, in the night of the fair of Motiers, which is in the beginning of September, I was
attacked in my habitation in such a manner as to endanger the lives of everybody in the house.
  At midnight I heard a great noise in the gallery which ran along the back part of the house. Ashower of stones thrown against the window and the door which opened to the gallery fell into it with
so much noise and violence, that my dog, which usually slept there, and had begun to bark, ceased from
fright, and ran into a corner gnawing and scratching the planks to endeavor to make his escape. I
immediately rose, and was preparing to go from my chamber into the kitchen, when a stone thrown by
a  vigorous  arm  crossed  the  latter,  after  having  broken  the  window,  forced  open  the  door  of  my
chamber, and fell at my feet, so that had I been a moment sooner upon the floor I should have had the
stone against my stomach. I judged the noise had been made to bring me to the door, and the stone
thrown to receive me as I went out. I ran into the kitchen, where I found Theresa, who also had risen,
and was tremblingly making her way to me as fast as she could. We placed ourselves against the wall
out of the direction of the window to avoid the stones, and deliberate upon what was best to be done;
for  going  out  to  call  assistance  was  the  certain  means  of  getting  ourselves  knocked  on  the  head.
Fortunately the maid-servant of an old man who lodged under me was waked by the noise, and got up
and ran to call the chatelain, whose house was next to mine. He jumped from his bed, put on his robe de
chambre, and instantly came to me with the guard, which, on account of the fair, went the round that
night, and was just at hand. The chatelain was so alarmed at the sight of the effects of what had
happened that he turned pale and on seeing the stones in the gallery, exclaimed, "Good God! here is a
quarry!" On examining below stairs, a door of a little court was found to have been forced, and there
was an appearance of an attempt having been made to get into the house by the gallery. On inquiring
the reason why the guard had neither prevented nor perceived the disturbance, it came out that the
guards of Motiers had insisted upon doing duty that night, although it was the turn of those of another
village.
  The next day the chatelain sent his report to the council of state, which two days afterwards sent an
order to inquire into the affair, to promise a reward and secrecy to those who should impeach such as
were guilty, and in the meantime to place, at the expense of the king, guards about my house, and that
of the chatelain, which joined to it. The day after the disturbance, Colonel Pury, the Attorney-General
Meuron, the Chatelain Martinet, the Receiver Guyenet, the Treasurer d'Ivernois and his father, in a
word, every person of consequence in the country, came to see me, and united their solicitations to
persuade me to yield to the storm and leave, at least for a time, a place in which I could no longer live
in safety nor with honor. I perceived that even the chatelain was frightened at the fury of the people,
and apprehending it might extend to himself, would be glad to see me depart as soon as possible, that
he might no longer have the trouble of protecting me there, and be able to quit the parish, which he did
after my departure. I therefore yielded to their solicitations, and this with but little pain, for the hatred
of the people so afflicted my heart that I was no longer able to support it.
I had a choice of places to retire to. After Madam de Verdelin returned to Paris, she had, in several
letters, mentioned a Mr. Walpole, whom she called my lord, who, having a strong desire to serve me,
proposed to me an asylum at one of his country houses, of the situation of which she gave me the most
agreeable description; entering, relative to lodging and subsistence, into a detail which proved she and
Lord Walpole had held particular consultations upon the project. My lord marshal had always advised
me to go to England or Scotland, and in case of my determining upon the latter, offered me there an
asylum. But he offered me another at Potsdam, near to his person, and which tempted me more than all
the rest.
  He had just communicated to me what the king had said to him about my going there, which was a
kind of invitation to me from that monarch, and the Duchess of Saxe-Gotha depended so much upon
my taking the journey that she wrote to me desiring I should go to see her in my way to the court of
Prussia, and stay some time before I proceeded farther; but I was so attached to Switzerland that I could
not resolve to quit it so long as it was possible for me to live there, and I seized this opportunity to
execute a project of which I had for several months conceived the idea, and of which I have deferred
speaking, that I might not interrupt my narrative.
  This  project  consisted  in  going  to  reside  in  the  island  of  St.  Peter,  an  estate  belonging  to  the
Hospital of Berne, in the middle of the lake of Bienne. In a pedestrian pilgrimage I had made thepreceding year with Du Peyrou we had visited this isle, with which I was so much delighted that I had
since that time incessantly thought of the means of making it my place of residence. The greatest
obstacle to my wishes arose from the property of the island being vested in the people of Berne, who
three years before had driven me from amongst them; and besides the mortification of returning to live
with people who had given me so unfavorable a reception, I had reason to fear they would leave me no
more at peace in the island than they had done at Yverdon. I had consulted the lord marshal upon the
subject, who thinking as I did, that the people of Berne would be glad to see me banished to the island,
and to keep me there as a hostage for the works I might be tempted to write, and sounded their
dispositions by means of M. Sturler, his old neighbor at Colombier. M. Sturler addressed himself to the
chiefs of the state, and, according to their answer assured the marshal the Bernois, sorry for their past
behavior, wished to see me settled in the island of St. Peter, and to leave me there at peace. As an
additional precaution, before I determined to reside there, I desired the Colonel Chaillet to make new
inquiries. He confirmed what I had already heard, and the receiver of the island having obtained from
his superiors permission to lodge me in it, I thought I might without danger go to the house, with the
tactic consent of the sovereign and the proprietors; for I could not expect the people of Berne would
openly acknowledge the injustice they had done me, and thus act contrary to the most inviolable maxim
of all sovereigns.
  The island of St. Peter, called at Neuchatel the island of La Motte, in the middle of the lake of
Bienne, is half a league in, circumference; but in this little space all the chief productions necessary to
subsistence are found. The island has fields, meadows, orchards, woods, and vineyards, and all these,
favored by variegated and mountainous situations, form a distribution of the more agreeable, as the
parts, not being discovered all at once, are seen successively to advantage, and make the island appear
greater than it really is. A very elevated terrace forms the western part of it, and commands Gleresse
and Neuverville. This terrace is planted with trees which form a long alley, interrupted in the middle by
a great saloon, in which, during the vintage, the people from the neighboring shores assemble and
divert themselves. There is but one house in the whole island, but that is very spacious and convenient,
inhabited by the receiver, and situated in a hollow by which it is sheltered from the winds.
  Five or six hundred paces to the south of the island of St. Peter is another island, considerably less
than the former, wild and uncultivated, which appears to have been detached from the greater island by
storms: its gravelly soil produces nothing but willows and persicaria, but there is in it a high hill well
covered with greensward and very pleasant. The form of the lake is an almost regular oval. The banks,
less  rich  than  those  of  the  lake  of  Geneva  and  Neuchatel,  form  a  beautiful  decoration,  especially
towards the western part, which is well peopled, and edged with vineyards at the foot, of a chain of
mountains,  something  like  those  of  Cote-Rotie,  but  which  produce  not  such  excellent  wine.  The
bailiwick of St. John, Neuveville, Berne, and Bienne, lie in a line from the south to the north, to the
extremity of the lake, the whole interspersed with very agreeable villages.
  Such was the asylum I had prepared for myself, and to which I was determined to retire alter
quitting Val de Travers.
  [It may perhaps be necessary to remark that I left there an enemy in M. du Teneaux, mayor of
Verrieres, not much esteemed in the country, but who has a brother, said to be an honest man, in the
office of M. de St. Florentin. The mayor had been to see him sometime before my adventure. Little
remarks of this kind, though of no consequence, in themselves, may lead to the discovery of many
underhand dealings.]
  This choice was so agreeable to my peaceful inclinations, and my solitary and indolent disposition,
that I consider it as one of the pleasing reveries of which I became the most passionately fond. I thought
I should in that island be more separated from men, more sheltered from their outrages, and sooner
forgotten by mankind: in a word, more abandoned to the delightful pleasures of the inaction of a
contemplative life. I could have wished to have been confined in it in such a manner as to have had no
intercourse with mortals, and I certainly took every measure I could imagine to relieve me from the
necessity of troubling my head about them.  The great question was that of subsistence, and by the dearness of provisions, and the difficulty of
carriage, this is expensive in the island; the inhabitants are besides at the mercy of the receiver. This
difficulty was removed by an arrangement which Du Peyrou made with me in becoming a substitute to
the company which had undertaken and abandoned my general edition. I gave him all the materials
necessary, and made the proper arrangement and distribution. To the engagement between us I added
that of giving him the memoirs of my life, and made him the general depositary of all my papers, under
the express condition of making no use of them until after my death, having it at heart quietly to end
my days without doing anything which should again bring me back to the recollection of the public.
The life annuity he undertook to pay me was sufficient to my subsistence. My lord marshal having
recovered all his property, had offered me twelve hundred livres (fifty pounds) a year, half of which I
accepted. He wished to send me the principal, and this I refused on account of the difficulty of placing
it. He then sent the amount to Du Peyrou, in whose hands it remained, and who pays me the annuity
according to the terms agreed upon with his lordship. Adding therefore to the result of my agreement
with Du Peyrou, the annuity of the marshal, two-thirds of which were reversible to Theresa after my
death, and the annuity of three hundred livres from Duchesne, I was assured of a genteel subsistence for
myself, and after me for Theresa, to whom I left seven hundred livres (twenty-nine pounds) a year,
from the annuities paid me by Rey and the lord marshal; I had therefore no longer to fear a want of
bread. But it was ordained that honor should oblige me to reject all these resources which fortune and
my labors placed within my reach, and that I should die as poor as I had lived. It will be seen whether
or not, without reducing myself to the last degree of infamy, I could abide by the engagements which
care has always taken to render ignominious, by depriving me of every other resource to force me to
consent to my own dishonor. How was it possible anybody could doubt of the choice I should make in
such an alternative? Others have judged of my heart by their own.
  My mind at ease relative to subsistence was without care upon every other subject. Although I left
in the world the field open to my enemies, there remained in the noble enthusiasm by which my
writings were dictated, and in the constant uniformity of my principles, an evidence of the uprightness
of my heart which answered to that deducible from my conduct in favor of my natural disposition. I had
no need of any other defense against my calumniators. They might under my name describe another
man, but it was impossible they should deceive such as were unwilling to be imposed upon. I could
have given them my whole life to animadvert upon, with a certainty, notwithstanding all my faults and
weaknesses, and my want of aptitude to, support the lightest yoke, of their finding me in every situation
a just and good man, without bitterness, hatred, or jealousy, ready to acknowledge my errors, and still
more prompt to forget the injuries I received from others; seeking all my happiness in love, friendship,
and affection and in everything carrying my sincerity even to imprudence and the most incredible
disinterestedness.
I therefore in some measure took leave of the age in which I lived and my contemporaries, and bade
adieu to the world, with an intention to confine myself for the rest of my days to that island; such was
my resolution, and it was there I hoped to execute the great project of the indolent life to which I had
until then consecrated the little activity with which Heaven had endowed me. The island was to become
to me that of Papimanie, that happy country where the inhabitants sleep:
  Ou l'on fait plus, ou l'on fait nulle chose.
  [Where they do more: where they do nothing.]
  This more was everything for me, for I never much regretted sleep; indolence is sufficient to my
happiness, and provided I do nothing, I had rather dream waking than asleep. Being past the age of
romantic projects, and having been more stunned than flattered by the trumpet of fame, my only hope
was that of living at ease, and constantly at leisure. This is the life of the blessed in the world to come,
and for the rest of mine here below I made it my supreme happiness.
  They who reproach me with so many contradictions, will not fail here to add another to the number.
I have observed the indolence of great companies made them unsupportable to me, and I am now
seeking solitude for the sole purpose of abandoning myself to inaction. This however is my disposition;if there be in it a contradiction, it proceeds from nature and not from me; but there is so little that it is
precisely  on  that  account  that  I  am  always  consistent.  The  indolence  of  company  is  burdensome
because it is forced. That of solitude is charming because it is free, and depends upon the will. In
company I suffer cruelly by inaction, because this is of necessity. I must there remain nailed to my
chair,  or  stand  upright  like  a  picket,  without  stirring  hand  or  foot,  not  daring  to  run,  jump,  sing,
exclaim, nor gesticulate when I please, not allowed even to dream, suffering at the same time the
fatigue of inaction and all the torment of constraint; obliged to pay attention to every foolish thing
uttered, and to all the idle compliments paid, and constantly to keep my mind upon the rack that I may
not fail to introduce in my turn my jest or my lie. And this is called idleness! It is the labor of a galley
slave.
  The indolence I love is not that of a lazy fellow who sits with his arms across in total inaction, and
thinks no more than he acts, but that of a child which is incessantly in motion doing nothing, and that of
a dotard who wanders from his subject. I love to amuse myself with trifles, by beginning a hundred
things and never finishing one of them, by going or coming as I take either into my head, by changing
my project at every instant, by following a fly through all its windings, in wishing to overturn a rock to
see what is under it, by undertaking with ardor the work of ten years, and abandoning it without regret
at the end of ten minutes; finally, in musing from morning until night without order or coherence, and
in following in everything the caprice of a moment.
  Botany, such as I have always considered it, and of which after my own manner I began to become
passionately fond, was precisely an idle study, proper to fill up the void of my leisure, without leaving
room for the delirium of imagination or the weariness of total inaction. Carelessly wandering in the
woods and the country, mechanically gathering here a flower and there a branch; eating my morsel
almost by chance, observing a thousand and a thousand times the same things, and always with the
same interest, because I always forgot them, were to me the means of passing an eternity without a
weary moment. However elegant, admirable, and variegated the structure of plants may be, it does not
strike an ignorant eye sufficiently to fix the attention. The constant analogy, with, at the same time, the
prodigious variety which reigns in their conformation, gives pleasure to those only who have already
some idea of the vegetable system. Others at the sight of these treasures of nature feel nothing more
than a stupid and monotonous admiration. They see nothing in detail because they know not for what to
look, nor do they perceive the whole, having no idea of the chain of connection and combinations
which overwhelms with its wonders the mind of the observer. I was arrived at that happy point of
knowledge, and my want of memory was such as constantly to keep me there, that I knew little enough
to make the whole new to me, and yet everything that was necessary to make me sensible to the
beauties of all the parts. The different soils into which the island, although little, was divided, offered a
sufficient variety of plants, for the study and amusement of my whole life. I was determined not to
leave a blade of grass without analyzing it, and I began already to take measures for making, with an
immense collection of observations, the 'Flora Petrinsularis'.
I sent for Theresa, who brought with her my books and effects. We boarded with the receiver of the
island. His wife had sisters at Nidau, who by turns came to see her, and were company for Theresa. I
here made the experiment of the agreeable life which I could have wished to continue to the end of my
days, and the pleasure I found in it only served to make me feel to a greater degree the bitterness of that
by which it was shortly to be succeeded.
I have ever been passionately fond of water, and the sight of it throws me into a delightful reverie,
although frequently without a determinate object.
  Immediately after I rose from my bed I never failed, if the weather was fine, to run to the terrace to
respire the fresh and salubrious air of the morning, and glide my eye over the horizon of the lake,
bounded by banks and mountains, delightful to the view. I know no homage more worthy of the
divinity  than  the  silent  admiration  excited  by  the  contemplation  of  his  works,  and  which  is  not
externally expressed. I can easily comprehend the reason why the inhabitants of great cities, who see
nothing but walls, and streets, have but little faith; but not whence it happens that people in the country,and especially such as live in solitude, can possibly be without it. How comes it to pass that these do
not a hundred times a day elevate their minds in ecstasy to the Author of the wonders which strike their
senses. For my part, it is especially at rising, wearied by a want of sleep, that long habit inclines me to
this elevation which imposes not the fatigue of thinking. But to this effect my eyes must be struck with
the ravishing beauties of nature. In my chamber I pray less frequently, and not so fervently; but at the
view of a fine landscape I feel myself moved, but by what I am unable to tell. I have somewhere read of
a wise bishop who in a visit to his diocese found an old woman whose only prayer consisted in the
single interjection "Oh!"--"Good mother," said he to her, "continue to pray in this manner; your prayer
is better than ours." This better prayer is mine also.
  After breakfast, I hastened, with a frown on my brow, to write a few pitiful letters, longing ardently
for the moment after which I should have no more to write. I busied myself for a few minutes about my
books  and  papers,  to  unpack  and  arrange  them,  rather  than  to  read  what  they  contained;  and  this
arrangement, which to me became the work of Penelope, gave me the pleasure of musing for a while. I
then grew weary, and quitted my books to spend the three or four hours which remained to me of the
morning in the study of botany, and especially of the system of Linnaeus, of which I became so
passionately fond, that, after having felt how useless my attachment to it was, I yet could not entirely
shake  it  off.  This  great  observer  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  only  one  who,  with  Ludwig,  has  hitherto
considered botany as a naturalist, and a philosopher; but he has too much studied it in herbals and
gardens, and not sufficiently in nature herself. For my part, whose garden was always the whole island,
the moment I wanted to make or verify an observation, I ran into the woods or meadows with my book
under my arm, and there laid myself upon the ground near the plant in question, to examine it at my
ease as it stood. This method was of great service to me in gaining a knowledge of vegetables in their
natural state, before they had been cultivated and changed in their nature by the hands of men. Fagon,
first physician to Louis XIV., and who named and perfectly knew all the plants in the royal garden, is
said to have been so ignorant in the country as not to know how to distinguish the same plants. I am
precisely the contrary. I know something of the work of nature, but nothing of that of the gardener.
I gave every afternoon totally up to my indolent and careless disposition, and to following without
regularity the impulse of the moment. When the weather was calm, I frequently went immediately after
I rose from dinner, and alone got into the boat. The receiver had taught me to row with one oar; I rowed
out into the middle of the lake. The moment I withdrew from the bank, I felt a secret joy which almost
made me leap, and of which it is impossible for me to tell or even comprehend the cause, if it were not
a secret congratulation on my being out of the reach of the wicked. I afterwards rowed about the lake,
sometimes approaching the opposite bank, but never touching at it. I often let my boat float at the
mercy of the wind and water, abandoning myself to reveries without object, and which were not the
less agreeable for their stupidity. I sometimes exclaimed, "O nature! O my mother! I am here under thy
guardianship alone; here is no deceitful and cunning mortal to interfere between thee and me." In this
manner I withdrew half a league from land; I could have wished the lake had been the ocean. However,
to please my poor dog, who was not so fond as I was of such a long stay on the water, I commonly
followed one constant course; this was going to land at the little island where I walked an hour or two,
or laid myself down on the grass on the summit of the hill, there to satiate myself with the pleasure of
admiring the lake and its environs, to examine and dissect all the herbs within my reach, and, like
another Robinson Crusoe, built myself an imaginary place of residence in the island. I became very
much attached to this eminence. When I brought Theresa, with the wife of the receiver and her sisters,
to walk there, how proud was I to be their pilot and guide! We took there rabbits to stock it. This was
another source of pleasure to Jean Jacques. These animals rendered the island still more interesting to
me. I afterwards went to it more frequently, and with greater pleasure to observe the progress of the
new inhabitants.
  To these amusements I added one which recalled to my recollection the delightful life I led at the
Charmettes, and to which the season particularly invited me. This was assisting in the rustic labors of
gathering of roots and fruits, of which Theresa and I made it a pleasure to partake with the wife of thereceiver and his family. I remember a Bernois, one M. Kirkeberguer, coming to see me, found me
perched upon a tree with a sack fastened to my waist, and already so full of apples that I could not stir
from the branch on which I stood. I was not sorry to be caught in this and similar situations. I hoped the
people of Berne, witnesses to the employment of my leisure, would no longer think of disturbing my
tranquillity but leave me at peace in my solitude. I should have preferred being confined there by their
desire: this would have rendered the continuation of my repose more certain.
  This is another declaration upon which I am previously certain of the incredulity of many of my
readers, who obstinately continue to judge me by themselves, although they cannot but have seen, in
the course of my life, a thousand internal affections which bore no resemblance to any of theirs. But
what is still more extraordinary is, that they refuse me every sentiment, good or indifferent, which they
have not, and are constantly ready to attribute to me such bad ones as cannot enter into the heart of
man: in this case they find it easy to set me in opposition to nature, and to make of me such a monster
as cannot in reality exist. Nothing absurd appears to them incredible, the moment it has a tendency to
blacken me, and nothing in the least extraordinary seems to them possible, if it tends to do me honor.
  But, notwithstanding what they may think or say, I will still continue faithfully to state what J. J.
Rousseau was, did, and thought; without explaining, or justifying, the singularity of his sentiments and
ideas, or endeavoring to discover whether or not others have thought as he did. I became so delighted
with the island of St. Peter, and my residence there was so agreeable to me that, by concentrating all my
desires within it, I formed the wish that I might stay there to the end of my life. The visits I had to
return in the neighborhood, the journeys I should be under the necessity of making to Neuchatel,
Bienne, Yverdon, and Nidau, already fatigued my imagination. A day passed out of the island, seemed
to me a loss of so much happiness, and to go beyond the bounds of the lake was to go out of my
element. Past experience had besides rendered me apprehensive. The very satisfaction that I received
from anything whatever was sufficient to make me fear the loss of it, and the ardent desire I had to end
my days in that island, was inseparable from the apprehension of being obliged to leave it. I had
contracted a habit of going in the evening to sit upon the sandy shore, especially when the lake was
agitated. I felt a singular pleasure in seeing the waves break at my feet. I formed of them in my
imagination the image of the tumult of the world contrasted with the peace of my habitation; and this
pleasing idea sometimes softened me even to tears. The repose I enjoyed with ecstasy was disturbed by
nothing but the fear of being deprived of it, and this inquietude was accompanied with some bitterness.
I felt my situation so precarious as not to dare to depend upon its continuance. "Ah! how willingly,"
said I to myself, "would I renounce the liberty of quitting this place, for which I have no desire, for the
assurance of always remaining in it. Instead of being permitted to stay here by favor, why am I not
detained by force! They who suffer me to remain may in a moment drive me away, and can I hope my
persecutors, seeing me happy, will leave me here to continue to be so? Permitting me to live in the
island is but a trifling favor. I could wish to be condemned to do it, and constrained to remain here that
I may not be obliged to go elsewhere." I cast an envious eye upon Micheli du Cret, who, quiet in the
castle of Arbourg, had only to determine to be happy to become so. In fine, by abandoning myself to
these reflections, and the alarming apprehensions of new storms always ready to break over my head, I
wished for them with an incredible ardor, and that instead of suffering me to reside in the island, the
Bernois would give it me for a perpetual prison; and I can assert that had it depended upon me to get
myself condemned to this, I would most joyfully have done it, preferring a thousand times the necessity
of passing my life there to the danger of being driven to another place.
  This fear did not long remain on my mind. When I least expected what was to happen, I received a
letter from the bailiff of Nidau, within whose jurisdiction the island of St. Peter was; by his letter he
announced to me from their excellencies an order to quit the island and their states. I thought myself in
a dream. Nothing could be less natural, reasonable, or foreseen than such an order: for I considered my
apprehensions as the result of inquietude in a man whose imagination was disturbed by his misfortunes,
and not to proceed from a foresight which could have the least foundation. The measures I had taken to
insure myself the tacit consent of the sovereign, the tranquillity with which I had been left to make myestablishment, the visits of several people from Berne, and that of the bailiff himself, who had shown
me such friendship and attention, and the rigor of the season in which it was barbarous to expel a man
who was sickly and infirm, all these circumstances made me and many people believe that there was
some mistake in the order and that ill-disposed people had purposely chosen the time of the vintage and
the vacation of the senate suddenly to do me an injury.
  Had I yielded to the first impulse of my indignation, I should immediately have departed. But to
what place was I to go? What was to become of me at the beginning of the winter, without object,
preparation, guide or carriage? Not to leave my papers and effects at the mercy of the first comer, time
was necessary to make proper arrangements, and it was not stated in the order whether or not this
would be granted me. The continuance of misfortune began to weigh down my courage. For the first
time in my life I felt my natural haughtiness stoop to the yoke of necessity, and, notwithstanding the
murmurs of my heart, I was obliged to demean myself by asking for a delay. I applied to M. de
Graffenried, who had sent me the order, for an explanation of it. His letter, conceived in the strongest
terms of disapprobation of the step that had been taken, assured me it was with the greatest regret he
communicated to me the nature of it, and the expressions of grief and esteem it contained seemed so
many gentle invitations to open to him my heart: I did so. I had no doubt but my letter would open the
eyes of my persecutors, and that if so cruel an order was not revoked, at least a reasonable delay,
perhaps the whole winter, to make the necessary preparations for my retreat, and to choose a place of
abode, would be granted me.
  Whilst I waited for an answer, I reflected upon my situation, and deliberated upon the steps I had to
take. I perceived so many difficulties on all sides, the vexation I had suffered had so strongly affected
me, and my health was then in such a bad state, that I was quite overcome, and the effect of my
discouragement was to deprive me of the little resource which remained in my mind, by which I might,
as well as it was possible to do it, have withdrawn myself from my melancholy situation. In whatever
asylum I should take refuge, it appeared impossible to avoid either of the two means made use of to
expel me. One of which was to stir up against me the populace by secret manoeuvres; and the other to
drive me away by open force, without giving a reason for so doing. I could not, therefore, depend upon
a safe retreat, unless I went in search of it farther than my strength and the season seemed likely to
permit. These circumstances again bringing to my recollection the ideas which had lately occurred to
me,  I  wished  my  persecutors  to  condemn  me  to  perpetual  imprisonment  rather  than  oblige  me
incessantly to wander upon the earth, by successively expelling me from the asylums of which I should
make  choice:  and  to  this  effect  I  made  them  a  proposal.  Two  days  after  my  first  letter  to  M.  de
Graffenried, I wrote him a second, desiring he would state what I had proposed to their excellencies.
The answer from Berne to both was an order, conceived in the most formal and severe terms, to go out
of the island, and leave every territory, mediate and immediate of the republic, within the space of
twenty-four hours, and never to enter them again under the most grievous penalties.
  This was a terrible moment. I have since that time felt greater anguish, but never have I been more
embarrassed. What afflicted me most was being forced to abandon the project which had made me
desirous  to  pass  the  winter  in  the  island.  It  is  now  time  I  should  relate  the  fatal  anecdote  which
completed my disasters, and involved in my ruin an unfortunate people, whose rising virtues already
promised to equal those of Rome and Sparta, I had spoken of the Corsicans in the 'Social Contract' as a
new people, the only nation in Europe not too worn out for legislation, and had expressed the great
hope there was of such a people, if it were fortunate enough to have a wise legislator. My work was
read by some of the Corsicans, who were sensible of the honorable manner in which I had spoken of
them; and the necessity under which they found themselves of endeavoring to establish their republic,
made their chiefs think of asking me for my ideas upon the subject. M. Buttafuoco, of one of the first
families in the country, and captain in France, in the Royal Italians, wrote to me to that effect, and sent
me several papers for which I had asked to make myself acquainted with the history of the nation and
the  state  of  the  country.  M.  Paoli,  also,  wrote  to  me  several  times,  and  although  I  felt  such  an
undertaking to be superior to my abilities; I thought I could not refuse to give my assistance to so greatand noble a work, the moment I should have acquired all the necessary information. It was to this effect
I answered both these gentlemen, and the correspondence lasted until my departure.
  Precisely at the same time, I heard that France was sending troops to Corsica, and that she had
entered into a treaty with the Genoese. This treaty and sending of troops gave me uneasiness, and,
without imagining I had any further relation with the business, I thought it impossible and the attempt
ridiculous,  to  labor  at  an  undertaking  which  required  such  undisturbed  tranquillity  as  the  political
institution of a people in the moment when perhaps they were upon the point of being subjugated. I did
not conceal my fears from M. Buttafuoco, who rather relieved me from them by the assurance that,
were there in the treaty things contrary to the liberty of his country, a good citizen like himself would
not remain as he did in the service of France. In fact, his zeal for the legislation of the Corsicans, and
his connections with M. Paoli, could not leave a doubt on my mind respecting him; and when I heard
he made frequent journeys to Versailles and Fontainebleau, and had conversations with M. de Choiseul,
all I concluded from the whole was, that with respect to the real intentions of France he had assurances
which he gave me to understand, but concerning which he did not choose openly to explain himself by
letter.
  This removed a part of my apprehensions. Yet, as I could not comprehend the meaning of the
transportation of troops from France, nor reasonably suppose they were sent to Corsica to protect the
liberty of the inhabitants, which they of themselves were very well able to defend against the Genoese,
I could neither make myself perfectly easy, nor seriously undertake the plan of the proposed legislation,
until I had solid proofs that the whole was serious, and that the parties meant not to trifle with me. I
much wished for an interview with M. Buttafuoco, as that was certainly the best means of coming at the
explanation I wished. Of this he gave me hopes, and I waited for it with the greatest impatience. I know
not  whether  he  really  intended  me  any  interview  or  not;  but  had  this  even  been  the  case,  my
misfortunes would have prevented me from profiting by it.
  The more I considered the proposed undertaking, and the further I advanced in the examination of
the papers I had in my hands, the greater I found the necessity of studying, in the country, the people
for whom institutions were to be made, the soil they inhabited, and all the relative circumstances by
which  it  was  necessary  to  appropriate  to  them  that  institution.  I  daily  perceived  more  clearly  the
impossibility of acquiring at a distance all the information necessary to guide me. This I wrote to M.
Buttafuoco, and he felt as I did. Although I did not form the precise resolution of going to Corsica. I
considered a good deal of the means necessary to make that voyage. I mentioned it to M. Dastier, who
having formerly served in the island under M. de Maillebois, was necessarily acquainted with it. He
used every effort to dissuade me from this intention, and I confess the frightful description he gave me
of the Corsicans and their country, considerably abated the desire I had of going to live amongst them.
  But when the persecutions of Motiers made me think of quitting Switzerland, this desire was again
strengthened by the hope of at length finding amongst these islanders the repose refused me in every
other place. One thing only alarmed me, which was my unfitness for the active life to which I was
going to be condemned, and the aversion I had always had to it. My disposition, proper for meditating
at leisure and in solitude, was not so for speaking and acting, and treating of affairs with men. Nature,
which had endowed me with the first talent, had refused me the last. Yet I felt that, even without taking
a direct and active part in public affairs, I should as soon as I was in Corsica, be under the necessity of
yielding to the desires of the people, and of frequently conferring with the chiefs. The object even of
the voyage required that, instead of seeking retirement, I should in the heart of the country endeavor to
gain the information of which I stood in need. It was certain that I should no longer be master of my
own time, and that, in spite of myself, precipitated into the vortex in which I was not born to move, I
should there lead a life contrary to my inclination, and never appear but to disadvantage. I foresaw that
ill-supporting by my presence the opinion my books might have given the Corsicans of my capacity, I
should lose my reputation amongst them, and, as much to their prejudice as my own, be deprived of the
confidence they had in me, without which, however, I could not successfully produce the work they
expected from my pen. I am certain that, by thus going out of my sphere, I should become useless tothe inhabitants, and render myself unhappy.
  Tormented, beaten by storms from every quarter, and, for several years past, fatigued by journeys
and persecution, I strongly felt a want of the repose of which my barbarous enemies wantonly deprived
me: I sighed more than ever after that delicious indolence, that soft tranquillity of body and mind,
which I had so much desired, and to which, now that I had recovered from the chimeras of love and
friendship,  my  heart  limited  its  supreme  felicity.  I  viewed  with  terror  the  work  I  was  about  to
undertake; the tumultuous life into which I was to enter made me tremble, and if the grandeur, beauty,
and utility of the object animated my courage, the impossibility of conquering so many difficulties
entirely deprived me of it.
  Twenty years of profound meditation in solitude would have been less painful to me than an active
life of six months in the midst of men and public affairs, with a certainty of not succeeding in my
undertaking.
I  thought  of  an  expedient  which  seemed  proper  to  obviate  every  difficulty.  Pursued  by  the
underhand dealings of my secret persecutors to every place in which I took refuge, and seeing no other
except Corsica where I could in my old days hope for the repose I had until then been everywhere
deprived of, I resolved to go there with the directions of M. Buttafuoco as soon as this was possible, but
to live there in tranquillity; renouncing, in appearance, everything relative to legislation, and, in some
measure, to make my hosts a return for their hospitality, to confine myself to writing in the country the
history of the Corsicans, with a reserve in my own mind of the intention of secretly acquiring the
necessary information to become more useful to them should I see a probability of success. In this
manner, by not entering into an engagement, I hoped to be enabled better to meditate in secret and more
at my ease, a plan which might be useful to their purpose, and this without much breaking in upon my
dearly beloved solitude, or submitting to a kind of life which I had ever found insupportable.
  But the journey was not, in my situation, a thing so easy to get over. According to what M. Dastier
had told me of Corsica, I could not expect to find there the most simple conveniences of life, except
such  as  I  should  take  with  me;  linen,  clothes,  plate,  kitchen  furniture,  and  books,  all  were  to  be
conveyed thither. To get there myself with my gouvernante, I had the Alps to cross, and in a journey of
two hundred leagues to drag after me all my baggage; I had also to pass through the states of several
sovereigns, and according to the example set to all Europe, I had, after what had befallen me, naturally
to expect to find obstacles in every quarter, and that each sovereign would think he did himself honor
by overwhelming me with some new insult, and violating in my person all the rights of persons and
humanity. The immense expense, fatigue, and risk of such a journey made a previous consideration of
them, and weighing every difficulty, the first step necessary. The idea of being alone, and, at my age,
without resource, far removed from all my acquaintance, and at the mercy of these semi-barbarous and
ferocious people, such as M. Dastier had described them to me, was sufficient to make me deliberate
before I resolved to expose myself to such dangers. I ardently wished for the interview for which M.
Buttafuoco had given me reason to hope, and I waited the result of it to guide me in my determination.
  Whilst I thus hesitated came on the persecutions of Motiers, which obliged me to retire. I was not
prepared for a long journey, especially to Corsica. I expected to hear from Buttafuoco; I took refuge in
the island of St. Peter, whence I was driven at the beginning of winter, as I have already stated. The
Alps, covered with snow, then rendered my emigration impracticable, especially with the promptitude
required from me. It is true, the extravagant severity of a like order rendered the execution of it almost
impossible; for, in the midst of that concentred solitude, surrounded by water, and having but twenty-
four hours after receiving the order to prepare for my departure, and find a boat and carriages to get out
of the island and the territory, had I had wings, I should scarcely have been able to pay obedience to it.
This I wrote to the bailiff of Nidau, in answer to his letter, and hastened to take my departure from a
country of iniquity. In this manner was I obliged to abandon my favorite project, for which reason, not
having  in  my  oppression  been  able  to  prevail  upon  my  persecutors  to  dispose  of  me  otherwise,  I
determined, in consequence of the invitation of my lord marshal, upon a journey to Berlin, leaving
Theresa to pass the winter in the island of St. Peter, with my books and effects, and depositing mypapers in the hands of M. du Peyrou. I used so much diligence that the next morning I left the island
and arrived at Bienne before noon. An accident, which I cannot pass over in silence, had here well nigh
put an end to my journey.
  As soon as the news or my having received an order to quit my asylum was circulated, I received a
great number of visits from the neighborhood, and especially from the Bernois, who came with the
most  detestable  falsehood  to  flatter  and  soothe  me,  protesting  that  my  persecutors  had  seized  the
moment of the vacation of the senate to obtain and send me the order, which, said they, had excited the
indignation of the two hundred. Some of these comforters came from the city of Bienne, a little free
state within that of Berne, and amongst others a young man of the name of Wildremet whose family
was of the first rank, and had the greatest credit in that city. Wildremet strongly solicited me in the
name of his fellow-citizens to choose my retreat amongst them, assuring me that they were anxiously
desirous of it, and that they would think it an honor and their duty to make me forget the persecutions I
had suffered; that with them I had nothing to fear from the influence of the Bernois, that Bienne was a
free city, governed by its own laws, and that the citizens were unanimously resolved not to hearken to
any solicitation which should be unfavorable to me.
  Wildremet perceiving all he could say to be ineffectual, brought to his aid several other persons, as
well from Bienne and the environs as from Berne; even, and amongst others, the same Kirkeberguer, of
whom I have spoken, who, after my retreat to Switzerland had endeavored to obtain my esteem, and by
his talents and principles had interested me in his favor. But I received much less expected and more
weighty  solicitations  from  M.  Barthes,  secretary  to  the  embassy  from  France,  who  came  with
Wildremet to see me, exhorted me to accept his invitation, and surprised me by the lively and tender
concern he seemed to feel for my situation. I did not know M. Barthes; however I perceived in what he
said the warmth and zeal of friendship, and that he had it at heart to persuade me to fix my residence at
Bienne. He made the most pompous eulogium of the city and its inhabitants, with whom he showed
himself so intimately connected as to call them several times in my presence his patrons and fathers.
  This from Barthes bewildered me in my conjectures. I had always suspected M. de Choisuel to be
the  secret  author  of  all  the  persecutions  I  suffered  in  Switzerland.  The  conduct  of  the  resident  of
Geneva, and that of the ambassador at Soleure but too much confirmed my suspicion; I perceived the
secret influence of France in everything that happened to me at Berne, Geneva and Neuchatel, and I did
not think I had any powerful enemy in that kingdom, except the Duke de Choiseul. What therefore
could I think of the visit of Barthes and the tender concern he showed for my welfare? My misfortunes
had not yet destroyed the confidence natural to my heart, and I had still to learn from experience to
discern snares under the appearance of friendship. I sought with surprise the reason of the benevolence
of M. Barthes; I was not weak enough to believe he had acted from himself; there was in his manner
something ostentatious, an affectation even which declared a concealed intention, and I was far from
having found in any of these little subaltern agents, that generous intrepidity which, when I was in a
similar employment, had often caused a fermentation in my heart. I had formerly known something of
the Chevalier Beauteville, at the castle of Montmorency; he had shown me marks of esteem; since his
appointment  to  the  embassy  he  had  given  me  proofs  of  his  not  having  entirely  forgotten  me,
accompanied with an invitation to go and see him at Soleure. Though I did not accept this invitation, I
was extremely sensible of his civility, not having been accustomed to be treated with such kindness by
people in place. I presume M. de Beauteville, obliged to follow his instructions in what related to the
affairs of Geneva, yet pitying me under my misfortunes, had by his private cares prepared for me the
asylum of Bienne, that I might live there in peace under his auspices. I was properly sensible of his
attention, but without wishing to profit by it and quite determined upon the journey to Berlin, I sighed
after the moment in which I was to see my lord marshal, persuaded I should in future find zeal repose
and lasting happiness nowhere but near his person.
  On my departure from the island, Kirkeberguer accompanied me to Bienne. I found Wildremet and
other Biennois, who, by the water side, waited my getting out of the boat. We all dined together at the
inn, and on my arrival there my first care was to provide a chaise, being determined to set off the nextmorning. Whilst we were at dinner these gentlemen repeated their solicitations to prevail upon me to
stay with them, and this with such warmth and obliging protestations, that notwithstanding all my
resolutions, my heart, which has never been able to resist friendly attentions, received an impression
from theirs; the moment they perceived I was shaken, they redoubled their efforts with so much effect
that I was at length overcome, and consented to remain at Bienne, at least until the spring.
  Wildremet  immediately  set  about  providing  me  with  a  lodging,  and  boasted,  as  of  a  fortunate
discovery, of a dirty little chamber in the back of the house, on the third story, looking into a courtyard,
where I had for a view the display of the stinking skins of a dresser of chamois leather. My host was a
man of a mean appearance, and a good deal of a rascal; the next day after I went to his house I heard
that he was a debauchee, a gamester, and in bad credit in the neighborhood. He had neither wife,
children, nor servants, and shut up in my solitary chamber, I was in the midst of one of the most
agreeable countries in Europe, lodged in a manner to make me die of melancholy in the course of a few
days. What affected me most was, that, notwithstanding what I had heard of the anxious wish of the
inhabitants to receive me amongst them, I had not perceived, as I passed through the streets, anything
polite towards me in their manners, or obliging in their looks. I was, however, determined to remain
there; but I learned, saw, and felt, the day after, that there was in the city a terrible fermentation, of
which I was the cause. Several persons hastened obligingly to inform me that on the next day I was to
receive an order conceived in the most severe terms, immediately to quit the state, that is the city. I had
nobody  in  whom  I  could  confide;  they  who  had  detained  me  were  dispersed.  Wildremet  had
disappeared; I heard no more of Barthes, and it did not appear that his recommendation had brought me
into great favor with those whom he had styled his patrons and fathers. One M. de Van Travers, a
Bernois, who had an agreeable house not far from the city, offered it to me for my asylum, hoping, as
he said, that I might there avoid being stoned. The advantage this offer held out was not sufficiently
flattering to tempt me to prolong my abode with these hospitable people.
  Yet, having lost three days by the delay, I had greatly exceeded the twenty-four hours the Bernois
had given me to quit their states, and knowing their severity, I was not without apprehensions as to the
manner in which they would suffer me to cross them, when the bailiff of Nidau came opportunely and
relieved me from my embarrassment. As he had highly disapproved of the violent proceedings of their
excellencies, he thought, in his generosity, he owed me some public proof of his taking no part in them,
and had courage to leave his bailiwick to come and pay me a visit at Bienne. He did me this favor the
evening before my departure, and far from being incognito he affected ceremony, coming in fiocchi in
his coach with his secretary, and brought me a passport in his own name that I might cross the state of
Berne  at  my  ease,  and  without  fear  of  molestation.  I  was  more  flattered  by  the  visit  than  by  the
passport, and should have been as sensible of the merit of it, had it had for object any other person
whatsoever. Nothing makes a greater impression on my heart than a well-timed act of courage in favor
of the weak unjustly oppressed.
  At length, after having with difficulty procured a chaise, I next morning left this barbarous country,
before the arrival of the deputation with which I was to be honored, and even before I had seen
Theresa, to whom I had written to come to me, when I thought I should remain at Bienne, and whom I
had scarcely time to countermand by a short letter, informing her of my new disaster. In the third part
of my memoirs, if ever I be able to write them, I shall state in what manner, thinking to set off for
Berlin, I really took my departure for England, and the means by which the two ladies who wished to
dispose of my person, after having by their manoeuvres driven me from Switzerland, where I was not
sufficiently in their power, at last delivered me into the hands of their friend.
I added what follows on reading my memoirs to M. and Madam, the Countess of Egmont, the
Prince Pignatelli, the Marchioness of Mesme, and the Marquis of Juigne.
I have written the truth: if any person has heard of things contrary to those I have just stated, were
they a thousand times proved, he has heard calumny and falsehood; and if he refuses thoroughly to
examine and compare them with me whilst I am alive, he is not a friend either to justice or truth. For
my part, I openly, and without the least fear declare, that whoever, even without having read my works,shall have examined with his own eyes, my disposition, character, manners, inclinations, pleasures, and
habits, and pronounce me a dishonest man, is himself one who deserves a gibbet.
  Thus I concluded, and every person was silent; Madam d'Egmont was the only person who seemed
affected; she visibly trembled, but soon recovered herself, and was silent like the rest of the company.
Such were the fruits of my reading and declaration.





  EMILE
  Or, On Education
  By Jean-Jacques Rousseau
 
  CONTENTS
  Author’s Preface
  Book I
  Book II
  Book III
  Book IV
  Book V
 
 
  Author's Preface
  This collection of scattered thoughts and observations has little order or continuity; it was begun to
give pleasure to a good mother who thinks for herself. My first idea was to write a tract a few pages
long, but I was carried away by my subject, and before I knew what I was doing my tract had become a
kind of book, too large indeed for the matter contained in it, but too small for the subject of which it
treats. For a long time I hesitated whether to publish it or not, and I have often felt, when at work upon
it, that it is one thing to publish a few pamphlets and another to write a book. After vain attempts to
improve it, I have decided that it is my duty to publish it as it stands. I consider that public attention
requires to be directed to this subject, and even if my own ideas are mistaken, my time will not have
been wasted if I stir up others to form right ideas. A solitary who casts his writings before the public
without any one to advertise them, without any party ready to defend them, one who does not even
know what is thought and said about those writings, is at least free from one anxiety--if he is mistaken,
no one will take his errors for gospel.
I  shall  say  very  little  about  the  value  of  a  good  education,  nor  shall  I  stop  to  prove  that  the
customary method of education is bad; this has been done again and again, and I do not wish to fill my
book with things which everyone knows. I will merely state that, go as far back as you will, you will
find a continual outcry against the established method, but no attempt to suggest a better. The literature
and science of our day tend rather to destroy than to build up. We find fault after the manner of a
master;  to  suggest,  we  must  adopt  another  style,  a  style  less  in  accordance  with  the  pride  of  the
philosopher. In spite of all those books, whose only aim, so they say, is public utility, the most useful of
all arts, the art of training men, is still neglected. Even after Locke's book was written the subject
remained almost untouched, and I fear that my book will leave it pretty much as it found it.
  We know nothing of childhood; and with our mistaken notions the further we advance the further
we go astray. The wisest writers devote themselves to what a man ought to know, without asking what
a child is capable of learning. They are always looking for the man in the child, without considering
what he is before he becomes a man. It is to this study that I have chiefly devoted myself, so that if my
method is fanciful and unsound, my observations may still be of service. I may be greatly mistaken asto what ought to be done, but I think I have clearly perceived the material which is to be worked upon.
Begin thus by making a more careful study of your scholars, for it is clear that you know nothing about
them; yet if you read this book with that end in view, I think you will find that it is not entirely useless.
  With regard to what will be called the systematic portion of the book, which is nothing more than
the course of nature, it is here that the reader will probably go wrong, and no doubt I shall be attacked
on this side, and perhaps my critics may be right. You will tell me, "This is not so much a treatise on
education as the visions of a dreamer with regard to education." What can I do? I have not written about
other people's ideas of education, but about my own. My thoughts are not those of others; this reproach
has been brought against me again and again. But is it within my power to furnish myself with other
eyes, or to adopt other ideas? It is within my power to refuse to be wedded to my own opinions and to
refuse to think myself wiser than others. I cannot change my mind; I can distrust myself. This is all I
can do, and this I have done. If I sometimes adopt a confident tone, it is not to impress the reader, it is
to make my meaning plain to him. Why should I profess to suggest as doubtful that which is not a
matter of doubt to myself? I say just what I think.
  When I freely express my opinion, I have so little idea of claiming authority that I always give my
reasons, so that you may weigh and judge them for yourselves; but though I would not obstinately
defend my ideas, I think it my duty to put them forward; for the principles with regard to which I differ
from other writers are not matters of indifference; we must know whether they are true or false, for on
them  depends  the  happiness  or  the  misery  of  mankind.  People  are  always  telling  me  to  make
PRACTICABLE suggestions. You might as well tell me to suggest what people are doing already, or at
least to suggest improvements which may be incorporated with the wrong methods at present in use.
There are matters with regard to which such a suggestion is far more chimerical than my own, for in
such a connection the good is corrupted and the bad is none the better for it. I would rather follow
exactly  the  established  method  than  adopt  a  better  method  by  halves.  There  would  be  fewer
contradictions in the man; he cannot aim at one and the same time at two different objects. Fathers and
mothers, what you desire that you can do. May I count on your goodwill?
  There are two things to be considered with regard to any scheme. In the first place, "Is it good in
itself" In the second, "Can it be easily put into practice?"
  With regard to the first of these it is enough that the scheme should be intelligible and feasible in
itself, that what is good in it should be adapted to the nature of things, in this case, for example, that the
proposed method of education should be suitable to man and adapted to the human heart.
  The  second  consideration  depends  upon  certain  given  conditions  in  particular  cases;  these
conditions are accidental and therefore variable; they may vary indefinitely. Thus one kind of education
would be possible in Switzerland and not in France; another would be adapted to the middle classes but
not to the nobility. The scheme can be carried out, with more or less success, according to a multitude
of circumstances, and its results can only be determined by its special application to one country or
another, to this class or that. Now all these particular applications are not essential to my subject, and
they form no part of my scheme. It is enough for me that, wherever men are born into the world, my
suggestions with regard to them may be carried out, and when you have made them what I would have
them be, you have done what is best for them and best for other people. If I fail to fulfil this promise, no
doubt I am to blame; but if I fulfil my promise, it is your own fault if you ask anything more of me, for
I have promised you nothing more.
 
 
  BOOK I
  God makes all things good; man meddles with them and they become evil. He forces one soil to
yield the products of another, one tree to bear another's fruit. He confuses and confounds time, place,
and natural conditions. He mutilates his dog, his horse, and his slave. He destroys and defaces all
things; he loves all that is deformed and monstrous; he will have nothing as nature made it, not even
man himself, who must learn his paces like a saddle-horse, and be shaped to his master's taste like thetrees in his garden. Yet things would be worse without this education, and mankind cannot be made by
halves. Under existing conditions a man left to himself from birth would be more of a monster than the
rest. Prejudice, authority, necessity, example, all the social conditions into which we are plunged,
would stifle nature in him and put nothing in her place. She would be like a sapling chance sown in the
midst of the highway, bent hither and thither and soon crushed by the passers-by.
  Tender, anxious mother, [Footnote: The earliest education is most important and it undoubtedly is
woman's work. If the author of nature had meant to assign it to men he would have given them milk to
feed the child. Address your treatises on education to the women, for not only are they able to watch
over it more closely than men, not only is their influence always predominant in education, its success
concerns them more nearly, for most widows are at the mercy of their children, who show them very
plainly whether their education was good or bad. The laws, always more concerned about property than
about people, since their object is not virtue but peace, the laws give too little authority to the mother.
Yet her position is more certain than that of the father, her duties are more trying; the right ordering of
the family depends more upon her, and she is usually fonder of her children. There are occasions when
a son may be excused for lack of respect for his father, but if a child could be so unnatural as to fail in
respect for the mother who bore him and nursed him at her breast, who for so many years devoted
herself to his care, such a monstrous wretch should be smothered at once as unworthy to live. You say
mothers spoil their children, and no doubt that is wrong, but it is worse to deprave them as you do. The
mother wants her child to be happy now. She is right, and if her method is wrong, she must be taught a
better. Ambition, avarice, tyranny, the mistaken foresight of fathers, their neglect, their harshness, are a
hundredfold more harmful to the child than the blind affection of the mother. Moreover, I must explain
what I mean by a mother and that explanation follows.] I appeal to you. You can remove this young
tree from the highway and shield it from the crushing force of social conventions. Tend and water it ere
it dies. One day its fruit will reward your care. From the outset raise a wall round your child's soul;
another may sketch the plan, you alone should carry it into execution.
  Plants are fashioned by cultivation, man by education. If a man were born tall and strong, his size
and strength would be of no good to him till he had learnt to use them; they would even harm him by
preventing others from coming to his aid; [Footnote: Like them in externals, but without speech and
without the ideas which are expressed by speech, he would be unable to make his wants known, while
there would be nothing in his appearance to suggest that he needed their help.] left to himself he would
die of want before he knew his needs. We lament the helplessness of infancy; we fail to perceive that
the race would have perished had not man begun by being a child.
  We are born weak, we need strength; helpless, we need aid; foolish, we need reason. All that we
lack at birth, all that we need when we come to man's estate, is the gift of education.
  This education comes to us from nature, from men, or from things. The inner growth of our organs
and faculties is the education of nature, the use we learn to make of this growth is the education of men,
what we gain by our experience of our surroundings is the education of things.
  Thus we are each taught by three masters. If their teaching conflicts, the scholar is ill-educated and
will never be at peace with himself; if their teaching agrees, he goes straight to his goal, he lives at
peace with himself, he is well-educated.
  Now of these three factors in education nature is wholly beyond our control, things are only partly
in our power; the education of men is the only one controlled by us; and even here our power is largely
illusory, for who can hope to direct every word and deed of all with whom the child has to do.
  Viewed as an art, the success of education is almost impossible, since the essential conditions of
success are beyond our control. Our efforts may bring us within sight of the goal, but fortune must
favour us if we are to reach it.
  What  is  this  goal?  As  we  have  just  shown,  it  is  the  goal  of  nature.  Since  all  three  modes  of
education must work together, the two that we can control must follow the lead of that which is beyond
our control. Perhaps this word Nature has too vague a meaning. Let us try to define it.
  Nature, we are told, is merely habit. What does that mean? Are there not habits formed undercompulsion,  habits  which  never  stifle  nature?  Such,  for  example,  are  the  habits  of  plants  trained
horizontally. The plant keeps its artificial shape, but the sap has not changed its course, and any new
growth the plant may make will be vertical. It is the same with a man's disposition; while the conditions
remain the same, habits, even the least natural of them, hold good; but change the conditions, habits
vanish, nature reasserts herself. Education itself is but habit, for are there not people who forget or lose
their education and others who keep it? Whence comes this difference? If the term nature is to be
restricted to habits conformable to nature we need say no more.
  We  are  born  sensitive  and  from  our  birth  onwards  we  are  affected  in  various  ways  by  our
environment. As soon as we become conscious of our sensations we tend to seek or shun the things that
cause them, at first because they are pleasant or unpleasant, then because they suit us or not, and at last
because of judgments formed by means of the ideas of happiness and goodness which reason gives us.
These tendencies gain strength and permanence with the growth of reason, but hindered by our habits
they are more or less warped by our prejudices. Before this change they are what I call Nature within
us.
  Everything should therefore be brought into harmony with these natural tendencies, and that might
well be if our three modes of education merely differed from one another; but what can be done when
they conflict, when instead of training man for himself you try to train him for others? Harmony
becomes impossible. Forced to combat either nature or society, you must make your choice between
the man and the citizen, you cannot train both.
  The smaller social group, firmly united in itself and dwelling apart from others, tends to withdraw
itself from the larger society. Every patriot hates foreigners; they are only men, and nothing to him.
[Footnote: Thus the wars of republics are more cruel than those of monarchies. But if the wars of kings
are less cruel, their peace is terrible; better be their foe than their subject.] This defect is inevitable, but
of little importance. The great thing is to be kind to our neighbours. Among strangers the Spartan was
selfish, grasping, and unjust, but unselfishness, justice, and harmony ruled his home life. Distrust those
cosmopolitans who search out remote duties in their books and neglect those that lie nearest. Such
philosophers will love the Tartars to avoid loving their neighbour.
  The natural man lives for himself; he is the unit, the whole, dependent only on himself and on his
like. The citizen is but the numerator of a fraction, whose value depends on its denominator; his value
depends upon the whole, that is, on the community. Good social institutions are those best fitted to
make a man unnatural, to exchange his independence for dependence, to merge the unit in the group, so
that he no longer regards himself as one, but as a part of the whole, and is only conscious of the
common life. A citizen of Rome was neither Caius nor Lucius, he was a Roman; he ever loved his
country better than his life. The captive Regulus professed himself a Carthaginian; as a foreigner he
refused to take his seat in the Senate except at his master's bidding. He scorned the attempt to save his
life. He had his will, and returned in triumph to a cruel death. There is no great likeness between
Regulus and the men of our own day.
  The Spartan Pedaretes presented himself for admission to the council of the Three Hundred and was
rejected; he went away rejoicing that there were three hundred Spartans better than himself. I suppose
he was in earnest; there is no reason to doubt it. That was a citizen.
  A Spartan mother had five sons with the army. A Helot arrived; trembling she asked his news.
"Your five sons are slain." "Vile slave, was that what I asked thee?" "We have won the victory." She
hastened to the temple to render thanks to the gods. That was a citizen.
  He who would preserve the supremacy of natural feelings in social life knows not what he asks.
Ever at war with himself, hesitating between his wishes and his duties, he will be neither a man nor a
citizen. He will be of no use to himself nor to others. He will be a man of our day, a Frenchman, an
Englishman, one of the great middle class.
  To be something, to be himself, and always at one with himself, a man must act as he speaks, must
know what course he ought to take, and must follow that course with vigour and persistence. When I
meet this miracle it will be time enough to decide whether he is a man or a citizen, or how he contrivesto be both.
  Two conflicting types of educational systems spring from these conflicting aims. One is public and
common to many, the other private and domestic.
  If you wish to know what is meant by public education, read Plato's Republic. Those who merely
judge books by their titles take this for a treatise on politics, but it is the finest treatise on education ever
written.
  In popular estimation the Platonic Institute stands for all that is fanciful and unreal. For my own
part I should have thought the system of Lycurgus far more impracticable had he merely committed it
to writing. Plato only sought to purge man's heart; Lycurgus turned it from its natural course.
  The public institute does not and cannot exist, for there is neither country nor patriot. The very
words should be struck out of our language. The reason does not concern us at present, so that though I
know it I refrain from stating it.
I do not consider our ridiculous colleges [Footnote: There are teachers dear to me in many schools
and especially in the University of Paris, men for whom I have a great respect, men whom I believe to
be quite capable of instructing young people, if they were not compelled to follow the established
custom. I exhort one of them to publish the scheme of reform which he has thought out. Perhaps people
would at length seek to cure the evil if they realised that there was a remedy.] as public institutes, nor
do  I  include  under  this  head  a  fashionable  education,  for  this  education  facing  two  ways  at  once
achieves  nothing.  It  is  only  fit  to  turn  out  hypocrites,  always  professing  to  live  for  others,  while
thinking of themselves alone. These professions, however, deceive no one, for every one has his share
in them; they are so much labour wasted.
  Our inner conflicts are caused by these contradictions. Drawn this way by nature and that way by
man, compelled to yield to both forces, we make a compromise and reach neither goal. We go through
life, struggling and hesitating, and die before we have found peace, useless alike to ourselves and to
others.
  There remains the education of the home or of nature; but how will a man live with others if he is
educated for himself alone? If the twofold aims could be resolved into one by removing the man's self-
contradictions, one great obstacle to his happiness would be gone. To judge of this you must see the
man full-grown; you must have noted his inclinations, watched his progress, followed his steps; in a
word you must really know a natural man. When you have read this work, I think you will have made
some progress in this inquiry.
  What must be done to train this exceptional man! We can do much, but the chief thing is to prevent
anything being done. To sail against the wind we merely follow one tack and another; to keep our
position in a stormy sea we must cast anchor. Beware, young pilot, lest your boat slip its cable or drag
its anchor before you know it.
 
 
  In the social order where each has his own place a man must be educated for it. If such a one leave
his own station he is fit for nothing else. His education is only useful when fate agrees with his parents'
choice; if not, education harms the scholar, if only by the prejudices it has created. In Egypt, where the
son was compelled to adopt his father's calling, education had at least a settled aim; where social grades
remain fixed, but the men who form them are constantly changing, no one knows whether he is not
harming his son by educating him for his own class.
  In the natural order men are all equal and their common calling is that of manhood, so that a well-
educated man cannot fail to do well in that calling and those related to it. It matters little to me whether
my pupil is intended for the army, the church, or the law. Before his parents chose a calling for him
nature called him to be a man. Life is the trade I would teach him. When he leaves me, I grant you, he
will be neither a magistrate, a soldier, nor a priest; he will be a man. All that becomes a man he will
learn as quickly as another. In vain will fate change his station, he will always be in his right place.
"Occupavi te, fortuna, atque cepi; omnes-que aditus tuos interclusi, ut ad me aspirare non posses." Thereal object of our study is man and his environment. To my mind those of us who can best endure the
good and evil of life are the best educated; hence it follows that true education consists less in precept
than in practice. We begin to learn when we begin to live; our education begins with ourselves, our first
teacher is our nurse. The ancients used the word "Education" in a different sense, it meant "Nurture."
"Educit obstetrix," says Varro. "Educat nutrix, instituit paedagogus, docet magister." Thus, education,
discipline, and instruction are three things as different in their purpose as the dame, the usher, and the
teacher. But these distinctions are undesirable and the child should only follow one guide.
  We must therefore look at the general rather than the particular, and consider our scholar as man in
the abstract, man exposed to all the changes and chances of mortal life. If men were born attached to
the soil of our country, if one season lasted all the year round, if every man's fortune were so firmly
grasped  that  he  could  never  lose  it,  then  the  established  method  of  education  would  have  certain
advantages; the child brought up to his own calling would never leave it, he could never have to face
the difficulties of any other condition. But when we consider the fleeting nature of human affairs, the
restless and uneasy spirit of our times, when every generation overturns the work of its predecessor, can
we conceive a more senseless plan than to educate a child as if he would never leave his room, as if he
would always have his servants about him? If the wretched creature takes a single step up or down he is
lost. This is not teaching him to bear pain; it is training him to feel it.
  People think only of preserving their child's life; this is not enough, he must be taught to preserve
his own life when he is a man, to bear the buffets of fortune, to brave wealth and poverty, to live at
need among the snows of Iceland or on the scorching rocks of Malta. In vain you guard against death;
he must needs die; and even if you do not kill him with your precautions, they are mistaken. Teach him
to live rather than to avoid death: life is not breath, but action, the use of our senses, our mind, our
faculties, every part of ourselves which makes us conscious of our being. Life consists less in length of
days than in the keen sense of living. A man maybe buried at a hundred and may never have lived at
all. He would have fared better had he died young.
  Our wisdom is slavish prejudice, our customs consist in control, constraint, compulsion. Civilised
man is born and dies a slave. The infant is bound up in swaddling clothes, the corpse is nailed down in
his coffin. All his life long man is imprisoned by our institutions.
I am told that many midwives profess to improve the shape of the infant's head by rubbing, and they
are allowed to do it. Our heads are not good enough as God made them, they must be moulded outside
by the nurse and inside by the philosopher. The Caribs are better off than we are. The child has hardly
left the mother's womb, it has hardly begun to move and stretch its limbs, when it is deprived of its
freedom. It is wrapped in swaddling bands, laid down with its head fixed, its legs stretched out, and its
arms by its sides; it is wound round with linen and bandages of all sorts so that it cannot move. It is
fortunate if it has room to breathe, and it is laid on its side so that water which should flow from its
mouth can escape, for it is not free to turn its head on one side for this purpose.
  The new-born child requires to stir and stretch his limbs to free them from the stiffness resulting
from being curled up so long. His limbs are stretched indeed, but he is not allowed to move them. Even
the head is confined by a cap. One would think they were afraid the child should look as if it were
alive.
  Thus the internal impulses which should lead to growth find an insurmountable obstacle in the way
of the necessary movements. The child exhausts his strength in vain struggles, or he gains strength very
slowly. He was freer and less constrained in the womb; he has gained nothing by birth.
  The inaction, the constraint to which the child's limbs are subjected can only check the circulation
of the blood and humours; it can only hinder the child's growth in size and strength, and injure its
constitution. Where these absurd precautions are absent, all the men are tall, strong, and well-made.
Where children are swaddled, the country swarms with the hump-backed, the lame, the bow-legged, the
rickety,  and  every  kind  of  deformity.  In  our  fear  lest  the  body  should  become  deformed  by  free
movement, we hasten to deform it by putting it in a press. We make our children helpless lest they
should hurt themselves.  Is not such a cruel bondage certain to affect both health and temper? Their first feeling is one of
pain and suffering; they find every necessary movement hampered; more miserable than a galley slave,
in vain they struggle, they become angry, they cry. Their first words you say are tears. That is so. From
birth you are always checking them, your first gifts are fetters, your first treatment, torture. Their voice
alone is free; why should they not raise it in complaint? They cry because you are hurting them; if you
were swaddled you would cry louder still.
  What is the origin of this senseless and unnatural custom? Since mothers have despised their first
duty and refused to nurse their own children, they have had to be entrusted to hired nurses. Finding
themselves the mothers of a stranger's children, without the ties of nature, they have merely tried to
save themselves trouble. A child unswaddled would need constant watching; well swaddled it is cast
into a corner and its cries are unheeded. So long as the nurse's negligence escapes notice, so long as the
nursling does not break its arms or legs, what matter if it dies or becomes a weakling for life. Its limbs
are kept safe at the expense of its body, and if anything goes wrong it is not the nurse's fault.
  These gentle mothers, having got rid of their babies, devote themselves gaily to the pleasures of the
town. Do they know how their children are being treated in the villages? If the nurse is at all busy, the
child is hung up on a nail like a bundle of clothes and is left crucified while the nurse goes leisurely
about her business. Children have been found in this position purple in the face, their tightly bandaged
chest forbade the circulation of the blood, and it went to the head; so the sufferer was considered very
quiet because he had not strength to cry. How long a child might survive under such conditions I do not
know, but it could not be long. That, I fancy, is one of the chief advantages of swaddling clothes.
  It is maintained that unswaddled infants would assume faulty positions and make movements which
might injure the proper development of their limbs. That is one of the empty arguments of our false
wisdom which has never been confirmed by experience. Out of all the crowds of children who grow up
with the full use of their limbs among nations wiser than ourselves, you never find one who hurts
himself or maims himself; their movements are too feeble to be dangerous, and when they assume an
injurious position, pain warns them to change it.
  We have not yet decided to swaddle our kittens and puppies; are they any the worse for this
neglect? Children are heavier, I admit, but they are also weaker. They can scarcely move, how could
they hurt themselves! If you lay them on their backs, they will lie there till they die, like the turtle,
unable to turn itself over. Not content with having ceased to suckle their children, women no longer
wish to do it; with the natural result motherhood becomes a burden; means are found to avoid it. They
will destroy their work to begin it over again, and they thus turn to the injury of the race the charm
which was given them for its increase. This practice, with other causes of depopulation, forbodes the
coming fate of Europe. Her arts and sciences, her philosophy and morals, will shortly reduce her to a
desert. She will be the home of wild beasts, and her inhabitants will hardly have changed for the worse.
I have sometimes watched the tricks of young wives who pretend that they wish to nurse their own
children. They take care to be dissuaded from this whim. They contrive that husbands, doctors, and
especially mothers should intervene. If a husband should let his wife nurse her own baby it would be
the ruin of him; they would make him out a murderer who wanted to be rid of her. A prudent husband
must sacrifice paternal affection to domestic peace. Fortunately for you there are women in the country
districts more continent than your wives. You are still more fortunate if the time thus gained is not
intended for another than yourself.
  There can be no doubt about a wife's duty, but, considering the contempt in which it is held, it is
doubtful whether it is not just as good for the child to be suckled by a stranger. This is a question for
the doctors to settle, and in my opinion they have settled it according to the women's wishes, [Footnote:
The league between the women and the doctors has always struck me as one of the oddest things in
Paris. The doctors' reputation depends on the women, and by means of the doctors the women get their
own way. It is easy to see what qualifications a doctor requires in Paris if he is to become celebrated.]
and for my own part I think it is better that the child should suck the breast of a healthy nurse rather
than of a petted mother, if he has any further evil to fear from her who has given him birth.  Ought the question, however, to be considered only from the physiological point of view? Does not
the child need a mother's care as much as her milk? Other women, or even other animals, may give him
the milk she denies him, but there is no substitute for a mother's love.
  The woman who nurses another's child in place of her own is a bad mother; how can she be a good
nurse? She may become one in time; use will overcome nature, but the child may perish a hundred
times before his nurse has developed a mother's affection for him.
  And this affection when developed has its drawbacks, which should make any feeling woman afraid
to put her child out to nurse. Is she prepared to divide her mother's rights, or rather to abdicate them in
favour of a stranger; to see her child loving another more than herself; to feel that the affection he
retains for his own mother is a favour, while his love for his foster-mother is a duty; for is not some
affection due where there has been a mother's care?
  To remove this difficulty, children are taught to look down on their nurses, to treat them as mere
servants. When their task is completed the child is withdrawn or the nurse is dismissed. Her visits to her
foster-child are discouraged by a cold reception. After a few years the child never sees her again. The
mother expects to take her place, and to repair by her cruelty the results of her own neglect. But she is
greatly mistaken; she is making an ungrateful foster-child, not an affectionate son; she is teaching him
ingratitude, and she is preparing him to despise at a later day the mother who bore him, as he now
despises his nurse.
  How emphatically would I speak if it were not so hopeless to keep struggling in vain on behalf of a
real reform. More depends on this than you realise. Would you restore all men to their primal duties,
begin with the mothers; the results will surprise you. Every evil follows in the train of this first sin; the
whole moral order is disturbed, nature is quenched in every breast, the home becomes gloomy, the
spectacle of a young family no longer stirs the husband's love and the stranger's reverence. The mother
whose children are out of sight wins scanty esteem; there is no home life, the ties of nature are not
strengthened by those of habit; fathers, mothers, children, brothers, and sisters cease to exist. They are
almost strangers; how should they love one another? Each thinks of himself first. When the home is a
gloomy solitude pleasure will be sought elsewhere.
  But when mothers deign to nurse their own children, then will be a reform in morals; natural feeling
will revive in every heart; there will be no lack of citizens for the state; this first step by itself will
restore mutual affection. The charms of home are the best antidote to vice. The noisy play of children,
which we thought so trying, becomes a delight; mother and father rely more on each other and grow
dearer to one another; the marriage tie is strengthened. In the cheerful home life the mother finds her
sweetest duties and the father his pleasantest recreation. Thus the cure of this one evil would work a
wide-spread reformation; nature would regain her rights. When women become good mothers, men
will be good husbands and fathers.
  My words are vain! When we are sick of worldly pleasures we do not return to the pleasures of the
home. Women have ceased to be mothers, they do not and will not return to their duty. Could they do it
if they would? The contrary custom is firmly established; each would have to overcome the opposition
of her neighbours, leagued together against the example which some have never given and others do
not desire to follow.
  Yet there are still a few young women of good natural disposition who refuse to be the slaves of
fashion and rebel against the clamour of other women, who fulfil the sweet task imposed on them by
nature.  Would  that  the  reward  in  store  for  them  might  draw  others  to  follow  their  example.  My
conclusion is based upon plain reason, and upon facts I have never seen disputed; and I venture to
promise these worthy mothers the firm and steadfast affection of their husbands and the truly filial love
of their children and the respect of all the world. Child-birth will be easy and will leave no ill-results,
their health will be strong and vigorous, and they will see their daughters follow their example, and find
that example quoted as a pattern to others.
  No mother, no child; their duties are reciprocal, and when ill done by the one they will be neglected
by the other. The child should love his mother before he knows what he owes her. If the voice ofinstinct is not strengthened by habit it soon dies, the heart is still-born. From the outset we have strayed
from the path of nature.
  There is another by-way which may tempt our feet from the path of nature. The mother may lavish
excessive care on her child instead of neglecting him; she may make an idol of him; she may develop
and increase his weakness to prevent him feeling it; she wards off every painful experience in the hope
of withdrawing him from the power of nature, and fails to realise that for every trifling ill from which
she preserves him the future holds in store many accidents and dangers, and that it is a cruel kindness to
prolong the child's weakness when the grown man must bear fatigue.
  Thetis, so the story goes, plunged her son in the waters of Styx to make him invulnerable. The truth
of this allegory is apparent. The cruel mothers I speak of do otherwise; they plunge their children into
softness, and they are preparing suffering for them, they open the way to every kind of ill, which their
children will not fail to experience after they grow up.
  Fix your eyes on nature, follow the path traced by her. She keeps children at work, she hardens
them by all kinds of difficulties, she soon teaches them the meaning of pain and grief. They cut their
teeth and are feverish, sharp colics bring on convulsions, they are choked by fits of coughing and
tormented by worms, evil humours corrupt the blood, germs of various kinds ferment in it, causing
dangerous eruptions. Sickness and danger play the chief part in infancy. One half of the children who
are born die before their eighth year. The child who has overcome hardships has gained strength, and as
soon as he can use his life he holds it more securely.
  This is nature's law; why contradict it? Do you not see that in your efforts to improve upon her
handiwork you are destroying it; her cares are wasted? To do from without what she does within is
according to you to increase the danger twofold. On the contrary, it is the way to avert it; experience
shows that children delicately nurtured are more likely to die. Provided we do not overdo it, there is
less risk in using their strength than in sparing it. Accustom them therefore to the hardships they will
have to face; train them to endure extremes of temperature, climate, and condition, hunger, thirst, and
weariness. Dip them in the waters of Styx. Before bodily habits become fixed you may teach what
habits you will without any risk, but once habits are established any change is fraught with peril. A
child will bear changes which a man cannot bear, the muscles of the one are soft and flexible, they take
whatever direction you give them without any effort; the muscles of the grown man are harder and they
only change their accustomed mode of action when subjected to violence. So we can make a child
strong without risking his life or health, and even if there were some risk, it should not be taken into
consideration. Since human life is full of dangers, can we do better than face them at a time when they
can do the least harm?
  A child's worth increases with his years. To his personal value must be added the cost of the care
bestowed upon him. For himself there is not only loss of life, but the consciousness of death. We must
therefore think most of his future in our efforts for his preservation. He must be protected against the
ills of youth before he reaches them: for if the value of life increases until the child reaches an age
when he can be useful, what madness to spare some suffering in infancy only to multiply his pain when
he reaches the age of reason. Is that what our master teaches us!
  Man is born to suffer; pain is the means of his preservation. His childhood is happy, knowing only
pain of body. These bodily sufferings are much less cruel, much less painful, than other forms of
suffering, and they rarely lead to self-destruction. It is not the twinges of gout which make a man kill
himself, it is mental suffering that leads to despair. We pity the sufferings of childhood; we should pity
ourselves; our worst sorrows are of our own making.
  The new-born infant cries, his early days are spent in crying. He is alternately petted and shaken by
way of soothing him; sometimes he is threatened, sometimes beaten, to keep him quiet. We do what he
wants or we make him do what we want, we submit to his whims or subject him to our own. There is
no middle course; he must rule or obey. Thus his earliest ideas are those of the tyrant or the slave. He
commands before he can speak, he obeys before he can act, and sometimes he is punished for faults
before he is aware of them, or rather before they are committed. Thus early are the seeds of evilpassions sown in his young heart. At a later day these are attributed to nature, and when we have taken
pains to make him bad we lament his badness.
  In this way the child passes six or seven years in the hands of women, the victim of his own
caprices or theirs, and after they have taught him all sorts of things, when they have burdened his
memory with words he cannot understand, or things which are of no use to him, when nature has been
stifled  by  the  passions  they  have  implanted  in  him,  this  sham  article  is  sent  to  a  tutor.  The  tutor
completes the development of the germs of artificiality which he finds already well grown, he teaches
him everything except self-knowledge and self-control, the arts of life and happiness. When at length
this infant slave and tyrant, crammed with knowledge but empty of sense, feeble alike in mind and
body, is flung upon the world, and his helplessness, his pride, and his other vices are displayed, we
begin to lament the wretchedness and perversity of mankind. We are wrong; this is the creature of our
fantasy; the natural man is cast in another mould.
  Would you keep him as nature made him? Watch over him from his birth. Take possession of him
as soon as he comes into the world and keep him till he is a man; you will never succeed otherwise. The
real nurse is the mother and the real teacher is the father. Let them agree in the ordering of their duties
as well as in their method, let the child pass from one to the other. He will be better educated by a
sensible though ignorant father than by the cleverest master in the world. For zeal will atone for lack of
knowledge, rather than knowledge for lack of zeal. But the duties of public and private business! Duty
indeed! Does a father's duty come last. [Footnote: When we read in Plutarch that Cato the Censor, who
ruled Rome with such glory, brought up his own sons from the cradle, and so carefully that he left
everything to be present when their nurse, that is to say their mother, bathed them; when we read in
Suetonius  that  Augustus,  the  master  of  the  world  which  he  had  conquered  and  which  he  himself
governed, himself taught his grandsons to write, to swim, to understand the beginnings of science, and
that he always had them with him, we cannot help smiling at the little people of those days who amused
themselves with such follies, and who were too ignorant, no doubt, to attend to the great affairs of the
great people of our own time.] It is not surprising that the man whose wife despises the duty of suckling
her child should despise its education. There is no more charming picture than that of family life; but
when one feature is wanting the whole is marred. If the mother is too delicate to nurse her child, the
father will be too busy to teach him. Their children, scattered about in schools, convents, and colleges,
will find the home of their affections elsewhere, or rather they will form the habit of oaring for nothing.
Brothers and sisters will scarcely know each other; when they are together in company they will behave
as strangers. When there is no confidence between relations, when the family society ceases to give
savour to life, its place is soon usurped by vice. Is there any man so stupid that he cannot see how all
this hangs together?
  A father has done but a third of his task when he begets children and provides a living for them. He
owes men to humanity, citizens to the state. A man who can pay this threefold debt and neglect to do so
is guilty, more guilty, perhaps, if he pays it in part than when he neglects it entirely. He has no right to
be a father if he cannot fulfil a father's duties. Poverty, pressure of business, mistaken social prejudices,
none of these can excuse a man from his duty, which is to support and educate his own children. If a
man of any natural feeling neglects these sacred duties he will repent it with bitter tears and will never
be comforted.
  But what does this rich man do, this father of a family, compelled, so he says, to neglect his
children? He pays another man to perform those duties which are his alone. Mercenary man! do you
expect to purchase a second father for your child? Do not deceive yourself; it is not even a master you
have hired for him, it is a flunkey, who will soon train such another as himself.
  There is much discussion as to the characteristics of a good tutor. My first requirement, and it
implies a good many more, is that he should not take up his task for reward. There are callings so great
that they cannot be undertaken for money without showing our unfitness for them; such callings are
those of the soldier and the teacher.
  "But who must train my child?" "I have just told you, you should do it yourself." "I cannot." "Youcannot! Then find a friend. I see no other course."
  A tutor! What a noble soul! Indeed for the training of a man one must either be a father or more
than man. It is this duty you would calmly hand over to a hireling!
  The more you think of it the harder you will find it. The tutor must have been trained for his pupil,
his servants must have been trained for their master, so that all who come near him may have received
the impression which is to be transmitted to him. We must pass from education to education, I know
not how far. How can a child be well educated by one who has not been well educated himself!
  Can such a one be found? I know not. In this age of degradation who knows the height of virtue to
which man's soul may attain? But let us assume that this prodigy has been discovered. We shall learn
what he should be from the consideration of his duties. I fancy the father who realises the value of a
good tutor will contrive to do without one, for it will be harder to find one than to become such a tutor
himself; he need search no further, nature herself having done half the work.
  Some one whose rank alone is known to me suggested that I should educate his son. He did me a
great honour, no doubt, but far from regretting my refusal, he ought to congratulate himself on my
prudence. Had the offer been accepted, and had I been mistaken in my method, there would have been
an education ruined; had I succeeded, things would have been worse--his son would have renounced his
title and refused to be a prince.
I feel too deeply the importance of a tutor's duties and my own unfitness, ever to accept such a post,
whoever offered it, and even the claims of friendship would be only an additional motive for my
refusal. Few, I think, will be tempted to make me such an offer when they have read this book, and I
beg any one who would do so to spare his pains. I have had enough experience of the task to convince
myself of my own unfitness, and my circumstances would make it impossible, even if my talents were
such  as  to  fit  me  for  it.  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to  make  this  public  declaration  to  those  who
apparently refuse to do me the honour of believing in the sincerity of my determination. If I am unable
to undertake the more useful task, I will at least venture to attempt the easier one; I will follow the
example of my predecessors and take up, not the task, but my pen; and instead of doing the right thing I
will try to say it.
I know that in such an undertaking the author, who ranges at will among theoretical systems, utters
many fine precepts impossible to practise, and even when he says what is practicable it remains undone
for want of details and examples as to its application.
I have therefore decided to take an imaginary pupil, to assume on my own part the age, health,
knowledge, and talents required for the work of his education, to guide him from birth to manhood,
when he needs no guide but himself. This method seems to me useful for an author who fears lest he
may stray from the practical to the visionary; for as soon as he departs from common practice he has
only to try his method on his pupil; he will soon know, or the reader will know for him, whether he is
following the development of the child and the natural growth of the human heart.
  This is what I have tried to do. Lest my book should be unduly bulky, I have been content to state
those principles the truth of which is self-evident. But as to the rules which call for proof, I have
applied them to Emile or to others, and I have shown, in very great detail, how my theories may be put
into practice. Such at least is my plan; the reader must decide whether I have succeeded. At first I have
said little about Emile, for my earliest maxims of education, though very different from those generally
accepted, are so plain that it is hard for a man of sense to refuse to accept them, but as I advance, my
scholar, educated after another fashion than yours, is no longer an ordinary child, he needs a special
system. Then he appears upon the scene more frequently, and towards the end I never lose sight of him
for a moment, until, whatever he may say, he needs me no longer.
I pass over the qualities required in a good tutor; I take them for granted, and assume that I am
endowed with them. As you read this book you will see how generous I have been to myself.
I will only remark that, contrary to the received opinion, a child's tutor should be young, as young
indeed as a man may well be who is also wise. Were it possible, he should become a child himself, that
he may be the companion of his pupil and win his confidence by sharing his games. Childhood and agehave too little in common for the formation of a really firm affection. Children sometimes flatter old
men; they never love them.
  People seek a tutor who has already educated one pupil. This is too much; one man can only
educate one pupil; if two were essential to success, what right would he have to undertake the first?
With more experience you may know better what to do, but you are less capable of doing it; once this
task has been well done, you will know too much of its difficulties to attempt it a second time--if ill
done, the first attempt augurs badly for the second.
  It is one thing to follow a young man about for four years, another to be his guide for five-and-
twenty. You find a tutor for your son when he is already formed; I want one for him before he is born.
Your man may change his pupil every five years; mine will never have but one pupil. You distinguish
between the teacher and the tutor. Another piece of folly! Do you make any distinction between the
pupil and the scholar? There is only one science for children to learn--the duties of man. This science is
one, and, whatever Xenophon may say of the education of the Persians, it is indivisible. Besides, I
prefer to call the man who has this knowledge master rather than teacher, since it is a question of
guidance rather than instruction. He must not give precepts, he must let the scholar find them out for
himself.
  If the master is to be so carefully chosen, he may well choose his pupil, above all when he proposes
to set a pattern for others. This choice cannot depend on the child's genius or character, as I adopt him
before he is born, and they are only known when my task is finished. If I had my choice I would take a
child of ordinary mind, such as I assume in my pupil. It is ordinary people who have to be educated,
and their education alone can serve as a pattern for the education of their fellows. The others find their
way alone.
  The birthplace is not a matter of indifference in the education of man; it is only in temperate climes
that he comes to his full growth. The disadvantages of extremes are easily seen. A man is not planted in
one place like a tree, to stay there the rest of his life, and to pass from one extreme to another you must
travel twice as far as he who starts half-way.
  If the inhabitant of a temperate climate passes in turn through both extremes his advantage is plain,
for although he may be changed as much as he who goes from one extreme to the other, he only
removes half-way from his natural condition. A Frenchman can live in New Guinea or in Lapland, but
a negro cannot live in Tornea nor a Samoyed in Benin. It seems also as if the brain were less perfectly
organised in the two extremes. Neither the negroes nor the Laps are as wise as Europeans. So if I want
my pupil to be a citizen of the world I will choose him in the temperate zone, in France for example,
rather than elsewhere.
  In the north with its barren soil men devour much food, in the fertile south they eat little. This
produces another difference: the one is industrious, the other contemplative. Society shows us, in one
and the same spot, a similar difference between rich and poor. The one dwells in a fertile land, the other
in a barren land.
  The poor man has no need of education. The education of his own station in life is forced upon him,
he can have no other; the education received by the rich man from his own station is least fitted for
himself and for society. Moreover, a natural education should fit a man for any position. Now it is more
unreasonable to train a poor man for wealth than a rich man for poverty, for in proportion to their
numbers more rich men are ruined and fewer poor men become rich. Let us choose our scholar among
the rich; we shall at least have made another man; the poor may come to manhood without our help.
  For the same reason I should not be sorry if Emile came of a good family. He will be another victim
snatched from prejudice.
  Emile is an orphan. No matter whether he has father or mother, having undertaken their duties I am
invested with their rights. He must honour his parents, but he must obey me. That is my first and only
condition.
I must add that there is just one other point arising out of this; we must never be separated except by
mutual consent. This clause is essential, and I would have tutor and scholar so inseparable that theyshould regard their fate as one. If once they perceive the time of their separation drawing near, the time
which must make them strangers to one another, they become strangers then and there; each makes his
own little world, and both of them being busy in thought with the time when they will no longer be
together, they remain together against their will. The disciple regards his master as the badge and
scourge of childhood, the master regards his scholar as a heavy burden which he longs to be rid of.
Both are looking forward to the time when they will part, and as there is never any real affection
between them, there will be scant vigilance on the one hand, and on the other scant obedience.
  But when they consider they must always live together, they must needs love one another, and in
this way they really learn to love one another. The pupil is not ashamed to follow as a child the friend
who will be with him in manhood; the tutor takes an interest in the efforts whose fruits he will enjoy,
and the virtues he is cultivating in his pupil form a store laid up for his old age.
  This agreement made beforehand assumes a normal birth, a strong, well-made, healthy child. A
father has no choice, and should have no preference within the limits of the family God has given him;
all his children are his alike, the same care and affection is due to all. Crippled or well-made, weak or
strong, each of them is a trust for which he is responsible to the Giver, and nature is a party to the
marriage contract along with husband and wife.
  But if you undertake a duty not imposed upon you by nature, you must secure beforehand the
means for its fulfilment, unless you would undertake duties you cannot fulfil. If you take the care of a
sickly, unhealthy child, you are a sick nurse, not a tutor. To preserve a useless life you are wasting the
time  which  should  be  spent  in  increasing  its  value,  you  risk  the  sight  of  a  despairing  mother
reproaching you for the death of her child, who ought to have died long ago.
I would not undertake the care of a feeble, sickly child, should he live to four score years. I want no
pupil who is useless alike to himself and others, one whose sole business is to keep himself alive, one
whose body is always a hindrance to the training of his mind. If I vainly lavish my care upon him, what
can I do but double the loss to society by robbing it of two men, instead of one? Let another tend this
weakling for me; I am quite willing, I approve his charity, but I myself have no gift for such a task; I
could never teach the art of living to one who needs all his strength to keep himself alive.
  The body must be strong enough to obey the mind; a good servant must be strong. I know that
intemperance stimulates the passions; in course of time it also destroys the body; fasting and penance
often  produce  the  same  results  in  an  opposite  way.  The  weaker  the  body,  the  more  imperious  its
demands; the stronger it is, the better it obeys. All sensual passions find their home in effeminate
bodies; the less satisfaction they can get the keener their sting.
  A feeble body makes a feeble mind. Hence the influence of physic, an art which does more harm to
man than all the evils it professes to cure. I do not know what the doctors cure us of, but I know this:
they infect us with very deadly diseases, cowardice, timidity, credulity, the fear of death. What matter if
they make the dead walk, we have no need of corpses; they fail to give us men, and it is men we need.
  Medicine is all the fashion in these days, and very naturally. It is the amusement of the idle and
unemployed, who do not know what to do with their time, and so spend it in taking care of themselves.
If by ill-luck they had happened to be born immortal, they would have been the most miserable of men;
a life they could not lose would be of no value to them. Such men must have doctors to threaten and
flatter them, to give them the only pleasure they can enjoy, the pleasure of not being dead.
I will say no more at present as to the uselessness of medicine. My aim is to consider its bearings on
morals. Still I cannot refrain from saying that men employ the same sophism about medicine as they do
about the search for truth. They assume that the patient is cured and that the seeker after truth finds it.
They fail to see that against one life saved by the doctors you must set a hundred slain, and against the
value of one truth discovered the errors which creep in with it. The science which instructs and the
medicine which heals are no doubt excellent, but the science which misleads us and the medicine which
kills us are evil. Teach us to know them apart. That is the real difficulty. If we were content to be
ignorant of truth we should not be the dupes of falsehood; if we did not want to be cured in spite of
nature, we should not be killed by the doctors. We should do well to steer clear of both, and we shouldevidently be the gainers. I do not deny that medicine is useful to some men; I assert that it is fatal to
mankind.
  You will tell me, as usual, that the doctors are to blame, that medicine herself is infallible. Well and
good, then give us the medicine without the doctor, for when we have both, the blunders of the artist
are a hundredfold greater than our hopes from the art. This lying art, invented rather for the ills of the
mind than of the body, is useless to both alike; it does less to cure us of our diseases than to fill us with
alarm. It does less to ward off death than to make us dread its approach. It exhausts life rather than
prolongs it; should it even prolong life it would only be to the prejudice of the race, since it makes us
set its precautions before society and our fears before our duties. It is the knowledge of danger that
makes  us  afraid.  If  we  thought  ourselves  invulnerable  we  should  know  no  fear.  The  poet  armed
Achilles against danger and so robbed him of the merit of courage; on such terms any man would be an
Achilles.
  Would you find a really brave man? Seek him where there are no doctors, where the results of
disease are unknown, and where death is little thought of. By nature a man bears pain bravely and dies
in peace. It is the doctors with their rules, the philosophers with their precepts, the priests with their
exhortations, who debase the heart and make us afraid to die.
  Give me a pupil who has no need of these, or I will have nothing to do with him. No one else shall
spoil my work, I will educate him myself or not at all. That wise man, Locke, who had devoted part of
his life to the study of medicine, advises us to give no drugs to the child, whether as a precaution, or on
account of slight ailments. I will go farther, and will declare that, as I never call in a doctor for myself, I
will never send for one for Emile, unless his life is clearly in danger, when the doctor can but kill him.
I know the doctor will make capital out of my delay. If the child dies, he was called in too late; if he
recovers, it is his doing. So be it; let the doctor boast, but do not call him in except in extremity.
  As the child does not know how to be cured, he knows how to be ill. The one art takes the place of
the other and is often more successful; it is the art of nature. When a beast is ill, it keeps quiet and
suffers in silence; but we see fewer sickly animals than sick men. How many men have been slain by
impatience, fear, anxiety, and above all by medicine, men whom disease would have spared, and time
alone have cured. I shall be told that animals, who live according to nature, are less liable to disease
than ourselves. Well, that way of living is just what I mean to teach my pupil; he should profit by it in
the same way.
  Hygiene  is  the  only  useful  part  of  medicine,  and  hygiene  is  rather  a  virtue  than  a  science.
Temperance and industry are man's true remedies; work sharpens his appetite and temperance teaches
him to control it.
  To learn what system is most beneficial you have only to study those races remarkable for health,
strength, and length of days. If common observation shows us that medicine neither increases health
nor prolongs life, it follows that this useless art is worse than useless, since it wastes time, men, and
things on what is pure loss. Not only must we deduct the time spent, not in using life, but preserving it,
but if this time is spent in tormenting ourselves it is worse than wasted, it is so much to the bad, and to
reckon fairly a corresponding share must be deducted from what remains to us. A man who lives ten
years for himself and others without the help of doctors lives more for himself and others than one who
spends thirty years as their victim. I have tried both, so I think I have a better right than most to draw
my own conclusions.
  For these reasons I decline to take any but a strong and healthy pupil, and these are my principles
for keeping him in health. I will not stop to prove at length the value of manual labour and bodily
exercise for strengthening the health and constitution; no one denies it. Nearly all the instances of long
life are to be found among the men who have taken most exercise, who have endured fatigue and
labour. [Footnote: I cannot help quoting the following passage from an English newspaper, as it throws
much light on my opinions: "A certain Patrick O'Neil, born in 1647, has just married his seventh wife
in 1760. In the seventeenth year of Charles II. he served in the dragoons and in other regiments up to
1740, when he took his discharge. He served in all the campaigns of William III. and Marlborough.This man has never drunk anything but small beer; he has always lived on vegetables, and has never
eaten  meat  except  on  few  occasions  when  he  made  a  feast  for  his  relations.  He  has  always  been
accustomed to rise with the sun and go to bed at sunset unless prevented by his military duties. He is
now in his 130th year; he is healthy, his hearing is good, and he walks with the help of a stick. In spite
of his great age he is never idle, and every Sunday he goes to his parish church accompanied by his
children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren."] Neither will I enter into details as to the care I shall
take for this alone. It will be clear that it forms such an essential part of my practice that it is enough to
get hold of the idea without further explanation.
  When our life begins our needs begin too. The new-born infant must have a nurse. If his mother
will do her duty, so much the better; her instructions will be given her in writing, but this advantage has
its drawbacks, it removes the tutor from his charge. But it is to be hoped that the child's own interests,
and her respect for the person to whom she is about to confide so precious a treasure, will induce the
mother to follow the master's wishes, and whatever she does you may be sure she will do better than
another. If we must have a strange nurse, make a good choice to begin with.
  It is one of the misfortunes of the rich to be cheated on all sides; what wonder they think ill of
mankind! It is riches that corrupt men, and the rich are rightly the first to feel the defects of the only
tool they know. Everything is ill-done for them, except what they do themselves, and they do next to
nothing. When a nurse must be selected the choice is left to the doctor. What happens? The best nurse
is the one who offers the highest bribe. I shall not consult the doctor about Emile's nurse, I shall take
care to choose her myself. I may not argue about it so elegantly as the surgeon, but I shall be more
reliable, I shall be less deceived by my zeal than the doctor by his greed.
  There is no mystery about this choice; its rules are well known, but I think we ought probably to
pay more attention to the age of the milk as well as its quality. The first milk is watery, it must be
almost an aperient, to purge the remains of the meconium curdled in the bowels of the new-born child.
Little by little the milk thickens and supplies more solid food as the child is able to digest it. It is surely
not without cause that nature changes the milk in the female of every species according to the age of the
offspring.
  Thus a new-born child requires a nurse who has recently become mother. There is, I know, a
difficulty here, but as soon as we leave the path of nature there are difficulties in the way of all well-
doing. The wrong course is the only right one under the circumstances, so we take it.
  The nurse must be healthy alike in disposition and in body. The violence of the passions as well as
the humours may spoil her milk. Moreover, to consider the body only is to keep only half our aim in
view. The milk may be good and the nurse bad; a good character is as necessary as a good constitution.
If you choose a vicious person, I do not say her foster-child will acquire her vices, but he will suffer for
them. Ought she not to bestow on him day by day, along with her milk, a care which calls for zeal,
patience, gentleness, and cleanliness. If she is intemperate and greedy her milk will soon be spoilt; if
she is careless and hasty what will become of a poor little wretch left to her mercy, and unable either to
protect himself or to complain. The wicked are never good for anything.
  The choice is all the more important because her foster-child should have no other guardian, just as
he should have no teacher but his tutor. This was the custom of the ancients, who talked less but acted
more wisely than we. The nurse never left her foster-daughter; this is why the nurse is the confidante in
most of their plays. A child who passes through many hands in turn, can never be well brought up.
  At every change he makes a secret comparison, which continually tends to lessen his respect for
those who control him, and with it their authority over him. If once he thinks there are grown-up people
with no more sense than children the authority of age is destroyed and his education is ruined. A child
should know no betters but its father and mother, or failing them its foster-mother and its tutor, and
even this is one too many, but this division is inevitable, and the best that can be done in the way of
remedy is that the man and woman who control him shall be so well agreed with regard to him that they
seem like one.
  The nurse must live rather more comfortably, she must have rather more substantial food, but herwhole way of living must not be altered, for a sudden change, even a change for the better, is dangerous
to health, and since her usual way of life has made her healthy and strong, why change it?
  Country women eat less meat and more vegetables than towns-women, and this vegetarian diet
seems favourable rather than otherwise to themselves and their children. When they take nurslings from
the upper classes they eat meat and broth with the idea that they will form better chyle and supply more
milk. I do not hold with this at all, and experience is on my side, for we do not find children fed in this
way less liable to colic and worms.
  That need not surprise us, for decaying animal matter swarms with worms, but this is not the case
with vegetable matter. [Footnote: Women eat bread, vegetables, and dairy produce; female dogs and
cats do the same; the she-wolves eat grass. This supplies vegetable juices to their milk. There are still
those species which are unable to eat anything but flesh, if such there are, which I very much doubt.]
Milk, although manufactured in the body of an animal, is a vegetable substance; this is shown by
analysis; it readily turns acid, and far from showing traces of any volatile alkali like animal matter, it
gives a neutral salt like plants.
  The milk of herbivorous creatures is sweeter and more wholesome than the milk of the carnivorous;
formed of a substance similar to its own, it keeps its goodness and becomes less liable to putrifaction. If
quantity is considered, it is well known that farinaceous foods produce more blood than meat, so they
ought to yield more milk. If a child were not weaned too soon, and if it were fed on vegetarian food,
and its foster-mother were a vegetarian, I do not think it would be troubled with worms.
  Milk derived from vegetable foods may perhaps be more liable to go sour, but I am far from
considering sour milk an unwholesome food; whole nations have no other food and are none the worse,
and all the array of absorbents seems to me mere humbug. There are constitutions which do not thrive
on milk, others can take it without absorbents. People are afraid of the milk separating or curdling; that
is absurd, for we know that milk always curdles in the stomach. This is how it becomes sufficiently
solid to nourish children and young animals; if it did not curdle it would merely pass away without
feeding them. [Footnote: Although the juices which nourish us are liquid, they must be extracted from
solids. A hard-working man who ate nothing but soup would soon waste away. He would be far better
fed on milk, just because it curdles.] In vain you dilute milk and use absorbents; whoever swallows
milk digests cheese, this rule is without exception; rennet is made from a calf's stomach.
  Instead  of  changing  the  nurse's  usual  diet,  I  think  it  would  be  enough  to  give  food  in  larger
quantities and better of its kind. It is not the nature of the food that makes a vegetable diet indigestible,
but the flavouring that makes it unwholesome. Reform your cookery, use neither butter nor oil for
frying. Butter, salt, and milk should never be cooked. Let your vegetables be cooked in water and only
seasoned when they come to table. The vegetable diet, far from disturbing the nurse, will give her a
plentiful supply of milk. [Footnote: Those who wish to study a full account of the advantages and
disadvantages of the Pythagorean regime, may consult the works of Dr. Cocchi and his opponent Dr.
Bianchi on this important subject.] If a vegetable diet is best for the child, how can meat food be best
for his nurse? The things are contradictory.
  Fresh air affects children's constitutions, particularly in early years. It enters every pore of a soft and
tender skin, it has a powerful effect on their young bodies. Its effects can never be destroyed. So I
should not agree with those who take a country woman from her village and shut her up in one room in
a town and her nursling with her. I would rather send him to breathe the fresh air of the country than the
foul air of the town. He will take his new mother's position, will live in her cottage, where his tutor will
follow him. The reader will bear in mind that this tutor is not a paid servant, but the father's friend. But
if this friend cannot be found, if this transfer is not easy, if none of my advice can be followed, you will
say to me, "What shall I do instead?" I have told you already--"Do what you are doing;" no advice is
needed there.
  Men are not made to be crowded together in ant-hills, but scattered over the earth to till it. The more
they are massed together, the more corrupt they become. Disease and vice are the sure results of over-
crowded cities. Of all creatures man is least fitted to live in herds. Huddled together like sheep, menwould very soon die. Man's breath is fatal to his fellows. This is literally as well as figuratively true.
  Men are devoured by our towns. In a few generations the race dies out or becomes degenerate; it
needs renewal, and it is always renewed from the country. Send your children to renew themselves, so
to speak, send them to regain in the open fields the strength lost in the foul air of our crowded cities.
Women hurry home that their children may be born in the town; they ought to do just the opposite,
especially those who mean to nurse their own children. They would lose less than they think, and in
more natural surroundings the pleasures associated by nature with maternal duties would soon destroy
the taste for other delights.
  The new-born infant is first bathed in warm water to which a little wine is usually added. I think the
wine might be dispensed with. As nature does not produce fermented liquors, it is not likely that they
are of much value to her creatures.
  In the same way it is unnecessary to take the precaution of heating the water; in fact among many
races the new-born infants are bathed with no more ado in rivers or in the sea. Our children, made
tender before birth by the softness of their parents, come into the world with a constitution already
enfeebled, which cannot be at once exposed to all the trials required to restore it to health. Little by
little they must be restored to their natural vigour. Begin then by following this custom, and leave it off
gradually. Wash your children often, their dirty ways show the need of this. If they are only wiped their
skin is injured; but as they grow stronger gradually reduce the heat of the water, till at last you bathe
them winter and summer in cold, even in ice-cold water. To avoid risk this change must be slow,
gradual, and imperceptible, so you may use the thermometer for exact measurements.
  This habit of the bath, once established, should never be broken off, it must be kept up all through
life. I value it not only on grounds of cleanliness and present health, but also as a wholesome means of
making the muscles supple, and accustoming them to bear without risk or effort extremes of heat and
cold. As he gets older I would have the child trained to bathe occasionally in hot water of every
bearable degree, and often in every degree of cold water. Now water being a denser fluid touches us at
more points than air, so that, having learnt to bear all the variations of temperature in water, we shall
scarcely feel this of the air. [Footnote: Children in towns are stifled by being kept indoors and too much
wrapped up. Those who control them have still to learn that fresh air, far from doing them harm, will
make them strong, while hot air will make them weak, will give rise to fevers, and will eventually kill
them.]
  When the child draws its first breath do not confine it in tight wrappings. No cap, no bandages, nor
swaddling clothes. Loose and flowing flannel wrappers, which leave its limbs free and are not too
heavy to check his movements, not too warm to prevent his feeling the air. [Footnote: I say "cradle"
using the common word for want of a better, though I am convinced that it is never necessary and often
harmful to rock children in the cradle.] Put him in a big cradle, well padded, where he can move easily
and safely. As he begins to grow stronger, let him crawl about the room; let him develop and stretch his
tiny limbs; you will see him gain strength from day to day. Compare him with a well swaddled child of
the same age and you will be surprised at their different rates of progress. [Footnote: The ancient
Peruvians wrapped their children in loose swaddling bands, leaving the arms quite free. Later they
placed them unswaddled in a hole in the ground, lined with cloths, so that the lower part of the body
was in the hole, and their arms were free and they could move the head and bend the body at will
without falling or hurting themselves. When they began to walk they were enticed to come to the
breast. The little negroes are often in a position much more difficult for sucking. They cling to the
mother's hip, and cling so tightly that the mother's arm is often not needed to support them. They clasp
the breast with their hand and continue sucking while their mother goes on with her ordinary work.
These children begin to walk at two months, or rather to crawl. Later on they can run on all fours
almost as well as on their feet.--Buffon. M. Buffon might also have quoted the example of England,
where the senseless and barbarous swaddling clothes have become almost obsolete. Cf. La Longue
Voyage de Siam, Le Beau Voyage de Canada, etc.]
  You must expect great opposition from the nurses, who find a half strangled baby needs much lesswatching. Besides his dirtyness is more perceptible in an open garment; he must be attended to more
frequently. Indeed, custom is an unanswerable argument in some lands and among all classes of people.
  Do not argue with the nurses; give your orders, see them carried out, and spare no pains to make the
attention you prescribe easy in practice. Why not take your share in it? With ordinary nurslings, where
the body alone is thought of, nothing matters so long as the child lives and does not actually die, but
with us, when education begins with life, the new-born child is already a disciple, not of his tutor, but
of nature. The tutor merely studies under this master, and sees that his orders are not evaded. He
watches over the infant, he observes it, he looks for the first feeble glimmering of intelligence, as the
Moslem looks for the moment of the moon's rising in her first quarter.
  We are born capable of learning, but knowing nothing, perceiving nothing. The mind, bound up
within imperfect and half grown organs, is not even aware of its own existence. The movements and
cries of the new-born child are purely reflex, without knowledge or will.
  Suppose a child born with the size and strength of manhood, entering upon life full grown like
Pallas from the brain of Jupiter; such a child-man would be a perfect idiot, an automaton, a statue
without motion and almost without feeling; he would see and hear nothing, he would recognise no one,
he could not turn his eyes towards what he wanted to see; not only would he perceive no external
object, he would not even be aware of sensation through the several sense-organs. His eye would not
perceive colour, his ear sounds, his body would be unaware of contact with neighbouring bodies, he
would not even know he had a body, what his hands handled would be in his brain alone; all his
sensations would be united in one place, they would exist only in the common "sensorium," he would
have only one idea, that of self, to which he would refer all his sensations; and this idea, or rather this
feeling, would be the only thing in which he excelled an ordinary child.
  This man, full grown at birth, would also be unable to stand on his feet, he would need a long time
to learn how to keep his balance; perhaps he would not even be able to try to do it, and you would see
the big strong body left in one place like a stone, or creeping and crawling like a young puppy.
  He would feel the discomfort of bodily needs without knowing what was the matter and without
knowing how to provide for these needs. There is no immediate connection between the muscles of the
stomach and those of the arms and legs to make him take a step towards food, or stretch a hand to seize
it, even were he surrounded with it; and as his body would be full grown and his limbs well developed
he would be without the perpetual restlessness and movement of childhood, so that he might die of
hunger  without  stirring  to  seek  food.  However  little  you  may  have  thought  about  the  order  and
development of our knowledge, you cannot deny that such a one would be in the state of almost
primitive ignorance and stupidity natural to man before he has learnt anything from experience or from
his fellows.
  We know then, or we may know, the point of departure from which we each start towards the usual
level of understanding; but who knows the other extreme? Each progresses more or less according to
his  genius,  his  taste,  his  needs,  his  talents,  his  zeal,  and  his  opportunities  for  using  them.  No
philosopher, so far as I know, has dared to say to man, "Thus far shalt thou go and no further." We
know not what nature allows us to be, none of us has measured the possible difference between man
and man. Is there a mind so dead that this thought has never kindled it, that has never said in his pride,
"How  much  have  I  already  done,  how  much  more  may  I  achieve?  Why  should  I  lag  behind  my
fellows?"
  As I said before, man's education begins at birth; before he can speak or understand he is learning.
Experience precedes instruction; when he recognises his nurse he has learnt much. The knowledge of
the most ignorant man would surprise us if we had followed his course from birth to the present time. If
all human knowledge were divided into two parts, one common to all, the other peculiar to the learned,
the  latter  would  seem  very  small  compared  with  the  former.  But  we  scarcely  heed  this  general
experience, because it is acquired before the age of reason. Moreover, knowledge only attracts attention
by its rarity, as in algebraic equations common factors count for nothing. Even animals learn much.
They have senses and must learn to use them; they have needs, they must learn to satisfy them; theymust learn to eat, walk, or fly. Quadrupeds which can stand on their feet from the first cannot walk for
all that; from their first attempts it is clear that they lack confidence. Canaries who escape from their
cage are unable to fly, having never used their wings. Living and feeling creatures are always learning.
If plants could walk they would need senses and knowledge, else their species would die out. The
child's first mental experiences are purely affective, he is only aware of pleasure and pain; it takes him
a long time to acquire the definite sensations which show him things outside himself, but before these
things present and withdraw themselves, so to speak, from his sight, taking size and shape for him, the
recurrence of emotional experiences is beginning to subject the child to the rule of habit. You see his
eyes constantly follow the light, and if the light comes from the side the eyes turn towards it, so that
one must be careful to turn his head towards the light lest he should squint. He must also be accustomed
from the first to the dark, or he will cry if he misses the light. Food and sleep, too, exactly measured,
become necessary at regular intervals, and soon desire is no longer the effect of need, but of habit, or
rather habit adds a fresh need to those of nature. You must be on your guard against this.
  The only habit the child should be allowed to contract is that of having no habits; let him be carried
on either arm, let him be accustomed to offer either hand, to use one or other indifferently; let him not
want to eat, sleep, or do anything at fixed hours, nor be unable to be left alone by day or night. Prepare
the way for his control of his liberty and the use of his strength by leaving his body its natural habit, by
making him capable of lasting self-control, of doing all that he wills when his will is formed.
  As soon as the child begins to take notice, what is shown him must be carefully chosen. The natural
man is interested in all new things. He feels so feeble that he fears the unknown: the habit of seeing
fresh things without ill effects destroys this fear. Children brought up in clean houses where there are
no spiders are afraid of spiders, and this fear often lasts through life. I never saw peasants, man,
woman, or child, afraid of spiders.
  Since the mere choice of things shown him may make the child timid or brave, why should not his
education begin before he can speak or understand? I would have him accustomed to see fresh things,
ugly, repulsive, and strange beasts, but little by little, and far off till he is used to them, and till having
seen others handle them he handles them himself. If in childhood he sees toads, snakes, and crayfish, he
will not be afraid of any animal when he is grown up. Those who are continually seeing terrible things
think nothing of them.
  All children are afraid of masks. I begin by showing Emile a mask with a pleasant face, then some
one puts this mask before his face; I begin to laugh, they all laugh too, and the child with them. By
degrees I accustom him to less pleasing masks, and at last hideous ones. If I have arranged my stages
skilfully, far from being afraid of the last mask, he will laugh at it as he did at the first. After that I am
not afraid of people frightening him with masks.
  When Hector bids farewell to Andromache, the young Astyanax, startled by the nodding plumes on
the helmet, does not know his father; he flings himself weeping upon his nurse's bosom and wins from
his mother a smile mingled with tears. What must be done to stay this terror? Just what Hector did; put
the helmet on the ground and caress the child. In a calmer moment one would do more; one would go
up to the helmet, play with the plumes, let the child feel them; at last the nurse would take the helmet
and place it laughingly on her own head, if indeed a woman's hand dare touch the armour of Hector.
  If Emile must get used to the sound of a gun, I first fire a pistol with a small charge. He is delighted
with this sudden flash, this sort of lightning; I repeat the process with more powder; gradually I add a
small  charge  without  a  wad,  then  a  larger;  in  the  end  I  accustom  him  to  the  sound  of  a  gun,  to
fireworks, cannon, and the most terrible explosions.
I have observed that children are rarely afraid of thunder unless the peals are really terrible and
actually hurt the ear, otherwise this fear only comes to them when they know that thunder sometimes
hurts or kills. When reason begins to cause fear, let use reassure them. By slow and careful stages man
and child learn to fear nothing.
  In the dawn of life, when memory and imagination have not begun to function, the child only
attends to what affects its senses. His sense experiences are the raw material of thought; they should,therefore, be presented to him in fitting order, so that memory may at a future time present them in the
same order to his understanding; but as he only attends to his sensations it is enough, at first, to show
him clearly the connection between these sensations and the things which cause them. He wants to
touch and handle everything; do not check these movements which teach him invaluable lessons. Thus
he learns to perceive the heat, cold, hardness, softness, weight, or lightness of bodies, to judge their size
and shape and all their physical properties, by looking, feeling, [Footnote: Of all the senses that of
smell is the latest to develop in children up to two or three years of age they appear to be insensible of
pleasant or unpleasant odours; in this respect they are as indifferent or rather as insensible as many
animals.]  listening,  and,  above  all,  by  comparing  sight  and  touch,  by  judging  with  the  eye  what
sensation they would cause to his hand.
  It is only by movement that we learn the difference between self and not self; it is only by our own
movements that we gain the idea of space. The child has not this idea, so he stretches out his hand to
seize the object within his reach or that which is a hundred paces from him. You take this as a sign of
tyranny, an attempt to bid the thing draw near, or to bid you bring it. Nothing of the kind, it is merely
that the object first seen in his brain, then before his eyes, now seems close to his arms, and he has no
idea of space beyond his reach. Be careful, therefore, to take him about, to move him from place to
place, and to let him perceive the change in his surroundings, so as to teach him to judge of distances.
  When he begins to perceive distances then you must change your plan, and only carry him when
you please, not when he pleases; for as soon as he is no longer deceived by his senses, there is another
motive for his effort. This change is remarkable and calls for explanation.
  The discomfort caused by real needs is shown by signs, when the help of others is required. Hence
the cries of children; they often cry; it must be so. Since they are only conscious of feelings, when those
feelings are pleasant they enjoy them in silence; when they are painful they say so in their own way and
demand relief. Now when they are awake they can scarcely be in a state of indifference, either they are
asleep or else they are feeling something.
  All our languages are the result of art. It has long been a subject of inquiry whether there ever was a
natural language common to all; no doubt there is, and it is the language of children before they begin
to  speak.  This  language  is  inarticulate,  but  it  has  tone,  stress,  and  meaning.  The  use  of  our  own
language has led us to neglect it so far as to forget it altogether. Let us study children and we shall soon
learn it afresh from them. Nurses can teach us this language; they understand all their nurslings say to
them, they answer them, and keep up long conversations with them; and though they use words, these
words are quite useless. It is not the hearing of the word, but its accompanying intonation that is
understood.
  To the language of intonation is added the no less forcible language of gesture. The child uses, not
its weak hands, but its face. The amount of expression in these undeveloped faces is extraordinary; their
features change from one moment to another with incredible speed. You see smiles, desires, terror,
come  and  go  like  lightning;  every  time  the  face  seems  different.  The  muscles  of  the  face  are
undoubtedly more mobile than our own. On the other hand the eyes are almost expressionless. Such
must be the sort of signs they use at an age when their only needs are those of the body. Grimaces are
the sign of sensation, the glance expresses sentiment.
  As man's first state is one of want and weakness, his first sounds are cries and tears. The child feels
his needs and cannot satisfy them, he begs for help by his cries. Is he hungry or thirsty? there are tears;
is he too cold or too hot? more tears; he needs movement and is kept quiet, more tears; he wants to
sleep and is disturbed, he weeps. The less comfortable he is, the more he demands change. He has only
one language because he has, so to say, only one kind of discomfort. In the imperfect state of his sense
organs he does not distinguish their several impressions; all ills produce one feeling of sorrow.
  These tears, which you think so little worthy of your attention, give rise to the first relation between
man and his environment; here is forged the first link in the long chain of social order.
  When the child cries he is uneasy, he feels some need which he cannot satisfy; you watch him, seek
this need, find it, and satisfy it. If you can neither find it nor satisfy it, the tears continue and becometiresome. The child is petted to quiet him, he is rocked or sung to sleep; if he is obstinate, the nurse
becomes impatient and threatens him; cruel nurses sometimes strike him. What strange lessons for him
at his first entrance into life!
I shall never forget seeing one of these troublesome crying children thus beaten by his nurse. He
was silent at once. I thought he was frightened, and said to myself, "This will be a servile being from
whom nothing can be got but by harshness." I was wrong, the poor wretch was choking with rage, he
could not breathe, he was black in the face. A moment later there were bitter cries, every sign of the
anger, rage, and despair of this age was in his tones. I thought he would die. Had I doubted the innate
sense of justice and injustice in man's heart, this one instance would have convinced me. I am sure that
a drop of boiling liquid falling by chance on that child's hand would have hurt him less than that blow,
slight in itself, but clearly given with the intention of hurting him.
  This tendency to anger, vexation, and rage needs great care. Boerhaave thinks that most of the
diseases of children are of the nature of convulsions, because the head being larger in proportion and
the nervous system more extensive than in adults, they are more liable to nervous irritation. Take the
greatest care to remove from them any servants who tease, annoy, or vex them. They are a hundredfold
more dangerous and more fatal than fresh air and changing seasons. When children only experience
resistance in things and never in the will of man, they do not become rebellious or passionate, and their
health is better. This is one reason why the children of the poor, who are freer and more independent,
are generally less frail and weakly, more vigorous than those who are supposed to be better brought up
by  being  constantly  thwarted;  but  you  must  always  remember  that  it  is  one  thing  to  refrain  from
thwarting them, but quite another to obey them. The child's first tears are prayers, beware lest they
become commands; he begins by asking for aid, he ends by demanding service. Thus from his own
weakness,  the  source  of  his  first  consciousness  of  dependence,  springs  the  later  idea  of  rule  and
tyranny; but as this idea is aroused rather by his needs than by our services, we begin to see moral
results whose causes are not in nature; thus we see how important it is, even at the earliest age, to
discern the secret meaning of the gesture or cry.
  When the child tries to seize something without speaking, he thinks he can reach the object, for he
does not rightly judge its distance; when he cries and stretches out his hands he no longer misjudges the
distance, he bids the object approach, or orders you to bring it to him. In the first case bring it to him
slowly; in the second do not even seem to hear his cries. The more he cries the less you should heed
him. He must learn in good time not to give commands to men, for he is not their master, nor to things,
for they cannot hear him. Thus when the child wants something you mean to give him, it is better to
carry him to it rather than to bring the thing to him. From this he will draw a conclusion suited to his
age, and there is no other way of suggesting it to him.
  The  Abbe  Saint-Pierre  calls  men  big  children;  one  might  also  call  children  little  men.  These
statements are true, but they require explanation. But when Hobbes calls the wicked a strong child, his
statement is contradicted by facts. All wickedness comes from weakness. The child is only naughty
because he is weak; make him strong and he will be good; if we could do everything we should never
do wrong. Of all the attributes of the Almighty, goodness is that which it would be hardest to dissociate
from our conception of Him. All nations who have acknowledged a good and an evil power, have
always regarded the evil as inferior to the good; otherwise their opinion would have been absurd.
Compare this with the creed of the Savoyard clergyman later on in this book.
  Reason alone teaches us to know good and evil. Therefore conscience, which makes us love the one
and hate the other, though it is independent of reason, cannot develop without it. Before the age of
reason we do good or ill without knowing it, and there is no morality in our actions, although there is
sometimes in our feeling with regard to other people's actions in relation to ourselves. A child wants to
overturn everything he sees. He breaks and smashes everything he can reach; he seizes a bird as he
seizes a stone, and strangles it without knowing what he is about.
  Why so? In the first place philosophy will account for this by inbred sin, man's pride, love of
power, selfishness, spite; perhaps it will say in addition to this that the child's consciousness of his ownweakness makes him eager to use his strength, to convince himself of it. But watch that broken down
old man reduced in the downward course of life to the weakness of a child; not only is he quiet and
peaceful, he would have all about him quiet and peaceful too; the least change disturbs and troubles
him, he would like to see universal calm. How is it possible that similar feebleness and similar passions
should produce such different effects in age and in infancy, if the original cause were not different?
And where can we find this difference in cause except in the bodily condition of the two. The active
principle, common to both, is growing in one case and declining in the other; it is being formed in the
one and destroyed in the other; one is moving towards life, the other towards death. The failing activity
of the old man is centred in his heart, the child's overflowing activity spreads abroad. He feels, if we
may say so, strong enough to give life to all about him. To make or to destroy, it is all one to him;
change is what he seeks, and all change involves action. If he seems to enjoy destructive activity it is
only that it takes time to make things and very little time to break them, so that the work of destruction
accords better with his eagerness.
  While the Author of nature has given children this activity, He takes care that it shall do little harm
by giving them small power to use it. But as soon as they can think of people as tools to be used, they
use them to carry out their wishes and to supplement their own weakness. This is how they become
tiresome, masterful, imperious, naughty, and unmanageable; a development which does not spring from
a natural love of power, but one which has been taught them, for it does not need much experience to
realise how pleasant it is to set others to work and to move the world by a word.
  As the child grows it gains strength and becomes less restless and unquiet and more independent.
Soul and body become better balanced and nature no longer asks for more movement than is required
for self-preservation. But the love of power does not die with the need that aroused it; power arouses
and flatters self-love, and habit strengthens it; thus caprice follows upon need, and the first seeds of
prejudice and obstinacy are sown.
  FIRST MAXIM.--Far from being too strong, children are not strong enough for all the claims of
nature. Give them full use of such strength as they have; they will not abuse it.
  SECOND MAXIM.--Help them and supply the experience and strength they lack whenever the
need is of the body.
  THIRD MAXIM.--In the help you give them confine yourself to what is really needful, without
granting anything to caprice or unreason; for they will not be tormented by caprice if you do not call it
into existence, seeing it is no part of nature.
  FOURTH MAXIM--Study carefully their speech and gestures, so that at an age when they are
incapable of deceit you may discriminate between those desires which come from nature and those
which spring from perversity.
  The spirit of these rules is to give children more real liberty and less power, to let them do more for
themselves and demand less of others; so that by teaching them from the first to confine their wishes
within the limits of their powers they will scarcely feel the want of whatever is not in their power.
  This is another very important reason for leaving children's limbs and bodies perfectly free, only
taking care that they do not fall, and keeping anything that might hurt them out of their way.
  The  child  whose  body  and  arms  are  free  will  certainly  cry  much  less  than  a  child  tied  up  in
swaddling clothes. He who knows only bodily needs, only cries when in pain; and this is a great
advantage, for then we know exactly when he needs help, and if possible we should not delay our help
for an instant. But if you cannot relieve his pain, stay where you are and do not flatter him by way of
soothing him; your caresses will not cure his colic, but he will remember what he must do to win them;
and if he once finds out how to gain your attention at will, he is your master; the whole education is
spoilt.
  Their movements being less constrained, children will cry less; less wearied with their tears, people
will not take so much trouble to check them. With fewer threats and promises, they will be less timid
and less obstinate, and will remain more nearly in their natural state. Ruptures are produced less by
letting children cry than by the means taken to stop them, and my evidence for this is the fact that themost neglected children are less liable to them than others. I am very far from wishing that they should
be neglected; on the contrary, it is of the utmost importance that their wants should be anticipated, so
that they need not proclaim their wants by crying. But neither would I have unwise care bestowed on
them. Why should they think it wrong to cry when they find they can get so much by it? When they
have learned the value of their silence they take good care not to waste it. In the end they will so
exaggerate its importance that no one will be able to pay its price; then worn out with crying they
become exhausted, and are at length silent.
  Prolonged crying on the part of a child neither swaddled nor out of health, a child who lacks
nothing, is merely the result of habit or obstinacy. Such tears are no longer the work of nature, but the
work  of  the  child's  nurse,  who  could  not  resist  its  importunity  and  so  has  increased  it,  without
considering that while she quiets the child to-day she is teaching him to cry louder to-morrow.
  Moreover, when caprice or obstinacy is the cause of their tears, there is a sure way of stopping them
by distracting their attention by some pleasant or conspicuous object which makes them forget that they
want to cry. Most nurses excel in this art, and rightly used it is very useful; but it is of the utmost
importance that the child should not perceive that you mean to distract his attention, and that he should
be amused without suspecting you are thinking about him; now this is what most nurses cannot do.
  Most children are weaned too soon. The time to wean them is when they cut their teeth. This
generally causes pain and suffering. At this time the child instinctively carries everything he gets hold
of to his mouth to chew it. To help forward this process he is given as a plaything some hard object
such as ivory or a wolf's tooth. I think this is a mistake. Hard bodies applied to the gums do not soften
them; far from it, they make the process of cutting the teeth more difficult and painful. Let us always
take instinct as our guide; we never see puppies practising their budding teeth on pebbles, iron, or
bones, but on wood, leather, rags, soft materials which yield to their jaws, and on which the tooth
leaves its mark.
  We can do nothing simply, not even for our children. Toys of silver, gold, coral, cut crystal, rattles
of every price and kind; what vain and useless appliances. Away with them all! Let us have no corals or
rattles; a small branch of a tree with its leaves and fruit, a stick of liquorice which he may suck and
chew, will amuse him as well as these splendid trifles, and they will have this advantage at least, he will
not be brought up to luxury from his birth.
  It is admitted that pap is not a very wholesome food. Boiled milk and uncooked flour cause gravel
and do not suit the stomach. In pap the flour is less thoroughly cooked than in bread and it has not
fermented. I think bread and milk or rice-cream are better. If you will have pap, the flour should be
lightly cooked beforehand. In my own country they make a very pleasant and wholesome soup from
flour thus heated. Meat-broth or soup is not a very suitable food and should be used as little as possible.
The child must first get used to chewing his food; this is the right way to bring the teeth through, and
when the child begins to swallow, the saliva mixed with the food helps digestion.
I would have them first chew dried fruit or crusts. I should give them as playthings little bits of dry
bread or biscuits, like the Piedmont bread, known in the country as "grisses." By dint of softening this
bread in the mouth some of it is eventually swallowed the teeth come through of themselves, and the
child is weaned almost imperceptibly. Peasants have usually very good digestions, and they are weaned
with no more ado.
  From the very first children hear spoken language; we speak to them before they can understand or
even imitate spoken sounds. The vocal organs are still stiff, and only gradually lend themselves to the
reproduction of the sounds heard; it is even doubtful whether these sounds are heard distinctly as we
hear them. The nurse may amuse the child with songs and with very merry and varied intonation, but I
object to her bewildering the child with a multitude of vain words of which it understands nothing but
her tone of voice. I would have the first words he hears few in number, distinctly and often repeated,
while the words themselves should be related to things which can first be shown to the child. That fatal
facility in the use of words we do not understand begins earlier than we think. In the schoolroom the
scholar listens to the verbiage of his master as he listened in the cradle to the babble of his nurse. I thinkit would be a very useful education to leave him in ignorance of both.
  All sorts of ideas crowd in upon us when we try to consider the development of speech and the
child's  first  words.  Whatever  we  do  they  all  learn  to  talk  in  the  same  way,  and  all  philosophical
speculations are utterly useless.
  To begin with, they have, so to say, a grammar of their own, whose rules and syntax are more
general than our own; if you attend carefully you will be surprised to find how exactly they follow
certain analogies, very much mistaken if you like, but very regular; these forms are only objectionable
because of their harshness or because they are not recognised by custom. I have just heard a child
severely scolded by his father for saying, "Mon pere, irai-je-t-y?" Now we see that this child was
following the analogy more closely than our grammarians, for as they say to him, "Vas-y," why should
he not say, "Irai-je-t-y?" Notice too the skilful way in which he avoids the hiatus in irai-je-y or y-irai-
je? Is it the poor child's fault that we have so unskilfully deprived the phrase of this determinative
adverb "y," because we did not know what to do with it? It is an intolerable piece of pedantry and most
superfluous  attention  to  detail  to  make  a  point  of  correcting  all  children's  little  sins  against  the
customary expression, for they always cure themselves with time. Always speak correctly before them,
let  them  never  be  so  happy  with  any  one  as  with  you,  and  be  sure  that  their  speech  will  be
imperceptibly modelled upon yours without any correction on your part.
  But a much greater evil, and one far less easy to guard against, is that they are urged to speak too
much, as if people were afraid they would not learn to talk of themselves. This indiscreet zeal produces
an  effect  directly  opposite  to  what  is  meant.  They  speak  later  and  more  confusedly;  the  extreme
attention paid to everything they say makes it unnecessary for them to speak distinctly, and as they will
scarcely open their mouths, many of them contract a vicious pronunciation and a confused speech,
which last all their life and make them almost unintelligible.
I have lived much among peasants, and I never knew one of them lisp, man or woman, boy or girl.
Why is this? Are their speech organs differently made from our own? No, but they are differently used.
There is a hillock facing my window on which the children of the place assemble for their games.
Although they are far enough away, I can distinguish perfectly what they say, and often get good notes
for this book. Every day my ear deceives me as to their age. I hear the voices of children of ten; I look
and see the height and features of children of three or four. This experience is not confined to me; the
townspeople who come to see me, and whom I consult on this point, all fall into the same mistake.
  This results from the fact that, up to five or six, children in town, brought up in a room and under
the care of a nursery governess, do not need to speak above a whisper to make themselves heard. As
soon as their lips move people take pains to make out what they mean; they are taught words which
they repeat inaccurately, and by paying great attention to them the people who are always with them
rather guess what they meant to say than what they said.
  It is quite a different matter in the country. A peasant woman is not always with her child; he is
obliged to learn to say very clearly and loudly what he wants, if he is to make himself understood.
Children scattered about the fields at a distance from their fathers, mothers and other children, gain
practice in making themselves heard at a distance, and in adapting the loudness of the voice to the
distance which separates them from those to whom they want to speak. This is the real way to learn
pronunciation, not by stammering out a few vowels into the ear of an attentive governess. So when you
question a peasant child, he may be too shy to answer, but what he says he says distinctly, while the
nurse must serve as interpreter for the town child; without her one can understand nothing of what he is
muttering between his teeth. [Footnote: There are exceptions to this; and often those children who at
first are most difficult to hear, become the noisiest when they begin to raise their voices. But if I were
to enter into all these details I should never make an end; every sensible reader ought to see that defect
and excess, caused by the same abuse, are both corrected by my method. I regard the two maxims as
inseparable--always enough--never too much. When the first ii well established, the latter necessarily
follows on it.]
  As they grow older, the boys are supposed to be cured of this fault at college, the girls in theconvent schools; and indeed both usually speak more clearly than children brought up entirely at home.
But they are prevented from acquiring as clear a pronunciation as the peasants in this way--they are
required to learn all sorts of things by heart, and to repeat aloud what they have learnt; for when they
are studying they get into the way of gabbling and pronouncing carelessly and ill; it is still worse when
they repeat their lessons; they cannot find the right words, they drag out their syllables. This is only
possible  when  the  memory  hesitates,  the  tongue  does  not  stammer  of  itself.  Thus  they  acquire  or
continue habits of bad pronunciation. Later on you will see that Emile does not acquire such habits or at
least not from this cause.
I grant you uneducated people and villagers often fall into the opposite extreme. They almost
always speak too loud; their pronunciation is too exact, and leads to rough and coarse articulation; their
accent is too pronounced, they choose their expressions badly, etc.
  But, to begin with, this extreme strikes me as much less dangerous than the other, for the first law
of speech is to make oneself understood, and the chief fault is to fail to be understood. To pride
ourselves on having no accent is to pride ourselves on ridding our phrases of strength and elegance.
Emphasis is the soul of speech, it gives it its feeling and truth. Emphasis deceives less than words;
perhaps that is why well-educated people are so afraid of it. From the custom of saying everything in
the same tone has arisen that of poking fun at people without their knowing it. When emphasis is
proscribed, its place is taken by all sorts of ridiculous, affected, and ephemeral pronunciations, such as
one observes especially among the young people about court. It is this affectation of speech and manner
which makes Frenchmen disagreeable and repulsive to other nations on first acquaintance. Emphasis is
found, not in their speech, but in their bearing. That is not the way to make themselves attractive.
  All these little faults of speech, which you are so afraid the children will acquire, are mere trifles;
they may be prevented or corrected with the greatest ease, but the faults which are taught them when
you make them speak in a low, indistinct, and timid voice, when you are always criticising their tone
and finding fault with their words, are never cured. A man who has only learnt to speak in society of
fine ladies could not make himself heard at the head of his troops, and would make little impression on
the rabble in a riot. First teach the child to speak to men; he will be able to speak to the women when
required.
  Brought up in all the rustic simplicity of the country, your children will gain a more sonorous voice;
they will not acquire the hesitating stammer of town children, neither will they acquire the expressions
nor the tone of the villagers, or if they do they will easily lose them; their master being with them from
their earliest years, and more and more in their society the older they grow, will be able to prevent or
efface by speaking correctly himself the impression of the peasants' talk. Emile will speak the purest
French I know, but he will speak it more distinctly and with a better articulation than myself.
  The child who is trying to speak should hear nothing but words he can understand, nor should he
say words he cannot articulate; his efforts lead him to repeat the same syllable as if he were practising
its clear pronunciation. When he begins to stammer, do not try to understand him. To expect to be
always listened to is a form of tyranny which is not good for the child. See carefully to his real needs,
and let him try to make you understand the rest. Still less should you hurry him into speech; he will
learn to talk when he feels the want of it.
  It has indeed been remarked that those who begin to speak very late never speak so distinctly as
others; but it is not because they talked late that they are hesitating; on the contrary, they began to talk
late because they hesitate; if not, why did they begin to talk so late? Have they less need of speech,
have they been less urged to it? On the contrary, the anxiety aroused with the first suspicion of this
backwardness leads people to tease them much more to begin to talk than those who articulated earlier;
and this mistaken zeal may do much to make their speech confused, when with less haste they might
have had time to bring it to greater perfection.
  Children who are forced to speak too soon have no time to learn either to pronounce correctly or to
understand what they are made to say; while left to themselves they first practise the easiest syllables,
and then, adding to them little by little some meaning which their gestures explain, they teach you theirown words before they learn yours. By this means they do not acquire your words till they have
understood them. Being in no hurry to use them, they begin by carefully observing the sense in which
you use them, and when they are sure of them they adopt them.
  The worst evil resulting from the precocious use of speech by young children is that we not only
fail to understand the first words they use, we misunderstand them without knowing it; so that while
they seem to answer us correctly, they fail to understand us and we them. This is the most frequent
cause of our surprise at children's sayings; we attribute to them ideas which they did not attach to their
words. This lack of attention on our part to the real meaning which words have for children seems to
me the cause of their earliest misconceptions; and these misconceptions, even when corrected, colour
their whole course of thought for the rest of their life. I shall have several opportunities of illustrating
these by examples later on.
  Let the child's vocabulary, therefore, be limited; it is very undesirable that he should have more
words than ideas, that he should be able to say more than he thinks. One of the reasons why peasants
are generally shrewder than townsfolk is, I think, that their vocabulary is smaller. They have few ideas,
but those few are thoroughly grasped.
  The infant is progressing in several ways at once; he is learning to talk, eat, and walk about the
same time. This is really the first phase of his life. Up till now, he was little more than he was before
birth; he had neither feeling nor thought, he was barely capable of sensation; he was unconscious of his
own existence.
  "Vivit, et est vitae nescius ipse suae."--Ovid.
 
 
  BOOK II
  We have now reached the second phase of life; infancy, strictly so-called, is over; for the words
infans and puer are not synonymous. The latter includes the former, which means literally "one who
cannot speak;" thus Valerius speaks of puerum infantem. But I shall continue to use the word child
(French enfant) according to the custom of our language till an age for which there is another term.
  When children begin to talk they cry less. This progress is quite natural; one language supplants
another. As soon as they can say "It hurts me," why should they cry, unless the pain is too sharp for
words? If they still cry, those about them are to blame. When once Emile has said, "It hurts me," it will
take a very sharp pain to make him cry.
  If the child is delicate and sensitive, if by nature he begins to cry for nothing, I let him cry in vain
and soon check his tears at their source. So long as he cries I will not go near him; I come at once when
he leaves off crying. He will soon be quiet when he wants to call me, or rather he will utter a single cry.
Children learn the meaning of signs by their effects; they have no other meaning for them. However
much a child hurts himself when he is alone, he rarely cries, unless he expects to be heard.
  Should he fall or bump his head, or make his nose bleed, or cut his fingers, I shall show no alarm,
nor shall I make any fuss over him; I shall take no notice, at any rate at first. The harm is done; he must
bear it; all my zeal could only frighten him more and make him more nervous. Indeed it is not the blow
but the fear of it which distresses us when we are hurt. I shall spare him this suffering at least, for he
will certainly regard the injury as he sees me regard it; if he finds that I hasten anxiously to him, if I
pity him or comfort him, he will think he is badly hurt. If he finds I take no notice, he will soon recover
himself, and will think the wound is healed when it ceases to hurt. This is the time for his first lesson in
courage, and by bearing slight ills without fear we gradually learn to bear greater.
I shall not take pains to prevent Emile hurting himself; far from it, I should be vexed if he never
hurt himself, if he grew up unacquainted with pain. To bear pain is his first and most useful lesson. It
seems as if children were small and weak on purpose to teach them these valuable lessons without
danger. The child has such a little way to fall he will not break his leg; if he knocks himself with a stick
he will not break his arm; if he seizes a sharp knife he will not grasp it tight enough to make a deep
wound. So far as I know, no child, left to himself, has ever been known to kill or maim itself, or even todo itself any serious harm, unless it has been foolishly left on a high place, or alone near the fire, or
within reach of dangerous weapons. What is there to be said for all the paraphernalia with which the
child is surrounded to shield him on every side so that he grows up at the mercy of pain, with neither
courage nor experience, so that he thinks he is killed by a pin-prick and faints at the sight of blood?
  With our foolish and pedantic methods we are always preventing children from learning what they
could learn much better by themselves, while we neglect what we alone can teach them. Can anything
be sillier than the pains taken to teach them to walk, as if there were any one who was unable to walk
when he grows up through his nurse's neglect? How many we see walking badly all their life because
they were ill taught?
  Emile shall have no head-pads, no go-carts, no leading-strings; or at least as soon as he can put one
foot before another he shall only be supported along pavements, and he shall be taken quickly across
them. [Footnote: There is nothing so absurd and hesitating as the gait of those who have been kept too
long in leading-strings when they were little. This is one of the observations which are considered
trivial because they are true.] Instead of keeping him mewed up in a stuffy room, take him out into a
meadow every day; let him run about, let him struggle and fall again and again, the oftener the better;
he will learn all the sooner to pick himself up. The delights of liberty will make up for many bruises.
My pupil will hurt himself oftener than yours, but he will always be merry; your pupils may receive
fewer injuries, but they are always thwarted, constrained, and sad. I doubt whether they are any better
off.
  As their strength increases, children have also less need for tears. They can do more for themselves,
they need the help of others less frequently. With strength comes the sense to use it. It is with this
second phase that the real personal life has its beginning; it is then that the child becomes conscious of
himself. During every moment of his life memory calls up the feeling of self; he becomes really one
person, always the same, and therefore capable of joy or sorrow. Hence we must begin to consider him
as a moral being.
  Although we know approximately the limits of human life and our chances of attaining those limits,
nothing is more uncertain than the length of the life of any one of us. Very few reach old age. The chief
risks occur at the beginning of life; the shorter our past life, the less we must hope to live. Of all the
children who are born scarcely one half reach adolescence, and it is very likely your pupil will not live
to be a man.
  What is to be thought, therefore, of that cruel education which sacrifices the present to an uncertain
future, that burdens a child with all sorts of restrictions and begins by making him miserable, in order to
prepare him for some far-off happiness which he may never enjoy? Even if I considered that education
wise in its aims, how could I view without indignation those poor wretches subjected to an intolerable
slavery and condemned like galley-slaves to endless toil, with no certainty that they will gain anything
by it? The age of harmless mirth is spent in tears, punishments, threats, and slavery. You torment the
poor thing for his good; you fail to see that you are calling Death to snatch him from these gloomy
surroundings. Who can say how many children fall victims to the excessive care of their fathers and
mothers? They are happy to escape from this cruelty; this is all that they gain from the ills they are
forced to endure: they die without regretting, having known nothing of life but its sorrows.
  Men, be kind to your fellow-men; this is your first duty, kind to every age and station, kind to all
that  is  not  foreign  to  humanity.  What  wisdom  can  you  find  that  is  greater  than  kindness?  Love
childhood, indulge its sports, its pleasures, its delightful instincts. Who has not sometimes regretted that
age when laughter was ever on the lips, and when the heart was ever at peace? Why rob these innocents
of  the  joys  which  pass  so  quickly,  of  that  precious  gift  which  they  cannot  abuse?  Why  fill  with
bitterness the fleeting days of early childhood, days which will no more return for them than for you?
Fathers, can you tell when death will call your children to him? Do not lay up sorrow for yourselves by
robbing them of the short span which nature has allotted to them. As soon as they are aware of the joy
of life, let them rejoice in it, go that whenever God calls them they may not die without having tasted
the joy of life.  How people will cry out against me! I hear from afar the shouts of that false wisdom which is ever
dragging us onwards, counting the present as nothing, and pursuing without a pause a future which flies
as we pursue, that false wisdom which removes us from our place and never brings us to any other.
  Now is the time, you say, to correct his evil tendencies; we must increase suffering in childhood,
when it is less keenly felt, to lessen it in manhood. But how do you know that you can carry out all
these fine schemes; how do you know that all this fine teaching with which you overwhelm the feeble
mind of the child will not do him more harm than good in the future? How do you know that you can
spare him anything by the vexations you heap upon him now? Why inflict on him more ills than befit
his present condition unless you are quite sure that these present ills will save him future ill? And what
proof can you give me that those evil tendencies you profess to cure are not the result of your foolish
precautions rather than of nature? What a poor sort of foresight, to make a child wretched in the present
with the more or less doubtful hope of making him happy at some future day. If such blundering
thinkers fail to distinguish between liberty and licence, between a merry child and a spoilt darling, let
them learn to discriminate.
  Let us not forget what befits our present state in the pursuit of vain fancies. Mankind has its place in
the sequence of things; childhood has its place in the sequence of human life; the man must be treated
as a man and the child as a child. Give each his place, and keep him there. Control human passions
according to man's nature; that is all we can do for his welfare. The rest depends on external forces,
which are beyond our control.
  Absolute good and evil are unknown to us. In this life they are blended together; we never enjoy
any perfectly pure feeling, nor do we remain for more than a moment in the same state. The feelings of
our minds, like the changes in our bodies, are in a continual flux. Good and ill are common to all, but in
varying proportions. The happiest is he who suffers least; the most miserable is he who enjoys least.
Ever more sorrow than joy--this is the lot of all of us. Man's happiness in this world is but a negative
state; it must be reckoned by the fewness of his ills.
  Every feeling of hardship is inseparable from the desire to escape from it; every idea of pleasure
from the desire to enjoy it. All desire implies a want, and all wants are painful; hence our wretchedness
consists in the disproportion between our desires and our powers. A conscious being whose powers
were equal to his desires would be perfectly happy.
  What then is human wisdom? Where is the path of true happiness? The mere limitation of our
desires is not enough, for if they were less than our powers, part of our faculties would be idle, and we
should not enjoy our whole being; neither is the mere extension of our powers enough, for if our desires
were also increased we should only be the more miserable. True happiness consists in decreasing the
difference between our desires and our powers, in establishing a perfect equilibrium between the power
and the will. Then only, when all its forces are employed, will the soul be at rest and man will find
himself in his true position.
  In this condition, nature, who does everything for the best, has placed him from the first. To begin
with, she gives him only such desires as are necessary for self-preservation and such powers as are
sufficient for their satisfaction. All the rest she has stored in his mind as a sort of reserve, to be drawn
upon at need. It is only in this primitive condition that we find the equilibrium between desire and
power, and then alone man is not unhappy. As soon as his potential powers of mind begin to function,
imagination, more powerful than all the rest, awakes, and precedes all the rest. It is imagination which
enlarges the bounds of possibility for us, whether for good or ill, and therefore stimulates and feeds
desires by the hope of satisfying them. But the object which seemed within our grasp flies quicker than
we can follow; when we think we have grasped it, it transforms itself and is again far ahead of us. We
no longer perceive the country we have traversed, and we think nothing of it; that which lies before us
becomes vaster and stretches still before us. Thus we exhaust our strength, yet never reach our goal,
and the nearer we are to pleasure, the further we are from happiness.
  On the other hand, the more nearly a man's condition approximates to this state of nature the less
difference is there between his desires and his powers, and happiness is therefore less remote. Lackingeverything, he is never less miserable; for misery consists, not in the lack of things, but in the needs
which they inspire.
  The world of reality has its bounds, the world of imagination is boundless; as we cannot enlarge the
one, let us restrict the other; for all the sufferings which really make us miserable arise from the
difference between the real and the imaginary. Health, strength, and a good conscience excepted, all the
good things of life are a matter of opinion; except bodily suffering and remorse, all our woes are
imaginary.  You  will  tell  me  this  is  a  commonplace;  I  admit  it,  but  its  practical  application  is  no
commonplace, and it is with practice only that we are now concerned.
  What do you mean when you say, "Man is weak"? The term weak implies a relation, a relation of
the creature to whom it is applied. An insect or a worm whose strength exceeds its needs is strong; an
elephant, a lion, a conqueror, a hero, a god himself, whose needs exceed his strength is weak. The
rebellious angel who fought against his own nature was weaker than the happy mortal who is living at
peace according to nature. When man is content to be himself he is strong indeed; when he strives to be
more than man he is weak indeed. But do not imagine that you can increase your strength by increasing
your powers. Not so; if your pride increases more rapidly your strength is diminished. Let us measure
the extent of our sphere and remain in its centre like the spider in its web; we shall have strength
sufficient for our needs, we shall have no cause to lament our weakness, for we shall never be aware of
it.
  The other animals possess only such powers as are required for self-preservation; man alone has
more. Is it not very strange that this superfluity should make him miserable? In every land a man's
labour yields more than a bare living. If he were wise enough to disregard this surplus he would always
have enough, for he would never have too much. "Great needs," said Favorin, "spring from great
wealth; and often the best way of getting what we want is to get rid of what we have." By striving to
increase our happiness we change it into wretchedness. If a man were content to live, he would live
happy; and he would therefore be good, for what would he have to gain by vice?
  If we were immortal we should all be miserable; no doubt it is hard to die, but it is sweet to think
that we shall not live for ever, and that a better life will put an end to the sorrows of this world. If we
had  the  offer  of  immortality  here  below,  who  would  accept  the  sorrowful  gift?  [Footnote:  You
understand I am speaking of those who think, and not of the crowd.] What resources, what hopes, what
consolation would be left against the cruelties of fate and man's injustice? The ignorant man never
looks before; he knows little of the value of life and does not fear to lose it; the wise man sees things of
greater worth and prefers them to it. Half knowledge and sham wisdom set us thinking about death and
what lies beyond it; and they thus create the worst of our ills. The wise man bears life's ills all the better
because he knows he must die. Life would be too dearly bought did we not know that sooner or later
death will end it.
  Our moral ills are the result of prejudice, crime alone excepted, and that depends on ourselves; our
bodily ills either put an end to themselves or to us. Time or death will cure them, but the less we know
how to bear it, the greater is our pain, and we suffer more in our efforts to cure our diseases than if we
endured them. Live according to nature; be patient, get rid of the doctors; you will not escape death, but
you will only die once, while the doctors make you die daily through your diseased imagination; their
lying art, instead of prolonging your days, robs you of all delight in them. I am always asking what real
good this art has done to mankind. True, the doctors cure some who would have died, but they kill
millions who would have lived. If you are wise you will decline to take part in this lottery when the
odds are so great against you. Suffer, die, or get better; but whatever you do, live while you are alive.
  Human institutions are one mass of folly and contradiction. As our life loses its value we set a
higher price upon it. The old regret life more than the young; they do not want to lose all they have
spent in preparing for its enjoyment. At sixty it is cruel to die when one has not begun to live. Man is
credited with a strong desire for self-preservation, and this desire exists; but we fail to perceive that this
desire, as felt by us, is largely the work of man. In a natural state man is only eager to preserve his life
while he has the means for its preservation; when self-preservation is no longer possible, he resignshimself to his fate and dies without vain torments. Nature teaches us the first law of resignation.
Savages, like wild beasts, make very little struggle against death, and meet it almost without a murmur.
When  this  natural  law  is  overthrown  reason  establishes  another,  but  few  discern  it,  and  man's
resignation is never so complete as nature's.
  Prudence! Prudence which is ever bidding us look forward into the future, a future which in many
cases we shall never reach; here is the real source of all our troubles! How mad it is for so short-lived a
creature as man to look forward into a future to which he rarely attains, while he neglects the present
which is his? This madness is all the more fatal since it increases with years, and the old, always timid,
prudent, and miserly, prefer to do without necessaries to-day that they may have luxuries at a hundred.
Thus we grasp everything, we cling to everything; we are anxious about time, place, people, things, all
that is and will be; we ourselves are but the least part of ourselves. We spread ourselves, so to speak,
over the whole world, and all this vast expanse becomes sensitive. No wonder our woes increase when
we may be wounded on every side. How many princes make themselves miserable for the loss of lands
they never saw, and how many merchants lament in Paris over some misfortune in the Indies!
  Is it nature that carries men so far from their real selves? Is it her will that each should learn his fate
from others and even be the last to learn it; so that a man dies happy or miserable before he knows what
he is about. There is a healthy, cheerful, strong, and vigorous man; it does me good to see him; his eyes
tell of content and well-being; he is the picture of happiness. A letter comes by post; the happy man
glances at it, it is addressed to him, he opens it and reads it. In a moment he is changed, he turns pale
and falls into a swoon. When he comes to himself he weeps, laments, and groans, he tears his hair, and
his shrieks re-echo through the air. You would say he was in convulsions. Fool, what harm has this bit
of paper done you? What limb has it torn away? What crime has it made you commit? What change has
it wrought in you to reduce you to this state of misery?
  Had the letter miscarried, had some kindly hand thrown it into the fire, it strikes me that the fate of
this mortal, at once happy and unhappy, would have offered us a strange problem. His misfortunes, you
say, were real enough. Granted; but he did not feel them. What of that? His happiness was imaginary. I
admit it; health, wealth, a contented spirit, are mere dreams. We no longer live in our own place, we
live outside it. What does it profit us to live in such fear of death, when all that makes life worth living
is our own?
  Oh, man! live your own life and you will no longer be wretched. Keep to your appointed place in
the order of nature and nothing can tear you from it. Do not kick against the stern law of necessity, nor
waste  in  vain  resistance  the  strength  bestowed  on  you  by  heaven,  not  to  prolong  or  extend  your
existence, but to preserve it so far and so long as heaven pleases. Your freedom and your power extend
as far and no further than your natural strength; anything more is but slavery, deceit, and trickery.
Power itself is servile when it depends upon public opinion; for you are dependent on the prejudices of
others when you rule them by means of those prejudices. To lead them as you will, they must be led as
they will. They have only to change their way of thinking and you are forced to change your course of
action. Those who approach you need only contrive to sway the opinions of those you rule, or of the
favourite  by  whom  you  are  ruled,  or  those  of  your  own  family  or  theirs.  Had  you  the  genius  of
Themistocles, [Footnote: "You see that little boy," said Themistocles to his friends, "the fate of Greece
is in his hands, for he rules his mother and his mother rules me, I rule the Athenians and the Athenians
rule the Greeks." What petty creatures we should often find controlling great empires if we traced the
course of power from the prince to those who secretly put that power in motion.] viziers, courtiers,
priests, soldiers, servants, babblers, the very children themselves, would lead you like a child in the
midst of your legions. Whatever you do, your actual authority can never extend beyond your own
powers. As soon as you are obliged to see with another's eyes you must will what he wills. You say
with pride, "My people are my subjects." Granted, but what are you? The subject of your ministers.
And your ministers, what are they? The subjects of their clerks, their mistresses, the servants of their
servants. Grasp all, usurp all, and then pour out your silver with both hands; set up your batteries, raise
the gallows and the wheel; make laws, issue proclamations, multiply your spies, your soldiers, yourhangmen, your prisons, and your chains. Poor little men, what good does it do you? You will be no
better served, you will be none the less robbed and deceived, you will be no nearer absolute power.
You will say continually, "It is our will," and you will continually do the will of others.
  There is only one man who gets his own way--he who can get it single-handed; therefore freedom,
not power, is the greatest good. That man is truly free who desires what he is able to perform, and does
what he desires. This is my fundamental maxim. Apply it to childhood, and all the rules of education
spring from it.
  Society has enfeebled man, not merely by robbing him of the right to his own strength, but still
more by making his strength insufficient for his needs. This is why his desires increase in proportion to
his weakness; and this is why the child is weaker than the man. If a man is strong and a child is weak it
is not because the strength of the one is absolutely greater than the strength of the other, but because the
one can naturally provide for himself and the other cannot. Thus the man will have more desires and
the child more caprices, a word which means, I take it, desires which are not true needs, desires which
can only be satisfied with the help of others.
I have already given the reason for this state of weakness. Parental affection is nature's provision
against it; but parental affection may be carried to excess, it may be wanting, or it may be ill applied.
Parents who live under our ordinary social conditions bring their child into these conditions too soon.
By increasing his needs they do not relieve his weakness; they rather increase it. They further increase
it by demanding of him what nature does not demand, by subjecting to their will what little strength he
has to further his own wishes, by making slaves of themselves or of him instead of recognising that
mutual dependence which should result from his weakness or their affection.
  The wise man can keep his own place; but the child who does not know what his place is, is unable
to keep it. There are a thousand ways out of it, and it is the business of those who have charge of the
child to keep him in his place, and this is no easy task. He should be neither beast nor man, but a child.
He must feel his weakness, but not suffer through it; he must be dependent, but he must not obey; he
must ask, not command. He is only subject to others because of his needs, and because they see better
than he what he really needs, what may help or hinder his existence. No one, not even his father, has
the right to bid the child do what is of no use to him.
  When  our  natural  tendencies  have  not  been  interfered  with  by  human  prejudice  and  human
institutions, the happiness alike of children and of men consists in the enjoyment of their liberty. But
the child's liberty is restricted by his lack of strength. He who does as he likes is happy provided he is
self-sufficing; it is so with the man who is living in a state of nature. He who does what he likes is not
happy if his desires exceed his strength; it is so with a child in like conditions. Even in a state of nature
children only enjoy an imperfect liberty, like that enjoyed by men in social life. Each of us, unable to
dispense with the help of others, becomes so far weak and wretched. We were meant to be men, laws
and customs thrust us back into infancy. The rich and great, the very kings themselves are but children;
they see that we are ready to relieve their misery; this makes them childishly vain, and they are quite
proud of the care bestowed on them, a care which they would never get if they were grown men.
  These are weighty considerations, and they provide a solution for all the conflicting problems of our
social system. There are two kinds of dependence: dependence on things, which is the work of nature;
and dependence on men, which is the work of society. Dependence on things, being non-moral, does no
injury  to  liberty  and  begets  no  vices;  dependence  on  men,  being  out  of  order,  [Footnote:  In  my
PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL LAW it is proved that no private will can be ordered in the social
system.] gives rise to every kind of vice, and through this master and slave become mutually depraved.
If there is any cure for this social evil, it is to be found in the substitution of law for the individual; in
arming the general will with a real strength beyond the power of any individual will. If the laws of
nations, like the laws of nature, could never be broken by any human power, dependence on men would
become dependence on things; all the advantages of a state of nature would be combined with all the
advantages of social life in the commonwealth. The liberty which preserves a man from vice would be
united with the morality which raises him to virtue.  Keep the child dependent on things only. By this course of education you will have followed the
order of nature. Let his unreasonable wishes meet with physical obstacles only, or the punishment
which results from his own actions, lessons which will be recalled when the same circumstances occur
again. It is enough to prevent him from wrong doing without forbidding him to do wrong. Experience
or lack of power should take the place of law. Give him, not what he wants, but what he needs. Let
there be no question of obedience for him or tyranny for you. Supply the strength he lacks just so far as
is required for freedom, not for power, so that he may receive your services with a sort of shame, and
look forward to the time when he may dispense with them and may achieve the honour of self-help.
  Nature provides for the child's growth in her own fashion, and this should never be thwarted. Do
not make him sit still when he wants to run about, nor run when he wants to be quiet. If we did not
spoil our children's wills by our blunders their desires would be free from caprice. Let them run, jump,
and shout to their heart's content. All their own activities are instincts of the body for its growth in
strength;  but  you  should  regard  with  suspicion  those  wishes  which  they  cannot  carry  out  for
themselves, those which others must carry out for them. Then you must distinguish carefully between
natural and artificial needs, between the needs of budding caprice and the needs which spring from the
overflowing life just described.
I have already told you what you ought to do when a child cries for this thing or that. I will only add
that as soon as he has words to ask for what he wants and accompanies his demands with tears, either to
get his own way quicker or to over-ride a refusal, he should never have his way. If his words were
prompted by a real need you should recognise it and satisfy it at once; but to yield to his tears is to
encourage him to cry, to teach him to doubt your kindness, and to think that you are influenced more by
his importunity than your own good-will. If he does not think you kind he will soon think you unkind;
if he thinks you weak he will soon become obstinate; what you mean to give must be given at once. Be
chary of refusing, but, having refused, do not change your mind.
  Above all, beware of teaching the child empty phrases of politeness, which serve as spells to subdue
those around him to his will, and to get him what he wants at once. The artificial education of the rich
never fails to make them politely imperious, by teaching them the words to use so that no one will dare
to resist them. Their children have neither the tone nor the manner of suppliants; they are as haughty or
even more haughty in their entreaties than in their commands, as though they were more certain to be
obeyed. You see at once that "If you please" means "It pleases me," and "I beg" means "I command."
What a fine sort of politeness which only succeeds in changing the meaning of words so that every
word is a command! For my own part, I would rather Emile were rude than haughty, that he should say
"Do this" as a request, rather than "Please" as a command. What concerns me is his meaning, not his
words.
  There is such a thing as excessive severity as well as excessive indulgence, and both alike should be
avoided. If you let children suffer you risk their health and life; you make them miserable now; if you
take too much pains to spare them every kind of uneasiness you are laying up much misery for them in
the future; you are making them delicate and over-sensitive; you are taking them out of their place
among men, a place to which they must sooner or later return, in spite of all your pains. You will say I
am  falling  into  the  same  mistake  as  those  bad  fathers  whom  I  blamed  for  sacrificing  the  present
happiness of their children to a future which may never be theirs.
  Not so; for the liberty I give my pupil makes up for the slight hardships to which he is exposed. I
see little fellows playing in the snow, stiff and blue with cold, scarcely able to stir a finger. They could
go and warm themselves if they chose, but they do not choose; if you forced them to come in they
would feel the harshness of constraint a hundredfold more than the sharpness of the cold. Then what
becomes of your grievance? Shall I make your child miserable by exposing him to hardships which he
is perfectly ready to endure? I secure his present good by leaving him his freedom, and his future good
by arming him against the evils he will have to bear. If he had his choice, would he hesitate for a
moment between you and me?
  Do you think any man can find true happiness elsewhere than in his natural state; and when you tryto spare him all suffering, are you not taking him out of his natural state? Indeed I maintain that to
enjoy great happiness he must experience slight ills; such is his nature. Too much bodily prosperity
corrupts the morals. A man who knew nothing of suffering would be incapable of tenderness towards
his fellow-creatures and ignorant of the joys of pity; he would be hard-hearted, unsocial, a very monster
among men.
  Do you know the surest way to make your child miserable? Let him have everything he wants; for
as his wants increase in proportion to the ease with which they are satisfied, you will be compelled,
sooner or later, to refuse his demands, and this unlooked-for refusal will hurt him more than the lack of
what he wants. He will want your stick first, then your watch, the bird that flies, or the star that shines
above him. He will want all he sets eyes on, and unless you were God himself, how could you satisfy
him?
  Man naturally considers all that he can get as his own. In this sense Hobbes' theory is true to a
certain extent: Multiply both our wishes and the means of satisfying them, and each will be master of
all.  Thus  the  child,  who  has  only  to  ask  and  have,  thinks  himself  the  master  of  the  universe;  he
considers all men as his slaves; and when you are at last compelled to refuse, he takes your refusal as an
act of rebellion, for he thinks he has only to command. All the reasons you give him, while he is still
too young to reason, are so many pretences in his eyes; they seem to him only unkindness; the sense of
injustice embitters his disposition; he hates every one. Though he has never felt grateful for kindness,
he resents all opposition.
  How should I suppose that such a child can ever be happy? He is the slave of anger, a prey to the
fiercest passions. Happy! He is a tyrant, at once the basest of slaves and the most wretched of creatures.
I have known children brought up like this who expected you to knock the house down, to give them
the weather-cock on the steeple, to stop a regiment on the march so that they might listen to the band;
when they could not get their way they screamed and cried and would pay no attention to any one. In
vain everybody strove to please them; as their desires were stimulated by the ease with which they got
their  own  way,  they  set  their  hearts  on  impossibilities,  and  found  themselves  face  to  face  with
opposition and difficulty, pain and grief. Scolding, sulking, or in a rage, they wept and cried all day.
Were they really so greatly favoured? Weakness, combined with love of power, produces nothing but
folly and suffering. One spoilt child beats the table; another whips the sea. They may beat and whip
long enough before they find contentment.
  If their childhood is made wretched by these notions of power and tyranny, what of their manhood,
when  their  relations  with  their  fellow-men  begin  to  grow  and  multiply?  They  are  used  to  find
everything give way to them; what a painful surprise to enter society and meet with opposition on every
side, to be crushed beneath the weight of a universe which they expected to move at will. Their insolent
manners, their childish vanity, only draw down upon them mortification, scorn, and mockery; they
swallow insults like water; sharp experience soon teaches them that they have realised neither their
position nor their strength. As they cannot do everything, they think they can do nothing. They are
daunted by unexpected obstacles, degraded by the scorn of men; they become base, cowardly, and
deceitful, and fall as far below their true level as they formerly soared above it.
  Let us come back to the primitive law. Nature has made children helpless and in need of affection;
did she make them to be obeyed and feared? Has she given them an imposing manner, a stern eye, a
loud and threatening voice with which to make themselves feared? I understand how the roaring of the
lion strikes terror into the other beasts, so that they tremble when they behold his terrible mane, but of
all unseemly, hateful, and ridiculous sights, was there ever anything like a body of statesmen in their
robes of office with their chief at their head bowing down before a swaddled babe, addressing him in
pompous phrases, while he cries and slavers in reply?
  If we consider childhood itself, is there anything so weak and wretched as a child, anything so
utterly at the mercy of those about it, so dependent on their pity, their care, and their affection? Does it
not seem as if his gentle face and touching appearance were intended to interest every one on behalf of
his weakness and to make them eager to help him? And what is there more offensive, more unsuitable,than the sight of a sulky or imperious child, who commands those about him, and impudently assumes
the tones of a master towards those without whom he would perish?
  On the other hand, do you not see how children are fettered by the weakness of infancy? Do you not
see how cruel it is to increase this servitude by obedience to our caprices, by depriving them of such
liberty as they have? a liberty which they can scarcely abuse, a liberty the loss of which will do so little
good to them or us. If there is nothing more ridiculous than a haughty child, there is nothing that claims
our pity like a timid child. With the age of reason the child becomes the slave of the community; then
why forestall this by slavery in the home? Let this brief hour of life be free from a yoke which nature
has not laid upon it; leave the child the use of his natural liberty, which, for a time at least, secures him
from the vices of the slave. Bring me those harsh masters, and those fathers who are the slaves of their
children, bring them both with their frivolous objections, and before they boast of their own methods let
them for once learn the method of nature.
I return to practical matters. I have already said your child must not get what he asks, but what he
needs; [Footnote: We must recognise that pain is often necessary, pleasure is sometimes needed. So
there is only one of the child's desires which should never be complied with, the desire for power.
Hence, whenever they ask for anything we must pay special attention to their motive in asking. As far
as  possible  give  them  everything  they  ask  for,  provided  it  can  really  give  them  pleasure;  refuse
everything they demand from mere caprice or love of power.] he must never act from obedience, but
from necessity.
  The very words OBEY and COMMAND will be excluded from his vocabulary, still more those of
DUTY and OBLIGATION; but the words strength, necessity, weakness, and constraint must have a
large place in it. Before the age of reason it is impossible to form any idea of moral beings or social
relations; so avoid, as far as may be, the use of words which express these ideas, lest the child at an
early age should attach wrong ideas to them, ideas which you cannot or will not destroy when he is
older. The first mistaken idea he gets into his head is the germ of error and vice; it is the first step that
needs watching. Act in such a way that while he only notices external objects his ideas are confined to
sensations; let him only see the physical world around him. If not, you may be sure that either he will
pay no heed to you at all, or he will form fantastic ideas of the moral world of which you prate, ideas
which you will never efface as long as he lives.
  "Reason with children" was Locke's chief maxim; it is in the height of fashion at present, and I
hardly think it is justified by its results; those children who have been constantly reasoned with strike
me as exceedingly silly. Of all man's faculties, reason, which is, so to speak, compounded of all the
rest, is the last and choicest growth, and it is this you would use for the child's early training. To make a
man reasonable is the coping stone of a good education, and yet you profess to train a child through his
reason! You begin at the wrong end, you make the end the means. If children understood reason they
would not need education, but by talking to them from their earliest age in a language they do not
understand you accustom them to be satisfied with words, to question all that is said to them, to think
themselves as wise as their teachers; you train them to be argumentative and rebellious; and whatever
you think you gain from motives of reason, you really gain from greediness, fear, or vanity with which
you are obliged to reinforce your reasoning.
  Most of the moral lessons which are and can be given to children may be reduced to this formula;
Master. You must not do that.
  Child. Why not?
  Master. Because it is wrong.
  Child. Wrong! What is wrong?
  Master. What is forbidden you.
  Child. Why is it wrong to do what is forbidden?
  Master. You will be punished for disobedience.
  Child. I will do it when no one is looking.
  Master. We shall watch you.  Child. I will hide.
  Master. We shall ask you what you were doing.
  Child. I shall tell a lie.
  Master. You must not tell lies.
  Child. Why must not I tell lies?
  Master. Because it is wrong, etc.
  That is the inevitable circle. Go beyond it, and the child will not understand you. What sort of use is
there in such teaching? I should greatly like to know what you would substitute for this dialogue. It
would have puzzled Locke himself. It is no part of a child's business to know right and wrong, to
perceive the reason for a man's duties.
  Nature would have them children before they are men. If we try to invert this order we shall
produce a forced fruit immature and flavourless, fruit which will be rotten before it is ripe; we shall
have young doctors and old children. Childhood has its own ways of seeing, thinking, and feeling;
nothing is more foolish than to try and substitute our ways; and I should no more expect judgment in a
ten-year-old child than I should expect him to be five feet high. Indeed, what use would reason be to
him at that age? It is the curb of strength, and the child does not need the curb.
  When  you  try  to  persuade  your  scholars  of  the  duty  of  obedience,  you  add  to  this  so-called
persuasion  compulsion  and  threats,  or  still  worse,  flattery  and  bribes.  Attracted  by  selfishness  or
constrained  by  force,  they  pretend  to  be  convinced  by  reason.  They  see  as  soon  as  you  do  that
obedience  is  to  their  advantage  and  disobedience  to  their  disadvantage.  But  as  you  only  demand
disagreeable things of them, and as it is always disagreeable to do another's will, they hide themselves
so that they may do as they please, persuaded that they are doing no wrong so long as they are not
found out, but ready, if found out, to own themselves in the wrong for fear of worse evils. The reason
for duty is beyond their age, and there is not a man in the world who could make them really aware of
it; but the fear of punishment, the hope of forgiveness, importunity, the difficulty of answering, wrings
from them as many confessions as you want; and you think you have convinced them when you have
only wearied or frightened them.
  What  does  it  all  come  to?  In  the  first  place,  by  imposing  on  them  a  duty  which  they  fail  to
recognise, you make them disinclined to submit to your tyranny, and you turn away their love; you
teach  them  deceit,  falsehood,  and  lying  as  a  way  to  gain  rewards  or  escape  punishment;  then  by
accustoming them to conceal a secret motive under the cloak of an apparent one, you yourself put into
their hands the means of deceiving you, of depriving you of a knowledge of their real character, of
answering you and others with empty words whenever they have the chance. Laws, you say, though
binding on conscience, exercise the same constraint over grown-up men. That is so, but what are these
men but children spoilt by education? This is just what you should avoid. Use force with children and
reasoning with men; this is the natural order; the wise man needs no laws.
  Treat your scholar according to his age. Put him in his place from the first, and keep him in it, so
that he no longer tries to leave it. Then before he knows what goodness is, he will be practising its chief
lesson. Give him no orders at all, absolutely none. Do not even let him think that you claim any
authority over him. Let him only know that he is weak and you are strong, that his condition and yours
puts him at your mercy; let this be perceived, learned, and felt. Let him early find upon his proud neck,
the heavy yoke which nature has imposed upon us, the heavy yoke of necessity, under which every
finite being must bow. Let him find this necessity in things, not in the caprices [Footnote: You may be
sure the child will regard as caprice any will which opposes his own or any will which he does not
understand. Now the child does not understand anything which interferes with his own fancies.] of
man; let the curb be force, not authority. If there is something he should not do, do not forbid him, but
prevent him without explanation or reasoning; what you give him, give it at his first word without
prayers or entreaties, above all without conditions. Give willingly, refuse unwillingly, but let your
refusal be irrevocable; let no entreaties move you; let your "No," once uttered, be a wall of brass,
against which the child may exhaust his strength some five or six times, but in the end he will try nomore to overthrow it.
  Thus you will make him patient, equable, calm, and resigned, even when he does not get all he
wants; for it is in man's nature to bear patiently with the nature of things, but not with the ill-will of
another. A child never rebels against, "There is none left," unless he thinks the reply is false. Moreover,
there is no middle course; you must either make no demands on him at all, or else you must fashion
him to perfect obedience. The worst education of all is to leave him hesitating between his own will and
yours, constantly disputing whether you or he is master; I would rather a hundred times that he were
master.
  It is very strange that ever since people began to think about education they should have hit upon no
other way of guiding children than emulation, jealousy, envy, vanity, greediness, base cowardice, all
the most dangerous passions, passions ever ready to ferment, ever prepared to corrupt the soul even
before the body is full-grown. With every piece of precocious instruction which you try to force into
their minds you plant a vice in the depths of their hearts; foolish teachers think they are doing wonders
when they are making their scholars wicked in order to teach them what goodness is, and then they tell
us seriously, "Such is man." Yes, such is man, as you have made him. Every means has been tried
except one, the very one which might succeed--well-regulated liberty. Do not undertake to bring up a
child if you cannot guide him merely by the laws of what can or cannot be. The limits of the possible
and the impossible are alike unknown to him, so they can be extended or contracted around him at your
will. Without a murmur he is restrained, urged on, held back, by the hands of necessity alone; he is
made adaptable and teachable by the mere force of things, without any chance for vice to spring up in
him; for passions do not arise so long as they have accomplished nothing.
  Give your scholar no verbal lessons; he should be taught by experience alone; never punish him, for
he does not know what it is to do wrong; never make him say, "Forgive me," for he does not know how
to do you wrong. Wholly unmoral in his actions, he can do nothing morally wrong, and he deserves
neither punishment nor reproof.
  Already I see the frightened reader comparing this child with those of our time; he is mistaken. The
perpetual restraint imposed upon your scholars stimulates their activity; the more subdued they are in
your presence, the more boisterous they are as soon as they are out of your sight. They must make
amends to themselves in some way or other for the harsh constraint to which you subject them. Two
schoolboys from the town will do more damage in the country than all the children of the village. Shut
up  a  young  gentleman  and  a  young  peasant  in  a  room;  the  former  will  have  upset  and  smashed
everything before the latter has stirred from his place. Why is that, unless that the one hastens to misuse
a moment's licence, while the other, always sure of freedom, does not use it rashly. And yet the village
children, often flattered or constrained, are still very far from the state in which I would have them kept.
  Let us lay it down as an incontrovertible rule that the first impulses of nature are always right; there
is no original sin in the human heart, the how and why of the entrance of every vice can be traced. The
only natural passion is self-love or selfishness taken in a wider sense. This selfishness is good in itself
and in relation to ourselves; and as the child has no necessary relations to other people he is naturally
indifferent to them; his self-love only becomes good or bad by the use made of it and the relations
established by its means. Until the time is ripe for the appearance of reason, that guide of selfishness,
the main thing is that the child shall do nothing because you are watching him or listening to him; in a
word, nothing because of other people, but only what nature asks of him; then he will never do wrong.
I do not mean to say that he will never do any mischief, never hurt himself, never break a costly
ornament if you leave it within his reach. He might do much damage without doing wrong, since
wrong-doing depends on the harmful intention which will never be his. If once he meant to do harm,
his whole education would be ruined; he would be almost hopelessly bad.
  Greed considers some things wrong which are not wrong in the eyes of reason. When you leave free
scope to a child's heedlessness, you must put anything he could spoil out of his way, and leave nothing
fragile or costly within his reach. Let the room be furnished with plain and solid furniture; no mirrors,
china, or useless ornaments. My pupil Emile, who is brought up in the country, shall have a room justlike a peasant's. Why take such pains to adorn it when he will be so little in it? I am mistaken, however;
he will ornament it for himself, and we shall soon see how.
  But if, in spite of your precautions, the child contrives to do some damage, if he breaks some useful
article, do not punish him for your carelessness, do not even scold him; let him hear no word of
reproval, do not even let him see that he has vexed you; behave just as if the thing had come to pieces
of itself; you may consider you have done great things if you have managed to hold your tongue.
  May  I  venture  at  this  point  to  state  the  greatest,  the  most  important,  the  most  useful  rule  of
education? It is: Do not save time, but lose it. I hope that every-day readers will excuse my paradoxes;
you cannot avoid paradox if you think for yourself, and whatever you may say I would rather fall into
paradox than into prejudice. The most dangerous period in human life lies between birth and the age of
twelve. It is the time when errors and vices spring up, while as yet there is no means to destroy them;
when the means of destruction are ready, the roots have gone too deep to be pulled up. If the infant
sprang at one bound from its mother's breast to the age of reason, the present type of education would
be quite suitable, but its natural growth calls for quite a different training. The mind should be left
undisturbed till its faculties have developed; for while it is blind it cannot see the torch you offer it, nor
can it follow through the vast expanse of ideas a path so faintly traced by reason that the best eyes can
scarcely follow it.
  Therefore the education of the earliest years should be merely negative. It consists, not in teaching
virtue or truth, but in preserving the heart from vice and from the spirit of error. If only you could let
well alone, and get others to follow your example; if you could bring your scholar to the age of twelve
strong and healthy, but unable to tell his right hand from his left, the eyes of his understanding would
be open to reason as soon as you began to teach him. Free from prejudices and free from habits, there
would be nothing in him to counteract the effects of your labours. In your hands he would soon become
the wisest of men; by doing nothing to begin with, you would end with a prodigy of education.
  Reverse the usual practice and you will almost always do right. Fathers and teachers who want to
make the child, not a child but a man of learning, think it never too soon to scold, correct, reprove,
threaten, bribe, teach, and reason. Do better than they; be reasonable, and do not reason with your
pupil,  more  especially  do  not  try  to  make  him  approve  what  he  dislikes;  for  if  reason  is  always
connected with disagreeable matters, you make it distasteful to him, you discredit it at an early age in a
mind not yet ready to understand it. Exercise his body, his limbs, his senses, his strength, but keep his
mind idle as long as you can. Distrust all opinions which appear before the judgment to discriminate
between them. Restrain and ward off strange impressions; and to prevent the birth of evil do not hasten
to do well, for goodness is only possible when enlightened by reason. Regard all delays as so much
time gained; you have achieved much, you approach the boundary without loss. Leave childhood to
ripen in your children. In a word, beware of giving anything they need to-day if it can be deferred
without danger to to-morrow.
  There is another point to be considered which confirms the suitability of this method: it is the
child's  individual  bent,  which  must  be  thoroughly  known  before  we  can  choose  the  fittest  moral
training. Every mind has its own form, in accordance with which it must be controlled; and the success
of the pains taken depends largely on the fact that he is controlled in this way and no other. Oh, wise
man, take time to observe nature; watch your scholar well before you say a word to him; first leave the
germ of his character free to show itself, do not constrain him in anything, the better to see him as he
really is. Do you think this time of liberty is wasted? On the contrary, your scholar will be the better
employed, for this is the way you yourself will learn not to lose a single moment when time is of more
value. If, however, you begin to act before you know what to do, you act at random; you may make
mistakes, and must retrace your steps; your haste to reach your goal will only take you further from it.
Do not imitate the miser who loses much lest he should lose a little. Sacrifice a little time in early
childhood, and it will be repaid you with usury when your scholar is older. The wise physician does not
hastily  give  prescriptions  at  first  sight,  but  he  studies  the  constitution  of  the  sick  man  before  he
prescribes anything; the treatment is begun later, but the patient is cured, while the hasty doctor killshim.
  But where shall we find a place for our child so as to bring him up as a senseless being, an
automaton? Shall we keep him in the moon, or on a desert island? Shall we remove him from human
society? Will he not always have around him the sight and the pattern of the passions of other people?
Will he never see children of his own age? Will he not see his parents, his neighbours, his nurse, his
governess, his man-servant, his tutor himself, who after all will not be an angel? Here we have a real
and serious objection. But did I tell you that an education according to nature would be an easy task?
Oh, men! is it my fault that you have made all good things difficult? I admit that I am aware of these
difficulties; perhaps they are insuperable; but nevertheless it is certain that we do to some extent avoid
them by trying to do so. I am showing what we should try to attain, I do not say we can attain it, but I
do say that whoever comes nearest to it is nearest to success.
  Remember you must be a man yourself before you try to train a man; you yourself must set the
pattern he shall copy. While the child is still unconscious there is time to prepare his surroundings, so
that nothing shall strike his eye but what is fit for his sight. Gain the respect of every one, begin to win
their hearts, so that they may try to please you. You will not be master of the child if you cannot control
every  one  about  him;  and  this  authority  will  never  suffice  unless  it  rests  upon  respect  for  your
goodness. There is no question of squandering one's means and giving money right and left; I never
knew money win love. You must neither be harsh nor niggardly, nor must you merely pity misery when
you can relieve it; but in vain will you open your purse if you do not open your heart along with it, the
hearts of others will always be closed to you. You must give your own time, attention, affection, your
very self; for whatever you do, people always perceive that your money is not you. There are proofs of
kindly interest which produce more results and are really more useful than any gift; how many of the
sick  and  wretched  have  more  need  of  comfort  than  of  charity;  how  many  of  the  oppressed  need
protection rather than money? Reconcile those who are at strife, prevent lawsuits; incline children to
duty, fathers to kindness; promote happy marriages; prevent annoyances; freely use the credit of your
pupil's parents on behalf of the weak who cannot obtain justice, the weak who are oppressed by the
strong. Be just, human, kindly. Do not give alms alone, give charity; works of mercy do more than
money for the relief of suffering; love others and they will love you; serve them and they will serve
you; be their brother and they will be your children.
  This is one reason why I want to bring up Emile in the country, far from those miserable lacqueys,
the most degraded of men except their masters; far from the vile morals of the town, whose gilded
surface makes them seductive and contagious to children; while the vices of peasants, unadorned and in
their naked grossness, are more fitted to repel than to seduce, when there is no motive for imitating
them.
  In the village a tutor will have much more control over the things he wishes to show the child; his
reputation, his words, his example, will have a weight they would never have in the town; he is of use
to every one, so every one is eager to oblige him, to win his esteem, to appeal before the disciple what
the master would have him be; if vice is not corrected, public scandal is at least avoided, which is all
that our present purpose requires.
  Cease to blame others for your own faults; children are corrupted less by what they see than by your
own teaching. With your endless preaching, moralising, and pedantry, for one idea you give your
scholars, believing it to be good, you give them twenty more which are good for nothing; you are full
of what is going on in your own minds, and you fail to see the effect you produce on theirs. In the
continual flow of words with which you overwhelm them, do you think there is none which they get
hold of in a wrong sense? Do you suppose they do not make their own comments on your long-winded
explanations, that they do not find material for the construction of a system they can understand--one
which they will use against you when they get the chance?
  Listen to a little fellow who has just been under instruction; let him chatter freely, ask questions,
and talk at his ease, and you will be surprised to find the strange forms your arguments have assumed in
his mind; he confuses everything, and turns everything topsy-turvy; you are vexed and grieved by hisunforeseen objections; he reduces you to be silent yourself or to silence him: and what can he think of
silence in one who is so fond of talking? If ever he gains this advantage and is aware of it, farewell
education; from that moment all is lost; he is no longer trying to learn, he is trying to refute you.
  Zealous teachers, be simple, sensible, and reticent; be in no hurry to act unless to prevent the
actions of others. Again and again I say, reject, if it may be, a good lesson for fear of giving a bad one.
Beware of playing the tempter in this world, which nature intended as an earthly paradise for men, and
do not attempt to give the innocent child the knowledge of good and evil; since you cannot prevent the
child learning by what he sees outside himself, restrict your own efforts to impressing those examples
on his mind in the form best suited for him.
  The explosive passions produce a great effect upon the child when he sees them; their outward
expression is very marked; he is struck by this and his attention is arrested. Anger especially is so noisy
in its rage that it is impossible not to perceive it if you are within reach. You need not ask yourself
whether this is an opportunity for a pedagogue to frame a fine disquisition. What! no fine disquisition,
nothing, not a word! Let the child come to you; impressed by what he has seen, he will not fail to ask
you questions. The answer is easy; it is drawn from the very things which have appealed to his senses.
He sees a flushed face, flashing eyes, a threatening gesture, he hears cries; everything shows that the
body is ill at ease. Tell him plainly, without affectation or mystery, "This poor man is ill, he is in a
fever." You may take the opportunity of giving him in a few words some idea of disease and its effects;
for that too belongs to nature, and is one of the bonds of necessity which he must recognise. By means
of this idea, which is not false in itself, may he not early acquire a certain aversion to giving way to
excessive passions, which he regards as diseases; and do you not think that such a notion, given at the
right moment, will produce a more wholesome effect than the most tedious sermon? But consider the
after effects of this idea; you have authority, if ever you find it necessary, to treat the rebellious child as
a sick child; to keep him in his room, in bed if need be, to diet him, to make him afraid of his growing
vices, to make him hate and dread them without ever regarding as a punishment the strict measures you
will perhaps have to use for his recovery. If it happens that you yourself in a moment's heat depart from
the calm and self-control which you should aim at, do not try to conceal your fault, but tell him frankly,
with a gentle reproach, "My dear, you have hurt me."
  Moreover, it is a matter of great importance that no notice should be taken in his presence of the
quaint sayings which result from the simplicity of the ideas in which he is brought up, nor should they
be quoted in a way he can understand. A foolish laugh may destroy six months' work and do irreparable
damage for life. I cannot repeat too often that to control the child one must often control oneself.
I picture my little Emile at the height of a dispute between two neighbours going up to the fiercest
of them and saying in a tone of pity, "You are ill, I am very sorry for you." This speech will no doubt
have its effect on the spectators and perhaps on the disputants. Without laughter, scolding, or praise I
should take him away, willing or no, before he could see this result, or at least before he could think
about it; and I should make haste to turn his thoughts to other things, so that he would soon forget all
about it.
I do not propose to enter into every detail, but only to explain general rules and to give illustrations
in cases of difficulty. I think it is impossible to train a child up to the age of twelve in the midst of
society,  without  giving  him  some  idea  of  the  relations  between  one  man  and  another,  and  of  the
morality of human actions. It is enough to delay the development of these ideas as long as possible, and
when they can no longer be avoided to limit them to present needs, so that he may neither think himself
master of everything nor do harm to others without knowing or caring. There are calm and gentle
characters which can be led a long way in their first innocence without any danger; but there are also
stormy dispositions whose passions develop early; you must hasten to make men of them lest you
should have to keep them in chains.
  Our first duties are to ourselves; our first feelings are centred on self; all our instincts are at first
directed to our own preservation and our own welfare. Thus the first notion of justice springs not from
what we owe to others, but from what is due to us. Here is another error in popular methods ofeducation. If you talk to children of their duties, and not of their rights, you are beginning at the wrong
end, and telling them what they cannot understand, what cannot be of any interest to them.
  If I had to train a child such as I have just described, I should say to myself, "A child never attacks
people, [Footnote: A child should never be allowed to play with grown-up people as if they were his
inferiors, nor even as if they were only his equals. If he ventured to strike any one in earnest, were it
only the footman, were it the hangman himself, let the sufferer return his blows with interest, so that he
will not want to do it again. I have seen silly women inciting children to rebellion, encouraging them to
hit people, allowing themselves to be beaten, and laughing at the harmless blows, never thinking that
those blows were in intention the blows of a murderer, and that the child who desires to beat people
now will desire to kill them when he is grown up.] only things; and he soon learns by experience to
respect those older and stronger than himself. Things, however, do not defend themselves. Therefore
the first idea he needs is not that of liberty but of property, and that he may get this idea he must have
something of his own." It is useless to enumerate his clothes, furniture, and playthings; although he
uses these he knows not how or why he has come by them. To tell him they were given him is little
better, for giving implies having; so here is property before his own, and it is the principle of property
that you want to teach him; moreover, giving is a convention, and the child as yet has no idea of
conventions. I hope my reader will note, in this and many other cases, how people think they have
taught children thoroughly, when they have only thrust on them words which have no intelligible
meaning to them. [Footnote: This is why most children want to take back what they have given, and cry
if they cannot get it. They do not do this when once they know what a gift is; only they are more careful
about giving things away.]
  We must therefore go back to the origin of property, for that is where the first idea of it must begin.
The child, living in the country, will have got some idea of field work; eyes and leisure suffice for that,
and he will have both. In every age, and especially in childhood, we want to create, to copy, to produce,
to give all the signs of power and activity. He will hardly have seen the gardener at work twice, sowing,
planting, and growing vegetables, before he will want to garden himself.
  According to the principles I have already laid down, I shall not thwart him; on the contrary, I shall
approve of his plan, share his hobby, and work with him, not for his pleasure but my own; at least, so
he thinks; I shall be his under-gardener, and dig the ground for him till his arms are strong enough to do
it; he will take possession of it by planting a bean, and this is surely a more sacred possession, and one
more worthy of respect, than that of Nunes Balboa, who took possession of South America in the name
of the King of Spain, by planting his banner on the coast of the Southern Sea.
  We water the beans every day, we watch them coming up with the greatest delight. Day by day I
increase this delight by saying, "Those belong to you." To explain what that word "belong" means, I
show him how he has given his time, his labour, and his trouble, his very self to it; that in this ground
there is a part of himself which he can claim against all the world, as he could withdraw his arm from
the hand of another man who wanted to keep it against his will.
  One fine day he hurries up with his watering-can in his hand. What a scene of woe! Alas! all the
beans are pulled up, the soil is dug over, you can scarcely find the place. Oh! what has become of my
labour, my work, the beloved fruits of my care and effort? Who has stolen my property! Who has taken
my beans? The young heart revolts; the first feeling of injustice brings its sorrow and bitterness; tears
come in torrents, the unhappy child fills the air with cries and groans, I share his sorrow and anger; we
look around us, we make inquiries. At last we discover that the gardener did it. We send for him.
  But we are greatly mistaken. The gardener, hearing our complaint, begins to complain louder than
we:
  What, gentlemen, was it you who spoilt my work! I had sown some Maltese melons; the seed was
given me as something quite out of the common, and I meant to give you a treat when they were ripe;
but you have planted your miserable beans and destroyed my melons, which were coming up so nicely,
and I can never get any more. You have behaved very badly to me and you have deprived yourselves of
the pleasure of eating most delicious melons.  JEAN JACQUES. My poor Robert, you must forgive us. You had given your labour and your pains
to it. I see we were wrong to spoil your work, but we will send to Malta for some more seed for you,
and we will never dig the ground again without finding out if some one else has been beforehand with
us.
  ROBERT. Well, gentlemen, you need not trouble yourselves, for there is no more waste ground. I
dig what my father tilled; every one does the same, and all the land you see has been occupied time out
of mind.
  EMILE. Mr. Robert, do people often lose the seed of Maltese melons?
  ROBERT. No indeed, sir; we do not often find such silly little gentlemen as you. No one meddles
with his neighbour's garden; every one respects other people's work so that his own may be safe.
  EMILE. But I have not got a garden.
  ROBERT. I don't care; if you spoil mine I won't let you walk in it, for you see I do not mean to lose
my labour.
  JEAN JACQUES. Could not we suggest an arrangement with this kind Robert? Let him give my
young friend and myself a corner of his garden to cultivate, on condition that he has half the crop.
  ROBERT. You may have it free. But remember I shall dig up your beans if you touch my melons.
  In this attempt to show how a child may be taught certain primitive ideas we see how the notion of
property goes back naturally to the right of the first occupier to the results of his work. That is plain and
simple, and quite within the child's grasp. From that to the rights of property and exchange there is but
a step, after which you must stop short.
  You also see that an explanation which I can give in writing in a couple of pages may take a year in
practice, for in the course of moral ideas we cannot advance too slowly, nor plant each step too firmly.
Young teacher, pray consider this example, and remember that your lessons should always be in deeds
rather than words, for children soon forget what they say or what is said to them, but not what they
have done nor what has been done to them.
  Such teaching should be given, as I have said, sooner or later, as the scholar's disposition, gentle or
turbulent, requires it. The way of using it is unmistakable; but to omit no matter of importance in a
difficult business let us take another example.
  Your ill-tempered child destroys everything he touches. Do not vex yourself; put anything he can
spoil out of his reach. He breaks the things he is using; do not be in a hurry to give him more; let him
feel the want of them. He breaks the windows of his room; let the wind blow upon him night and day,
and do not be afraid of his catching cold; it is better to catch cold than to be reckless. Never complain
of the inconvenience he causes you, but let him feel it first. At last you will have the windows mended
without saying anything. He breaks them again; then change your plan; tell him dryly and without
anger, "The windows are mine, I took pains to have them put in, and I mean to keep them safe." Then
you will shut him up in a dark place without a window. At this unexpected proceeding he cries and
howls; no one heeds. Soon he gets tired and changes his tone; he laments and sighs; a servant appears,
the rebel begs to be let out. Without seeking any excuse for refusing, the servant merely says, "I, too,
have windows to keep," and goes away. At last, when the child has been there several hours, long
enough to get very tired of it, long enough to make an impression on his memory, some one suggests to
him that he should offer to make terms with you, so that you may set him free and he will never break
windows again. That is just what he wants. He will send and ask you to come and see him; you will
come, he will suggest his plan, and you will agree to it at once, saying, "That is a very good idea; it will
suit  us  both;  why  didn't  you  think  of  it  sooner?"  Then  without  asking  for  any  affirmation  or
confirmation of his promise, you will embrace him joyfully and take him back at once to his own room,
considering this agreement as sacred as if he had confirmed it by a formal oath. What idea do you think
he will form from these proceedings, as to the fulfilment of a promise and its usefulness? If I am not
greatly mistaken, there is not a child upon earth, unless he is utterly spoilt already, who could resist this
treatment, or one who would ever dream of breaking windows again on purpose. Follow out the whole
train of thought. The naughty little fellow hardly thought when he was making a hole for his beans thathe was hewing out a cell in which his own knowledge would soon imprison him. [Footnote: Moreover
if the duty of keeping his word were not established in the child's mind by its own utility, the child's
growing consciousness would soon impress it on him as a law of conscience, as an innate principle,
only requiring suitable experiences for its development. This first outline is not sketched by man, it is
engraved on the heart by the author of all justice. Take away the primitive law of contract and the
obligation imposed by contract and there is nothing left of human society but vanity and empty show.
He who only keeps his word because it is to his own profit is hardly more pledged than if he had given
no promise at all. This principle is of the utmost importance, and deserves to be thoroughly studied, for
man is now beginning to be at war with himself.]
  We are now in the world of morals, the door to vice is open. Deceit and falsehood are born along
with conventions and duties. As soon as we can do what we ought not to do, we try to hide what we
ought not to have done. As soon as self-interest makes us give a promise, a greater interest may make
us break it; it is merely a question of doing it with impunity; we naturally take refuge in concealment
and falsehood. As we have not been able to prevent vice, we must punish it. The sorrows of life begin
with its mistakes.
I have already said enough to show that children should never receive punishment merely as such; it
should always come as the natural consequence of their fault. Thus you will not exclaim against their
falsehood, you will not exactly punish them for lying, but you will arrange that all the ill effects of
lying, such as not being believed when we speak the truth, or being accused of what we have not done
in spite of our protests, shall fall on their heads when they have told a lie. But let us explain what lying
means to the child.
  There are two kinds of lies; one concerns an accomplished fact, the other concerns a future duty.
The first occurs when we falsely deny or assert that we did or did not do something, or, to put it in
general terms, when we knowingly say what is contrary to facts. The other occurs when we promise
what we do not mean to perform, or, in general terms, when we profess an intention which we do not
really mean to carry out. These two kinds of lie are sometimes found in combination, [Footnote: Thus
the guilty person, accused of some evil deed, defends himself by asserting that he is a good man. His
statement is false in itself and false in its application to the matter in hand.] but their differences are my
present business.
  He who feels the need of help from others, he who is constantly experiencing their kindness, has
nothing to gain by deceiving them; it is plainly to his advantage that they should see things as they are,
lest they should mistake his interests. It is therefore plain that lying with regard to actual facts is not
natural  to  children,  but  lying  is  made  necessary  by  the  law  of  obedience;  since  obedience  is
disagreeable, children disobey as far as they can in secret, and the present good of avoiding punishment
or reproof outweighs the remoter good of speaking the truth. Under a free and natural education why
should your child lie? What has he to conceal from you? You do not thwart him, you do not punish
him, you demand nothing from him. Why should he not tell everything to you as simply as to his little
playmate? He cannot see anything more risky in the one course than in the other.
  The  lie  concerning  duty  is  even  less  natural,  since  promises  to  do  or  refrain  from  doing  are
conventional agreements which are outside the state of nature and detract from our liberty. Moreover,
all promises made by children are in themselves void; when they pledge themselves they do not know
what they are doing, for their narrow vision cannot look beyond the present. A child can hardly lie
when he makes a promise; for he is only thinking how he can get out of the present difficulty, any
means which has not an immediate result is the same to him; when he promises for the future he
promises nothing, and his imagination is as yet incapable of projecting him into the future while he
lives in the present. If he could escape a whipping or get a packet of sweets by promising to throw
himself out of the window to-morrow, he would promise on the spot. This is why the law disregards all
promises made by minors, and when fathers and teachers are stricter and demand that promises shall be
kept, it is only when the promise refers to something the child ought to do even if he had made no
promise.  The child cannot lie when he makes a promise, for he does not know what he is doing when he
makes his promise. The case is different when he breaks his promise, which is a sort of retrospective
falsehood; for he clearly remembers making the promise, but he fails to see the importance of keeping
it. Unable to look into the future, he cannot foresee the results of things, and when he breaks his
promises he does nothing contrary to his stage of reasoning.
  Children's lies are therefore entirely the work of their teachers, and to teach them to speak the truth
is nothing less than to teach them the art of lying. In your zeal to rule, control, and teach them, you
never find sufficient means at your disposal. You wish to gain fresh influence over their minds by
baseless maxims, by unreasonable precepts; and you would rather they knew their lessons and told lies,
than leave them ignorant and truthful.
  We, who only give our scholars lessons in practice, who prefer to have them good rather than
clever, never demand the truth lest they should conceal it, and never claim any promise lest they should
be tempted to break it. If some mischief has been done in my absence and I do not know who did it, I
shall take care not to accuse Emile, nor to say, "Did you do it?" [Footnote: Nothing could be more
indiscreet than such a question, especially if the child is guilty. Then if he thinks you know what he has
done, he will think you are setting a trap for him, and this idea can only set him against you. If he
thinks you do not know, he will say to himself, "Why should I make my fault known?" And here we
have the first temptation to falsehood as the direct result of your foolish question.] For in so doing what
should I do but teach him to deny it? If his difficult temperament compels me to make some agreement
with him, I will take good care that the suggestion always comes from him, never from me; that when
he undertakes anything he has always a present and effective interest in fulfilling his promise, and if he
ever fails this lie will bring down on him all the unpleasant consequences which he sees arising from
the natural order of things, and not from his tutor's vengeance. But far from having recourse to such
cruel measures, I feel almost certain that Emile will not know for many years what it is to lie, and that
when he does find out, he will be astonished and unable to understand what can be the use of it. It is
quite clear that the less I make his welfare dependent on the will or the opinions of others, the less is it
to his interest to lie.
  When we are in no hurry to teach there is no hurry to demand, and we can take our time, so as to
demand nothing except under fitting conditions. Then the child is training himself, in so far as he is not
being spoilt. But when a fool of a tutor, who does not know how to set about his business, is always
making his pupil promise first this and then that, without discrimination, choice, or proportion, the
child is puzzled and overburdened with all these promises, and neglects, forgets or even scorns them,
and considering them as so many empty phrases he makes a game of making and breaking promises.
Would you have him keep his promise faithfully, be moderate in your claims upon him.
  The detailed treatment I have just given to lying may be applied in many respects to all the other
duties imposed upon children, whereby these duties are made not only hateful but impracticable. For
the sake of a show of preaching virtue you make them love every vice; you instil these vices by
forbidding them. Would you have them pious, you take them to church till they are sick of it; you teach
them to gabble prayers until they long for the happy time when they will not have to pray to God. To
teach them charity you make them give alms as if you scorned to give yourself. It is not the child, but
the master, who should give; however much he loves his pupil he should vie with him for this honour;
he should make him think that he is too young to deserve it. Alms-giving is the deed of a man who can
measure the worth of his gift and the needs of his fellow-men. The child, who knows nothing of these,
can have no merit in giving; he gives without charity, without kindness; he is almost ashamed to give,
for, to judge by your practice and his own, he thinks it is only children who give, and that there is no
need for charity when we are grown up.
  Observe that the only things children are set to give are things of which they do not know the value,
bits of metal carried in their pockets for which they have no further use. A child would rather give a
hundred coins than one cake. But get this prodigal giver to distribute what is dear to him, his toys, his
sweets, his own lunch, and we shall soon see if you have made him really generous.  People try yet another way; they soon restore what he gave to the child, so that he gets used to
giving everything which he knows will come back to him. I have scarcely seen generosity in children
except of these two types, giving what is of no use to them, or what they expect to get back again.
"Arrange things," says Locke. "so that experience may convince them that the most generous giver gets
the biggest share." That is to make the child superficially generous but really greedy. He adds that
"children will thus form the habit of liberality." Yes, a usurer's liberality, which expects cent. per cent.
But when it is a question of real giving, good-bye to the habit; when they do not get things back, they
will not give. It is the habit of the mind, not of the hands, that needs watching. All the other virtues
taught to children are like this, and to preach these baseless virtues you waste their youth in sorrow.
What a sensible sort of education!
  Teachers, have done with these shams; be good and kind; let your example sink into your scholars'
memories till they are old enough to take it to heart. Rather than hasten to demand deeds of charity
from my pupil I prefer to perform such deeds in his presence, even depriving him of the means of
imitating me, as an honour beyond his years; for it is of the utmost importance that he should not regard
a man's duties as merely those of a child. If when he sees me help the poor he asks me about it, and it is
time to reply to his questions, [Footnote: It must be understood that I do not answer his questions when
he wants; that would be to subject myself to his will and to place myself in the most dangerous state of
dependence that ever a tutor was in.] I shall say, "My dear boy, the rich only exist, through the good-
will of the poor, so they have promised to feed those who have not enough to live on, either in goods or
labour." "Then you promised to do this?" "Certainly; I am only master of the wealth that passes through
my hands on the condition attached to its ownership."
  After this talk (and we have seen how a child may be brought to understand it) another than Emile
would be tempted to imitate me and behave like a rich man; in such a case I should at least take care
that it was done without ostentation; I would rather he robbed me of my privilege and hid himself to
give. It is a fraud suitable to his age, and the only one I could forgive in him.
I know that all these imitative virtues are only the virtues of a monkey, and that a good action is
only morally good when it is done as such and not because of others. But at an age when the heart does
not yet feel anything, you must make children copy the deeds you wish to grow into habits, until they
can do them with understanding and for the love of what is good. Man imitates, as do the beasts. The
love of imitating is well regulated by nature; in society it becomes a vice. The monkey imitates man,
whom he fears, and not the other beasts, which he scorns; he thinks what is done by his betters must be
good. Among ourselves, our harlequins imitate all that is good to degrade it and bring it into ridicule;
knowing their owners' baseness they try to equal what is better than they are, or they strive to imitate
what they admire, and their bad taste appears in their choice of models, they would rather deceive
others or win applause for their own talents than become wiser or better. Imitation has its roots in our
desire to escape from ourselves. If I succeed in my undertaking, Emile will certainly have no such wish.
So we must dispense with any seeming good that might arise from it.
  Examine your rules of education; you will find them all topsy-turvy, especially in all that concerns
virtue and morals. The only moral lesson which is suited for a child--the most important lesson for
every time of life--is this: "Never hurt anybody." The very rule of well-doing, if not subordinated to this
rule, is dangerous, false, and contradictory. Who is there who does no good? Every one does some
good, the wicked as well as the righteous; he makes one happy at the cost of the misery of a hundred,
and hence spring all our misfortunes. The noblest virtues are negative, they are also the most difficult,
for they make little show, and do not even make room for that pleasure so dear to the heart of man, the
thought that some one is pleased with us. If there be a man who does no harm to his neighbours, what
good must he have accomplished! What a bold heart, what a strong character it needs! It is not in
talking  about  this  maxim,  but  in  trying  to  practise  it,  that  we  discover  both  its  greatness  and  its
difficulty. [Footnote: The precept "Never hurt anybody," implies the greatest possible independence of
human society; for in the social state one man's good is another man's evil. This relation is part of the
nature of things; it is inevitable. You may apply this test to man in society and to the hermit to discoverwhich is best. A distinguished author says, "None but the wicked can live alone." I say, "None but the
good can live alone." This proposition, if less sententious, is truer and more logical than the other. If the
wicked were alone, what evil would he do? It is among his fellows that he lays his snares for others. If
they wish to apply this argument to the man of property, my answer is to be found in the passage to
which this note is appended.]
  This will give you some slight idea of the precautions I would have you take in giving children
instruction which cannot always be refused without risk to themselves or others, or the far greater risk
of the formation of bad habits, which would be difficult to correct later on; but be sure this necessity
will  not  often  arise  with  children  who  are  properly  brought  up,  for  they  cannot  possibly  become
rebellious, spiteful, untruthful, or greedy, unless the seeds of these vices are sown in their hearts. What
I have just said applies therefore rather to the exception than the rule. But the oftener children have the
opportunity of quitting their proper condition, and contracting the vices of men, the oftener will these
exceptions arise. Those who are brought up in the world must receive more precocious instruction than
those who are brought up in retirement. So this solitary education would be preferable, even if it did
nothing more than leave childhood time to ripen.
  There is quite another class of exceptions: those so gifted by nature that they rise above the level of
their age. As there are men who never get beyond infancy, so there are others who are never, so to
speak, children, they are men almost from birth. The difficulty is that these cases are very rare, very
difficult to distinguish; while every mother, who knows that a child may be a prodigy, is convinced that
her  child  is  that  one.  They  go  further;  they  mistake  the  common  signs  of  growth  for  marks  of
exceptional talent. Liveliness, sharp sayings, romping, amusing simplicity, these are the characteristic
marks of this age, and show that the child is a child indeed. Is it strange that a child who is encouraged
to chatter and allowed to say anything, who is restrained neither by consideration nor convention,
should chance to say something clever? Were he never to hit the mark, his case would be stranger than
that of the astrologer who, among a thousand errors, occasionally predicts the truth. "They lie so often,"
said Henry IV., "that at last they say what is true." If you want to say something clever, you have only
to talk long enough. May Providence watch over those fine folk who have no other claim to social
distinction.
  The finest thoughts may spring from a child's brain, or rather the best words may drop from his lips,
just as diamonds of great worth may fall into his hands, while neither the thoughts nor the diamonds are
his own; at that age neither can be really his. The child's sayings do not mean to him what they mean to
us, the ideas he attaches to them are different. His ideas, if indeed he has any ideas at all, have neither
order nor connection; there is nothing sure, nothing certain, in his thoughts. Examine your so-called
prodigy. Now and again you will discover in him extreme activity of mind and extraordinary clearness
of thought. More often this same mind will seem slack and spiritless, as if wrapped in mist. Sometimes
he goes before you, sometimes he will not stir. One moment you would call him a genius, another a
fool. You would be mistaken in both; he is a child, an eaglet who soars aloft for a moment, only to drop
back into the nest.
  Treat him, therefore, according to his age, in spite of appearances, and beware of exhausting his
strength by over-much exercise. If the young brain grows warm and begins to bubble, let it work freely,
but do not heat it any further, lest it lose its goodness, and when the first gases have been given off,
collect and compress the rest so that in after years they may turn to life-giving heat and real energy. If
not, your time and your pains will be wasted, you will destroy your own work, and after foolishly
intoxicating yourself with these heady fumes, you will have nothing left but an insipid and worthless
wine.
  Silly children grow into ordinary men. I know no generalisation more certain than this. It is the
most  difficult  thing  in  the  world  to  distinguish  between  genuine  stupidity,  and  that  apparent  and
deceitful stupidity which is the sign of a strong character. At first sight it seems strange that the two
extremes should have the same outward signs; and yet it may well be so, for at an age when man has as
yet no true ideas, the whole difference between the genius and the rest consists in this: the latter onlytake in false ideas, while the former, finding nothing but false ideas, receives no ideas at all. In this he
resembles the fool; the one is fit for nothing, the other finds nothing fit for him. The only way of
distinguishing between them depends upon chance, which may offer the genius some idea which he can
understand, while the fool is always the same. As a child, the young Cato was taken for an idiot by his
parents; he was obstinate and silent, and that was all they perceived in him; it was only in Sulla's ante-
chamber that his uncle discovered what was in him. Had he never found his way there, he might have
passed for a fool till he reached the age of reason. Had Caesar never lived, perhaps this same Cato, who
discerned his fatal genius, and foretold his great schemes, would have passed for a dreamer all his days.
Those who judge children hastily are apt to be mistaken; they are often more childish than the child
himself. I knew a middle-aged man, [Footnote: The Abbe de Condillac] whose friendship I esteemed an
honour, who was reckoned a fool by his family. All at once he made his name as a philosopher, and I
have no doubt posterity will give him a high place among the greatest thinkers and the profoundest
metaphysicians of his day.
  Hold  childhood  in  reverence,  and  do  not  be  in  any  hurry  to  judge  it  for  good  or  ill.  Leave
exceptional  cases  to  show  themselves,  let  their  qualities  be  tested  and  confirmed,  before  special
methods are adopted. Give nature time to work before you take over her business, lest you interfere
with her dealings. You assert that you know the value of time and are afraid to waste it. You fail to
perceive that it is a greater waste of time to use it ill than to do nothing, and that a child ill taught is
further from virtue than a child who has learnt nothing at all. You are afraid to see him spending his
early years doing nothing. What! is it nothing to be happy, nothing to run and jump all day? He will
never be so busy again all his life long. Plato, in his Republic, which is considered so stern, teaches the
children only through festivals, games, songs, and amusements. It seems as if he had accomplished his
purpose when he had taught them to be happy; and Seneca, speaking of the Roman lads in olden days,
says, "They were always on their feet, they were never taught anything which kept them sitting." Were
they any the worse for it in manhood? Do not be afraid, therefore, of this so-called idleness. What
would you think of a man who refused to sleep lest he should waste part of his life? You would say,
"He is mad; he is not enjoying his life, he is robbing himself of part of it; to avoid sleep he is hastening
his death." Remember that these two cases are alike, and that childhood is the sleep of reason.
  The apparent ease with which children learn is their ruin. You fail to see that this very facility
proves that they are not learning. Their shining, polished brain reflects, as in a mirror, the things you
show them, but nothing sinks in. The child remembers the words and the ideas are reflected back; his
hearers understand them, but to him they are meaningless.
  Although memory and reason are wholly different faculties, the one does not really develop apart
from the other. Before the age of reason the child receives images, not ideas; and there is this difference
between them: images are merely the pictures of external objects, while ideas are notions about those
objects determined by their relations. An image when it is recalled may exist by itself in the mind, but
every idea implies other ideas. When we image we merely perceive, when we reason we compare. Our
sensations are merely passive, our notions or ideas spring from an active principle which judges. The
proof of this will be given later.
I maintain, therefore, that as children are incapable of judging, they have no true memory. They
retain sounds, form, sensation, but rarely ideas, and still more rarely relations. You tell me they acquire
some rudiments of geometry, and you think you prove your case; not so, it is mine you prove; you
show that far from being able to reason themselves, children are unable to retain the reasoning of
others; for if you follow the method of these little geometricians you will see they only retain the exact
impression  of  the  figure  and  the  terms  of  the  demonstration.  They  cannot  meet  the  slightest  new
objection; if the figure is reversed they can do nothing. All their knowledge is on the sensation-level,
nothing has penetrated to their understanding. Their memory is little better than their other powers, for
they always have to learn over again, when they are grown up, what they learnt as children.
I am far from thinking, however, that children have no sort of reason. [Footnote: I have noticed
again and again that it is impossible in writing a lengthy work to use the same words always in thesame  sense.  There  is  no  language  rich  enough  to  supply  terms  and  expressions  sufficient  for  the
modifications of our ideas. The method of defining every term and constantly substituting the definition
for the term defined looks well, but it is impracticable. For how can we escape from our vicious circle?
Definitions would be all very well if we did not use words in the making of them. In spite of this I am
convinced that even in our poor language we can make our meaning clear, not by always using words
in the same sense, but by taking care hat every time we use a word the sense in which we use it is
sufficiently indicated by the sense of the context, so that each sentence in which the word occurs acts as
a sort of definition. Sometimes I say children are incapable of reasoning. Sometimes I say they reason
cleverly.  I  must  admit  that  my  words  are  often  contradictory,  but  I  do  not  think  there  is  any
contradiction in my ideas.] On the contrary, I think they reason very well with regard to things that
affect their actual and sensible well-being. But people are mistaken as to the extent of their information,
and they attribute to them knowledge they do not possess, and make them reason about things they
cannot understand. Another mistake is to try to turn their attention to matters which do not concern
them in the least, such as their future interest, their happiness when they are grown up, the opinion
people will have of them when they are men--terms which are absolutely meaningless when addressed
to creatures who are entirely without foresight. But all the forced studies of these poor little wretches
are directed towards matters utterly remote from their minds. You may judge how much attention they
can give to them.
  The pedagogues, who make a great display of the teaching they give their pupils, are paid to say
just the opposite; yet their actions show that they think just as I do. For what do they teach? Words!
words! words! Among the various sciences they boast of teaching their scholars, they take good care
never to choose those which might be really useful to them, for then they would be compelled to deal
with things and would fail utterly; the sciences they choose are those we seem to know when we know
their technical terms--heraldry, geography, chronology, languages, etc., studies so remote from man,
and even more remote from the child, that it is a wonder if he can ever make any use of any part of
them.
  You will be surprised to find that I reckon the study of languages among the useless lumber of
education; but you must remember that I am speaking of the studies of the earliest years, and whatever
you may say, I do not believe any child under twelve or fifteen ever really acquired two languages.
  If the study of languages were merely the study of words, that is, of the symbols by which language
expresses itself, then this might be a suitable study for children; but languages, as they change the
symbols, also modify the ideas which the symbols express. Minds are formed by language, thoughts
take their colour from its ideas. Reason alone is common to all. Every language has its own form, a
difference  which  may  be  partly  cause  and  partly  effect  of  differences  in  national  character;  this
conjecture appears to be confirmed by the fact that in every nation under the sun speech follows the
changes of manners, and is preserved or altered along with them.
  By use the child acquires one of these different forms, and it is the only language he retains till the
age of reason. To acquire two languages he must be able to compare their ideas, and how can he
compare ideas he can barely understand? Everything may have a thousand meanings to him, but each
idea can only have one form, so he can only learn one language. You assure me he learns several
languages;  I  deny  it.  I  have  seen  those  little  prodigies  who  are  supposed  to  speak  half  a  dozen
languages. I have heard them speak first in German, then in Latin, French, or Italian; true, they used
half a dozen different vocabularies, but they always spoke German. In a word, you may give children as
many synonyms as you like; it is not their language but their words that you change; they will never
have but one language.
  To conceal their deficiencies teachers choose the dead languages, in which we have no longer any
judges whose authority is beyond dispute. The familiar use of these tongues disappeared long ago, so
they are content to imitate what they find in books, and they call that talking. If the master's Greek and
Latin is such poor stuff, what about the children? They have scarcely learnt their primer by heart,
without understanding a word of it, when they are set to translate a French speech into Latin words;then when they are more advanced they piece together a few phrases of Cicero for prose or a few lines
of Vergil for verse. Then they think they can speak Latin, and who will contradict them?
  In any study whatsoever the symbols are of no value without the idea of the things symbolised. Yet
the education of the child in confined to those symbols, while no one ever succeeds in making him
understand the thing signified. You think you are teaching him what the world is like; he is only
learning the map; he is taught the names of towns, countries, rivers, which have no existence for him
except on the paper before him. I remember seeing a geography somewhere which began with: "What
is the world?"--"A sphere of cardboard." That is the child's geography. I maintain that after two years'
work with the globe and cosmography, there is not a single ten-year-old child who could find his way
from Paris to Saint Denis by the help of the rules he has learnt. I maintain that not one of these children
could find his way by the map about the paths on his father's estate without getting lost. These are the
young doctors who can tell us the position of Pekin, Ispahan, Mexico, and every country in the world.
  You tell me the child must be employed on studies which only need eyes. That may be; but if there
are any such studies, they are unknown to me.
  It is a still more ridiculous error to set them to study history, which is considered within their grasp
because it is merely a collection of facts. But what is meant by this word "fact"? Do you think the
relations which determine the facts of history are so easy to grasp that the corresponding ideas are
easily developed in the child's mind! Do you think that a real knowledge of events can exist apart from
the knowledge of their causes and effects, and that history has so little relation to words that the one can
be learnt without the other? If you perceive nothing in a man's actions beyond merely physical and
external movements, what do you learn from history? Absolutely nothing; while this study, robbed of
all that makes it interesting, gives you neither pleasure nor information. If you want to judge actions by
their moral bearings, try to make these moral bearings intelligible to your scholars. You will soon find
out if they are old enough to learn history.
  Remember, reader, that he who speaks to you is neither a scholar nor a philosopher, but a plain man
and a lover of truth; a man who is pledged to no one party or system, a hermit, who mixes little with
other men, and has less opportunity of imbibing their prejudices, and more time to reflect on the things
that strike him in his intercourse with them. My arguments are based less on theories than on facts, and
I think I can find no better way to bring the facts home to you than by quoting continually some
example from the observations which suggested my arguments.
I had gone to spend a few days in the country with a worthy mother of a family who took great
pains with her children and their education. One morning I was present while the eldest boy had his
lessons. His tutor, who had taken great pains to teach him ancient history, began upon the story of
Alexander and lighted on the well-known anecdote of Philip the Doctor. There is a picture of it, and the
story is well worth study. The tutor, worthy man, made several reflections which I did not like with
regard to Alexander's courage, but I did not argue with him lest I should lower him in the eyes of his
pupil. At dinner they did not fail to get the little fellow talking, French fashion. The eager spirit of a
child of his age, and the confident expectation of applause, made him say a number of silly things, and
among them from time to time there were things to the point, and these made people forget the rest. At
last came the story of Philip the Doctor. He told it very distinctly and prettily. After the usual meed of
praise, demanded by his mother and expected by the child himself, they discussed what he had said.
Most of them blamed Alexander's rashness, some of them, following the tutor's example, praised his
resolution, which showed me that none of those present really saw the beauty of the story. "For my own
part," I said, "if there was any courage or any steadfastness at all in Alexander's conduct I think it was
only a piece of bravado." Then every one agreed that it was a piece of bravado. I was getting angry, and
would have replied, when a lady sitting beside me, who had not hitherto spoken, bent towards me and
whispered in my ear. "Jean Jacques," said she, "say no more, they will never understand you." I looked
at her, I recognised the wisdom of her advice, and I held my tongue.
  Several things made me suspect that our young professor had not in the least understood the story
he told so prettily. After dinner I took his hand in mine and we went for a walk in the park. When I hadquestioned him quietly, I discovered that he admired the vaunted courage of Alexander more than any
one.  But  in  what  do  you  suppose  he  thought  this  courage  consisted?  Merely  in  swallowing  a
disagreeable  drink  at  a  single  draught  without  hesitation  and  without  any  signs  of  dislike.  Not  a
fortnight before the poor child had been made to take some medicine which he could hardly swallow,
and the taste of it was still in his mouth. Death, and death by poisoning, were for him only disagreeable
sensations, and senna was his only idea of poison. I must admit, however, that Alexander's resolution
had made a great impression on his young mind, and he was determined that next time he had to take
medicine he would be an Alexander. Without entering upon explanations which were clearly beyond
his grasp, I confirmed him in his praiseworthy intention, and returned home smiling to myself over the
great wisdom of parents and teachers who expect to teach history to children.
  Such words as king, emperor, war, conquest, law, and revolution are easily put into their mouths;
but when it is a question of attaching clear ideas to these words the explanations are very different from
our talk with Robert the gardener.
I feel sure some readers dissatisfied with that "Say no more, Jean Jacques," will ask what I really
saw to admire in the conduct of Alexander. Poor things! if you need telling, how can you comprehend
it? Alexander believed in virtue, he staked his head, he staked his own life on that faith, his great soul
was fitted to hold such a faith. To swallow that draught was to make a noble profession of the faith that
was in him. Never did mortal man recite a finer creed. If there is an Alexander in our own days, show
me such deeds.
  If children have no knowledge of words, there is no study that is suitable for them. If they have no
real ideas they have no real memory, for I do not call that a memory which only recalls sensations.
What is the use of inscribing on their brains a list of symbols which mean nothing to them? They will
learn the symbols when they learn the things signified; why give them the useless trouble of learning
them twice over? And yet what dangerous prejudices are you implanting when you teach them to
accept as knowledge words which have no meaning for them. The first meaningless phrase, the first
thing taken for granted on the word of another person without seeing its use for himself, this is the
beginning of the ruin of the child's judgment. He may dazzle the eyes of fools long enough before he
recovers from such a loss. [Footnote: The learning of most philosophers is like the learning of children.
Vast erudition results less in the multitude of ideas than in a multitude of images. Dates, names, places,
all objects isolated or unconnected with ideas are merely retained in the memory for symbols, and we
rarely recall any of these without seeing the right or left page of the book in which we read it, or the
form in which we first saw it. Most science was of this kind till recently. The science of our times is
another matter; study and observation are things of the past; we dream and the dreams of a bad night
are given to us as philosophy. You will say I too am a dreamer; I admit it, but I do what the others fail
to do, I give my dreams as dreams, and leave the reader to discover whether there is anything in them
which may prove useful to those who are awake.]
  No, if nature has given the child this plasticity of brain which fits him to receive every kind of
impression,  it  was  not  that  you  should  imprint  on  it  the  names  and  dates  of  kings,  the  jargon  of
heraldry, the globe and geography, all those words without present meaning or future use for the child,
which flood of words overwhelms his sad and barren childhood. But by means of this plasticity all the
ideas he can understand and use, all that concern his happiness and will some day throw light upon his
duties, should be traced at an early age in indelible characters upon his brain, to guide him to live in
such a way as befits his nature and his powers.
  Without the study of books, such a memory as the child may possess is not left idle; everything he
sees and hears makes an impression on him, he keeps a record of men's sayings and doings, and his
whole environment is the book from which he unconsciously enriches his memory, till his judgment is
able to profit by it.
  To select these objects, to take care to present him constantly with those he may know, to conceal
from him those he ought not to know, this is the real way of training his early memory; and in this way
you must try to provide him with a storehouse of knowledge which will serve for his education in youthand his conduct throughout life. True, this method does not produce infant prodigies, nor will it reflect
glory upon their tutors and governesses, but it produces men, strong, right-thinking men, vigorous both
in mind and body, men who do not win admiration as children, but honour as men.
  Emile will not learn anything by heart, not even fables, not even the fables of La Fontaine, simple
and delightful as they are, for the words are no more the fable than the words of history are history.
How can people be so blind as to call fables the child's system of morals, without considering that the
child is not only amused by the apologue but misled by it? He is attracted by what is false and he
misses the truth, and the means adopted to make the teaching pleasant prevent him profiting by it. Men
may be taught by fables; children require the naked truth.
  All children learn La Fontaine's fables, but not one of them understands them. It is just as well that
they do not understand, for the morality of the fables is so mixed and so unsuitable for their age that it
would be more likely to incline them to vice than to virtue. "More paradoxes!" you exclaim. Paradoxes
they may be; but let us see if there is not some truth in them.
I maintain that the child does not understand the fables he is taught, for however you try to explain
them, the teaching you wish to extract from them demands ideas which he cannot grasp, while the
poetical form which makes it easier to remember makes it harder to understand, so that clearness is
sacrificed to facility. Without quoting the host of wholly unintelligible and useless fables which are
taught to children because they happen to be in the same book as the others, let us keep to those which
the author seems to have written specially for children.
  In the whole of La Fontaine's works I only know five or six fables conspicuous for child-like
simplicity; I will take the first of these as an example, for it is one whose moral is most suitable for all
ages,  one  which  children  get  hold  of  with  the  least  difficulty,  which  they  have  most  pleasure  in
learning, one which for this very reason the author has placed at the beginning of his book. If his object
were really to delight and instruct children, this fable is his masterpiece. Let us go through it and
examine it briefly.
  THE FOX AND THE CROW
  A FABLE
  "Maitre corbeau, sur un arbre perche" (Mr. Crow perched on a tree).--"Mr.!" what does that word
really mean? What does it mean before a proper noun? What is its meaning here? What is a crow?
What is "un arbre perche"? We do not say "on a tree perched," but perched on a tree. So we must speak
of poetical inversions, we must distinguish between prose and verse.
  "Tenait dans son bec un fromage" (Held a cheese in his beak)--What sort of a cheese? Swiss, Brie,
or Dutch? If the child has never seen crows, what is the good of talking about them? If he has seen
crows will he believe that they can hold a cheese in their beak? Your illustrations should always be
taken from nature.
  "Maitre renard, par l'odeur alleche" (Mr. Fox, attracted by the smell).--Another Master! But the title
suits  the  fox,--who  is  master  of  all  the  tricks  of  his  trade.  You  must  explain  what  a  fox  is,  and
distinguish between the real fox and the conventional fox of the fables.
  "Alleche." The word is obsolete; you will have to explain it. You will say it is only used in verse.
Perhaps the child will ask why people talk differently in verse. How will you answer that question?
  "Alleche, par l'odeur d'un fromage." The cheese was held in his beak by a crow perched on a tree; it
must indeed have smelt strong if the fox, in his thicket or his earth, could smell it. This is the way you
train your pupil in that spirit of right judgment, which rejects all but reasonable arguments, and is able
to distinguish between truth and falsehood in other tales.
  "Lui tient a peu pres ce langage" (Spoke to him after this fashion).--"Ce langage." So foxes talk, do
they! They talk like crows! Mind what you are about, oh, wise tutor; weigh your answer before you
give it, it is more important than you suspect.
  "Eh!  Bonjour,  Monsieur  le  Corbeau!"  ("Good-day,  Mr.  Crow!")--Mr.!  The  child  sees  this  title
laughed to scorn before he knows it is a title of honour. Those who say "Monsieur du Corbeau" will
find their work cut out for them to explain that "du."  "Que vous etes joli! Que vous me semblez beau!" ("How handsome you are, how beautiful in my
eyes!")--Mere padding. The child, finding the same thing repeated twice over in different words, is
learning to speak carelessly. If you say this redundance is a device of the author, a part of the fox's
scheme to make his praise seem all the greater by his flow of words, that is a valid excuse for me, but
not for my pupil.
  "Sans mentir, si votre ramage" ("Without lying, if your song").--"Without lying." So people do tell
lies sometimes. What will the child think of you if you tell him the fox only says "Sans mentir" because
he is lying?
  "Se rapporte a votre plumage" ("Answered to your fine feathers").--"Answered!" What does that
mean? Try to make the child compare qualities so different as those of song and plumage; you will see
how much he understands.
  "Vous seriez le phenix des hotes de ces bois!" ("You would be the phoenix of all the inhabitants of
this wood!")--The phoenix! What is a phoenix? All of a sudden we are floundering in the lies of
antiquity--we are on the edge of mythology.
  "The inhabitants of this wood." What figurative language! The flatterer adopts the grand style to
add dignity to his speech, to make it more attractive. Will the child understand this cunning? Does he
know, how could he possibly know, what is meant by grand style and simple style?
  "A ces mots le corbeau ne se sent pas de joie" (At these words, the crow is beside himself with
delight).--To realise the full force of this proverbial expression we must have experienced very strong
feeling.
  "Et,  pour  montrer  sa  belle  voix"  (And,  to  show  his  fine  voice).--Remember  that  the  child,  to
understand this line and the whole fable, must know what is meant by the crow's fine voice.
  "Il ouvre un large bec, laisse tomber sa proie" (He opens his wide beak and drops his prey).--This is
a splendid line; its very sound suggests a picture. I see the great big ugly gaping beak, I hear the cheese
crashing through the branches; but this kind of beauty is thrown away upon children.
  "Le renard s'en saisit, et dit, 'Mon bon monsieur'" (The fox catches it, and says, "My dear sir").--So
kindness is already folly. You certainly waste no time in teaching your children.
  "Apprenez que tout flatteur" ("You must learn that every flatterer").--A general maxim. The child
can make neither head nor tail of it.
  "Vit  au  depens  de  celui  qui  l'ecoute"  ("Lives  at  the  expense  of  the  person  who  listens  to  his
flattery").--No child of ten ever understood that.
  "Ce lecon vaut bien un fromage, sans doute" ("No doubt this lesson is well worth a cheese").--This
is intelligible and its meaning is very good. Yet there are few children who could compare a cheese and
a lesson, few who would not prefer the cheese. You will therefore have to make them understand that
this is said in mockery. What subtlety for a child!
  "Le corbeau, honteux et confus" (The crow, ashamed and confused).--A nothing pleonasm, and
there is no excuse for it this time.
  "Jura, mais un peu tard, qu'on ne l'y prendrait plus" (Swore, but rather too late, that he would not be
caught in that way again).--"Swore." What master will be such a fool as to try to explain to a child the
meaning of an oath?
  What a host of details! but much more would be needed for the analysis of all the ideas in this fable
and their reduction to the simple and elementary ideas of which each is composed. But who thinks this
analysis necessary to make himself intelligible to children? Who of us is philosopher enough to be able
to put himself in the child's place? Let us now proceed to the moral.
  Should we teach a six-year-old child that there are people who flatter and lie for the sake of gain?
One might perhaps teach them that there are people who make fools of little boys and laugh at their
foolish vanity behind their backs. But the whole thing is spoilt by the cheese. You are teaching them
how to make another drop his cheese rather than how to keep their own. This is my second paradox,
and it is not less weighty than the former one.
  Watch children learning their fables and you will see that when they have a chance of applyingthem they almost always use them exactly contrary to the author's meaning; instead of being on their
guard against the fault which you would prevent or cure, they are disposed to like the vice by which
one takes advantage of another's defects. In the above fable children laugh at the crow, but they all love
the fox. In the next fable you expect them to follow the example of the grasshopper. Not so, they will
choose the ant. They do not care to abase themselves, they will always choose the principal part--this is
the choice of self-love, a very natural choice. But what a dreadful lesson for children! There could be
no monster more detestable than a harsh and avaricious child, who realised what he was asked to give
and what he refused. The ant does more; she teaches him not merely to refuse but to revile.
  In all the fables where the lion plays a part, usually the chief part, the child pretends to be the lion,
and when he has to preside over some distribution of good things, he takes care to keep everything for
himself; but when the lion is overthrown by the gnat, the child is the gnat. He learns how to sting to
death those whom he dare not attack openly.
  From the fable of the sleek dog and the starving wolf he learns a lesson of licence rather than the
lesson of moderation which you profess to teach him. I shall never forget seeing a little girl weeping
bitterly over this tale, which had been told her as a lesson in obedience. The poor child hated to be
chained up; she felt the chain chafing her neck; she was crying because she was not a wolf.
  So from the first of these fables the child learns the basest flattery; from the second, cruelty; from
the third, injustice; from the fourth, satire; from the fifth, insubordination. The last of these lessons is no
more suitable for your pupils than for mine, though he has no use for it. What results do you expect to
get  from  your  teaching  when  it  contradicts  itself!  But  perhaps  the  same  system  of  morals  which
furnishes me with objections against the fables supplies you with as many reasons for keeping to them.
Society requires a rule of morality in our words; it also requires a rule of morality in our deeds; and
these two rules are quite different. The former is contained in the Catechism and it is left there; the
other is contained in La Fontaine's fables for children and his tales for mothers. The same author does
for both.
  Let us make a bargain, M. de la Fontaine. For my own part, I undertake to make your books my
favourite study; I undertake to love you, and to learn from your fables, for I hope I shall not mistake
their meaning. As to my pupil, permit me to prevent him studying any one of them till you have
convinced me that it is good for him to learn things three-fourths of which are unintelligible to him, and
until you can convince me that in those fables he can understand he will never reverse the order and
imitate the villain instead of taking warning from his dupe.
  When I thus get rid of children's lessons, I get rid of the chief cause of their sorrows, namely their
books. Reading is the curse of childhood, yet it is almost the only occupation you can find for children.
Emile, at twelve years old, will hardly know what a book is. "But," you say, "he must, at least, know
how to read."
  When reading is of use to him, I admit he must learn to read, but till then he will only find it a
nuisance.
  If children are not to be required to do anything as a matter of obedience, it follows that they will
only learn what they perceive to be of real and present value, either for use or enjoyment; what other
motive could they have for learning? The art of speaking to our absent friends, of hearing their words;
the art of letting them know at first hand our feelings, our desires, and our longings, is an art whose
usefulness can be made plain at any age. How is it that this art, so useful and pleasant in itself, has
become a terror to children? Because the child is compelled to acquire it against his will, and to use it
for purposes beyond his comprehension. A child has no great wish to perfect himself in the use of an
instrument of torture, but make it a means to his pleasure, and soon you will not be able to keep him
from it.
  People make a great fuss about discovering the beat way to teach children to read. They invent
"bureaux" [Footnote: Translator's note.--The "bureau" was a sort of case containing letters to be put
together to form words. It was a favourite device for the teaching of reading and gave its name to a
special method, called the bureau-method, of learning to read.] and cards, they turn the nursery into aprinter's shop. Locke would have them taught to read by means of dice. What a fine idea! And the pity
of it! There is a better way than any of those, and one which is generally overlooked--it consists in the
desire to learn. Arouse this desire in your scholar and have done with your "bureaux" and your dice--
any method will serve.
  Present interest, that is the motive power, the only motive power that takes us far and safely.
Sometimes Emile receives notes of invitation from his father or mother, his relations or friends; he is
invited to a dinner, a walk, a boating expedition, to see some public entertainment. These notes are
short, clear, plain, and well written. Some one must read them to him, and he cannot always find
anybody  when  wanted;  no  more  consideration  is  shown  to  him  than  he  himself  showed  to  you
yesterday. Time passes, the chance is lost. The note is read to him at last, but it is too late. Oh! if only
he had known how to read! He receives other notes, so short, so interesting, he would like to try to read
them. Sometimes he gets help, sometimes none. He does his best, and at last he makes out half the note;
it is something about going to-morrow to drink cream--Where? With whom? He cannot tell--how hard
he tries to make out the rest! I do not think Emile will need a "bureau." Shall I proceed to the teaching
of writing? No, I am ashamed to toy with these trifles in a treatise on education.
I will just add a few words which contain a principle of great importance. It is this--What we are in
no hurry to get is usually obtained with speed and certainty. I am pretty sure Emile will learn to read
and write before he is ten, just because I care very little whether he can do so before he is fifteen; but I
would rather he never learnt to read at all, than that this art should be acquired at the price of all that
makes reading useful. What is the use of reading to him if he always hates it? "Id imprimis cavere
oportebit, ne studia, qui amare nondum potest, oderit, et amaritudinem semel perceptam etiam ultra
rudes annos reformidet."--Quintil.
  The more I urge my method of letting well alone, the more objections I perceive against it. If your
pupil  learns  nothing  from  you,  he  will  learn  from  others.  If  you  do  not  instil  truth  he  will  learn
falsehoods; the prejudices you fear to teach him he will acquire from those about him, they will find
their way through every one of his senses; they will either corrupt his reason before it is fully developed
or his mind will become torpid through inaction, and will become engrossed in material things. If we
do not form the habit of thinking as children, we shall lose the power of thinking for the rest of our life.
I fancy I could easily answer that objection, but why should I answer every objection? If my
method  itself  answers  your  objections,  it  is  good;  if  not,  it  is  good  for  nothing.  I  continue  my
explanation.
  If, in accordance with the plan I have sketched, you follow rules which are just the opposite of the
established practice, if instead of taking your scholar far afield, instead of wandering with him in
distant places, in far-off lands, in remote centuries, in the ends of the earth, and in the very heavens
themselves,  you  try  to  keep  him  to  himself,  to  his  own  concerns,  you  will  then  find  him  able  to
perceive, to remember, and even to reason; this is nature's order. As the sentient being becomes active
his discernment develops along with his strength. Not till his strength is in excess of what is needed for
self-preservation, is the speculative faculty developed, the faculty adapted for using this superfluous
strength for other purposes. Would you cultivate your pupil's intelligence, cultivate the strength it is
meant to control. Give his body constant exercise, make it strong and healthy, in order to make him
good and wise; let him work, let him do things, let him run and shout, let him be always on the go;
make a man of him in strength, and he will soon be a man in reason.
  Of course by this method you will make him stupid if you are always giving him directions, always
saying come here, go there, stop, do this, don't do that. If your head always guides his hands, his own
mind will become useless. But remember the conditions we laid down; if you are a mere pedant it is not
worth your while to read my book.
  It is a lamentable mistake to imagine that bodily activity hinders the working of the mind, as if these
two kinds of activity ought not to advance hand in hand, and as if the one were not intended to act as
guide to the other.
  There are two classes of men who are constantly engaged in bodily activity, peasants and savages,and certainly neither of these pays the least attention to the cultivation of the mind. Peasants are rough,
coarse, and clumsy; savages are noted, not only for their keen senses, but for great subtility of mind.
Speaking generally, there is nothing duller than a peasant or sharper than a savage. What is the cause of
this difference? The peasant has always done as he was told, what his father did before him, what he
himself has always done; he is the creature of habit, he spends his life almost like an automaton on the
same tasks; habit and obedience have taken the place of reason.
  The case of the savage is very different; he is tied to no one place, he has no prescribed task, no
superior to obey, he knows no law but his own will; he is therefore forced to reason at every step he
takes. He can neither move nor walk without considering the consequences. Thus the more his body is
exercised, the more alert is his mind; his strength and his reason increase together, and each helps to
develop the other.
  Oh, learned tutor, let us see which of our two scholars is most like the savage and which is most
like the peasant. Your scholar is subject to a power which is continually giving him instruction; he acts
only at the word of command; he dare not eat when he is hungry, nor laugh when he is merry, nor weep
when he is sad, nor offer one hand rather than the other, nor stir a foot unless he is told to do it; before
long he will not venture to breathe without orders. What would you have him think about, when you do
all the thinking for him? He rests securely on your foresight, why should he think for himself? He
knows you have undertaken to take care of him, to secure his welfare, and he feels himself freed from
this responsibility. His judgment relies on yours; what you have not forbidden that he does, knowing
that he runs no risk. Why should he learn the signs of rain? He knows you watch the clouds for him.
Why should he time his walk? He knows there is no fear of your letting him miss his dinner hour. He
eats till you tell him to stop, he stops when you tell him to do so; he does not attend to the teaching of
his own stomach, but yours. In vain do you make his body soft by inaction; his understanding does not
become subtle. Far from it, you complete your task of discrediting reason in his eyes, by making him
use such reasoning power as he has on the things which seem of least importance to him. As he never
finds his reason any use to him, he decides at last that it is useless. If he reasons badly he will be found
fault with; nothing worse will happen to him; and he has been found fault with so often that he pays no
attention to it, such a common danger no longer alarms him.
  Yet you will find he has a mind. He is quick enough to chatter with the women in the way I spoke
of further back; but if he is in danger, if he must come to a decision in difficult circumstances, you will
find him a hundredfold more stupid and silly than the son of the roughest labourer.
  As for my pupil, or rather Nature's pupil, he has been trained from the outset to be as self-reliant as
possible, he has not formed the habit of constantly seeking help from others, still less of displaying his
stores of learning. On the other hand, he exercises discrimination and forethought, he reasons about
everything that concerns himself. He does not chatter, he acts. Not a word does he know of what is
going on in the world at large, but he knows very thoroughly what affects himself. As he is always
stirring he is compelled to notice many things, to recognise many effects; he soon acquires a good deal
of experience. Nature, not man, is his schoolmaster, and he learns all the quicker because he is not
aware that he has any lesson to learn. So mind and body work together. He is always carrying out his
own ideas, not those of other people, and thus he unites thought and action; as he grows in health and
strength he grows in wisdom and discernment. This is the way to attain later on to what is generally
considered incompatible, though most great men have achieved it, strength of body and strength of
mind, the reason of the philosopher and the vigour of the athlete.
  Young teacher, I am setting before you a difficult task, the art of controlling without precepts, and
doing everything without doing anything at all. This art is, I confess, beyond your years, it is not
calculated to display your talents nor to make your value known to your scholar's parents; but it is the
only road to success. You will never succeed in making wise men if you do not first make little imps of
mischief. This was the education of the Spartans; they were not taught to stick to their books, they were
set to steal their dinners. Were they any the worse for it in after life? Ever ready for victory, they
crushed their foes in every kind of warfare, and the prating Athenians were as much afraid of theirwords as of their blows.
  When education is most carefully attended to, the teacher issues his orders and thinks himself
master, but it is the child who is really master. He uses the tasks you set him to obtain what he wants
from you, and he can always make you pay for an hour's industry by a week's complaisance. You must
always be making bargains with him. These bargains, suggested in your fashion, but carried out in his,
always follow the direction of his own fancies, especially when you are foolish enough to make the
condition some advantage he is almost sure to obtain, whether he fulfils his part of the bargain or not.
The child is usually much quicker to read the master's thoughts than the master to read the child's
feelings. And that is as it should be, for all the sagacity which the child would have devoted to self-
preservation, had he been left to himself, is now devoted to the rescue of his native freedom from the
chains of his tyrant; while the latter, who has no such pressing need to understand the child, sometimes
finds that it pays him better to leave him in idleness or vanity.
  Take the opposite course with your pupil; let him always think he is master while you are really
master. There is no subjection so complete as that which preserves the forms of freedom; it is thus that
the will itself is taken captive. Is not this poor child, without knowledge, strength, or wisdom, entirely
at your mercy? Are you not master of his whole environment so far as it affects him? Cannot you make
of him what you please? His work and play, his pleasure and pain, are they not, unknown to him, under
your control? No doubt he ought only to do what he wants, but he ought to want to do nothing but what
you want him to do. He should never take a step you have not foreseen, nor utter a word you could not
foretell.
  Then he can devote himself to the bodily exercises adapted to his age without brutalising his mind;
instead of developing his cunning to evade an unwelcome control, you will then find him entirely
occupied in getting the best he can out of his environment with a view to his present welfare, and you
will be surprised by the subtlety of the means he devises to get for himself such things as he can obtain,
and to really enjoy things without the aid of other people's ideas. You leave him master of his own
wishes, but you do not multiply his caprices. When he only does what he wants, he will soon only do
what he ought, and although his body is constantly in motion, so far as his sensible and present interests
are concerned, you will find him developing all the reason of which he is capable, far better and in a
manner much better fitted for him than in purely theoretical studies.
  Thus when he does not find you continually thwarting him, when he no longer distrusts you, no
longer has anything to conceal from you, he will neither tell you lies nor deceive you; he will show
himself fearlessly as he really is, and you can study him at your ease, and surround him with all the
lessons you would have him learn, without awaking his suspicions.
  Neither will he keep a curious and jealous eye on your own conduct, nor take a secret delight in
catching you at fault. It is a great thing to avoid this. One of the child's first objects is, as I have said, to
find the weak spots in its rulers. Though this leads to spitefulness, it does not arise from it, but from the
desire to evade a disagreeable control. Overburdened by the yoke laid upon him, he tries to shake it off,
and the faults he finds in his master give him a good opportunity for this. Still the habit of spying out
faults and delighting in them grows upon people. Clearly we have stopped another of the springs of
vice in Emile's heart. Having nothing to gain from my faults, he will not be on the watch for them, nor
will he be tempted to look out for the faults of others.
  All  these  methods  seem  difficult  because  they  are  new  to  us,  but  they  ought  not  to  be  really
difficult. I have a right to assume that you have the knowledge required for the business you have
chosen; that you know the usual course of development of the human thought, that you can study
mankind and man, that you know beforehand the effect on your pupil's will of the various objects suited
to his age which you put before him. You have the tools and the art to use them; are you not master of
your trade?
  You speak of childish caprice; you are mistaken. Children's caprices are never the work of nature,
but of bad discipline; they have either obeyed or given orders, and I have said again and again, they
must do neither. Your pupil will have the caprices you have taught him; it is fair you should bear thepunishment of your own faults. "But how can I cure them?" do you say? That may still be done by
better conduct on your own part and great patience. I once undertook the charge of a child for a few
weeks; he was accustomed not only to have his own way, but to make every one else do as he pleased;
he was therefore capricious. The very first day he wanted to get up at midnight, to try how far he could
go with me. When I was sound asleep he jumped out of bed, got his dressing-gown, and waked me up. I
got up and lighted the candle, which was all he wanted. After a quarter of an hour he became sleepy
and went back to bed quite satisfied with his experiment. Two days later he repeated it, with the same
success and with no sign of impatience on my part. When he kissed me as he lay down, I said to him
very quietly, "My little dear, this is all very well, but do not try it again." His curiosity was aroused by
this, and the very next day he did not fail to get up at the same time and woke me to see whether I
should dare to disobey him. I asked what he wanted, and he told me he could not sleep. "So much the
worse for you," I replied, and I lay quiet. He seemed perplexed by this way of speaking. He felt his way
to the flint and steel and tried to strike a light. I could not help laughing when I heard him strike his
fingers. Convinced at last that he could not manage it, he brought the steel to my bed; I told him I did
not want it, and I turned my back to him. Then he began to rush wildly about the room, shouting,
singing, making a great noise, knocking against chairs and tables, but taking, however, good care not to
hurt himself seriously, but screaming loudly in the hope of alarming me. All this had no effect, but I
perceived that though he was prepared for scolding or anger, he was quite unprepared for indifference.
  However, he was determined to overcome my patience with his own obstinacy, and he continued
his racket so successfully that at last I lost my temper. I foresaw that I should spoil the whole business
by an unseemly outburst of passion. I determined on another course. I got up quietly, went to the tinder
box, but could not find it; I asked him for it, and he gave it me, delighted to have won the victory over
me. I struck a light, lighted the candle, took my young gentleman by the hand and led him quietly into
an adjoining dressing-room with the shutters firmly fastened, and nothing he could break.
I left him there without a light; then locking him in I went back to my bed without a word. What a
noise there was! That was what I expected, and took no notice. At last the noise ceased; I listened,
heard him settling down, and I was quite easy about him. Next morning I entered the room at daybreak,
and my little rebel was lying on a sofa enjoying a sound and much needed sleep after his exertions.
  The matter did not end there. His mother heard that the child had spent a great part of the night out
of bed. That spoilt the whole thing; her child was as good as dead. Finding a good chance for revenge,
he pretended to be ill, not seeing that he would gain nothing by it. They sent for the doctor. Unluckily
for the mother, the doctor was a practical joker, and to amuse himself with her terrors he did his best to
increase them. However, he whispered to me, "Leave it to me, I promise to cure the child of wanting to
be ill for some time to come." As a matter of fact he prescribed bed and dieting, and the child was
handed over to the apothecary. I sighed to see the mother cheated on every hand except by me, whom
she hated because I did not deceive her.
  After pretty severe reproaches, she told me her son was delicate, that he was the sole heir of the
family, his life must be preserved at all costs, and she would not have him contradicted. In that I
thoroughly agreed with her, but what she meant by contradicting was not obeying him in everything. I
saw I should have to treat the mother as I had treated the son. "Madam," I said coldly, "I do not know
how to educate the heir to a fortune, and what is more, I do not mean to study that art. You can take that
as settled." I was wanted for some days longer, and the father smoothed things over. The mother wrote
to the tutor to hasten his return, and the child, finding he got nothing by disturbing my rest, nor yet by
being ill, decided at last to get better and to go to sleep.
  You can form no idea of the number of similar caprices to which the little tyrant had subjected his
unlucky tutor; for his education was carried on under his mother's eye, and she would not allow her son
and heir to be disobeyed in anything. Whenever he wanted to go out, you must be ready to take him, or
rather to follow him, and he always took good care to choose the time when he knew his tutor was very
busy. He wished to exercise the same power over me and to avenge himself by day for having to leave
me in peace at night. I gladly agreed and began by showing plainly how pleased I was to give himpleasure; after that when it was a matter of curing him of his fancies I set about it differently.
  In the first place, he must be shown that he was in the wrong. This was not difficult; knowing that
children think only of the present, I took the easy advantage which foresight gives; I took care to
provide him with some indoor amusement of which he was very fond. Just when he was most occupied
with it, I went and suggested a short walk, and he sent me away. I insisted, but he paid no attention. I
had to give in, and he took note of this sign of submission.
  The next day it was my turn. As I expected, he got tired of his occupation; I, however, pretended to
be very busy. That was enough to decide him. He came to drag me from my work, to take him at once
for a walk. I refused; he persisted. "No," I said, "when I did what you wanted, you taught me how to get
my own way; I shall not go out." "Very well," he replied eagerly, "I shall go out by myself." "As you
please," and I returned to my work.
  He put on his things rather uneasily when he saw I did not follow his example. When he was ready
he came and made his bow; I bowed too; he tried to frighten me with stories of the expeditions he was
going to make; to hear him talk you would think he was going to the world's end. Quite unmoved, I
wished him a pleasant journey. He became more and more perplexed. However, he put a good face on
it, and when he was ready to go out he told his foot man to follow him. The footman, who had his
instructions, replied that he had no time, and that he was busy carrying out my orders, and he must obey
me first. For the moment the child was taken aback. How could he think they would really let him go
out alone, him, who, in his own eyes, was the most important person in the world, who thought that
everything in heaven and earth was wrapped up in his welfare? However, he was beginning to feel his
weakness, he perceived that he should find himself alone among people who knew nothing of him. He
saw beforehand the risks he would run; obstinacy alone sustained him; very slowly and unwillingly he
went downstairs. At last he went out into the street, consoling himself a little for the harm that might
happen to himself, in the hope that I should be held responsible for it.
  This was just what I expected. All was arranged beforehand, and as it meant some sort of public
scene I had got his father's consent. He had scarcely gone a few steps, when he heard, first on this side
then on that, all sorts of remarks about himself. "What a pretty little gentleman, neighbour? Where is he
going all alone? He will get lost! I will ask him into our house." "Take care you don't. Don't you see he
is a naughty little boy, who has been turned out of his own house because he is good for nothing? You
must not stop naughty boys; let him go where he likes." "Well, well; the good God take care of him. I
should be sorry if anything happened to him." A little further on he met some young urchins of about
his own age who teased him and made fun of him. The further he got the more difficulties he found.
Alone and unprotected he was at the mercy of everybody, and he found to his great surprise that his
shoulder knot and his gold lace commanded no respect.
  However, I had got a friend of mine, who was a stranger to him, to keep an eye on him. Unnoticed
by him, this friend followed him step by step, and in due time he spoke to him. The role, like that of
Sbrigani  in  Pourceaugnac,  required  an  intelligent  actor,  and  it  was  played  to  perfection.  Without
making the child fearful and timid by inspiring excessive terror, he made him realise so thoroughly the
folly of his exploit that in half an hour's time he brought him home to me, ashamed and humble, and
afraid to look me in the face.
  To put the finishing touch to his discomfiture, just as he was coming in his father came down on his
way out and met him on the stairs. He had to explain where he had been, and why I was not with him.
[Footnote: In a case like this there is no danger in asking a child to tell the truth, for he knows very well
that it cannot be hid, and that if he ventured to tell a lie he would be found out at once.] The poor child
would gladly have sunk into the earth. His father did not take the trouble to scold him at length, but said
with more severity than I should have expected, "When you want to go out by yourself, you can do so,
but I will not have a rebel in my house, so when you go, take good care that you never come back."
  As for me, I received him somewhat gravely, but without blame and without mockery, and for fear
he should find out we had been playing with him, I declined to take him out walking that day. Next day
I was well pleased to find that he passed in triumph with me through the very same people who hadmocked him the previous day, when they met him out by himself. You may be sure he never threatened
to go out without me again.
  By these means and other like them I succeeded during the short time I was with him in getting him
to do everything I wanted without bidding him or forbidding him to do anything, without preaching or
exhortation, without wearying him with unnecessary lessons. So he was pleased when I spoke to him,
but when I was silent he was frightened, for he knew there was something amiss, and he always got his
lesson from the thing itself. But let us return to our subject.
  The body is strengthened by this constant exercise under the guidance of nature herself, and far
from brutalising the mind, this exercise develops in it the only kind of reason of which young children
are capable, the kind of reason most necessary at every age. It teaches us how to use our strength, to
perceive the relations between our own and neighbouring bodies, to use the natural tools, which are
within our reach and adapted to our senses. Is there anything sillier than a child brought up indoors
under his mother's eye, who, in his ignorance of weight and resistance, tries to uproot a tall tree or pick
up a rock. The first time I found myself outside Geneva I tried to catch a galloping horse, and I threw
stones at Mont Saleve, two leagues away; I was the laughing stock of the whole village, and was
supposed to be a regular idiot. At eighteen we are taught in our natural philosophy the use of the lever;
every village boy of twelve knows how to use a lever better than the cleverest mechanician in the
academy. The lessons the scholars learn from one another in the playground are worth a hundredfold
more than what they learn in the class-room.
  Watch a cat when she comes into a room for the first time; she goes from place to place, she sniffs
about and examines everything, she is never still for a moment; she is suspicious of everything till she
has examined it and found out what it is. It is the same with the child when he begins to walk, and
enters, so to speak, the room of the world around him. The only difference is that, while both use sight,
the child uses his hands and the cat that subtle sense of smell which nature has bestowed upon it. It is
this instinct, rightly or wrongly educated, which makes children skilful or clumsy, quick or slow, wise
or foolish.
  Man's primary natural goals are, therefore, to measure himself against his environment, to discover
in every object he sees those sensible qualities which may concern himself, so his first study is a kind
of experimental physics for his own preservation. He is turned away from this and sent to speculative
studies before he has found his proper place in the world. While his delicate and flexible limbs can
adjust themselves to the bodies upon which they are intended to act, while his senses are keen and as
yet free from illusions, then is the time to exercise both limbs and senses in their proper business. It is
the time to learn to perceive the physical relations between ourselves and things. Since everything that
comes into the human mind enters through the gates of sense, man's first reason is a reason of sense-
experience. It is this that serves as a foundation for the reason of the intelligence; our first teachers in
natural philosophy are our feet, hands, and eyes. To substitute books for them does not teach us to
reason, it teaches us to use the reason of others rather than our own; it teaches us to believe much and
know little.
  Before you can practise an art you must first get your tools; and if you are to make good use of
those tools, they must be fashioned sufficiently strong to stand use. To learn to think we must therefore
exercise our limbs, our senses, and our bodily organs, which are the tools of the intellect; and to get the
best use out of these tools, the body which supplies us with them must be strong and healthy. Not only
is  it  quite  a  mistake  that  true  reason  is  developed  apart  from  the  body,  but  it  is  a  good  bodily
constitution which makes the workings of the mind easy and correct.
  While I am showing how the child's long period of leisure should be spent, I am entering into
details which may seem absurd. You will say, "This is a strange sort of education, and it is subject to
your own criticism, for it only teaches what no one needs to learn. Why spend your time in teaching
what will come of itself without care or trouble? Is there any child of twelve who is ignorant of all you
wish to teach your pupil, while he also knows what his master has taught him."
  Gentlemen, you are mistaken. I am teaching my pupil an art, the acquirement of which demandsmuch time and trouble, an art which your scholars certainly do not possess; it is the art of being
ignorant; for the knowledge of any one who only thinks he knows, what he really does know is a very
small  matter.  You  teach  science;  well  and  good;  I  am  busy  fashioning  the  necessary  tools  for  its
acquisition. Once upon a time, they say the Venetians were displaying the treasures of the Cathedral of
Saint Mark to the Spanish ambassador; the only comment he made was, "Qui non c'e la radice." When I
see a tutor showing off his pupil's learning, I am always tempted to say the same to him.
  Every one who has considered the manner of life among the ancients, attributes the strength of body
and mind by which they are distinguished from the men of our own day to their gymnastic exercises.
The stress laid by Montaigne upon this opinion, shows that it had made a great impression on him; he
returns to it again and again. Speaking of a child's education he says, "To strengthen the mind you must
harden the muscles; by training the child to labour you train him to suffering; he must be broken in to
the hardships of gymnastic exercises to prepare him for the hardships of dislocations, colics, and other
bodily ills." The philosopher Locke, the worthy Rollin, the learned Fleury, the pedant De Crouzas,
differing as they do so widely from one another, are agreed in this one matter of sufficient bodily
exercise for children. This is the wisest of their precepts, and the one which is certain to be neglected. I
have already dwelt sufficiently on its importance, and as better reasons and more sensible rules cannot
be found than those in Locke's book, I will content myself with referring to it, after taking the liberty of
adding a few remarks of my own.
  The limbs of a growing child should be free to move easily in his clothing; nothing should cramp
their growth or movement; there should be nothing tight, nothing fitting closely to the body, no belts of
any kind. The French style of dress, uncomfortable and unhealthy for a man, is especially bad for
children. The stagnant humours, whose circulation is interrupted, putrify in a state of inaction, and this
process proceeds more rapidly in an inactive and sedentary life; they become corrupt and give rise to
scurvy;  this  disease,  which  is  continually  on  the  increase  among  us,  was  almost  unknown  to  the
ancients,  whose  way  of  dressing  and  living  protected  them  from  it.  The  hussar's  dress,  far  from
correcting this fault, increases it, and compresses the whole of the child's body, by way of dispensing
with a few bands. The best plan is to keep children in frocks as long as possible and then to provide
them with loose clothing, without trying to define the shape which is only another way of deforming it.
Their defects of body and mind may all be traced to the same source, the desire to make men of them
before their time.
  There are bright colours and dull; children like the bright colours best, and they suit them better too.
I see no reason why such natural suitability should not be taken into consideration; but as soon as they
prefer a material because it is rich, their hearts are already given over to luxury, to every caprice of
fashion,  and  this  taste  is  certainly  not  their  own.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how  much  education  is
influenced by this choice of clothes, and the motives for this choice. Not only do short-sighted mothers
offer ornaments as rewards to their children, but there are foolish tutors who threaten to make their
pupils wear the plainest and coarsest clothes as a punishment. "If you do not do your lessons better, if
you do not take more care of your clothes, you shall be dressed like that little peasant boy." This is like
saying to them, "Understand that clothes make the man." Is it to be wondered at that our young people
profit by such wise teaching, that they care for nothing but dress, and that they only judge of merit by
its outside.
  If I had to bring such a spoilt child to his senses, I would take care that his smartest clothes were the
most uncomfortable, that he was always cramped, constrained, and embarrassed in every way; freedom
and mirth should flee before his splendour. If he wanted to take part in the games of children more
simply dressed, they should cease their play and run away. Before long I should make him so tired and
sick of his magnificence, such a slave to his gold-laced coat, that it would become the plague of his life,
and  he  would  be  less  afraid  to  behold  the  darkest  dungeon  than  to  see  the  preparations  for  his
adornment.  Before  the  child  is  enslaved  by  our  prejudices  his  first  wish  is  always  to  be  free  and
comfortable. The plainest and most comfortable clothes, those which leave him most liberty, are what
he always likes best.  There are habits of body suited for an active life and others for a sedentary life. The latter leaves the
humours  an  equable  and  uniform  course,  and  the  body  should  be  protected  from  changes  in
temperature; the former is constantly passing from action to rest, from heat to cold, and the body should
be inured to these changes. Hence people, engaged in sedentary pursuits indoors, should always be
warmly dressed, to keep their bodies as nearly as possible at the same temperature at all times and
seasons. Those, however, who come and go in sun, wind, and rain, who take much exercise, and spend
most of their time out of doors, should always be lightly clad, so as to get used to the changes in the air
and to every degree of temperature without suffering inconvenience. I would advise both never to
change their clothes with the changing seasons, and that would be the invariable habit of my pupil
Emile. By this I do not mean that he should wear his winter clothes in summer like many people of
sedentary habits, but that he should wear his summer clothes in winter like hard-working folk. Sir Isaac
Newton always did this, and he lived to be eighty.
  Emile should wear little or nothing on his head all the year round. The ancient Egyptians always
went bareheaded; the Persians used to wear heavy tiaras and still wear large turbans, which according
to Chardin are required by their climate. I have remarked elsewhere on the difference observed by
Herodotus on a battle-field between the skulls of the Persians and those of the Egyptians. Since it is
desirable that the bones of the skull should grow harder and more substantial, less fragile and porous,
not only to protect the brain against injuries but against colds, fever, and every influence of the air, you
should therefore accustom your children to go bare-headed winter and summer, day and night. If you
make them wear a night-cap to keep their hair clean and tidy, let it be thin and transparent like the nets
with which the Basques cover their hair. I am aware that most mothers will be more impressed by
Chardin's observations than my arguments, and will think that all climates are the climate of Persia, but
I did not choose a European pupil to turn him into an Asiatic.
  Children are generally too much wrapped up, particularly in infancy. They should be accustomed to
cold rather than heat; great cold never does them any harm, if they are exposed to it soon enough; but
their skin is still too soft and tender and leaves too free a course for perspiration, so that they are
inevitably exhausted by excessive heat. It has been observed that infant mortality is greatest in August.
Moreover, it seems certain from a comparison of northern and southern races that we become stronger
by bearing extreme cold rather than excessive heat. But as the child's body grows bigger and his
muscles get stronger, train him gradually to bear the rays of the sun. Little by little you will harden him
till he can face the burning heat of the tropics without danger.
  Locke, in the midst of the manly and sensible advice he gives us, falls into inconsistencies one
would hardly expect in such a careful thinker. The same man who would have children take an ice-cold
bath summer and winter, will not let them drink cold water when they are hot, or lie on damp grass. But
he would never have their shoes water-tight; and why should they let in more water when the child is
hot than when he is cold, and may we not draw the same inference with regard to the feet and body that
he draws with regard to the hands and feet and the body and face? If he would have a man all face, why
blame me if I would have him all feet?
  To prevent children drinking when they are hot, he says they should be trained to eat a piece of
bread first. It is a strange thing to make a child eat because he is thirsty; I would as soon give him a
drink when he is hungry. You will never convince me that our first instincts are so ill-regulated that we
cannot satisfy them without endangering our lives. Were that so, the man would have perished over and
over again before he had learned how to keep himself alive.
  Whenever Emile is thirsty let him have a drink, and let him drink fresh water just as it is, not even
taking the chill off it in the depths of winter and when he is bathed in perspiration. The only precaution
I advise is to take care what sort of water you give him. If the water comes from a river, give it him just
as it is; if it is spring-water let it stand a little exposed to the air before he drinks it. In warm weather
rivers are warm; it is not so with springs, whose water has not been in contact with the air. You must
wait till the temperature of the water is the same as that of the air. In winter, on the other hand, spring
water is safer than river water. It is, however, unusual and unnatural to perspire greatly in winter,especially in the open air, for the cold air constantly strikes the skin and drives the perspiration inwards,
and prevents the pores opening enough to give it passage. Now I do not intend Emile to take his
exercise by the fireside in winter, but in the open air and among the ice. If he only gets warm with
making and throwing snowballs, let him drink when he is thirsty, and go on with his game after
drinking, and you need not be afraid of any ill effects. And if any other exercise makes him perspire let
him drink cold water even in winter provided he is thirsty. Only take care to take him to get the water
some little distance away. In such cold as I am supposing, he would have cooled down sufficiently
when he got there to be able to drink without danger. Above all, take care to conceal these precautions
from him. I would rather he were ill now and then, than always thinking about his health.
  Since children take such violent exercise they need a great deal of sleep. The one makes up for the
other, and this shows that both are necessary. Night is the time set apart by nature for rest. It is an
established fact that sleep is quieter and calmer when the sun is below the horizon, and that our senses
are less calm when the air is warmed by the rays of the sun. So it is certainly the healthiest plan to rise
with the sun and go to bed with the sun. Hence in our country man and all the other animals with him
want more sleep in winter than in summer. But town life is so complex, so unnatural, so subject to
chances and changes, that it is not wise to accustom a man to such uniformity that he cannot do without
it. No doubt he must submit to rules; but the chief rule is this--be able to break the rule if necessary. So
do not be so foolish as to soften your pupil by letting him always sleep his sleep out. Leave him at first
to the law of nature without any hindrance, but never forget that under our conditions he must rise
above this law; he must be able to go to bed late and rise early, be awakened suddenly, or sit up all
night without ill effects. Begin early and proceed gently, a step at a time, and the constitution adapts
itself to the very conditions which would destroy it if they were imposed for the first time on the grown
man.
  In the next place he must be accustomed to sleep in an uncomfortable bed, which is the best way to
find no bed uncomfortable. Speaking generally, a hard life, when once we have become used to it,
increases  our  pleasant  experiences;  an  easy  life  prepares  the  way  for  innumerable  unpleasant
experiences. Those who are too tenderly nurtured can only sleep on down; those who are used to sleep
on bare boards can find them anywhere. There is no such thing as a hard bed for the man who falls
asleep at once.
  The body is, so to speak, melted and dissolved in a soft bed where one sinks into feathers and eider-
down. The reins when too warmly covered become inflamed. Stone and other diseases are often due to
this, and it invariably produces a delicate constitution, which is the seed-ground of every ailment.
  The best bed is that in which we get the best sleep. Emile and I will prepare such a bed for
ourselves during the daytime. We do not need Persian slaves to make our beds; when we are digging
the soil we are turning our mattresses. I know that a healthy child may be made to sleep or wake almost
at will. When the child is put to bed and his nurse grows weary of his chatter, she says to him, "Go to
sleep." That is much like saying, "Get well," when he is ill. The right way is to let him get tired of
himself. Talk so much that he is compelled to hold his tongue, and he will soon be asleep. Here is at
least one use for sermons, and you may as well preach to him as rock his cradle; but if you use this
narcotic at night, do not use it by day.
I shall sometimes rouse Emile, not so much to prevent his sleeping too much, as to accustom him to
anything--even to waking with a start. Moreover, I should be unfit for my business if I could not make
him wake himself, and get up, so to speak, at my will, without being called.
  If he wakes too soon, I shall let him look forward to a tedious morning, so that he will count as gain
any time he can give to sleep. If he sleeps too late I shall show him some favourite toy when he wakes.
If I want him to wake at a given hour I shall say, "To-morrow at six I am going fishing," or "I shall take
a walk to such and such a place. Would you like to come too?" He assents, and begs me to wake him. I
promise, or do not promise, as the case requires. If he wakes too late, he finds me gone. There is
something amiss if he does not soon learn to wake himself.
  Moreover,  should  it  happen,  though  it  rarely  does,  that  a  sluggish  child  desires  to  stagnate  inidleness, you must not give way to this tendency, which might stupefy him entirely, but you must apply
some stimulus to wake him. You must understand that is no question of applying force, but of arousing
some appetite which leads to action, and such an appetite, carefully selected on the lines laid down by
nature, kills two birds with one stone.
  If one has any sort of skill, I can think of nothing for which a taste, a very passion, cannot be
aroused in children, and that without vanity, emulation, or jealousy. Their keenness, their spirit of
imitation, is enough of itself; above all, there is their natural liveliness, of which no teacher so far has
contrived to take advantage. In every game, when they are quite sure it is only play, they endure
without complaint, or even with laughter, hardships which they would not submit to otherwise without
floods of tears. The sports of the young savage involve long fasting, blows, burns, and fatigue of every
kind, a proof that even pain has a charm of its own, which may remove its bitterness. It is not every
master, however, who knows how to season this dish, nor can every scholar eat it without making
faces. However, I must take care or I shall be wandering off again after exceptions.
  It is not to be endured that man should become the slave of pain, disease, accident, the perils of life,
or even death itself; the more familiar he becomes with these ideas the sooner he will be cured of that
over-sensitiveness which adds to the pain by impatience in bearing it; the sooner he becomes used to
the sufferings which may overtake him, the sooner he shall, as Montaigne has put it, rob those pains of
the sting of unfamiliarity, and so make his soul strong and invulnerable; his body will be the coat of
mail which stops all the darts which might otherwise find a vital part. Even the approach of death,
which is not death itself, will scarcely be felt as such; he will not die, he will be, so to speak, alive or
dead and nothing more. Montaigne might say of him as he did of a certain king of Morocco, "No man
ever prolonged his life so far into death." A child serves his apprenticeship in courage and endurance as
well as in other virtues; but you cannot teach children these virtues by name alone; they must learn
them unconsciously through experience.
  But speaking of death, what steps shall I take with regard to my pupil and the smallpox? Shall he be
inoculated in infancy, or shall I wait till he takes it in the natural course of things? The former plan is
more in accordance with our practice, for it preserves his life at a time when it is of greater value, at the
cost of some danger when his life is of less worth; if indeed we can use the word danger with regard to
inoculation when properly performed.
  But the other plan is more in accordance with our general principles--to leave nature to take the
precautions she delights in, precautions she abandons whenever man interferes. The natural man is
always ready; let nature inoculate him herself, she will choose the fitting occasion better than we.
  Do not think I am finding fault with inoculation, for my reasons for exempting my pupil from it do
not in the least apply to yours. Your training does not prepare them to escape catching smallpox as soon
as they are exposed to infection. If you let them take it anyhow, they will probably die. I perceive that
in different lands the resistance to inoculation is in proportion to the need for it; and the reason is plain.
So I scarcely condescend to discuss this question with regard to Emile. He will be inoculated or not
according  to  time,  place,  and  circumstances;  it  is  almost  a  matter  of  indifference,  as  far  as  he  is
concerned. If it gives him smallpox, there will be the advantage of knowing what to expect, knowing
what the disease is; that is a good thing, but if he catches it naturally it will have kept him out of the
doctor's hands, which is better.
  An exclusive education, which merely tends to keep those who have received it apart from the mass
of mankind, always selects such teaching as is costly rather than cheap, even when the latter is of more
use. Thus all carefully educated young men learn to ride, because it is costly, but scarcely any of them
learn to swim, as it costs nothing, and an artisan can swim as well as any one. Yet without passing
through the riding school, the traveller learns to mount his horse, to stick on it, and to ride well enough
for practical purposes; but in the water if you cannot swim you will drown, and we cannot swim unless
we are taught. Again, you are not forced to ride on pain of death, while no one is sure of escaping such
a common danger as drowning. Emile shall be as much at home in the water as on land. Why should he
not be able to live in every element? If he could learn to fly, he should be an eagle; I would make him asalamander, if he could bear the heat.
  People are afraid lest the child should be drowned while he is learning to swim; if he dies while he
is learning, or if he dies because he has not learnt, it will be your own fault. Foolhardiness is the result
of vanity; we are not rash when no one is looking. Emile will not be foolhardy, though all the world
were watching him. As the exercise does not depend on its danger, he will learn to swim the Hellespont
by swimming, without any danger, a stream in his father's park; but he must get used to danger too, so
as not to be flustered by it. This is an essential part of the apprenticeship I spoke of just now. Moreover,
I shall take care to proportion the danger to his strength, and I shall always share it myself, so that I
need scarcely fear any imprudence if I take as much care for his life as for my own.
  A child is smaller than a man; he has not the man's strength or reason, but he sees and hears as well
or nearly as well; his sense of taste is very good, though he is less fastidious, and he distinguishes
scents as clearly though less sensuously. The senses are the first of our faculties to mature; they are
those most frequently overlooked or neglected.
  To train the senses it is not enough merely to use them; we must learn to judge by their means, to
learn to feel, so to speak; for we cannot touch, see, or hear, except as we have been taught.
  There is a mere natural and mechanical use of the senses which strengthens the body without
improving the judgment. It is all very well to swim, run, jump, whip a top, throw stones; but have we
nothing but arms and legs? Have we not eyes and ears as well; and are not these organs necessary for
the use of the rest? Do not merely exercise the strength, exercise all the senses by which it is guided;
make the best use of every one of them, and check the results of one by the other. Measure, count,
weigh, compare. Do not use force till you have estimated the resistance; let the estimation of the effect
always  precede  the  application  of  the  means.  Get  the  child  interested  in  avoiding  insufficient  or
superfluous efforts. If in this way you train him to calculate the effects of all his movements, and to
correct his mistakes by experience, is it not clear that the more he does the wiser he will become?
  Take the case of moving a heavy mass; if he takes too long a lever, he will waste his strength; if it is
too short, he will not have strength enough; experience will teach him to use the very stick he needs.
This knowledge is not beyond his years. Take, for example, a load to be carried; if he wants to carry as
much as he can, and not to take up more than he can carry, must he not calculate the weight by the
appearance? Does he know how to compare masses of like substance and different size, or to choose
between masses of the same size and different substances? He must set to work to compare their
specific weights. I have seen a young man, very highly educated, who could not be convinced, till he
had tried it, that a bucket full of blocks of oak weighed less than the same bucket full of water.
  All our senses are not equally under our control. One of them, touch, is always busy during our
waking hours; it is spread over the whole surface of the body, like a sentinel ever on the watch to warn
us of anything which may do us harm. Whether we will or not, we learn to use it first of all by
experience, by constant practice, and therefore we have less need for special training for it. Yet we
know that the blind have a surer and more delicate sense of touch than we, for not being guided by the
one sense, they are forced to get from the touch what we get from sight. Why, then, are not we trained
to walk as they do in the dark, to recognise what we touch, to distinguish things about us; in a word, to
do at night and in the dark what they do in the daytime without sight? We are better off than they while
the sun shines; in the dark it is their turn to be our guide. We are blind half our time, with this
difference: the really blind always know what to do, while we are afraid to stir in the dark. We have
lights, you say. What always artificial aids. Who can insure that they will always be at hand when
required. I had rather Emil's eyes were in his finger tips, than in the chandler's shop.
  If you are shut up in a building at night, clap your hands, you will know from the sound whether the
space is large or small, if you are in the middle or in one corner. Half a foot from a wall the air, which
is refracted and does not circulate freely, produces a different effect on your face. Stand still in one
place and turn this way and that; a slight draught will tell you if there is a door open. If you are on a
boat you will perceive from the way the air strikes your face not merely the direction in which you are
going, but whether the current is bearing you slow or fast. These observations and many others likethem can only be properly made at night; however much attention we give to them by daylight, we are
always helped or hindered by sight, so that the results escape us. Yet here we use neither hand nor stick.
How much may be learnt by touch, without ever touching anything!
I would have plenty of games in the dark! This suggestion is more valuable than it seems at first
sight.  Men  are  naturally  afraid  of  the  dark;  so  are  some  animals.  [Footnote:  This  terror  is  very
noticeable during great eclipses of the sun.] Only a few men are freed from this burden by knowledge,
determination,  and  courage.  I  have  seen  thinkers,  unbelievers,  philosophers,  exceedingly  brave  by
daylight, tremble like women at the rustling of a leaf in the dark. This terror is put down to nurses' tales;
this is a mistake; it has a natural cause. What is this cause? What makes the deaf suspicious and the
lower classes superstitious? Ignorance of the things about us, and of what is taking place around us.
[Footnote:  Another  cause  has  been  well  explained  by  a  philosopher,  often  quoted  in  this  work,  a
philosopher to whose wide views I am very greatly indebted.]
  When under special conditions we cannot form a fair idea of distance, when we can only judge
things by the size of the angle or rather of the image formed in our eyes, we cannot avoid being
deceived as to the size of these objects. Every one knows by experience how when we are travelling at
night we take a bush near at hand for a great tree at a distance, and vice versa. In the same way, if the
objects were of a shape unknown to us, so that we could not tell their size in that way, we should be
equally mistaken with regard to it. If a fly flew quickly past a few inches from our eyes, we should
think it was a distant bird; a horse standing still at a distance from us in the midst of open country, in a
position somewhat like that of a sheep, would be taken for a large sheep, so long as we did not perceive
that it was a horse; but as soon as we recognise what it is, it seems as large as a horse, and we at once
correct our former judgment.
  Whenever one finds oneself in unknown places at night where we cannot judge of distance, and
where we cannot recognise objects by their shape on account of the darkness, we are in constant danger
of forming mistaken judgments as to the objects which present themselves to our notice. Hence that
terror, that kind of inward fear experienced by most people on dark nights. This is foundation for the
supposed appearances of spectres, or gigantic and terrible forms which so many people profess to have
seen. They are generally told that they imagined these things, yet they may really have seen them, and
it is quite possible they really saw what they say they did see; for it will always be the case that when
we can only estimate the size of an object by the angle it forms in the eye, that object will swell and
grow as we approach it; and if the spectator thought it several feet high when it was thirty or forty feet
away, it will seem very large indeed when it is a few feet off; this must indeed astonish and alarm the
spectator until he touches it and perceives what it is, for as soon as he perceives what it is, the object
which seemed so gigantic will suddenly shrink and assume its real size, but if we run away or are afraid
to approach, we shall certainly form no other idea of the thing than the image formed in the eye, and we
shall have really seen a gigantic figure of alarming size and shape. There is, therefore, a natural ground
for the tendency to see ghosts, and these appearances are not merely the creation of the imagination, as
the men of science would have us think.--Buffon, Nat. Hist.
  In the text I have tried to show that they are always partly the creation of the imagination, and with
regard to the cause explained in this quotation, it is clear that the habit of walking by night should teach
us to distinguish those appearances which similarity of form and diversity of distance lend to the
objects seen in the dark. For if the air is light enough for us to see the outlines there must be more air
between us and them when they are further off, so that we ought to see them less distinctly when
further off, which should be enough, when we are used to it, to prevent the error described by M.
Buffon. [Whichever explanation you prefer, my mode of procedure is still efficacious, and experience
entirely confirms it.] Accustomed to perceive things from a distance and to calculate their effects, how
can I help supposing, when I cannot see, that there are hosts of creatures and all sorts of movements all
about me which may do me harm, and against which I cannot protect myself? In vain do I know I am
safe where I am; I am never so sure of it as when I can actually see it, so that I have always a cause for
fear which did not exist in broad daylight. I know, indeed, that a foreign body can scarcely act upon mewithout some slight sound, and how intently I listen! At the least sound which I cannot explain, the
desire of self-preservation makes me picture everything that would put me on my guard, and therefore
everything most calculated to alarm me.
I am just as uneasy if I hear no sound, for I might be taken unawares without a sound. I must picture
things as they were before, as they ought to be; I must see what I do not see. Thus driven to exercise my
imagination, it soon becomes my master, and what I did to reassure myself only alarms me more. I hear
a noise, it is a robber; I hear nothing, it is a ghost. The watchfulness inspired by the instinct of self-
preservation only makes me more afraid. Everything that ought to reassure me exists only for my
reason, and the voice of instinct is louder than that of reason. What is the good of thinking there is
nothing to be afraid of, since in that case there is nothing we can do?
  The cause indicates the cure. In everything habit overpowers imagination; it is only aroused by
what is new. It is no longer imagination, but memory which is concerned with what we see every day,
and  that  is  the  reason  of  the  maxim,  "Ab  assuetis  non  fit  passio,"  for  it  is  only  at  the  flame  of
imagination that the passions are kindled. Therefore do not argue with any one whom you want to cure
of the fear of darkness; take him often into dark places and be assured this practice will be of more
avail than all the arguments of philosophy. The tiler on the roof does not know what it is to be dizzy,
and those who are used to the dark will not be afraid.
  There is another advantage to be gained from our games in the dark. But if these games are to be a
success I cannot speak too strongly of the need for gaiety. Nothing is so gloomy as the dark: do not shut
your child up in a dungeon, let him laugh when he goes, into a dark place, let him laugh when he comes
out, so that the thought of the game he is leaving and the games he will play next may protect him from
the fantastic imagination which might lay hold on him.
  There comes a stage in life beyond which we progress backwards. I feel I have reached this stage. I
am, so to speak, returning to a past career. The approach of age makes us recall the happy days of our
childhood. As I grow old I become a child again, and I recall more readily what I did at ten than at
thirty. Reader, forgive me if I sometimes draw my examples from my own experience. If this book is to
be well written, I must enjoy writing it.
I was living in the country with a pastor called M. Lambercier. My companion was a cousin richer
than myself, who was regarded as the heir to some property, while I, far from my father, was but a poor
orphan. My big cousin Bernard was unusually timid, especially at night. I laughed at his fears, till M.
Lambercier was tired of my boasting, and determined to put my courage to the proof. One autumn
evening, when it was very dark, he gave me the church key, and told me to go and fetch a Bible he had
left in the pulpit. To put me on my mettle he said something which made it impossible for me to refuse.
I set out without a light; if I had had one, it would perhaps have been even worse. I had to pass
through the graveyard; I crossed it bravely, for as long as I was in the open air I was never afraid of the
dark.
  As I opened the door I heard a sort of echo in the roof; it sounded like voices and it began to shake
my Roman courage. Having opened the door I tried to enter, but when I had gone a few steps I stopped.
At the sight of the profound darkness in which the vast building lay I was seized with terror and my
hair stood on end. I turned, I went out through the door, and took to my heels. In the yard I found a
little dog, called Sultan, whose caresses reassured me. Ashamed of my fears, I retraced my steps, trying
to take Sultan with me, but he refused to follow. Hurriedly I opened the door and entered the church. I
was hardly inside when terror again got hold of me and so firmly that I lost my head, and though the
pulpit was on the right, as I very well knew, I sought it on the left, and entangling myself among the
benches I was completely lost. Unable to find either pulpit or door, I fell into an indescribable state of
mind. At last I found the door and managed to get out of the church and run away as I had done before,
quite determined never to enter the church again except in broad daylight.
I returned to the house; on the doorstep I heard M. Lambercier laughing, laughing, as I supposed, at
me. Ashamed to face his laughter, I was hesitating to open the door, when I heard Miss Lambercier,
who was anxious about me, tell the maid to get the lantern, and M. Lambercier got ready to come andlook for me, escorted by my gallant cousin, who would have got all the credit for the expedition. All at
once my fears departed, and left me merely surprised at my terror. I ran, I fairly flew, to the church;
without losing my way, without groping about, I reached the pulpit, took the Bible, and ran down the
steps. In three strides I was out of the church, leaving the door open. Breathless, I entered the room and
threw the Bible on the table, frightened indeed, but throbbing with pride that I had done it without the
proposed assistance.
  You will ask if I am giving this anecdote as an example, and as an illustration, of the mirth which I
say should accompany these games. Not so, but I give it as a proof that there is nothing so well
calculated to reassure any one who is afraid in the dark as to hear sounds of laughter and talking in an
adjoining room. Instead of playing alone with your pupil in the evening, I would have you get together
a number of merry children; do not send them alone to begin with, but several together, and do not
venture to send any one quite alone, until you are quite certain beforehand that he will not be too
frightened.
I can picture nothing more amusing and more profitable than such games, considering how little
skill  is  required  to  organise  them.  In  a  large  room  I  should  arrange  a  sort  of  labyrinth  of  tables,
armchairs, chairs, and screens. In the inextricable windings of this labyrinth I should place some eight
or ten sham boxes, and one real box almost exactly like them, but well filled with sweets. I should
describe clearly and briefly the place where the right box would be found. I should give instructions
sufficient to enable people more attentive and less excitable than children to find it. [Footnote: To
practise them in attention, only tell them things which it is clearly to their present interest that they
should understand thoroughly; above all be brief, never say a word more than necessary. But neither let
your speech be obscure nor of doubtful meaning.] Then having made the little competitors draw lots, I
should send first one and then another till the right box was found. I should increase the difficulty of the
task in proportion to their skill.
  Picture to yourself a youthful Hercules returning, box in hand, quite proud of his expedition. The
box is placed on the table and opened with great ceremony. I can hear the bursts of laughter and the
shouts of the merry party when, instead of the looked-for sweets, he finds, neatly arranged on moss or
cotton-wool, a beetle, a snail, a bit of coal, a few acorns, a turnip, or some such thing. Another time in a
newly whitewashed room, a toy or some small article of furniture would be hung on the wall and the
children would have to fetch it without touching the wall. When the child who fetches it comes back, if
he has failed ever so little to fulfil the conditions, a dab of white on the brim of his cap, the tip of his
shoe, the flap of his coat or his sleeve, will betray his lack of skill.
  This is enough, or more than enough, to show the spirit of these games. Do not read my book if you
expect me to tell you everything.
  What great advantages would be possessed by a man so educated, when compared with others. His
feet are accustomed to tread firmly in the dark, and his hands to touch lightly; they will guide him
safely in the thickest darkness. His imagination is busy with the evening games of his childhood, and
will find it difficult to turn towards objects of alarm. If he thinks he hears laughter, it will be the
laughter of his former playfellows, not of frenzied spirits; if he thinks there is a host of people, it will
not  be  the  witches'  sabbath,  but  the  party  in  his  tutor's  study.  Night  only  recalls  these  cheerful
memories, and it will never alarm him; it will inspire delight rather than fear. He will be ready for a
military expedition at any hour, with or without his troop. He will enter the camp of Saul, he will find
his way, he will reach the king's tent without waking any one, and he will return unobserved. Are the
steeds of Rhesus to be stolen, you may trust him. You will scarcely find a Ulysses among men educated
in any other fashion.
I have known people who tried to train the children not to fear the dark by startling them. This is a
very bad plan; its effects are just the opposite of those desired, and it only makes children more timid.
Neither reason nor habit can secure us from the fear of a present danger whose degree and kind are
unknown, nor from the fear of surprises which we have often experienced. Yet how will you make sure
that you can preserve your pupil from such accidents? I consider this the best advice to give himbeforehand. I should say to Emile, "This is a matter of self-defence, for the aggressor does not let you
know whether he means to hurt or frighten you, and as the advantage is on his side you cannot even
take refuge in flight. Therefore seize boldly anything, whether man or beast, which takes you unawares
in the dark. Grasp it, squeeze it with all your might; if it struggles, strike, and do not spare your blows;
and whatever he may say or do, do not let him go till you know just who he is. The event will probably
prove that you had little to be afraid of, but this way of treating practical jokers would naturally prevent
their trying it again."
  Although touch is the sense oftenest used, its discrimination remains, as I have already pointed out,
coarser and more imperfect than that of any other sense, because we always use sight along with it; the
eye perceives the thing first, and the mind almost always judges without the hand. On the other hand,
discrimination by touch is the surest just because of its limitations; for extending only as far as our
hands  can  reach,  it  corrects  the  hasty  judgments  of  the  other  senses,  which  pounce  upon  objects
scarcely perceived, while what we learn by touch is learnt thoroughly. Moreover, touch, when required,
unites the force of our muscles to the action of the nerves; we associate by simultaneous sensations our
ideas of temperature, size, and shape, to those of weight and density. Thus touch is the sense which best
teaches us the action of foreign bodies upon ourselves, the sense which most directly supplies us with
the knowledge required for self-preservation.
  As the trained touch takes the place of sight, why should it not, to some extent, take the place of
hearing, since sounds set up, in sonorous bodies, vibrations perceptible by touch? By placing the hand
on the body of a 'cello one can distinguish without the use of eye or ear, merely by the way in which the
wood vibrates and trembles, whether the sound given out is sharp or flat, whether it is drawn from the
treble string or the bass. If our touch were trained to note these differences, no doubt we might in time
become so sensitive as to hear a whole tune by means of our fingers. But if we admit this, it is clear that
one could easily speak to the deaf by means of music; for tone and measure are no less capable of
regular combination than voice and articulation, so that they might be used as the elements of speech.
  There are exercises by which the sense of touch is blunted and deadened, and others which sharpen
it and make it delicate and discriminating. The former, which employ much movement and force for the
continued  impression  of  hard  bodies,  make  the  skin  hard  and  thick,  and  deprive  it  of  its  natural
sensitiveness. The latter are those which give variety to this feeling, by slight and repeated contact, so
that  the  mind  is  attentive  to  constantly  recurring  impressions,  and  readily  learns  to  discern  their
variations. This difference is clear in the use of musical instruments. The harsh and painful touch of the
'cello, bass-viol, and even of the violin, hardens the finger-tips, although it gives flexibility to the
fingers. The soft and smooth touch of the harpsichord makes the fingers both flexible and sensitive. In
this respect the harpsichord is to be preferred.
  The skin protects the rest of the body, so it is very important to harden it to the effects of the air that
it may be able to bear its changes. With regard to this I may say I would not have the hand roughened
by too servile application to the same kind of work, nor should the skin of the hand become hardened
so as to lose its delicate sense of touch which keeps the body informed of what is going on, and by the
kind of contact sometimes makes us shudder in different ways even in the dark.
  Why should my pupil be always compelled to wear the skin of an ox under his foot? What harm
would come of it if his own skin could serve him at need as a sole. It is clear that a delicate skin could
never be of any use in this way, and may often do harm. The Genevese, aroused at midnight by their
enemies in the depth of winter, seized their guns rather than their shoes. Who can tell whether the town
would have escaped capture if its citizens had not been able to go barefoot?
  Let a man be always fore-armed against the unforeseen. Let Emile run about barefoot all the year
round, upstairs, downstairs, and in the garden. Far from scolding him, I shall follow his example; only I
shall  be  careful  to  remove  any  broken  glass.  I  shall  soon  proceed  to  speak  of  work  and  manual
occupations. Meanwhile, let him learn to perform every exercise which encourages agility of body; let
him learn to hold himself easily and steadily in any position, let him practise jumping and leaping,
climbing trees and walls. Let him always find his balance, and let his every movement and gesture beregulated by the laws of weight, long before he learns to explain them by the science of statics. By the
way his foot is planted on the ground, and his body supported on his leg, he ought to know if he is
holding himself well or ill. An easy carriage is always graceful, and the steadiest positions are the most
elegant. If I were a dancing master I would refuse to play the monkey tricks of Marcel, which are only
fit for the stage where they are performed; but instead of keeping my pupil busy with fancy steps, I
would take him to the foot of a cliff. There I would show him how to hold himself, how to carry his
body and head, how to place first a foot then a hand, to follow lightly the steep, toilsome, and rugged
paths, to leap from point to point, either up or down. He should emulate the mountain-goat, not the
ballet dancer.
  As touch confines its operations to the man's immediate surroundings, so sight extends its range
beyond them; it is this which makes it misleading; man sees half his horizon at a glance. In the midst of
this host of simultaneous impressions and the thoughts excited by them, how can he fail now and then
to make mistakes? Thus sight is the least reliable of our senses, just because it has the widest range; it
functions long before our other senses, and its work is too hasty and on too large a scale to be corrected
by the rest. Moreover, the very illusions of perspective are necessary if we are to arrive at a knowledge
of space and compare one part of space with another. Without false appearances we should never see
anything at a distance; without the gradations of size and tone we could not judge of distance, or rather
distance would have no existence for us. If two trees, one of which was a hundred paces from us and
the other ten, looked equally large and distinct, we should think they were side by side. If we perceived
the real dimensions of things, we should know nothing of space; everything would seem close to our
eyes.
  The angle formed between any objects and our eye is the only means by which our sight estimates
their size and distance, and as this angle is the simple effect of complex causes, the judgment we form
does not distinguish between the several causes; we are compelled to be inaccurate. For how can I tell,
by sight alone, whether the angle at which an object appears to me smaller than another, indicates that it
is really smaller or that it is further off.
  Here we must just reverse our former plan. Instead of simplifying the sensation, always reinforce it
and verify it by means of another sense. Subject the eye to the hand, and, so to speak, restrain the
precipitation of the former sense by the slower and more reasoned pace of the latter. For want of this
sort of practice our sight measurements are very imperfect. We cannot correctly, and at a glance,
estimate height, length, breadth, and distance; and the fact that engineers, surveyors, architects, masons,
and painters are generally quicker to see and better able to estimate distances correctly, proves that the
fault is not in our eyes, but in our use of them. Their occupations give them the training we lack, and
they  check  the  equivocal  results  of  the  angle  of  vision  by  its  accompanying  experiences,  which
determine the relations of the two causes of this angle for their eyes.
  Children will always do anything that keeps them moving freely. There are countless ways of
rousing their interest in measuring, perceiving, and estimating distance. There is a very tall cherry tree;
how shall we gather the cherries? Will the ladder in the barn be big enough? There is a wide stream;
how shall we get to the other side? Would one of the wooden planks in the yard reach from bank to
bank? From our windows we want to fish in the moat; how many yards of line are required? I want to
make a swing between two trees; will two fathoms of cord be enough? They tell me our room in the
new house will be twenty-five feet square; do you think it will be big enough for us? Will it be larger
than this? We are very hungry; here are two villages, which can we get to first for our dinner?
  An idle, lazy child was to be taught to run. He had no liking for this or any other exercise, though
he was intended for the army. Somehow or other he had got it into his head that a man of his rank need
know nothing and do nothing--that his birth would serve as a substitute for arms and legs, as well as for
every kind of virtue. The skill of Chiron himself would have failed to make a fleet-footed Achilles of
this young gentleman. The difficulty was increased by my determination to give him no kind of orders.
I had renounced all right to direct him by preaching, promises, threats, emulation, or the desire to show
off. How should I make him want to run without saying anything? I might run myself, but he might notfollow my example, and this plan had other drawbacks. Moreover, I must find some means of teaching
him through this exercise, so as to train mind and body to work together. This is how I, or rather how
the teacher who supplied me with this illustration, set about it.
  When I took him a walk of an afternoon I sometimes put in my pocket a couple of cakes, of a kind
he was very fond of; we each ate one while we were out, and we came back well pleased with our
outing. One day he noticed I had three cakes; he could have easily eaten six, so he ate his cake quickly
and asked for the other. "No," said I, "I could eat it myself, or we might divide it, but I would rather see
those two little boys run a race for it." I called them to us, showed them the cake, and suggested that
they should race for it. They were delighted. The cake was placed on a large stone which was to be the
goal; the course was marked out, we sat down, and at a given signal off flew the children! The victor
seized the cake and ate it without pity in the sight of the spectators and of his defeated rival.
  The sport was better than the cake; but the lesson did not take effect all at once, and produced no
result. I was not discouraged, nor did I hurry; teaching is a trade at which one must be able to lose time
and save it. Our walks were continued, sometimes we took three cakes, sometimes four, and from time
to time there were one or two cakes for the racers. If the prize was not great, neither was the ambition
of the competitors. The winner was praised and petted, and everything was done with much ceremony.
To give room to run and to add interest to the race I marked out a longer course and admitted several
fresh competitors. Scarcely had they entered the lists than all the passers-by stopped to watch. They
were encouraged by shouting, cheering, and clapping. I sometimes saw my little man trembling with
excitement, jumping up and shouting when one was about to reach or overtake another--to him these
were the Olympian games.
  However, the competitors did not always play fair, they got in each other's way, or knocked one
another down, or put stones on the track. That led us to separate them and make them start from
different places at equal distances from the goal. You will soon see the reason for this, for I must
describe this important affair at length.
  Tired of seeing his favourite cakes devoured before his eyes, the young lord began to suspect that
there was some use in being a quick runner, and seeing that he had two legs of his own, he began to
practise running on the quiet. I took care to see nothing, but I knew my stratagem had taken effect.
When he thought he was good enough (and I thought so too), he pretended to tease me to give him the
other cake. I refused; he persisted, and at last he said angrily, "Well, put it on the stone and mark out
the course, and we shall see." "Very good," said I, laughing, "You will get a good appetite, but you will
not get the cake." Stung by my mockery, he took heart, won the prize, all the more easily because I had
marked out a very short course and taken care that the best runner was out of the way. It will be evident
that, after the first step, I had no difficulty in keeping him in training. Soon he took such a fancy for this
form of exercise that without any favour he was almost certain to beat the little peasant boys at running,
however long the course.
  The advantage thus obtained led unexpectedly to another. So long as he seldom won the prize, he
ate it himself like his rivals, but as he got used to victory he grew generous, and often shared it with the
defeated. That taught me a lesson in morals and I saw what was the real root of generosity.
  While I continued to mark out a different starting place for each competitor, he did not notice that I
had made the distances unequal, so that one of them, having farther to run to reach the goal, was clearly
at a disadvantage. But though I left the choice to my pupil he did not know how to take advantage of it.
Without thinking of the distance, he always chose the smoothest path, so that I could easily predict his
choice, and could almost make him win or lose the cake at my pleasure. I had more than one end in
view in this stratagem; but as my plan was to get him to notice the difference himself, I tried to make
him aware of it. Though he was generally lazy and easy going, he was so eager in his sports and trusted
me so completely that I had great difficulty in making him see that I was cheating him. When at last I
managed to make him see it in spite of his excitement, he was angry with me. "What have you to
complain of?" said I. "In a gift which I propose to give of my own free will am not I master of the
conditions? Who makes you run? Did I promise to make the courses equal? Is not the choice yours? Donot you see that I am favouring you, and that the inequality you complain of is all to your advantage, if
you knew how to use it?" That was plain to him; and to choose he must observe more carefully. At first
he wanted to count the paces, but a child measures paces slowly and inaccurately; moreover, I decided
to have several races on one day; and the game having become a sort of passion with the child, he was
sorry to waste in measuring the portion of time intended for running. Such delays are not in accordance
with a child's impatience; he tried therefore to see better and to reckon the distance more accurately at
sight. It was now quite easy to extend and develop this power. At length, after some months' practice,
and the correction of his errors, I so trained his power of judging at sight that I had only to place an
imaginary cake on any distant object and his glance was nearly as accurate as the surveyor's chain.
  Of all the senses, sight is that which we can least distinguish from the judgments of the mind; as it
takes a long time to learn to see. It takes a long time to compare sight and touch, and to train the former
sense to give a true report of shape and distance. Without touch, without progressive motion, the
sharpest eyes in the world could give us no idea of space. To the oyster the whole world must seem a
point, and it would seem nothing more to it even if it had a human mind. It is only by walking, feeling,
counting, measuring the dimensions of things, that we learn to judge them rightly; but, on the other
hand, if we were always measuring, our senses would trust to the instrument and would never gain
confidence. Nor must the child pass abruptly from measurement to judgment; he must continue to
compare the parts when he could not compare the whole; he must substitute his estimated aliquot parts
for  exact  aliquot  parts,  and  instead  of  always  applying  the  measure  by  hand  he  must  get  used  to
applying it by eye alone. I would, however, have his first estimates tested by measurement, so that he
may correct his errors, and if there is a false impression left upon the senses he may correct it by a
better judgment. The same natural standards of measurement are in use almost everywhere, the man's
foot, the extent of his outstretched arms, his height. When the child wants to measure the height of a
room, his tutor may serve as a measuring rod; if he is estimating the height of a steeple let him measure
it by the house; if he wants to know how many leagues of road there are, let him count the hours spent
in walking along it. Above all, do not do this for him; let him do it himself.
  One cannot learn to estimate the extent and size of bodies without at the same time learning to
know  and  even  to  copy  their  shape;  for  at  bottom  this  copying  depends  entirely  on  the  laws  of
perspective, and one cannot estimate distance without some feeling for these laws. All children in the
course of their endless imitation try to draw; and I would have Emile cultivate this art; not so much for
art's sake, as to give him exactness of eye and flexibility of hand. Generally speaking, it matters little
whether he is acquainted with this or that occupation, provided he gains clearness of sense--perception
and the good bodily habits which belong to the exercise in question. So I shall take good care not to
provide him with a drawing master, who would only set him to copy copies and draw from drawings.
Nature should be his only teacher, and things his only models. He should have the real thing before his
eyes, not its copy on paper. Let him draw a house from a house, a tree from a tree, a man from a man;
so that he may train himself to observe objects and their appearance accurately and not to take false and
conventional copies for truth. I would even train him to draw only from objects actually before him and
not  from  memory,  so  that,  by  repeated  observation,  their  exact  form  may  be  impressed  on  his
imagination, for fear lest he should substitute absurd and fantastic forms for the real truth of things, and
lose his sense of proportion and his taste for the beauties of nature.
  Of course I know that in this way he will make any number of daubs before he produces anything
recognisable,  that  it  will  be  long  before  he  attains  to  the  graceful  outline  and  light  touch  of  the
draughtsman; perhaps he will never have an eye for picturesque effect or a good taste in drawing. On
the other hand, he will certainly get a truer eye, a surer hand, a knowledge of the real relations of form
and size between animals, plants, and natural objects, together with a quicker sense of the effects of
perspective. That is just what I wanted, and my purpose is rather that he should know things than copy
them. I would rather he showed me a plant of acanthus even if he drew a capital with less accuracy.
  Moreover, in this occupation as in others, I do not intend my pupil to play by himself; I mean to
make it pleasanter for him by always sharing it with him. He shall have no other rival; but mine will bea continual rivalry, and there will be no risk attaching to it; it will give interest to his pursuits without
awaking jealousy between us. I shall follow his example and take up a pencil; at first I shall use it as
unskilfully as he. I should be an Apelles if I did not set myself daubing. To begin with, I shall draw a
man such as lads draw on walls, a line for each arm, another for each leg, with the fingers longer than
the arm. Long after, one or other of us will notice this lack of proportion; we shall observe that the leg
is thick, that this thickness varies, that the length of the arm is proportionate to the body. In this
improvement I shall either go side by side with my pupil, or so little in advance that he will always
overtake me easily and sometimes get ahead of me. We shall get brushes and paints, we shall try to
copy the colours of things and their whole appearance, not merely their shape. We shall colour prints,
we shall paint, we shall daub; but in all our daubing we shall be searching out the secrets of nature, and
whatever we do shall be done under the eye of that master.
  We badly needed ornaments for our room, and now we have them ready to our hand. I will have our
drawings framed and covered with good glass, so that no one will touch them, and thus seeing them
where we put them, each of us has a motive for taking care of his own. I arrange them in order round
the room, each drawing repeated some twenty or thirty times, thus showing the author's progress in
each specimen, from the time when the house is merely a rude square, till its front view, its side view,
its proportions, its light and shade are all exactly portrayed. These graduations will certainly furnish us
with pictures, a source of interest to ourselves and of curiosity to others, which will spur us on to
further emulation. The first and roughest drawings I put in very smart gilt frames to show them off; but
as the copy becomes more accurate and the drawing really good, I only give it a very plain dark frame;
it needs no other ornament than itself, and it would be a pity if the frame distracted the attention which
the picture itself deserves. Thus we each aspire to a plain frame, and when we desire to pour scorn on
each other's drawings, we condemn them to a gilded frame. Some day perhaps "the gilt frame" will
become a proverb among us, and we shall be surprised to find how many people show what they are
really made of by demanding a gilt frame.
I have said already that geometry is beyond the child's reach; but that is our own fault. We fail to
perceive that their method is not ours, that what is for us the art of reasoning, should be for them the art
of seeing. Instead of teaching them our way, we should do better to adopt theirs, for our way of learning
geometry is quite as much a matter of imagination as of reasoning. When a proposition is enunciated
you must imagine the proof; that is, you must discover on what proposition already learnt it depends,
and of all the possible deductions from that proposition you must choose just the one required.
  In this way the closest reasoner, if he is not inventive, may find himself at a loss. What is the result?
Instead of making us discover proofs, they are dictated to us; instead of teaching us to reason, our
memory only is employed.
  Draw accurate figures, combine them together, put them one upon another, examine their relations,
and you will discover the whole of elementary geometry in passing from one observation to another,
without a word of definitions, problems, or any other form of demonstration but super-position. I do not
profess to teach Emile geometry; he will teach me; I shall seek for relations, he will find them, for I
shall seek in such a fashion as to make him find. For instance, instead of using a pair of compasses to
draw a circle, I shall draw it with a pencil at the end of bit of string attached to a pivot. After that, when
I want to compare the radii one with another, Emile will laugh at me and show me that the same thread
at full stretch cannot have given distances of unequal length. If I wish to measure an angle of 60
degrees I describe from the apex of the angle, not an arc, but a complete circle, for with children
nothing must be taken for granted. I find that the part of the circle contained between the two lines of
the angle is the sixth part of a circle. Then I describe another and larger circle from the same centre, and
I find the second arc is again the sixth part of its circle. I describe a third concentric circle with a similar
result, and I continue with more and more circles till Emile, shocked at my stupidity, shows me that
every arc, large or small, contained by the same angle will always be the sixth part of its circle. Now we
are ready to use the protractor.
  To prove that two adjacent angles are equal to two right angles people describe a circle. On thecontrary I would have Emile observe the fact in a circle, and then I should say, "If we took away the
circle and left the straight lines, would the angles have changed their size, etc.?"
  Exactness in the construction of figures is neglected; it is taken for granted and stress is laid on the
proof. With us, on the other hand, there will be no question of proof. Our chief business will be to draw
very straight, accurate, and even lines, a perfect square, a really round circle. To verify the exactness of
a figure we will test it by each of its sensible properties, and that will give us a chance to discover fresh
properties day by day. We will fold the two semi-circles along the diameter, the two halves of the
square by the diagonal; he will compare our two figures to see who has got the edges to fit moat
exactly, i.e., who has done it best; we should argue whether this equal division would always be
possible in parallelograms, trapezes, etc. We shall sometimes try to forecast the result of an experiment,
to find reasons, etc.
  Geometry means to my scholar the successful use of the rule and compass; he must not confuse it
with drawing, in which these instruments are not used. The rule and compass will be locked up, so that
he will not get into the way of messing about with them, but we may sometimes take our figures with
us when we go for a walk, and talk over what we have done, or what we mean to do.
I shall never forget seeing a young man at Turin, who had learnt as a child the relations of contours
and surfaces by having to choose every day isoperimetric cakes among cakes of every geometrical
figure. The greedy little fellow had exhausted the art of Archimedes to find which were the biggest.
  When the child flies a kite he is training eye and hand to accuracy; when he whips a top, he is
increasing his strength by using it, but without learning anything. I have sometimes asked why children
are not given the same games of skill as men; tennis, mall, billiards, archery, football, and musical
instruments. I was told that some of these are beyond their strength, that the child's senses are not
sufficiently developed for others. These do not strike me as valid reasons; a child is not as tall as a man,
but he wears the same sort of coat; I do not want him to play with our cues at a billiard-table three feet
high; I do not want him knocking about among our games, nor carrying one of our racquets in his little
hand; but let him play in a room whose windows have been protected; at first let him only use soft
balls, let his first racquets be of wood, then of parchment, and lastly of gut, according to his progress.
You prefer the kite because it is less tiring and there is no danger. You are doubly wrong. Kite-flying is
a sport for women, but every woman will run away from a swift ball. Their white skins were not meant
to be hardened by blows and their faces were not made for bruises. But we men are made for strength;
do you think we can attain it without hardship, and what defence shall we be able to make if we are
attacked? People always play carelessly in games where there is no danger. A falling kite hurts nobody,
but nothing makes the arm so supple as protecting the head, nothing makes the sight so accurate as
having to guard the eye. To dash from one end of the room to another, to judge the rebound of a ball
before it touches the ground, to return it with strength and accuracy, such games are not so much sports
fit for a man, as sports fit to make a man of him.
  The child's limbs, you say, are too tender. They are not so strong as those of a man, but they are
more supple. His arm is weak, still it is an arm, and it should be used with due consideration as we use
other tools. Children have no skill in the use of their hands. That is just why I want them to acquire
skill; a man with as little practice would be just as clumsy. We can only learn the use of our limbs by
using  them.  It  is  only  by  long  experience  that  we  learn  to  make  the  best  of  ourselves,  and  this
experience is the real object of study to which we cannot apply ourselves too early.
  What is done can be done. Now there is nothing commoner than to find nimble and skilful children
whose limbs are as active as those of a man. They may be seen at any fair, swinging, walking on their
hands, jumping, dancing on the tight rope. For many years past, troops of children have attracted
spectators to the ballets at the Italian Comedy House. Who is there in Germany and Italy who has not
heard  of  the  famous  pantomime  company  of  Nicolini?  Has  it  ever  occurred  to  any  one  that  the
movements of these children were less finished, their postures less graceful, their ears less true, their
dancing  more  clumsy  than  those  of  grown-up  dancers?  If  at  first  the  fingers  are  thick,  short,  and
awkward, the dimpled hands unable to grasp anything, does this prevent many children from learningto read and write at an age when others cannot even hold a pen or pencil? All Paris still recalls the little
English girl of ten who did wonders on the harpsichord. I once saw a little fellow of eight, the son of a
magistrate, who was set like a statuette on the table among the dishes, to play on a fiddle almost as big
as himself, and even artists were surprised at his execution.
  To my mind, these and many more examples prove that the supposed incapacity of children for our
games is imaginary, and that if they are unsuccessful in some of them, it is for want of practice.
  You will tell me that with regard to the body I am falling into the same mistake of precocious
development which I found fault with for the mind. The cases are very different: in the one, progress is
apparent only; in the other it is real. I have shown that children have not the mental development they
appear to have, while they really do what they seem to do. Besides, we must never forget that all this
should be play, the easy and voluntary control of the movements which nature demands of them, the art
of varying their games to make them pleasanter, without the least bit of constraint to transform them
into work; for what games do they play in which I cannot find material for instruction for them? And
even if I could not do so, so long as they are amusing themselves harmlessly and passing the time
pleasantly, their progress in learning is not yet of such great importance. But if one must be teaching
them this or that at every opportunity, it cannot be done without constraint, vexation, or tedium.
  What I have said about the use of the two senses whose use is most constant and most important,
may serve as an example of how to train the rest. Sight and touch are applied to bodies at rest and
bodies in motion, but as hearing is only affected by vibrations of the air, only a body in motion can
make a noise or sound; if everything were at rest we should never hear. At night, when we ourselves
only move as we choose, we have nothing to fear but moving bodies; hence we need a quick ear, and
power to judge from the sensations experienced whether the body which causes them is large or small,
far off or near, whether its movements are gentle or violent. When once the air is set in motion, it is
subject to repercussions which produce echoes, these renew the sensations and make us hear a loud or
penetrating sound in another quarter. If you put your ear to the ground you may hear the sound of men's
voices or horses' feet in a plain or valley much further off than when you stand upright.
  As we have made a comparison between sight and touch, it will be as well to do the same for
hearing, and to find out which of the two impressions starting simultaneously from a given body first
reaches the sense-organ. When you see the flash of a cannon, you have still time to take cover; but
when you hear the sound it is too late, the ball is close to you. One can reckon the distance of a
thunderstorm by the interval between the lightning and the thunder. Let the child learn all these facts,
let him learn those that are within his reach by experiment, and discover the rest by induction; but I
would far rather he knew nothing at all about them, than that you should tell him.
  In the voice we have an organ answering to hearing; we have no such organ answering to sight, and
we do not repeat colours as we repeat sounds. This supplies an additional means of cultivating the ear
by practising the active and passive organs one with the other.
  Man has three kinds of voice, the speaking or articulate voice, the singing or melodious voice, and
the pathetic or expressive voice, which serves as the language of the passions, and gives life to song
and speech. The child has these three voices, just as the man has them, but he does not know how to use
them in combination. Like us, he laughs, cries, laments, shrieks, and groans, but he does not know how
to combine these inflexions with speech or song. These three voices find their best expression in perfect
music. Children are incapable of such music, and their singing lacks feeling. In the same way their
spoken language lacks expression; they shout, but they do not speak with emphasis, and there is as little
power in their voice as there is emphasis in their speech. Our pupil's speech will be plainer and simpler
still, for his passions are still asleep, and will not blend their tones with his. Do not, therefore, set him to
recite tragedy or comedy, nor try to teach declamation so-called. He will have too much sense to give
voice to things he cannot understand, or expression to feelings he has never known.
  Teach him to speak plainly and distinctly, to articulate clearly, to pronounce correctly and without
affectation, to perceive and imitate the right accent in prose and verse, and always to speak loud enough
to be heard, but without speaking too loud--a common fault with school-children. Let there be no wastein anything.
  The same method applies to singing; make his voice smooth and true, flexible and full, his ear alive
to time and tune, but nothing more. Descriptive and theatrical music is not suitable at his age----I would
rather he sang no words; if he must have words, I would try to compose songs on purpose for him,
songs interesting to a child, and as simple as his own thoughts.
  You may perhaps suppose that as I am in no hurry to teach Emile to read and write, I shall not want
to teach him to read music. Let us spare his brain the strain of excessive attention, and let us be in no
hurry to turn his mind towards conventional signs. I grant you there seems to be a difficulty here, for if
at first sight the knowledge of notes seems no more necessary for singing than the knowledge of letters
for speaking, there is really this difference between them: When we speak, we are expressing our own
thoughts; when we sing we are expressing the thoughts of others. Now in order to express them we
must read them.
  But at first we can listen to them instead of reading them, and a song is better learnt by ear than by
eye. Moreover, to learn music thoroughly we must make songs as well as sing them, and the two
processes must be studied together, or we shall never have any real knowledge of music. First give your
young musician practice in very regular, well-cadenced phrases; then let him connect these phrases
with the very simplest modulations; then show him their relation one to another by correct accent,
which can be done by a fit choice of cadences and rests. On no account give him anything unusual, or
anything that requires pathos or expression. A simple, tuneful air, always based on the common chords
of the key, with its bass so clearly indicated that it is easily felt and accompanied, for to train his voice
and ear he should always sing with the harpsichord.
  We articulate the notes we sing the better to distinguish them; hence the custom of sol-faing with
certain syllables. To tell the keys one from another they must have names and fixed intervals; hence the
names of the intervals, and also the letters of the alphabet attached to the keys of the clavier and the
notes of the scale. C and A indicate fixed sounds, invariable and always rendered by the same keys; Ut
and La are different. Ut is always the dominant of a major scale, or the leading-note of a minor scale.
La is always the dominant of a minor scale or the sixth of a major scale. Thus the letters indicate fixed
terms in our system of music, and the syllables indicate terms homologous to the similar relations in
different keys. The letters show the keys on the piano, and the syllables the degrees in the scale. French
musicians have made a strange muddle of this. They have confused the meaning of the syllables with
that of the letters, and while they have unnecessarily given us two sets of symbols for the keys of the
piano, they have left none for the chords of the scales; so that Ut and C are always the same for them;
this is not and ought not to be; if so, what is the use of C? Their method of sol-faing is, therefore,
extremely and needlessly difficult, neither does it give any clear idea to the mind; since, by this method,
Ut and Me, for example, may mean either a major third, a minor third, an augmented third, or a
diminished third. What a strange thing that the country which produces the finest books about music
should be the very country where it is hardest to learn music!
  Let us adopt a simpler and clearer plan with our pupil; let him have only two scales whose relations
remain unchanged, and indicated by the same symbols. Whether he sings or plays, let him learn to fix
his scale on one of the twelve tones which may serve as a base, and whether he modulates in D, C, or
G, let the close be always Ut or La, according to the scale. In this way he will understand what you
mean, and the essential relations for correct singing and playing will always be present in his mind; his
execution will be better and his progress quicker. There is nothing funnier than what the French call
"natural sol-faing;" it consists in removing the real meaning of things and putting in their place other
meanings which only distract us. There is nothing more natural than sol-faing by transposition, when
the scale is transposed. But I have said enough, and more than enough, about music; teach it as you
please, so long as it is nothing but play.
  We are now thoroughly acquainted with the condition of foreign bodies in relation to our own, their
weight, form, colour, density, size, distance, temperature, stability, or motion. We have learnt which of
them to approach or avoid, how to set about overcoming their resistance or to resist them so as toprevent ourselves from injury; but this is not enough. Our own body is constantly wasting and as
constantly requires to be renewed. Although we have the power of changing other substances into our
own, our choice is not a matter of indifference. Everything is not food for man, and what may be food
for him is not all equally suitable; it depends on his racial constitution, the country he lives in, his
individual temperament, and the way of living which his condition demands.
  If we had to wait till experience taught us to know and choose fit food for ourselves, we should die
of hunger or poison; but a kindly providence which has made pleasure the means of self-preservation to
sentient beings teaches us through our palate what is suitable for our stomach. In a state of nature there
is no better doctor than a man's own appetite, and no doubt in a state of nature man could find the most
palateable food the most wholesome.
  Nor is this all. Our Maker provides, not only for those needs he has created, but for those we create
for ourselves; and it is to keep the balance between our wants and our needs that he has caused our
tastes to change and vary with our way of living. The further we are from a state of nature, the more we
lose our natural tastes; or rather, habit becomes a second nature, and so completely replaces our real
nature, that we have lost all knowledge of it.
  From this it follows that the most natural tastes should be the simplest, for those are more easily
changed; but when they are sharpened and stimulated by our fancies they assume a form which is
incapable of modification. The man who so far has not adapted himself to one country can learn the
ways of any country whatsoever; but the man who has adopted the habits of one particular country can
never shake them off.
  This seems to be true of all our senses, especially of taste. Our first food is milk; we only become
accustomed by degrees to strong flavours; at first we dislike them. Fruit, vegetables, herbs, and then
fried meat without salt or seasoning, formed the feasts of primitive man. When the savage tastes wine
for the first time, he makes a grimace and spits it out; and even among ourselves a man who has not
tasted fermented liquors before twenty cannot get used to them; we should all be sober if we did not
have wine when we were children. Indeed, the simpler our tastes are, the more general they are; made
dishes are those most frequently disliked. Did you ever meet with any one who disliked bread or water?
Here  is  the  finger  of  nature,  this  then  is  our  rule.  Preserve  the  child's  primitive  tastes  as  long  as
possible; let his food be plain and simple, let strong flavours be unknown to his palate, and do not let
his diet be too uniform.
I am not asking, for the present, whether this way of living is healthier or no; that is not what I have
in view. It is enough for me to know that my choice is more in accordance with nature, and that it can
be  more  readily  adapted  to  other  conditions.  In  my  opinion,  those  who  say  children  should  be
accustomed to the food they will have when they are grown up are mistaken. Why should their food be
the same when their way of living is so different? A man worn out by labour, anxiety, and pain needs
tasty foods to give fresh vigour to his brain; a child fresh from his games, a child whose body is
growing, needs plentiful food which will supply more chyle. Moreover the grown man has already a
settled profession, occupation, and home, but who can tell what Fate holds in store for the child? Let us
not give him so fixed a bent in any direction that he cannot change it if required without hardship. Do
not bring him up so that he would die of hunger in a foreign land if he does not take a French cook
about with him; do not let him say at some future time that France is the only country where the food is
fit to eat. By the way, that is a strange way of praising one's country. On the other hand, I myself should
say that the French are the only people who do not know what good food is, since they require such a
special art to make their dishes eatable.
  Of all our different senses, we are usually most affected by taste. Thus it concerns us more nearly to
judge aright of what will actually become part of ourselves, than of that which will merely form part of
our environment. Many things are matters of indifference to touch, hearing, and sight; but taste is
affected by almost everything. Moreover the activity of this sense is wholly physical and material; of all
the senses, it alone makes no appeal to the imagination, or at least, imagination plays a smaller part in
its sensations; while imitation and imagination often bring morality into the impressions of the othersenses.  Thus,  speaking  generally,  soft  and  pleasure-loving  minds,  passionate  and  truly  sensitive
dispositions, which are easily stirred by the other senses, are usually indifferent to this. From this very
fact, which apparently places taste below our other senses and makes our inclination towards it the
more despicable, I draw just the opposite conclusion--that the best way to lead children is by the mouth.
Greediness is a better motive than vanity; for the former is a natural appetite directly dependent on the
senses, while the latter is the outcome of convention, it is the slave of human caprice and liable to every
kind of abuse. Believe me the child will cease to care about his food only too soon, and when his heart
is too busy, his palate will be idle. When he is grown up greediness will be expelled by a host of
stronger passions, while vanity will only be stimulated by them; for this latter passion feeds upon the
rest till at length they are all swallowed up in it. I have sometimes studied those men who pay great
attention to good eating, men whose first waking thought is--What shall we have to eat to-day? men
who describe their dinner with as much detail as Polybius describes a combat. I have found these so-
called men were only children of forty, without strength or vigour--fruges consumere nati. Gluttony is
the vice of feeble minds. The gourmand has his brains in his palate, he can do nothing but eat; he is so
stupid and incapable that the table is the only place for him, and dishes are the only things he knows
anything about. Let us leave him to this business without regret; it is better for him and for us.
  It is a small mind that fears lest greediness should take root in the child who is fit for something
better. The child thinks of nothing but his food, the youth pays no heed to it at all; every kind of food is
good, and we have other things to attend to. Yet I would not have you use the low motive unwisely. I
would not have you trust to dainties rather than to the honour which is the reward of a good deed. But
childhood is, or ought to be, a time of play and merry sports, and I do not see why the rewards of purely
bodily exercises should not be material and sensible rewards. If a little lad in Majorca sees a basket on
the tree-top and brings it down with his sling, is it not fair that he should get something by this, and a
good breakfast should repair the strength spent in getting it. If a young Spartan, facing the risk of a
hundred stripes, slips skilfully into the kitchen, and steals a live fox cub, carries it off in his garment,
and is scratched, bitten till the blood comes, and for shame lest he should be caught the child allows his
bowels to be torn out without a movement or a cry, is it not fair that he should keep his spoils, that he
should eat his prey after it has eaten him? A good meal should never be a reward; but why should it not
be sometimes the result of efforts made to get it. Emile does not consider the cake I put on the stone as
a reward for good running; he knows that the only way to get the cake is to get there first.
  This does not contradict my previous rules about simple food; for to tempt a child's appetite you
need not stimulate it, you need only satisfy it; and the commonest things will do this if you do not
attempt to refine children's taste. Their perpetual hunger, the result of their need for growth, will be the
best sauce. Fruit, milk, a piece of cake just a little better than ordinary bread, and above all the art of
dispensing these things prudently, by these means you may lead a host of children to the world's end,
without on the one hand giving them a taste for strong flavours, nor on the other hand letting them get
tired of their food.
  The indifference of children towards meat is one proof that the taste for meat is unnatural; their
preference is for vegetable foods, such as milk, pastry, fruit, etc. Beware of changing this natural taste
and making children flesh-eaters, if not for their health's sake, for the sake of their character; for how
can one explain away the fact that great meat-eaters are usually fiercer and more cruel than other men;
this has been recognised at all times and in all places. The English are noted for their cruelty [Footnote:
I am aware that the English make a boast of their humanity and of the kindly disposition of their race,
which they call "good-natured people;" but in vain do they proclaim this fact; no one else says it of
them.] while the Gaures are the gentlest of men. [Footnote: The Banians, who abstain from flesh even
more completely than the Gaures, are almost as gentle as the Gaures themselves, but as their morality is
less pure and their form of worship less reasonable they are not such good men.] All savages are cruel,
and it is not their customs that tend in this direction; their cruelty is the result of their food. They go to
war as to the chase, and treat men as they would treat bears. Indeed in England butchers are not allowed
to give evidence in a court of law, no more can surgeons. [Footnote: One of the English translators ofmy book has pointed out my mistake, and both of them have corrected it. Butchers and surgeons are
allowed to give evidence in the law courts, but butchers may not serve on juries in criminal cases,
though surgeons are allowed to do so.] Great criminals prepare themselves for murder by drinking
blood. Homer makes his flesh-eating Cyclops a terrible man, while his Lotus-eaters are so delightful
that those who went to trade with them forgot even their own country to dwell among them.
  "You ask me," said Plutarch, "why Pythagoras abstained from eating the flesh of beasts, but I ask
you, what courage must have been needed by the first man who raised to his lips the flesh of the slain,
who broke with his teeth the bones of a dying beast, who had dead bodies, corpses, placed before him
and swallowed down limbs which a few moments ago were bleating, bellowing, walking, and seeing?
How could his hand plunge the knife into the heart of a sentient creature, how could his eyes look on
murder, how could he behold a poor helpless animal bled to death, scorched, and dismembered? how
can he bear the sight of this quivering flesh? does not the very smell of it turn his stomach? is he not
repelled, disgusted, horror-struck, when he has to handle the blood from these wounds, and to cleanse
his fingers from the dark and viscous bloodstains?
  "The scorched skins wriggled upon the ground, The shrinking flesh bellowed upon the spit. Man
cannot eat them without a shudder; He seems to hear their cries within his breast.
  "Thus must he have felt the first time he did despite to nature and made this horrible meal; the first
time he hungered for the living creature, and desired to feed upon the beast which was still grazing;
when he bade them slay, dismember, and cut up the sheep which licked his hands. It is those who began
these cruel feasts, not those who abandon them, who should cause surprise, and there were excuses for
those primitive men, excuses which we have not, and the absence of such excuses multiplies our
barbarity a hundredfold.
  "'Mortals, beloved of the gods,' says this primitive man, 'compare our times with yours; see how
happy you are, and how wretched were we. The earth, newly formed, the air heavy with moisture, were
not yet subjected to the rule of the seasons. Three-fourths of the surface of the globe was flooded by the
ever-shifting channels of rivers uncertain of their course, and covered with pools, lakes, and bottomless
morasses. The remaining quarter was covered with woods and barren forests. The earth yielded no
good fruit, we had no instruments of tillage, we did not even know the use of them, and the time of
harvest never came for those who had sown nothing. Thus hunger was always in our midst. In winter,
mosses and the bark of trees were our common food. A few green roots of dogs-bit or heather were a
feast, and when men found beech-mast, nuts, or acorns, they danced for joy round the beech or oak, to
the sound of some rude song, while they called the earth their mother and their nurse. This was their
only festival, their only sport; all the rest of man's life was spent in sorrow, pain, and hunger.
  "'At length, when the bare and naked earth no longer offered us any food, we were compelled in
self-defence to outrage nature, and to feed upon our companions in distress, rather than perish with
them. But you, oh, cruel men! who forces you to shed blood? Behold the wealth of good things about
you, the fruits yielded by the earth, the wealth of field and vineyard; the animals give their milk for
your drink and their fleece for your clothing. What more do you ask? What madness compels you to
commit such murders, when you have already more than you can eat or drink? Why do you slander our
mother earth, and accuse her of denying you food? Why do you sin against Ceres, the inventor of the
sacred laws, and against the gracious Bacchus, the comforter of man, as if their lavish gifts were not
enough to preserve mankind? Have you the heart to mingle their sweet fruits with the bones upon your
table, to eat with the milk the blood of the beasts which gave it? The lions and panthers, wild beasts as
you call them, are driven to follow their natural instinct, and they kill other beasts that they may live.
But,  a  hundredfold  fiercer  than  they,  you  fight  against  your  instincts  without  cause,  and  abandon
yourselves to the most cruel pleasures. The animals you eat are not those who devour others; you do
not eat the carnivorous beasts, you take them as your pattern. You only hunger for the sweet and gentle
creatures which harm no one, which follow you, serve you, and are devoured by you as the reward of
their service.
  "'O unnatural murderer! if you persist in the assertion that nature has made you to devour yourfellow-creatures, beings of flesh and blood, living and feeling like yourself, stifle if you can that horror
with which nature makes you regard these horrible feasts; slay the animals yourself, slay them, I say,
with your own hands, without knife or mallet; tear them with your nails like the lion and the bear, take
this ox and rend him in pieces, plunge your claws into his hide; eat this lamb while it is yet alive,
devour its warm flesh, drink its soul with its blood. You shudder! you dare not feel the living throbbing
flesh between your teeth? Ruthless man; you begin by slaying the animal and then you devour it, as if
to slay it twice. It is not enough. You turn against the dead flesh, it revolts you, it must be transformed
by  fire,  boiled  and  roasted,  seasoned  and  disguised  with  drugs;  you  must  have  butchers,  cooks,
turnspits, men who will rid the murder of its horrors, who will dress the dead bodies so that the taste
deceived by these disguises will not reject what is strange to it, and will feast on corpses, the very sight
of which would sicken you.'"
  Although this quotation is irrelevant, I cannot resist the temptation to transcribe it, and I think few
of my readers will resent it.
  In conclusion, whatever food you give your children, provided you accustom them to nothing but
plain and simple dishes, let them eat and run and play as much as they want; you may be sure they will
never eat too much and will never have indigestion; but if you keep them hungry half their time, when
they do contrive to evade your vigilance, they will take advantage of it as far as they can; they will eat
till they are sick, they will gorge themselves till they can eat no more. Our appetite is only excessive
because we try to impose on it rules other than those of nature, opposing, controlling, prescribing,
adding, or substracting; the scales are always in our hands, but the scales are the measure of our
caprices not of our stomachs. I return to my usual illustration; among peasants the cupboard and the
apple-loft are always left open, and indigestion is unknown alike to children and grown-up people.
  If, however, it happened that a child were too great an eater, though, under my system, I think it is
impossible, he is so easily distracted by his favourite games that one might easily starve him without
his knowing it. How is it that teachers have failed to use such a safe and easy weapon. Herodotus
records that the Lydians, [Footnote: The ancient historians are full of opinions which may be useful,
even if the facts which they present are false. But we do not know how to make any real use of history.
Criticism and erudition are our only care; as if it mattered more that a statement were true or false than
that we should be able to get a useful lesson from it. A wise man should consider history a tissue of
fables whose morals are well adapted to the human heart.] under the pressure of great scarcity, decided
to invent sports and other amusements with which to cheat their hunger, and they passed whole days
without thought of food. Your learned teachers may have read this passage time after time without
seeing how it might be applied to children. One of these teachers will probably tell me that a child does
not like to leave his dinner for his lessons. You are right, sir--I was not thinking of that sort of sport.
  The sense of smell is to taste what sight is to touch; it goes before it and gives it warning that it will
be affected by this or that substance; and it inclines it to seek or shun this experience according to the
impressions received beforehand. I have been told that savages receive impressions quite different from
ours, and that they have quite different ideas with regard to pleasant or unpleasant odours. I can well
believe it. Odours alone are slight sensations; they affect the imagination rather than the senses, and
they work mainly through the anticipations they arouse. This being so, and the tastes of savages being
so unlike the taste of civilised men, they should lead them to form very different ideas with regard to
flavours and therefore with regard to the odours which announce them. A Tartar must enjoy the smell
of a haunch of putrid horseflesh, much as a sportsman enjoys a very high partridge. Our idle sensations,
such as the scents wafted from the flower beds, must pass unnoticed among men who walk too much to
care for strolling in a garden, and do not work enough to find pleasure in repose. Hungry men would
find little pleasure in scents which did not proclaim the approach of food.
  Smell is the sense of the imagination; as it gives tone to the nerves it must have a great effect on the
brain; that is why it revives us for the time, but eventually causes exhaustion. Its effects on love are
pretty generally recognised. The sweet perfumes of a dressing-room are not so slight a snare as you
may fancy them, and I hardly know whether to congratulate or condole with that wise and somewhatinsensible person whose senses are never stirred by the scent of the flowers his mistress wears in her
bosom.
  Hence the sense of smell should not be over-active in early childhood; the imagination, as yet
unstirred by changing passions, is scarcely susceptible of emotion, and we have not enough experience
to discern beforehand from one sense the promise of another. This view is confirmed by observation,
and it is certain that the sense of smell is dull and almost blunted in most children. Not that their
sensations are less acute than those of grown-up people, but that there is no idea associated with them;
they do not easily experience pleasure or pain, and are not flattered or hurt as we are. Without going
beyond my system, and without recourse to comparative anatomy, I think we can easily see why
women are generally fonder of perfumes than men.
  It is said that from early childhood the Redskins of Canada, train their sense of smell to such a
degree of subtlety that, although they have dogs, they do not condescend to use them in hunting--they
are their own dogs. Indeed I believe that if children were trained to scent their dinner as a dog scents
game, their sense of smell might be nearly as perfect; but I see no very real advantage to be derived
from this sense, except by teaching the child to observe the relation between smell and taste. Nature has
taken  care  to.  compel  us  to  learn  these  relations.  She  has  made  the  exercise  of  the  latter  sense
practically inseparable from that of the former, by placing their organs close together, and by providing,
in the mouth, a direct pathway between them, so that we taste nothing without smelling it too. Only I
would not have these natural relations disturbed in order to deceive the child, e.g.; to conceal the taste
of medicine with an aromatic odour, for the discord between the senses is too great for deception, the
more  active  sense  overpowers.  the  other,  the  medicine  is  just  as  distasteful,  and  this  disagreeable
association extends to every sensation experienced at the time; so the slightest of these sensations
recalls the rest to his imagination and a very pleasant perfume is for him only a nasty smell; thus our
foolish  precautions  increase  the  sum  total  of  his  unpleasant  sensations  at  the  cost  of  his  pleasant
sensations.
  In the following books I have still to speak of the training of a sort of sixth sense, called common-
sense, not so much because it is common to all men, but because it results from the well-regulated use
of the other five, and teaches the nature of things by the sum-total of their external aspects. So this sixth
sense has no special organ, it has its seat in the brain, and its sensations which are purely internal are
called percepts or ideas. The number of these ideas is the measure of our knowledge; exactness of
thought depends on their clearness and precision; the art of comparing them one with another is called
human reason. Thus what I call the reasoning of the senses, or the reasoning of the child, consists in the
formation of simple ideas through the associated experience of several sensations; what I call the
reasoning of the intellect, consists in the formation, of complex ideas through the association of several
simple ideas.
  If my method is indeed that of nature, and if I am not mistaken in the application of that method, we
have led our pupil through the region of sensation to the bounds of the child's reasoning; the first step
we take beyond these bounds must be the step of a man. But before we make this fresh advance, let us
glance back for a moment at the path we have hitherto followed. Every age, every station in life, has a
perfection, a ripeness, of its own. We have often heard the phrase "a grown man;" but we will consider
"a grown child." This will be a new experience and none the less pleasing.
  The life of finite creatures is so poor and narrow that the mere sight of what is arouses no emotion.
It is fancy which decks reality, and if imagination does not lend its charm to that which touches our
senses, our barren pleasure is confined to the senses alone, while the heart remains cold. The earth
adorned with the treasures of autumn displays a wealth of colour which the eye admires; but this
admiration fails to move us, it springs rather from thought than from feeling. In spring the country is
almost bare and leafless, the trees give no shade, the grass has hardly begun to grow, yet the heart is
touched by the sight. In this new birth of nature, we feel the revival of our own life; the memories of
past pleasures surround us; tears of delight, those companions of pleasure ever ready to accompany a
pleasing sentiment, tremble on our eyelids. Animated, lively, and delightful though the vintage may be,we behold it without a tear.
  And why is this? Because imagination adds to the sight of spring the image of the seasons which
are yet to come; the eye sees the tender shoot, the mind's eye beholds its flowers, fruit, and foliage, and
even the mysteries they may conceal. It blends successive stages into one moment's experience; we see
things, not so much as they will be, but as we would have them be, for imagination has only to take her
choice. In autumn, on the other hand, we only behold the present; if we wish to look forward to spring,
winter bars the way, and our shivering imagination dies away among its frost and snow.
  This is the source of the charm we find in beholding the beauties of childhood, rather than the
perfection of manhood. When do we really delight in beholding a man? When the memory of his deeds
leads us to look back over his life and his youth is renewed in our eyes. If we are reduced to viewing
him as he is, or to picturing him as he will be in old age, the thought of declining years destroys all our
pleasure. There is no pleasure in seeing a man hastening to his grave; the image of death makes all
hideous.
  But when I think of a child of ten or twelve, strong, healthy, well-grown for his age, only pleasant
thoughts are called up, whether of the present or the future. I see him keen, eager, and full of life, free
from gnawing cares and painful forebodings, absorbed in this present state, and delighting in a fullness
of life which seems to extend beyond himself. I look forward to a time when he will use his daily
increasing sense, intelligence and vigour, those growing powers of which he continually gives fresh
proof. I watch the child with delight, I picture to myself the man with even greater pleasure. His eager
life seems to stir my own pulses, I seem to live his life and in his vigour I renew my own.
  The hour strikes, the scene is changed. All of a sudden his eye grows dim, his mirth has fled.
Farewell mirth, farewell untrammelled sports in which he delighted. A stern, angry man takes him by
the hand, saying gravely, "Come with me, sir," and he is led away. As they are entering the room, I
catch a glimpse of books. Books, what dull food for a child of his age! The poor child allows himself to
be dragged away; he casts a sorrowful look on all about him, and departs in silence, his eyes swollen
with the tears he dare not shed, and his heart bursting with the sighs he dare not utter.
  You who have no such cause for fear, you for whom no period of life is a time of weariness and
tedium, you who welcome days without care and nights without impatience, you who only reckon time
by your pleasures, come, my happy kindly pupil, and console us for the departure of that miserable
creature. Come! Here he is and at his approach I feel a thrill of delight which I see he shares. It is his
friend, his comrade, who meets him; when he sees me he knows very well that he will not be long
without amusement; we are never dependent on each other, but we are always on good terms, and we
are never so happy as when together.
  His face, his bearing, his expression, speak of confidence and contentment; health shines in his
countenance, his firm step speaks of strength; his colour, delicate but not sickly, has nothing of softness
or effeminacy. Sun and wind have already set the honourable stamp of manhood on his countenance;
his  rounded  muscles  already  begin  to  show  some  signs  of  growing  individuality;  his  eyes,  as  yet
unlighted by the flame of feeling, have at least all their native calm; They have not been darkened by
prolonged sorrow, nor are his cheeks furrowed by ceaseless tears. Behold in his quick and certain
movements the natural vigour of his age and the confidence of independence. His manner is free and
open, but without a trace of insolence or vanity; his head which has not been bent over books does not
fall upon his breast; there is no need to say, "Hold your head up," he will neither hang his head for
shame or fear.
  Make room for him, gentlemen, in your midst; question him boldly; have no fear of importunity,
chatter, or impertinent questions. You need not be afraid that he will take possession of you and expect
you to devote yourself entirely to him, so that you cannot get rid of him.
  Neither need you look for compliments from him; nor will he tell you what I have taught him to
say; expect nothing from him but the plain, simple truth, without addition or ornament and without
vanity. He will tell you the wrong things he has done and thought as readily as the right, without
troubling himself in the least as to the effect of his words upon you; he will use speech with all thesimplicity of its first beginnings.
  We love to augur well of our children, and we are continually regretting the flood of folly which
overwhelms the hopes we would fain have rested on some chance phrase. If my scholar rarely gives me
cause for such prophecies, neither will he give me cause for such regrets, for he never says a useless
word, and does not exhaust himself by chattering when he knows there is no one to listen to him. His
ideas are few but precise, he knows nothing by rote but much by experience. If he reads our books
worse than other children, he reads far better in the book of nature; his thoughts are not in his tongue
but in his brain; he has less memory and more judgment; he can only speak one language, but he
understands what he is saying, and if his speech is not so good as that of other children his deeds are
better.
  He does not know the meaning of habit, routine, and custom; what he did yesterday has no control
over what he is doing to-day; he follows no rule, submits to no authority, copies no pattern, and only
acts or speaks as he pleases. So do not expect set speeches or studied manners from him, but just the
faithful expression of his thoughts and the conduct that springs from his inclinations. [Footnote: Habit
owes its charm to man's natural idleness, and this idleness grows upon us if indulged; it is easier to do
what we have already done, there is a beaten path which is easily followed. Thus we may observe that
habit is very strong in the aged and in the indolent, and very weak in the young and active. The rule of
habit is only good for feeble hearts, and it makes them more and more feeble day by day. The only
useful habit for children is to be accustomed to submit without difficulty to necessity, and the only
useful habit for man is to submit without difficulty to the rule of reason. Every other habit is a vice.]
  You will find he has a few moral ideas concerning his present state and none concerning manhood;
what use could he make of them, for the child is not, as yet, an active member of society. Speak to him
of freedom, of property, or even of what is usually done; he may understand you so far; he knows why
his things are his own, and why other things are not his, and nothing more. Speak to him of duty or
obedience; he will not know what you are talking about; bid him do something and he will pay no
attention; but say to him, "If you will give me this pleasure, I will repay it when required," and he will
hasten to give you satisfaction, for he asks nothing better than to extend his domain, to acquire rights
over you, which will, he knows, be respected. Maybe he is not sorry to have a place of his own, to be
reckoned of some account; but if he has formed this latter idea, he has already left the realms of nature,
and you have failed to bar the gates of vanity.
  For his own part, should he need help, he will ask it readily of the first person he meets. He will ask
it of a king as readily as of his servant; all men are equals in his eyes. From his way of asking you will
see he knows you owe him nothing, that he is asking a favour. He knows too that humanity moves you
to grant this favour; his words are few and simple. His voice, his look, his gesture are those of a being
equally familiar with compliance and refusal. It is neither the crawling, servile submission of the slave,
nor the imperious tone of the master, it is a modest confidence in mankind; it is the noble and touching
gentleness of a creature, free, yet sensitive and feeble, who asks aid of a being, free, but strong and
kindly. If you grant his request he will not thank you, but he will feel he has incurred a debt. If you
refuse he will neither complain nor insist; he knows it is useless; he will not say, "They refused to help
me," but "It was impossible," and as I have already said, we do not rebel against necessity when once
we have perceived it.
  Leave him to himself and watch his actions without speaking, consider what he is doing and how he
sets about it. He does not require to convince himself that he is free, so he never acts thoughtlessly and
merely to show that he can do what he likes; does he not know that he is always his own master? He is
quick, alert, and ready; his movements are eager as befits his age, but you will not find one which has
no end in view. Whatever he wants, he will never attempt what is beyond his powers, for he has learnt
by experience what those powers are; his means will always be adapted to the end in view, and he will
rarely attempt anything without the certainty of success; his eye is keen and true; he will not be so
stupid as to go and ask other people about what he sees; he will examine it on his own account, and
before he asks he will try every means at his disposal to discover what he wants to know for himself. Ifhe lights upon some unexpected difficulty, he will be less upset than others; if there is danger he will be
less afraid. His imagination is still asleep and nothing has been done to arouse it; he only sees what is
really there, and rates the danger at its true worth; so he never loses his head. He does not rebel against
necessity, her hand is too heavy upon him; he has borne her yoke all his life long, he is well used to it;
he is always ready for anything.
  Work or play are all one to him, his games are his work; he knows no difference. He brings to
everything the cheerfulness of interest, the charm of freedom, and he snows the bent of his own mind
and the extent of his knowledge. Is there anything better worth seeing, anything more touching or more
delightful,  than  a  pretty  child,  with  merry,  cheerful  glance,  easy  contented  manner,  open  smiling
countenance, playing at the most important things, or working at the lightest amusements?
  Would you now judge him by comparison? Set him among other children and leave him to himself.
You will soon see which has made most progress, which comes nearer to the perfection of childhood.
Among all the children in the town there is none more skilful and none so strong. Among young
peasants he is their equal in strength and their superior in skill. In everything within a child's grasp he
judges, reasons, and shows a forethought beyond the rest. Is it a matter of action, running, jumping, or
shifting things, raising weights or estimating distance, inventing games, carrying off prizes; you might
say, "Nature obeys his word," so easily does he bend all things to his will. He is made to lead, to rule
his fellows; talent and experience take the place of right and authority. In any garb, under any name, he
will still be first; everywhere he will rule the rest, they will always feel his superiority, he will be
master without knowing it, and they will serve him unawares.
  He has reached the perfection of childhood; he has lived the life of a child; his progress has not
been bought at the price of his happiness, he has gained both. While he has acquired all the wisdom of a
child, he has been as free and happy as his health permits. If the Reaper Death should cut him off and
rob us of our hopes, we need not bewail alike his life and death, we shall not have the added grief of
knowing that we caused him pain; we will say, "His childhood, at least, was happy; we have robbed
him of nothing that nature gave him."
  The chief drawback to this early education is that it is only appreciated by the wise; to vulgar eyes
the child so carefully educated is nothing but a rough little boy. A tutor thinks rather of the advantage to
himself than to his pupil; he makes a point of showing that there has been no time wasted; he provides
his pupil with goods which can be readily displayed in the shop window, accomplishments which can
be shown off at will; no matter whether they are useful, provided they are easily seen. Without choice
or discrimination he loads his memory with a pack of rubbish. If the child is to be examined he is set to
display his wares; he spreads them out, satisfies those who behold them, packs up his bundle and goes
his way. My pupil is poorer, he has no bundle to display, he has only himself to show. Now neither
child  nor  man  can  be  read  at  a  glance.  Where  are  the  observers  who  can  at  once  discern  the
characteristics  of  this  child?  There  are  such  people,  but  they  are  few  and  far  between;  among  a
thousand fathers you will scarcely find one.
  Too many questions are tedious and revolting to most of us and especially to children. After a few
minutes their attention flags, they cease to listen to your everlasting questions and reply at random. This
way of testing them is pedantic and useless; a chance word will often show their sense and intelligence
better than much talking, but take care that the answer is neither a matter of chance nor yet learnt by
heart. A man must needs have a good judgment if he is to estimate the judgment of a child.
I heard the late Lord Hyde tell the following story about one of his friends. He had returned from
Italy after a three years' absence, and was anxious to test the progress of his son, a child of nine or ten.
One evening he took a walk with the child and his tutor across a level space where the schoolboys were
flying their kites. As they went, the father said to his son, "Where is the kite that casts this shadow?"
Without hesitating and without glancing upwards the child replied, "Over the high road." "And indeed,"
said Lord Hyde, "the high road was between us and the sun." At these words, the father kissed his child,
and having finished his examination he departed. The next day he sent the tutor the papers settling an
annuity on him in addition to his salary.  What a father! and what a promising child! The question is exactly adapted to the child's age, the
answer is perfectly simple; but see what precision it implies in the child's judgment. Thus did the pupil
of Aristotle master the famous steed which no squire had ever been able to tame.
 
 
  BOOK III
  The whole course of man's life up to adolescence is a period of weakness; yet there comes a time
during these early years when the child's strength overtakes the demands upon it, when the growing
creature, though absolutely weak, is relatively strong. His needs are not fully developed and his present
strength is more than enough for them. He would be a very feeble man, but he is a strong child.
  What is the cause of man's weakness? It is to be found in the disproportion between his strength and
his desires. It is our passions that make us weak, for our natural strength is not enough for their
satisfaction. To limit our desires comes to the same thing, therefore, as to increase our strength. When
we can do more than we want, we have strength enough and to spare, we are really strong. This is the
third stage of childhood, the stage with which I am about to deal. I still speak of childhood for want of a
better word; for our scholar is approaching adolescence, though he has not yet reached the age of
puberty.
  About twelve or thirteen the child's strength increases far more rapidly than his needs. The strongest
and fiercest of the passions is still unknown, his physical development is still imperfect and seems to
await the call of the will. He is scarcely aware of extremes of heat and cold and braves them with
impunity. He needs no coat, his blood is warm; no spices, hunger is his sauce, no food comes amiss at
this age; if he is sleepy he stretches himself on the ground and goes to sleep; he finds all he needs
within his reach; he is not tormented by any imaginary wants; he cares nothing what others think; his
desires are not beyond his grasp; not only is he self-sufficing, but for the first and last time in his life he
has more strength than he needs.
I know beforehand what you will say. You will not assert that the child has more needs than I
attribute to him, but you will deny his strength. You forget that I am speaking of my own pupil, not of
those puppets who walk with difficulty from one room to another, who toil indoors and carry bundles
of paper. Manly strength, you say, appears only with manhood; the vital spirits, distilled in their proper
vessels and spreading through the whole body, can alone make the muscles firm, sensitive, tense, and
springy,  can  alone  cause  real  strength.  This  is  the  philosophy  of  the  study;  I  appeal  to  that  of
experience. In the country districts, I see big lads hoeing, digging, guiding the plough, filling the wine-
cask, driving the cart, like their fathers; you would take them for grown men if their voices did not
betray them. Even in our towns, iron-workers', tool makers', and blacksmiths' lads are almost as strong
as  their  masters  and  would  be  scarcely  less  skilful  had  their  training  begun  earlier.  If  there  is  a
difference, and I do not deny that there is, it is, I repeat, much less than the difference between the
stormy passions of the man and the few wants of the child. Moreover, it is not merely a question of
bodily  strength,  but  more  especially  of  strength  of  mind,  which  reinforces  and  directs  the  bodily
strength.
  This interval in which the strength of the individual is in excess of his wants is, as I have said,
relatively though not absolutely the time of greatest strength. It is the most precious time in his life; it
comes but once; it is very short, all too short, as you will see when you consider the importance of
using it aright.
  He has, therefore, a surplus of strength and capacity which he will never have again. What use shall
he make of it? He will strive to use it in tasks which will help at need. He will, so to speak, cast his
present surplus into the storehouse of the future; the vigorous child will make provision for the feeble
man; but he will not store his goods where thieves may break in, nor in barns which are not his own. To
store them aright, they must be in the hands and the head, they must be stored within himself. This is
the time for work, instruction, and inquiry. And note that this is no arbitrary choice of mine, it is the
way of nature herself.  Human intelligence is finite, and not only can no man know everything, he cannot even acquire all
the scanty knowledge of others. Since the contrary of every false proposition is a truth, there are as
many truths as falsehoods. We must, therefore, choose what to teach as well as when to teach it. Some
of  the  information  within  our  reach  is  false,  some  is  useless,  some  merely  serves  to  puff  up  its
possessor. The small store which really contributes to our welfare alone deserves the study of a wise
man, and therefore of a child whom one would have wise. He must know not merely what is, but what
is useful.
  From this small stock we must also deduct those truths which require a full grown mind for their
understanding, those which suppose a knowledge of man's relations to his fellow-men--a knowledge
which no child can acquire; these things, although in themselves true, lead an inexperienced mind into
mistakes with regard to other matters.
  We are now confined to a circle, small indeed compared with the whole of human thought, but this
circle is still a vast sphere when measured by the child's mind. Dark places of the human understanding,
what rash hand shall dare to raise your veil? What pitfalls does our so-called science prepare for the
miserable child. Would you guide him along this dangerous path and draw the veil from the face of
nature? Stay your hand. First make sure that neither he nor you will become dizzy. Beware of the
specious  charms  of  error  and  the  intoxicating  fumes  of  pride.  Keep  this  truth  ever  before  you--
Ignorance never did any one any harm, error alone is fatal, and we do not lose our way through
ignorance but through self-confidence.
  His progress in geometry may serve as a test and a true measure of the growth of his intelligence,
but as soon as he can distinguish between what is useful and what is useless, much skill and discretion
are required to lead him towards theoretical studies. For example, would you have him find a mean
proportional  between  two  lines,  contrive  that  he  should  require  to  find  a  square  equal  to  a  given
rectangle; if two mean proportionals are required, you must first contrive to interest him in the doubling
of the cube. See how we are gradually approaching the moral ideas which distinguish between good
and evil. Hitherto we have known no law but necessity, now we are considering what is useful; we shall
soon come to what is fitting and right.
  Man's diverse powers are stirred by the same instinct. The bodily activity, which seeks an outlet for
its energies, is succeeded by the mental activity which seeks for knowledge. Children are first restless,
then curious; and this curiosity, rightly directed, is the means of development for the age with which we
are dealing. Always distinguish between natural and acquired tendencies. There is a zeal for learning
which has no other foundation than a wish to appear learned, and there is another which springs from
man's natural curiosity about all things far or near which may affect himself. The innate desire for
comfort and the impossibility of its complete satisfaction impel him to the endless search for fresh
means of contributing to its satisfaction. This is the first principle of curiosity; a principle natural to the
human heart, though its growth is proportional to the development of our feeling and knowledge. If a
man of science were left on a desert island with his books and instruments and knowing that he must
spend the rest of his life there, he would scarcely trouble himself about the solar system, the laws of
attraction, or the differential calculus. He might never even open a book again; but he would never rest
till he had explored the furthest corner of his island, however large it might be. Let us therefore omit
from our early studies such knowledge as has no natural attraction for us, and confine ourselves to such
things as instinct impels us to study.
  Our island is this earth; and the most striking object we behold is the sun. As soon as we pass
beyond our immediate surroundings, one or both of these must meet our eye. Thus the philosophy of
most savage races is mainly directed to imaginary divisions of the earth or to the divinity of the sun.
  What a sudden change you will say. Just now we were concerned with what touches ourselves, with
our immediate environment, and all at once we are exploring the round world and leaping to the bounds
of the universe. This change is the result of our growing strength and of the natural bent of the mind.
While we were weak and feeble, self-preservation concentrated our attention on ourselves; now that we
are strong and powerful, the desire for a wider sphere carries us beyond ourselves as far as our eyes canreach. But as the intellectual world is still unknown to us, our thoughts are bounded by the visible
horizon, and our understanding only develops within the limits of our vision.
  Let us transform our sensations into ideas, but do not let us jump all at once from the objects of
sense to objects of thought. The latter are attained by means of the former. Let the senses be the only
guide for the first workings of reason. No book but the world, no teaching but that of fact. The child
who reads ceases to think, he only reads. He is acquiring words not knowledge.
  Teach your scholar to observe the phenomena of nature; you will soon rouse his curiosity, but if
you would have it grow, do not be in too great a hurry to satisfy this curiosity. Put the problems before
him and let him solve them himself. Let him know nothing because you have told him, but because he
has learnt it for himself. Let him not be taught science, let him discover it. If ever you substitute
authority for reason he will cease to reason; he will be a mere plaything of other people's thoughts.
  You wish to teach this child geography and you provide him with globes, spheres, and maps. What
elaborate preparations! What is the use of all these symbols; why not begin by showing him the real
thing so that he may at least know what you are talking about?
  One fine evening we are walking in a suitable place where the wide horizon gives us a full view of
the setting sun, and we note the objects which mark the place where it sets. Next morning we return to
the same place for a breath of fresh air before sun-rise. We see the rays of light which announce the
sun's approach; the glow increases, the east seems afire, and long before the sun appears the light leads
us to expect its return. Every moment you expect to see it. There it is at last! A shining point appears
like a flash of lightning and soon fills the whole space; the veil of darkness rolls away, man perceives
his dwelling place in fresh beauty. During the night the grass has assumed a fresher green; in the light
of early dawn, and gilded by the first rays of the sun, it seems covered with a shining network of dew
reflecting the light and colour. The birds raise their chorus of praise to greet the Father of life, not one
of them is mute; their gentle warbling is softer than by day, it expresses the langour of a peaceful
waking. All these produce an impression of freshness which seems to reach the very soul. It is a brief
hour of enchantment which no man can resist; a sight so grand, so fair, so delicious, that none can
behold it unmoved.
  Fired with this enthusiasm, the master wishes to impart it to the child. He expects to rouse his
emotion by drawing attention to his own. Mere folly! The splendour of nature lives in man's heart; to be
seen, it must be felt. The child sees the objects themselves, but does not perceive their relations, and
cannot  hear  their  harmony.  It  needs  knowledge  he  has  not  yet  acquired,  feelings  he  has  not  yet
experienced, to receive the complex impression which results from all these separate sensations. If he
has not wandered over arid plains, if his feet have not been scorched by the burning sands of the desert,
if he has not breathed the hot and oppressive air reflected from the glowing rocks, how shall he delight
in the fresh air of a fine morning. The scent of flowers, the beauty of foliage, the moistness of the dew,
the soft turf beneath his feet, how shall all these delight his senses. How shall the song of the birds
arouse voluptuous emotion if love and pleasure are still unknown to him? How shall he behold with
rapture the birth of this fair day, if his imagination cannot paint the joys it may bring in its track? How
can he feel the beauty of nature, while the hand that formed it is unknown?
  Never tell the child what he cannot understand: no descriptions, no eloquence, no figures of speech,
no poetry. The time has not come for feeling or taste. Continue to be clear and cold; the time will come
only too soon when you must adopt another tone.
  Brought up in the spirit of our maxims, accustomed to make his own tools and not to appeal to
others until he has tried and failed, he will examine everything he sees carefully and in silence. He
thinks rather than questions. Be content, therefore, to show him things at a fit season; then, when you
see  that  his  curiosity  is  thoroughly  aroused,  put  some  brief  question  which  will  set  him  trying  to
discover the answer.
  On the present occasion when you and he have carefully observed the rising sun, when you have
called his attention to the mountains and other objects visible from the same spot, after he has chattered
freely about them, keep quiet for a few minutes as if lost in thought and then say, "I think the sun setover there last night; it rose here this morning. How can that be?" Say no more; if he asks questions, do
not answer them; talk of something else. Let him alone, and be sure he will think about it.
  To train a child to be really attentive so that he may be really impressed by any truth of experience,
he must spend anxious days before he discovers that truth. If he does not learn enough in this way,
there is another way of drawing his attention to the matter. Turn the question about. If he does not
know how the sun gets from the place where it sets to where it rises, he knows at least how it travels
from sunrise to sunset, his eyes teach him that. Use the second question to throw light on the first;
either your pupil is a regular dunce or the analogy is too clear to be missed. This is his first lesson in
cosmography.
  As we always advance slowly from one sensible idea to another, and as we give time enough to
each for him to become really familiar with it before we go on to another, and lastly as we never force
our scholar's attention, we are still a long way from a knowledge of the course of the sun or the shape of
the earth; but as all the apparent movements of the celestial bodies depend on the same principle, and
the first observation leads on to all the rest, less effort is needed, though more time, to proceed from the
diurnal revolution to the calculation of eclipses, than to get a thorough understanding of day and night.
  Since the sun revolves round the earth it describes a circle, and every circle must have a centre; that
we know already. This centre is invisible, it is in the middle of the earth, but we can mark out two
opposite points on the earth's surface which correspond to it. A skewer passed through the three points
and prolonged to the sky at either end would represent the earth's axis and the sun's daily course. A
round teetotum revolving on its point represents the sky turning on its axis, the two points of the
teetotum are the two poles; the child will be delighted to find one of them, and I show him the tail of
the Little bear. Here is a another game for the dark. Little by little we get to know the stars, and from
this comes a wish to know the planets and observe the constellations.
  We saw the sun rise at midsummer, we shall see it rise at Christmas or some other fine winter's day;
for you know we are no lie-a-beds and we enjoy the cold. I take care to make this second observation in
the same place as the first, and if skilfully lead up to, one or other will certainly exclaim, "What a funny
thing! The sun is not rising in the same place; here are our landmarks, but it is rising over there. So
there is the summer east and the winter east, etc." Young teacher, you are on the right track. These
examples should show you how to teach the sphere without any difficulty, taking the earth for the earth
and the sun for the sun.
  As a general rule--never substitute the symbol for the thing signified, unless it is impossible to show
the thing itself; for the child's attention is so taken up with the symbol that he will forget what it
signifies.
I consider the armillary sphere a clumsy disproportioned bit of apparatus. The confused circles and
the strange figures described on it suggest witchcraft and frighten the child. The earth is too small, the
circles too large and too numerous, some of them, the colures, for instance, are quite useless, and the
thickness of the pasteboard gives them an appearance of solidity so that they are taken for circular
masses having a real existence, and when you tell the child that these are imaginary circles, he does not
know what he is looking at and is none the wiser.
  We are unable to put ourselves in the child's place, we fail to enter into his thoughts, we invest him
with our own ideas, and while we are following our own chain of reasoning, we merely fill his head
with errors and absurdities.
  Should the method of studying science be analytic or synthetic? People dispute over this question,
but it is not always necessary to choose between them. Sometimes the same experiments allow one to
use both analysis and synthesis, and thus to guide the child by the method of instruction when he
fancies he is only analysing. Then, by using both at once, each method confirms the results of the other.
Starting from opposite ends, without thinking of following the same road, he will unexpectedly reach
their meeting place and this will be a delightful surprise. For example, I would begin geography at both
ends and add to the study of the earth's revolution the measurement of its divisions, beginning at home.
While the child is studying the sphere and is thus transported to the heavens, bring him back to thedivisions of the globe and show him his own home.
  His geography will begin with the town he lives in and his father's country house, then the places
between them, the rivers near them, and then the sun's aspect and how to find one's way by its aid. This
is the meeting place. Let him make his own map, a very simple map, at first containing only two places;
others may be added from time to time, as he is able to estimate their distance and position. You see at
once what a good start we have given him by making his eye his compass.
  No doubt he will require some guidance in spite of this, but very little, and that little without his
knowing it. If he goes wrong let him alone, do not correct his mistakes; hold your tongue till he finds
them out for himself and corrects them, or at most arrange something, as opportunity offers, which may
show him his mistakes. If he never makes mistakes he will never learn anything thoroughly. Moreover,
what he needs is not an exact knowledge of local topography, but how to find out for himself. No
matter whether he carries maps in his head provided he understands what they mean, and has a clear
idea of the art of making them. See what a difference there is already between the knowledge of your
scholars and the ignorance of mine. They learn maps, he makes them. Here are fresh ornaments for his
room.
  Remember that this is the essential point in my method--Do not teach the child many things, but
never to let him form inaccurate or confused ideas. I care not if he knows nothing provided he is not
mistaken, and I only acquaint him with truths to guard him against the errors he might put in their
place. Reason and judgment come slowly, prejudices flock to us in crowds, and from these he must be
protected. But if you make science itself your object, you embark on an unfathomable and shoreless
ocean, an ocean strewn with reefs from which you will never return. When I see a man in love with
knowledge, yielding to its charms and flitting from one branch to another unable to stay his steps, he
seems to me like a child gathering shells on the sea-shore, now picking them up, then throwing them
aside for others which he sees beyond them, then taking them again, till overwhelmed by their number
and unable to choose between them, he flings them all away and returns empty handed.
  Time was long during early childhood; we only tried to pass our time for fear of using it ill; now it
is the other way; we have not time enough for all that would be of use. The passions, remember, are
drawing near, and when they knock at the door your scholar will have no ear for anything else. The
peaceful age of intelligence is so short, it flies so swiftly, there is so much to be done, that it is madness
to try to make your child learned. It is not your business to teach him the various sciences, but to give
him a taste for them and methods of learning them when this taste is more mature. That is assuredly a
fundamental principle of all good education.
  This  is  also  the  time  to  train  him  gradually  to  prolonged  attention  to  a  given  object;  but  this
attention should never be the result of constraint, but of interest or desire; you must be very careful that
it is not too much for his strength, and that it is not carried to the point of tedium. Watch him, therefore,
and whatever happens, stop before he is tired, for it matters little what he learns; it does matter that he
should do nothing against his will.
  If he asks questions let your answers be enough to whet his curiosity but not enough to satisfy it;
above all, when you find him talking at random and overwhelming you with silly questions instead of
asking for information, at once refuse to answer; for it is clear that he no longer cares about the matter
in hand, but wants to make you a slave to his questions. Consider his motives rather than his words.
This warning, which was scarcely needed before, becomes of supreme importance when the child
begins to reason.
  There is a series of abstract truths by means of which all the sciences are related to common
principles and are developed each in its turn. This relationship is the method of the philosophers. We
are not concerned with it at present. There is quite another method by which every concrete example
suggests another and always points to the next in the series. This succession, which stimulates the
curiosity and so arouses the attention required by every object in turn, is the order followed by most
men, and it is the right order for all children. To take our bearings so as to make our maps we must find
meridians. Two points of intersection between the equal shadows morning and evening supply anexcellent meridian for a thirteen-year-old astronomer. But these meridians disappear, it takes time to
trace them, and you are obliged to work in one place. So much trouble and attention will at last become
irksome. We foresaw this and are ready for it.
  Again I must enter into minute and detailed explanations. I hear my readers murmur, but I am
prepared to meet their disapproval; I will not sacrifice the most important part of this book to your
impatience. You may think me as long-winded as you please; I have my own opinion as to your
complaints.
  Long ago my pupil and I remarked that some substances such as amber, glass, and wax, when well
rubbed, attracted straws, while others did not. We accidentally discover a substance which has a more
unusual property, that of attracting filings or other small particles of iron from a distance and without
rubbing. How much time do we devote to this game to the exclusion of everything else! At last we
discover that this property is communicated to the iron itself, which is, so to speak, endowed with life.
We go to the fair one day [Footnote: I could not help laughing when I read an elaborate criticism of this
little tale by M. de Formy. "This conjuror," says he, "who is afraid of a child's competition and preaches
to his tutor is the sort of person we meet with in the world in which Emile and such as he are living."
This witty M. de Formy could not guess that this little scene was arranged beforehand, and that the
juggler was taught his part in it; indeed I did not state this fact. But I have said again and again that I
was not writing for people who expected to be told everything.] and a conjuror has a wax duck floating
in a basin of water, and he makes it follow a bit of bread. We are greatly surprised, but we do not call
him a wizard, never having heard of such persons. As we are continually observing effects whose
causes are unknown to us, we are in no hurry to make up our minds, and we remain in ignorance till we
find an opportunity of learning.
  When we get home we discuss the duck till we try to imitate it. We take a needle thoroughly
magnetised, we imbed it in white wax, shaped as far as possible like a duck, with the needle running
through the body, so that its eye forms the beak. We put the duck in water and put the end of a key near
its beak, and you will readily understand our delight when we find that our duck follows the key just as
the duck at the fair followed the bit of bread. Another time we may note the direction assumed by the
duck when left in the basin; for the present we are wholly occupied with our work and we want nothing
more.
  The same evening we return to the fair with some bread specially prepared in our pockets, and as
soon as the conjuror has performed his trick, my little doctor, who can scarcely sit still, exclaims, "The
trick is quite easy; I can do it myself." "Do it then." He at once takes the bread with a bit of iron hidden
in it from his pocket; his heart throbs as he approaches the table and holds out the bread, his hand
trembles with excitement. The duck approaches and follows his hand. The child cries out and jumps for
joy. The applause, the shouts of the crowd, are too much for him, he is beside himself. The conjuror,
though  disappointed,  embraces  him,  congratulates  him,  begs  the  honour  of  his  company  on  the
following day, and promises to collect a still greater crowd to applaud his skill. My young scientist is
very  proud  of  himself  and  is  beginning  to  chatter,  but  I  check  him  at  once  and  take  him  home
overwhelmed with praise.
  The child counts the minutes till to-morrow with absurd anxiety. He invites every one he meets, he
wants all mankind to behold his glory; he can scarcely wait till the appointed hour. He hurries to the
place; the hall is full already; as he enters his young heart swells with pride. Other tricks are to come
first. The conjuror surpasses himself and does the most surprising things. The child sees none of these;
he wriggles, perspires, and hardly breathes; the time is spent in fingering with a trembling hand the bit
of  bread  in  his  pocket.  His  turn  comes  at  last;  the  master  announces  it  to  the  audience  with  all
ceremony; he goes up looking somewhat shamefaced and takes out his bit of bread. Oh fleeting joys of
human life! the duck, so tame yesterday, is quite wild to-day; instead of offering its beak it turns tail
and  swims  away;  it  avoids  the  bread  and  the  hand  that  holds  it  as  carefully  as  it  followed  them
yesterday.  After  many  vain  attempts  accompanied  by  derisive  shouts  from  the  audience  the  child
complains that he is being cheated, that is not the same duck, and he defies the conjuror to attract it.  The conjuror, without further words, takes a bit of bread and offers it to the duck, which at once
follows it and comes to the hand which holds it. The child takes the same bit of bread with no better
success;  the  duck  mocks  his  efforts  and  swims  round  the  basin.  Overwhelmed  with  confusion  he
abandons the attempt, ashamed to face the crowd any longer. Then the conjuror takes the bit of bread
the child brought with him and uses it as successfully as his own. He takes out the bit of iron before the
audience--another laugh at our expense--then with this same bread he attracts the duck as before. He
repeats the experiment with a piece of bread cut by a third person in full view of the audience. He does
it with his glove, with his finger-tip. Finally he goes into the middle of the room and in the emphatic
tones used by such persons he declares that his duck will obey his voice as readily as his hand; he
speaks and the duck obeys; he bids him go to the right and he goes, to come back again and he comes.
The movement is as ready as the command. The growing applause completes our discomfiture. We slip
away unnoticed and shut ourselves up in our room, without relating our successes to everybody as we
had expected.
  Next day there is a knock at the door. When I open it there is the conjuror, who makes a modest
complaint with regard to our conduct. What had he done that we should try to discredit his tricks and
deprive him of his livelihood? What is there so wonderful in attracting a duck that we should purchase
this honour at the price of an honest man's living? "My word, gentlemen! had I any other trade by
which I could earn a living I would not pride myself on this. You may well believe that a man who has
spent his life at this miserable trade knows more about it than you who only give your spare time to it.
If I did not show you my best tricks at first, it was because one must not be so foolish as to display all
one knows at once. I always take care to keep my best tricks for emergencies; and I have plenty more to
prevent young folks from meddling. However, I have come, gentlemen, in all kindness, to show you the
trick that gave you so much trouble; I only beg you not to use it to my hurt, and to be more discreet in
future." He then shows us his apparatus, and to our great surprise we find it is merely a strong magnet
in the hand of a boy concealed under the table. The man puts up his things, and after we have offered
our thanks and apologies, we try to give him something. He refuses it. "No, gentlemen," says he, "I owe
you no gratitude and I will not accept your gift. I leave you in my debt in spite of all, and that is my
only revenge. Generosity may be found among all sorts of people, and I earn my pay by doing my
tricks not by teaching them."
  As he is going he blames me out-right. "I can make excuses for the child," he says, "he sinned in
ignorance. But you, sir, should know better. Why did you let him do it? As you are living together and
you are older than he, you should look after him and give him good advice. Your experience should be
his guide. When he is grown up he will reproach, not only himself, but you, for the faults of his youth."
  When he is gone we are greatly downcast. I blame myself for my easy-going ways. I promise the
child that another time I will put his interests first and warn him against faults before he falls into them,
for the time is coming when our relations will be changed, when the severity of the master must give
way to the friendliness of the comrade; this change must come gradually, you must look ahead, and
very far ahead.
  We go to the fair again the next day to see the trick whose secret we know. We approach our
Socrates, the conjuror, with profound respect, we scarcely dare to look him in the face. He overwhelms
us with politeness, gives us the best places, and heaps coals of fire on our heads. He goes through his
performance as usual, but he lingers affectionately over the duck, and often glances proudly in our
direction. We are in the secret, but we do not tell. If my pupil did but open his mouth he would be
worthy of death.
  There is more meaning than you suspect in this detailed illustration. How many lessons in one!
How mortifying are the results of a first impulse towards vanity! Young tutor, watch this first impulse
carefully. If you can use it to bring about shame and disgrace, you may be sure it will not recur for
many a day. What a fuss you will say. Just so; and all to provide a compass which will enable us to
dispense with a meridian!
  Having learnt that a magnet acts through other bodies, our next business is to construct a bit ofapparatus similar to that shown us. A bare table, a shallow bowl placed on it and filled with water, a
duck rather better finished than the first, and so on. We often watch the thing and at last we notice that
the duck, when at rest. always turns the same way. We follow up this observation; we examine the
direction, we find that it is from south to north. Enough! we have found our compass or its equivalent;
the study of physics is begun.
  There are various regions of the earth, and these regions differ in temperature. The variation is more
evident as we approach the poles; all bodies expand with heat and contract with cold; this is best
measured in liquids and best of all in spirits; hence the thermometer. The wind strikes the face, then the
air is a body, a fluid; we feel it though we cannot see it. I invert a glass in water; the water will not fill it
unless you leave a passage for the escape of the air; so air is capable of resistance. Plunge the glass
further in the water; the water will encroach on the air-space without filling it entirely; so air yields
somewhat to pressure. A ball filled with compressed air bounces better than one filled with anything
else; so air is elastic. Raise your arm horizontally from the water when you are lying in your bath; you
will feel a terrible weight on it; so air is a heavy body. By establishing an equilibrium between air and
other fluids its weight can be measured, hence the barometer, the siphon, the air-gun, and the air-pump.
All the laws of statics and hydrostatics are discovered by such rough experiments. For none of these
would I take the child into a physical cabinet; I dislike that array of instruments and apparatus. The
scientific  atmosphere  destroys  science.  Either  the  child  is  frightened  by  these  instruments  or  his
attention, which should be fixed on their effects, is distracted by their appearance.
  We shall make all our apparatus ourselves, and I would not make it beforehand, but having caught a
glimpse of the experiment by chance we mean to invent step by step an instrument for its verification. I
would rather our apparatus was somewhat clumsy and imperfect, but our ideas clear as to what the
apparatus ought to be, and the results to be obtained by means of it. For my first lesson in statics,
instead of fetching a balance, I lay a stick across the back of a chair, I measure the two parts when it is
balanced; add equal or unequal weights to either end; by pulling or pushing it as required, I find at last
that equilibrium is the result of a reciprocal proportion between the amount of the weights and the
length of the levers. Thus my little physicist is ready to rectify a balance before ever he sees one.
  Undoubtedly the notions of things thus acquired for oneself are clearer and much more convincing
than those acquired from the teaching of others; and not only is our reason not accustomed to a slavish
submission to authority, but we develop greater ingenuity in discovering relations, connecting ideas and
inventing apparatus, than when we merely accept what is given us and allow our minds to be enfeebled
by indifference, like the body of a man whose servants always wait on him, dress him and put on his
shoes, whose horse carries him, till he loses the use of his limbs. Boileau used to boast that he had
taught Racine the art of rhyming with difficulty. Among the many short cuts to science, we badly need
some one to teach us the art of learning with difficulty.
  The  most  obvious  advantage  of  these  slow  and  laborious  inquiries  is  this:  the  scholar,  while
engaged in speculative studies, is actively using his body, gaining suppleness of limb, and training his
hands to labour so that he will be able to make them useful when he is a man. Too much apparatus,
designed to guide us in our experiments and to supplement the exactness of our senses, makes us
neglect to use those senses. The theodolite makes it unnecessary to estimate the size of angles; the eye
which used to judge distances with much precision, trusts to the chain for its measurements; the steel
yard dispenses with the need of judging weight by the hand as I used to do. The more ingenious our
apparatus, the coarser and more unskilful are our senses. We surround ourselves with tools and fail to
use those with which nature has provided every one of us.
  But when we devote to the making of these instruments the skill which did instead of them, when
for their construction we use the intelligence which enabled us to dispense with them, this is gain not
loss, we add art to nature, we gain ingenuity without loss of skill. If instead of making a child stick to
his books I employ him in a workshop, his hands work for the development of his mind. While he
fancies himself a workman he is becoming a philosopher. Moreover, this exercise has other advantages
of which I shall speak later; and you will see how, through philosophy in sport, one may rise to the realduties of man.
I have said already that purely theoretical science is hardly suitable for children, even for children
approaching  adolescence;  but  without  going  far  into  theoretical  physics,  take  care  that  all  their
experiments are connected together by some chain of reasoning, so that they may follow an orderly
sequence in the mind, and may be recalled at need; for it is very difficult to remember isolated facts or
arguments, when there is no cue for their recall.
  In your inquiry into the laws of nature always begin with the commonest and most conspicuous
phenomena, and train your scholar not to accept these phenomena as causes but as facts. I take a stone
and pretend to place it in the air; I open my hand, the stone falls. I see Emile watching my action and I
say, "Why does this stone fall?"
  What child will hesitate over this question? None, not even Emile, unless I have taken great pains to
teach him not to answer. Every one will say, "The stone falls because it is heavy." "And what do you
mean by heavy?" "That which falls." "So the stone falls because it falls?" Here is a poser for my little
philosopher. This is his first lesson in systematic physics, and whether he learns physics or no it is a
good lesson in common-sense.
  As the child develops in intelligence other important considerations require us to be still more
careful in our choice of his occupations. As soon as he has sufficient self-knowledge to understand
what constitutes his well-being, as soon as he can grasp such far-reaching relations as to judge what is
good for him and what is not, then he is able to discern the difference between work and play, and to
consider the latter merely as relaxation. The objects of real utility may be introduced into his studies
and may lead him to more prolonged attention than he gave to his games. The ever-recurring law of
necessity soon teaches a man to do what he does not like, so as to avert evils which he would dislike
still more. Such is the use of foresight, and this foresight, well or ill used, is the source of all the
wisdom or the wretchedness of mankind.
  Every one desires happiness, but to secure it he must know what happiness is. For the natural man
happiness is as simple as his life; it consists in the absence of pain; health, freedom, the necessaries of
life are its elements. The happiness of the moral man is another matter, but it does not concern us at
present. I cannot repeat too often that it is only objects which can be perceived by the senses which can
have any interest for children, especially children whose vanity has not been stimulated nor their minds
corrupted by social conventions.
  As soon as they foresee their needs before they feel them, their intelligence has made a great step
forward, they are beginning to know the value of time. They must then be trained to devote this time to
useful purposes, but this usefulness should be such as they can readily perceive and should be within
the reach of their age and experience. What concerns the moral order and the customs of society should
not yet be given them, for they are not in a condition to understand it. It is folly to expect them to attend
to things vaguely described as good for them, when they do not know what this good is, things which
they are assured will be to their advantage when they are grown up, though for the present they take no
interest in this so-called advantage, which they are unable to understand.
  Let the child do nothing because he is told; nothing is good for him but what he recognises as good.
When you are always urging him beyond his present understanding, you think you are exercising a
foresight which you really lack. To provide him with useless tools which he may never require, you
deprive him of man's most useful tool--common-sense. You would have him docile as a child; he will
be a credulous dupe when he grows up. You are always saying, "What I ask is for your good, though
you cannot understand it. What does it matter to me whether you do it or not; my efforts are entirely on
your account." All these fine speeches with which you hope to make him good, are preparing the way,
so that the visionary, the tempter, the charlatan, the rascal, and every kind of fool may catch him in his
snare or draw him into his folly.
  A man must know many things which seem useless to a child, but need the child learn, or can he
indeed learn, all that the man must know? Try to teach the child what is of use to a child and you will
find that it takes all his time. Why urge him to the studies of an age he may never reach, to the neglectof those studies which meet his present needs? "But," you ask, "will it not be too late to learn what he
ought to know when the time comes to use it?" I cannot tell; but this I do know, it is impossible to teach
it sooner, for our real teachers are experience and emotion, and man will never learn what befits a man
except under its own conditions. A child knows he must become a man; all the ideas he may have as to
man's estate are so many opportunities for his instruction, but he should remain in complete ignorance
of those ideas which are beyond his grasp. My whole book is one continued argument in support of this
fundamental principle of education.
  As soon as we have contrived to give our pupil an idea of the word "Useful," we have got an
additional means of controlling him, for this word makes a great impression on him, provided that its
meaning for him is a meaning relative to his own age, and provided he clearly sees its relation to his
own well-being. This word makes no impression on your scholars because you have taken no pains to
give it a meaning they can understand, and because other people always undertake to supply their needs
so that they never require to think for themselves, and do not know what utility is.
  "What is the use of that?" In future this is the sacred formula, the formula by which he and I test
every action of our lives. This is the question with which I invariably answer all his questions; it serves
to check the stream of foolish and tiresome questions with which children weary those about them.
These incessant questions produce no result, and their object is rather to get a hold over you than to
gain any real advantage. A pupil, who has been really taught only to want to know what is useful,
questions like Socrates; he never asks a question without a reason for it, for he knows he will be
required to give his reason before he gets an answer.
  See what a powerful instrument I have put into your hands for use with your pupil. As he does not
know the reason for anything you can reduce him to silence almost at will; and what advantages do
your knowledge and experience give you to show him the usefulness of what you suggest. For, make
no mistake about it, when you put this question to him, you are teaching him to put it to you, and you
must expect that whatever you suggest to him in the future he will follow your own example and ask,
"What is the use of this?"
  Perhaps this is the greatest of the tutor's difficulties. If you merely try to put the child off when he
asks a question, and if you give him a single reason he is not able to understand, if he finds that you
reason according to your own ideas, not his, he will think what you tell him is good for you but not for
him; you will lose his confidence and all your labour is thrown away. But what master will stop short
and confess his faults to his pupil? We all make it a rule never to own to the faults we really have. Now
I would make it a rule to admit even the faults I have not, if I could not make my reasons clear to him;
as my conduct will always be intelligible to him, he will never doubt me and I shall gain more credit by
confessing my imaginary faults than those who conceal their real defects.
  In the first place do not forget that it is rarely your business to suggest what he ought to learn; it is
for him to want to learn, to seek and to find it. You should put it within his reach, you should skilfully
awaken the desire and supply him with means for its satisfaction. So your questions should be few and
well-chosen, and as he will always have more questions to put to you than you to him, you will always
have the advantage and will be able to ask all the oftener, "What is the use of that question?" Moreover,
as it matters little what he learns provided he understands it and knows how to use it, as soon as you
cannot give him a suitable explanation give him none at all. Do not hesitate to say, "I have no good
answer to give you; I was wrong, let us drop the subject." If your teaching was really ill-chosen there is
no harm in dropping it altogether; if it was not, with a little care you will soon find an opportunity of
making its use apparent to him.
I do not like verbal explanations. Young people pay little heed to them, nor do they remember them.
Things! Things! I cannot repeat it too often. We lay too much stress upon words; we teachers babble,
and our scholars follow our example.
  Suppose we are studying the course of the sun and the way to find our bearings, when all at once
Emile interrupts me with the question, "What is the use of that?" what a fine lecture I might give, how
many things I might take occasion to teach him in reply to his question, especially if there is any onethere.  I  might  speak  of  the  advantages  of  travel,  the  value  of  commerce,  the  special  products  of
different lands and the peculiar customs of different nations, the use of the calendar, the way to reckon
the seasons for agriculture, the art of navigation, how to steer our course at sea, how to find our way
without  knowing  exactly  where  we  are.  Politics,  natural  history,  astronomy,  even  morals  and
international law are involved in my explanation, so as to give my pupil some idea of all these sciences
and a great wish to learn them. When I have finished I shall have shown myself a regular pedant, I shall
have made a great display of learning, and not one single idea has he understood. He is longing to ask
me again, "What is the use of taking one's bearings?" but he dare not for fear of vexing me. He finds it
pays best to pretend to listen to what he is forced to hear. This is the practical result of our fine systems
of education.
  But Emile is educated in a simpler fashion. We take so much pains to teach him a difficult idea that
he will have heard nothing of all this. At the first word he does not understand, he will run away, he
will prance about the room, and leave me to speechify by myself. Let us seek a more commonplace
explanation; my scientific learning is of no use to him.
  We were observing the position of the forest to the north of Montmorency when he interrupted me
with the usual question, "What is the use of that?" "You are right," I said. "Let us take time to think it
over, and if we find it is no use we will drop it, for we only want useful games." We find something
else to do and geography is put aside for the day.
  Next morning I suggest a walk before breakfast; there is nothing he would like better; children are
always ready to run about, and he is a good walker. We climb up to the forest, we wander through its
clearings and lose ourselves; we have no idea where we are, and when we want to retrace our steps we
cannot find the way. Time passes, we are hot and hungry; hurrying vainly this way and that we find
nothing but woods, quarries, plains, not a landmark to guide us. Very hot, very tired, very hungry, we
only get further astray. At last we sit down to rest and to consider our position. I assume that Emile has
been educated like an ordinary child. He does not think, he begins to cry; he has no idea we are close to
Montmorency, which is hidden from our view by a mere thicket; but this thicket is a forest to him, a
man of his size is buried among bushes. After a few minutes' silence I begin anxiously----
  JEAN JACQUES. My dear Emile, what shall we do get out?
  EMILE. I am sure I do not know. I am tired, I am hungry, I am thirsty. I cannot go any further.
  JEAN  JACQUES.  Do  you  suppose  I  am  any  better  off?  I  would  cry  too  if  I  could  make  my
breakfast off tears. Crying is no use, we must look about us. Let us see your watch; what time is it?
  EMILE. It is noon and I am so hungry!
  JEAN JACQUES. Just so; it is noon and I am so hungry too.
  EMILE. You must be very hungry indeed.
  JEAN JACQUES. Unluckily my dinner won't come to find me. It is twelve o'clock. This time
yesterday we were observing the position of the forest from Montmorency. If only we could see the
position of Montmorency from the forest.
  EMILE. But yesterday we could see the forest, and here we cannot see the town.
  JEAN JACQUES. That is just it. If we could only find it without seeing it.
  EMILE. Oh! my dear friend!
  JEAN JACQUES. Did not we say the forest was...
  EMILE. North of Montmorency.
  JEAN JACQUES. Then Montmorency must lie...
  EMILE. South of the forest.
  JEAN JACQUES. We know how to find the north at midday.
  EMILE. Yes, by the direction of the shadows.
  JEAN JACQUES. But the south?
  EMILE. What shall we do?
  JEAN JACQUES. The south is opposite the north.
  EMILE. That is true; we need only find the opposite of the shadows. That is the south! That is thesouth! Montmorency must be over there! Let us look for it there!
  JEAN JACQUES. Perhaps you are right; let us follow this path through the wood.
  EMILE. (Clapping his hands.) Oh, I can see Montmorency! there it is, quite plain, just in front of
us! Come to luncheon, come to dinner, make haste! Astronomy is some use after all.
  Be sure that he thinks this if he does not say it; no matter which, provided I do not say it myself. He
will certainly never forget this day's lesson as long as he lives, while if I had only led him to think of all
this at home, my lecture would have been forgotten the next day. Teach by doing whenever you can,
and only fall back upon words when doing is out of the question.
  The reader will not expect me to have such a poor opinion of him as to supply him with an example
of  every  kind  of  study;  but,  whatever  is  taught,  I  cannot  too  strongly  urge  the  tutor  to  adapt  his
instances to the capacity of his scholar; for once more I repeat the risk is not in what he does not know,
but in what he thinks he knows.
I remember how I once tried to give a child a taste for chemistry. After showing him several
metallic precipitates, I explained how ink was made. I told him how its blackness was merely the result
of fine particles of iron separated from the vitriol and precipitated by an alkaline solution. In the midst
of my learned explanation the little rascal pulled me up short with the question I myself had taught him.
I was greatly puzzled. After a few moments' thought I decided what to do. I sent for some wine from
the cellar of our landlord, and some very cheap wine from a wine-merchant. I took a small [Footnote:
Before giving any explanation to a child a little bit of apparatus serves to fix his attention.] flask of an
alkaline solution, and placing two glasses before me filled with the two sorts of wine, I said.
  Food and drink are adulterated to make them seem better than they really are. These adulterations
deceive both the eye and the palate, but they are unwholesome and make the adulterated article even
worse than before in spite of its fine appearance.
  All sorts of drinks are adulterated, and wine more than others; for the fraud is more difficult to
detect, and more profitable to the fraudulent person.
  Sour wine is adulterated with litharge; litharge is a preparation of lead. Lead in combination with
acids forms a sweet salt which corrects the harsh taste of the sour wine, but it is poisonous. So before
we drink wine of doubtful quality we should be able to tell if there is lead in it. This is how I should do
it.
  Wine contains not merely an inflammable spirit as you have seen from the brandy made from it; it
also contains an acid as you know from the vinegar made from it.
  This acid has an affinity for metals, it combines with them and forms salts, such as iron-rust, which
is only iron dissolved by the acid in air or water, or such as verdegris, which is only copper dissolved in
vinegar.
  But this acid has a still greater affinity for alkalis than for metals, so that when we add alkalis to the
above-mentioned salts, the acid sets free the metal with which it had combined, and combines with the
alkali.
  Then the metal, set free by the acid which held it in solution, is precipitated and the liquid becomes
opaque.
  If then there is litharge in either of these glasses of wine, the acid holds the litharge in solution.
When I pour into it an alkaline solution, the acid will be forced to set the lead free in order to combine
with the alkali. The lead, no longer held in solution, will reappear, the liquor will become thick, and
after a time the lead will be deposited at the bottom of the glass.
  If there is no lead [Footnote: The wine sold by retail dealers in Paris is rarely free from lead, though
some of it does not contain litharge, for the counters are covered with lead and when the wine is poured
into the measures and some of it spilt upon the counter and the measures left standing on the counter,
some of the lead is always dissolved. It is strange that so obvious and dangerous an abuse should be
tolerated by the police. But indeed well-to-do people, who rarely drink these wines, are not likely to be
poisoned by them.] nor other metal in the wine the alkali will slowly [Footnote: The vegetable acid is
very gentle in its action. If it were a mineral acid and less diluted, the combination would not take placewithout effervescence.] combine with the acid, all will remain clear and there will be no precipitate.
  Then I poured my alkaline solution first into one glass and then into the other. The wine from our
own house remained clear and unclouded, the other at once became turbid, and an hour later the lead
might be plainly seen, precipitated at the bottom of the glass.
  "This," said I, "is a pure natural wine and fit to drink; the other is adulterated and poisonous. You
wanted to know the use of knowing how to make ink. If you can make ink you can find out what wines
are adulterated."
I was very well pleased with my illustration, but I found it made little impression on my pupil.
When I had time to think about it I saw I had been a fool, for not only was it impossible for a child of
twelve to follow my explanations, but the usefulness of the experiment did not appeal to him; he had
tasted  both  glasses  of  wine  and  found  them  both  good,  so  he  attached  no  meaning  to  the  word
"adulterated" which I thought I had explained so nicely. Indeed, the other words, "unwholesome" and
"poison," had no meaning whatever for him; he was in the same condition as the boy who told the story
of Philip and his doctor. It is the condition of all children.
  The relation of causes and effects whose connection is unknown to us, good and ill of which we
have  no  idea,  the  needs  we  have  never  felt,  have  no  existence  for  us.  It  is  impossible  to  interest
ourselves in them sufficiently to make us do anything connected with them. At fifteen we become
aware of the happiness of a good man, as at thirty we become aware of the glory of Paradise. If we had
no clear idea of either we should make no effort for their attainment; and even if we had a clear idea of
them, we should make little or no effort unless we desired them and unless we felt we were made for
them. It is easy to convince a child that what you wish to teach him is useful, but it is useless to
convince if you cannot also persuade. Pure reason may lead us to approve or censure, but it is feeling
which leads to action, and how shall we care about that which does not concern us?
  Never show a child what he cannot see. Since mankind is almost unknown to him, and since you
cannot make a man of him, bring the man down to the level of the child. While you are thinking what
will be useful to him when he is older, talk to him of what he knows he can use now. Moreover, as soon
as he begins to reason let there be no comparison with other children, no rivalry, no competition, not
even in running races. I would far rather he did not learn anything than have him learn it through
jealousy or self-conceit. Year by year I shall just note the progress he had made, I shall compare the
results with those of the following year, I shall say, "You have grown so much; that is the ditch you
jumped, the weight you carried, the distance you flung a pebble, the race you ran without stopping to
take breath, etc.; let us see what you can do now."
  In this way he is stimulated to further effort without jealousy. He wants to excel himself as he ought
to do; I see no reason why he should not emulate his own performances.
I hate books; they only teach us to talk about things we know nothing about. Hermes, they say,
engraved the elements of science on pillars lest a deluge should destroy them. Had he imprinted them
on men's hearts they would have been preserved by tradition. Well-trained minds are the pillars on
which human knowledge is most deeply engraved.
  Is  there  no  way  of  correlating  so  many  lessons  scattered  through  so  many  books,  no  way  of
focussing them on some common object, easy to see, interesting to follow, and stimulating even to a
child? Could we but discover a state in which all man's needs appear in such a way as to appeal to the
child's mind, a state in which the ways of providing for these needs are as easily developed, the simple
and stirring portrayal of this state should form the earliest training of the child's imagination.
  Eager philosopher, I see your own imagination at work. Spare yourself the trouble; this state is
already known, it is described, with due respect to you, far better than you could describe it, at least
with greater truth and simplicity. Since we must have books, there is one book which, to my thinking,
supplies the best treatise on an education according to nature. This is the first book Emile will read; for
a long time it will form his whole library, and it will always retain an honoured place. It will be the text
to which all our talks about natural science are but the commentary. It will serve to test our progress
towards a right judgment, and it will always be read with delight, so long as our taste is unspoilt. Whatis this wonderful book? Is it Aristotle? Pliny? Buffon? No; it is Robinson Crusoe.
  Robinson  Crusoe  on  his  island,  deprived  of  the  help  of  his  fellow-men,  without  the  means  of
carrying on the various arts, yet finding food, preserving his life, and procuring a certain amount of
comfort; this is the thing to interest people of all ages, and it can be made attractive to children in all
sorts  of  ways.  We  shall  thus  make  a  reality  of  that  desert  island  which  formerly  served  as  an
illustration. The condition, I confess, is not that of a social being, nor is it in all probability Emile's own
condition, but he should use it as a standard of comparison for all other conditions. The surest way to
raise him above prejudice and to base his judgments on the true relations of things, is to put him in the
place of a solitary man, and to judge all things as they would be judged by such a man in relation to
their own utility.
  This novel, stripped of irrelevant matter, begins with Robinson's shipwreck on his island, and ends
with the coming of the ship which bears him from it, and it will furnish Emile with material, both for
work and play, during the whole period we are considering. His head should be full of it, he should
always be busy with his castle, his goats, his plantations. Let him learn in detail, not from books but
from things, all that is necessary in such a case. Let him think he is Robinson himself; let him see
himself clad in skins, wearing a tall cap, a great cutlass, all the grotesque get-up of Robinson Crusoe,
even to the umbrella which he will scarcely need. He should anxiously consider what steps to take; will
this or that be wanting. He should examine his hero's conduct; has he omitted nothing; is there nothing
he could have done better? He should carefully note his mistakes, so as not to fall into them himself in
similar circumstances, for you may be sure he will plan out just such a settlement for himself. This is
the genuine castle in the air of this happy age, when the child knows no other happiness but food and
freedom.
  What a motive will this infatuation supply in the hands of a skilful teacher who has aroused it for
the purpose of using it. The child who wants to build a storehouse on his desert island will be more
eager to learn than the master to teach. He will want to know all sorts of useful things and nothing else;
you will need the curb as well as the spur. Make haste, therefore, to establish him on his island while
this is all he needs to make him happy; for the day is at hand, when, if he must still live on his island,
he will not be content to live alone, when even the companionship of Man Friday, who is almost
disregarded now, will not long suffice.
  The  exercise  of  the  natural  arts,  which  may  be  carried  on  by  one  man  alone,  leads  on  to  the
industrial arts which call for the cooperation of many hands. The former may be carried on by hermits,
by savages, but the others can only arise in a society, and they make society necessary. So long as only
bodily needs are recognised man is self-sufficing; with superfluity comes the need for division and
distribution of labour, for though one man working alone can earn a man's living, one hundred men
working together can earn the living of two hundred. As soon as some men are idle, others must work
to make up for their idleness.
  Your main object should be to keep out of your scholar's way all idea of such social relations as he
cannot understand, but when the development of knowledge compels you to show him the mutual
dependence of mankind, instead of showing him its moral side, turn all his attention at first towards
industry and the mechanical arts which make men useful to one another. While you take him from one
workshop to another, let him try his hand at every trade you show him, and do not let him leave it till he
has thoroughly learnt why everything is done, or at least everything that has attracted his attention.
With this aim you should take a share in his work and set him an example. Be yourself the apprentice
that he may become a master; you may expect him to learn more in one hour's work than he would
retain after a whole day's explanation.
  The value set by the general public on the various arts is in inverse ratio to their real utility. They
are even valued directly according to their uselessness. This might be expected. The most useful arts
are  the  worst  paid,  for  the  number  of  workmen  is  regulated  by  the  demand,  and  the  work  which
everybody requires must necessarily be paid at a rate which puts it within the reach of the poor. On the
other hand, those great people who are called artists, not artisans, who labour only for the rich and idle,put a fancy price on their trifles; and as the real value of this vain labour is purely imaginary, the price
itself adds to their market value, and they are valued according to their costliness. The rich think so
much of these things, not because they are useful, but because they are beyond the reach of the poor.
Nolo habere bona, nisi quibus populus inviderit.
  What will become of your pupils if you let them acquire this foolish prejudice, if you share it
yourself? If, for instance, they see you show more politeness in a jeweller's shop than in a locksmith's.
What idea will they form of the true worth of the arts and the real value of things when they see, on the
one hand, a fancy price and, on the other, the price of real utility, and that the more a thing costs the
less it is worth? As soon as you let them get hold of these ideas, you may give up all attempt at further
education; in spite of you they will be like all the other scholars--you have wasted fourteen years.
  Emile, bent on furnishing his island, will look at things from another point of view. Robinson
would have thought more of a toolmaker's shop than all Saide's trifles put together. He would have
reckoned the toolmaker a very worthy man, and Saide little more than a charlatan.
  "My son will have to take the world as he finds it, he will not live among the wise but among fools;
he  must  therefore  be  acquainted  with  their  follies,  since  they  must  be  led  by  this  means.  A  real
knowledge of things may be a good thing in itself, but the knowledge of men and their opinions is
better, for in human society man is the chief tool of man, and the wisest man is he who best knows the
use of this tool. What is the good of teaching children an imaginary system, just the opposite of the
established order of things, among which they will have to live? First teach them wisdom, then show
them the follies of mankind."
  These are the specious maxims by which fathers, who mistake them for prudence, strive to make
their children the slaves of the prejudices in which they are educated, and the puppets of the senseless
crowd, which they hope to make subservient to their passions. How much must be known before we
attain to a knowledge of man. This is the final study of the philosopher, and you expect to make it the
first lesson of the child! Before teaching him our sentiments, first teach him to judge of their worth. Do
you perceive folly when you mistake it for wisdom? To be wise we must discern between good and
evil. How can your child know men, when he can neither judge of their judgments nor unravel their
mistakes? It is a misfortune to know what they think, without knowing whether their thoughts are true
or false. First teach him things as they really are, afterwards you will teach him how they appear to us.
He will then be able to make a comparison between popular ideas and truth, and be able to rise above
the vulgar crowd; for you are unaware of the prejudices you adopt, and you do not lead a nation when
you are like it. But if you begin to teach the opinions of other people before you teach how to judge of
their worth, of one thing you may be sure, your pupil will adopt those opinions whatever you may do,
and you will not succeed in uprooting them. I am therefore convinced that to make a young man judge
rightly, you must form his judgment rather than teach him your own.
  So far you see I have not spoken to my pupil about men; he would have too much sense to listen to
me. His relations to other people are as yet not sufficiently apparent to him to enable him to judge
others  by  himself.  The  only  person  he  knows  is  himself,  and  his  knowledge  of  himself  is  very
imperfect. But if he forms few opinions about others, those opinions are correct. He knows nothing of
another's place, but he knows his own and keeps to it. I have bound him with the strong cord of
necessity, instead of social laws, which are beyond his knowledge. He is still little more than a body; let
us treat him as such.
  Every substance in nature and every work of man must be judged in relation to his own use, his
own safety, his own preservation, his own comfort. Thus he should value iron far more than gold, and
glass than diamonds; in the same way he has far more respect for a shoemaker or a mason than for a
Lempereur, a Le Blanc, or all the jewellers in Europe. In his eyes a confectioner is a really great man,
and he would give the whole academy of sciences for the smallest pastrycook in Lombard Street.
Goldsmiths, engravers, gilders, and embroiderers, he considers lazy people, who play at quite useless
games. He does not even think much of a clockmaker. The happy child enjoys Time without being a
slave to it; he uses it, but he does not know its value. The freedom from passion which makes every dayalike to him, makes any means of measuring time unnecessary. When I assumed that Emile had a
watch, [Footnote: When our hearts are abandoned to the sway of passion, then it is that we need a
measure of time. The wise man's watch is his equable temper and his peaceful heart. He is always
punctual, and he always knows the time.] just as I assumed that he cried, it was a commonplace Emile
that I chose to serve my purpose and make myself understood. The real Emile, a child so different from
the rest, would not serve as an illustration for anything.
  There is an order no less natural and even more accurate, by which the arts are valued according to
bonds of necessity which connect them; the highest class consists of the most independent, the lowest
of those most dependent on others. This classification, which suggests important considerations on the
order of society in general, is like the preceding one in that it is subject to the same inversion in popular
estimation, so that the use of raw material is the work of the lowest and worst paid trades, while the
oftener the material changes hands, the more the work rises in price and in honour. I do not ask whether
industry is really greater and more deserving of reward when engaged in the delicate arts which give
the final shape to these materials, than in the labour which first gave them to man's use; but this I say,
that in everything the art which is most generally useful and necessary, is undoubtedly that which most
deserves esteem, and that art which requires the least help from others, is more worthy of honour than
those which are dependent on other arts, since it is freer and more nearly independent. These are the
true laws of value in the arts; all others are arbitrary and dependent on popular prejudice.
  Agriculture is the earliest and most honourable of arts; metal work I put next, then carpentry, and so
on. This is the order in which the child will put them, if he has not been spoilt by vulgar prejudices.
What valuable considerations Emile will derive from his Robinson in such matters. What will he think
when he sees the arts only brought to perfection by sub-division, by the infinite multiplication of tools.
He will say, "All those people are as silly as they are ingenious; one would think they were afraid to use
their eyes and their hands, they invent so many tools instead. To carry on one trade they become the
slaves of many others; every single workman needs a whole town. My friend and I try to gain skill; we
only make tools we can take about with us; these people, who are so proud of their talents in Paris,
would be no use at all on our island; they would have to become apprentices."
  Reader, do not stay to watch the bodily exercises and manual skill of our pupil, but consider the
bent  we  are  giving  to  his  childish  curiosity;  consider  his  common-sense,  his  inventive  spirit,  his
foresight;  consider  what  a  head  he  will  have  on  his  shoulders.  He  will  want  to  know  all  about
everything he sees or does, to learn the why and the wherefore of it; from tool to tool he will go back to
the first beginning, taking nothing for granted; he will decline to learn anything that requires previous
knowledge which he has not acquired. If he sees a spring made he will want to know how they got the
steel from the mine; if he sees the pieces of a chest put together, he will want to know how the tree was
out down; when at work he will say of each tool, "If I had not got this, how could I make one like it, or
how could I get along without it?"
  It is, however, difficult to avoid another error. When the master is very fond of certain occupations,
he is apt to assume that the child shares his tastes; beware lest you are carried away by the interest of
your work, while the child is bored by it, but is afraid to show it. The child must come first, and you
must  devote  yourself  entirely  to  him.  Watch  him,  study  him  constantly,  without  his  knowing  it;
consider his feelings beforehand, and provide against those which are undesirable, keep him occupied
in such a way that he not only feels the usefulness of the thing, but takes a pleasure in understanding
the purpose which his work will serve.
  The solidarity of the arts consists in the exchange of industry, that of commerce in the exchange of
commodities, that of banks in the exchange of money or securities. All these ideas hang together, and
their foundation has already been laid in early childhood with the help of Robert the gardener. All we
have now to do is to substitute general ideas for particular, and to enlarge these ideas by means of
numerous examples, so as to make the child understand the game of business itself, brought home to
him by means of particular instances of natural history with regard to the special products of each
country, by particular instances of the arts and sciences which concern navigation and the difficulties oftransport, greater or less in proportion to the distance between places, the position of land, seas, rivers,
etc.
  There  can  be  no  society  without  exchange,  no  exchange  without  a  common  standard  of
measurement, no common standard of measurement without equality. Hence the first law of every
society is some conventional equality either in men or things.
  Conventional  equality  between  men,  a  very  different  thing  from  natural  equality,  leads  to  the
necessity for positive law, i.e., government and kings. A child's political knowledge should be clear and
restricted;  he  should  know  nothing  of  government  in  general,  beyond  what  concerns  the  rights  of
property, of which he has already some idea.
  Conventional equality between things has led to the invention of money, for money is only one
term in a comparison between the values of different sorts of things; and in this sense money is the real
bond of society; but anything may be money; in former days it was cattle; shells are used among many
tribes at the present day; Sparta used iron; Sweden, leather; while we use gold and silver.
  Metals, being easier to carry, have generally been chosen as the middle term of every exchange, and
these metals have been made into coin to save the trouble of continual weighing and measuring, for the
stamp on the coin is merely evidence that the coin is of given weight; and the sole right of coining
money is vested in the ruler because he alone has the right to demand the recognition of his authority
by the whole nation.
  The stupidest person can perceive the use of money when it is explained in this way. It is difficult to
make a direct comparison between various things, for instance, between cloth and corn; but when we
find a common measure, in money, it is easy for the manufacturer and the farmer to estimate the value
of the goods they wish to exchange in terms of this common measure. If a given quantity of cloth is
worth a given some of money, and a given quantity of corn is worth the same sum of money, then the
seller, receiving the corn in exchange for his cloth, makes a fair bargain. Thus by means of money it
becomes possible to compare the values of goods of various kinds.
  Be content with this, and do not touch upon the moral effects of this institution. In everything you
must show clearly the use before the abuse. If you attempt to teach children how the sign has led to the
neglect of the thing signified, how money is the source of all the false ideas of society, how countries
rich in silver must be poor in everything else, you will be treating these children as philosophers, and
not  only  as  philosophers  but  as  wise  men,  for  you  are  professing  to  teach  them  what  very  few
philosophers have grasped.
  What a wealth of interesting objects, towards which the curiosity of our pupil may be directed
without ever quitting the real and material relations he can understand, and without permitting the
formation of a single idea beyond his grasp! The teacher's art consists in this: To turn the child's
attention from trivial details and to guide his thoughts continually towards relations of importance
which he will one day need to know, that he may judge rightly of good and evil in human society. The
teacher must be able to adapt the conversation with which he amuses his pupil to the turn already given
to his mind. A problem which another child would never heed will torment Emile half a year.
  We are going to dine with wealthy people; when we get there everything is ready for a feast, many
guests, many servants, many dishes, dainty and elegant china. There is something intoxicating in all
these preparations for pleasure and festivity when you are not used to them. I see how they will affect
my young pupil. While dinner is going on, while course follows course, and conversation is loud
around us, I whisper in his ear, "How many hands do you suppose the things on this table passed
through before they got here?" What a crowd of ideas is called up by these few words. In a moment the
mists of excitement have rolled away. He is thinking, considering, calculating, and anxious. The child
is philosophising, while philosophers, excited by wine or perhaps by female society, are babbling like
children. If he asks questions I decline to answer and put him off to another day. He becomes impatient,
he forgets to eat and drink, he longs to get away from table and talk as he pleases. What an object of
curiosity, what a text for instruction. Nothing has so far succeeded in corrupting his healthy reason;
what will he think of luxury when he finds that every quarter of the globe has been ransacked, thatsome 2,000,000 men have laboured for years, that many lives have perhaps been sacrificed, and all to
furnish him with fine clothes to be worn at midday and laid by in the wardrobe at night.
  Be sure you observe what private conclusions he draws from all his observations. If you have
watched him less carefully than I suppose, his thoughts may be tempted in another direction; he may
consider himself a person of great importance in the world, when he sees so much labour concentrated
on the preparation of his dinner. If you suspect his thoughts will take this direction you can easily
prevent it, or at any rate promptly efface the false impression. As yet he can only appropriate things by
personal enjoyment, he can only judge of their fitness or unfitness by their outward effects. Compare a
plain  rustic  meal,  preceded  by  exercise,  seasoned  by  hunger,  freedom,  and  delight,  with  this
magnificent but tedious repast. This will suffice to make him realise that he has got no real advantage
from the splendour of the feast, that his stomach was as well satisfied when he left the table of the
peasant, as when he left the table of the banker; from neither had he gained anything he could really
call his own.
  Just fancy what a tutor might say to him on such an occasion. Consider the two dinners and decide
for yourself which gave you most pleasure, which seemed the merriest, at which did you eat and drink
most  heartily,  which  was  the  least  tedious  and  required  least  change  of  courses?  Yet  note  the
difference--this black bread you so enjoy is made from the peasant's own harvest; his wine is dark in
colour and of a common kind, but wholesome and refreshing; it was made in his own vineyard; the
cloth is made of his own hemp, spun and woven in the winter by his wife and daughters and the maid;
no hands but theirs have touched the food. His world is bounded by the nearest mill and the next
market. How far did you enjoy all that the produce of distant lands and the service of many people had
prepared for you at the other dinner? If you did not get a better meal, what good did this wealth do you?
how much of it was made for you? Had you been the master of the house, the tutor might say, it would
have been of still less use to you; for the anxiety of displaying your enjoyment before the eyes of others
would have robbed you of it; the pains would be yours, the pleasure theirs.
  This may be a very fine speech, but it would be thrown away upon Emile, as he cannot understand
it,  and  he  does  not  accept  second-hand  opinions.  Speak  more  simply  to  him.  After  these  two
experiences, say to him some day, "Where shall we have our dinner to-day? Where that mountain of
silver covered three quarters of the table and those beds of artificial flowers on looking glass were
served with the dessert, where those smart ladies treated you as a toy and pretended you said what you
did not mean; or in that village two leagues away, with those good people who were so pleased to see
us and gave us such delicious cream?" Emile will not hesitate; he is not vain and he is no chatterbox; he
cannot endure constraint, and he does not care for fine dishes; but he is always ready for a run in the
country and is very fond of good fruit and vegetables, sweet cream and kindly people. [Footnote: This
taste, which I assume my pupil to have acquired, is a natural result of his education. Moreover, he has
nothing foppish or affected about him, so that the ladies take little notice of him and he is less petted
than other children; therefore he does not care for them, and is less spoilt by their company; he is not
yet of an age to feel its charm. I have taken care not to teach him to kiss their hands, to pay them
compliments, or even to be more polite to them than to men. It is my constant rule to ask nothing from
him  but  what  he  can  understand,  and  there  is  no  good  reason  why  a  child  should  treat  one  sex
differently from the other.] On our way, the thought will occur to him, "All those people who laboured
to  prepare  that  grand  feast  were  either  wasting  their  time  or  they  have  no  idea  how  to  enjoy
themselves."
  My example may be right for one child and wrong for the rest. If you enter into their way of
looking at things you will know how to vary your instances as required; the choice depends on the
study of the individual temperament, and this study in turn depends on the opportunities which occur to
show this temperament. You will not suppose that, in the three or four years at our disposal, even the
most gifted child can get an idea of all the arts and sciences, sufficient to enable him to study them for
himself when he is older; but by bringing before him what he needs to know, we enable him to develop
his  own  tastes,  his  own  talents,  to  take  the  first  step  towards  the  object  which  appeals  to  hisindividuality and to show us the road we must open up to aid the work of nature.
  There is another advantage of these trains of limited but exact bits of knowledge; he learns by their
connection and interdependence how to rank them in his own estimation and to be on his guard against
those prejudices, common to most men, which draw them towards the gifts they themselves cultivate
and away from those they have neglected. The man who clearly sees the whole, sees where each part
should be; the man who sees one part clearly and knows it thoroughly may be a learned man, but the
former is a wise man, and you remember it is wisdom rather than knowledge that we hope to acquire.
  However that may be, my method does not depend on my examples; it depends on the amount of a
man's powers at different ages, and the choice of occupations adapted to those powers. I think it would
be easy to find a method which appeared to give better results, but if it were less suited to the type, sex,
and age of the scholar, I doubt whether the results would really be as good.
  At the beginning of this second period we took advantage of the fact that our strength was more
than enough for our needs, to enable us to get outside ourselves. We have ranged the heavens and
measured the earth; we have sought out the laws of nature; we have explored the whole of our island.
Now let us return to ourselves, let us unconsciously approach our own dwelling. We are happy indeed
if we do not find it already occupied by the dreaded foe, who is preparing to seize it.
  What remains to be done when we have observed all that lies around us? We must turn to our own
use all that we can get, we must increase our comfort by means of our curiosity. Hitherto we have
provided ourselves with tools of all kinds, not knowing which we require. Perhaps those we do not
want will be useful to others, and perhaps we may need theirs. Thus we discover the use of exchange;
but for this we must know each other's needs, what tools other people use, what they can offer in
exchange. Given ten men, each of them has ten different requirements. To get what he needs for
himself each must work at ten different trades; but considering our different talents, one will do better
at this trade, another at that. Each of them, fitted for one thing, will work at all, and will be badly
served. Let us form these ten men into a society, and let each devote himself to the trade for which he is
best adapted, and let him work at it for himself and for the rest. Each will reap the advantage of the
others' talents, just as if they were his own; by practice each will perfect his own talent, and thus all the
ten, well provided for, will still have something to spare for others. This is the plain foundation of all
our institutions. It is not my aim to examine its results here; I have done so in another book (Discours
sur l'inegalite).
  According to this principle, any one who wanted to consider himself as an isolated individual, self-
sufficing and independent of others, could only be utterly wretched. He could not even continue to
exist, for finding the whole earth appropriated by others while he had only himself, how could he get
the means of subsistence? When we leave the state of nature we compel others to do the same; no one
can remain in a state of nature in spite of his fellow-creatures, and to try to remain in it when it is no
longer practicable, would really be to leave it, for self-preservation is nature's first law.
  Thus the idea of social relations is gradually developed in the child's mind, before he can really be
an active member of human society. Emile sees that to get tools for his own use, other people must
have theirs, and that he can get in exchange what he needs and they possess. I easily bring him to feel
the need of such exchange and to take advantage of it.
  "Sir, I must live," said a miserable writer of lampoons to the minister who reproved him for his
infamous trade. "I do not see the necessity," replied the great man coldly. This answer, excellent from
the minister, would have been barbarous and untrue in any other mouth. Every man must live; this
argument, which appeals to every one with more or less force in proportion to his humanity, strikes me
as unanswerable when applied to oneself. Since our dislike of death is the strongest of those aversions
nature has implanted in us, it follows that everything is permissible to the man who has no other means
of living. The principles, which teach the good man to count his life a little thing and to sacrifice it at
duty's call, are far removed from this primitive simplicity. Happy are those nations where one can be
good  without  effort,  and  just  without  conscious  virtue.  If  in  this  world  there  is  any  condition  so
miserable that one cannot live without wrong-doing, where the citizen is driven into evil, you shouldhang, not the criminal, but those who drove him into crime.
  As soon as Emile knows what life is, my first care will be to teach him to preserve his life. Hitherto
I have made no distinction of condition, rank, station, or fortune; nor shall I distinguish between them
in the future, since man is the same in every station; the rich man's stomach is no bigger than the poor
man's, nor is his digestion any better; the master's arm is neither longer nor stronger than the slave's; a
great man is no taller than one of the people, and indeed the natural needs are the same to all, and the
means of satisfying them should be equally within the reach of all. Fit a man's education to his real self,
not to what is no part of him. Do you not see that in striving to fit him merely for one station, you are
unfitting him for anything else, so that some caprice of Fortune may make your work really harmful to
him? What could be more absurd than a nobleman in rags, who carries with him into his poverty the
prejudices of his birth? What is more despicable than a rich man fallen into poverty, who recalls the
scorn with which he himself regarded the poor, and feels that he has sunk to the lowest depth of
degradation? The one may become a professional thief, the other a cringing servant, with this fine
saying, "I must live."
  You reckon on the present order of society, without considering that this order is itself subject to
inscrutable changes, and that you can neither foresee nor provide against the revolution which may
affect your children. The great become small, the rich poor, the king a commoner. Does fate strike so
seldom that you can count on immunity from her blows? The crisis is approaching, and we are on the
edge of a revolution. [Footnote: In my opinion it is impossible that the great kingdoms of Europe
should last much longer. Each of them has had its period of splendour, after which it must inevitably
decline. I have my own opinions as to the special applications of this general statement, but this is not
the place to enter into details, and they are only too evident to everybody.] Who can answer for your
fate? What man has made, man may destroy. Nature's characters alone are ineffaceable, and nature
makes neither the prince, the rich man, nor the nobleman. This satrap whom you have educated for
greatness, what will become of him in his degradation? This farmer of the taxes who can only live on
gold, what will he do in poverty? This haughty fool who cannot use his own hands, who prides himself
on what is not really his, what will he do when he is stripped of all? In that day, happy will he be who
can give up the rank which is no longer his, and be still a man in Fate's despite. Let men praise as they
will that conquered monarch who like a madman would be buried beneath the fragments of his throne; I
behold him with scorn; to me he is merely a crown, and when that is gone he is nothing. But he who
loses his crown and lives without it, is more than a king; from the rank of a king, which may be held by
a coward, a villain, or madman, he rises to the rank of a man, a position few can fill. Thus he triumphs
over Fortune, he dares to look her in the face; he depends on himself alone, and when he has nothing
left to show but himself he is not a nonentity, he is somebody. Better a thousandfold the king of Corinth
a schoolmaster at Syracuse, than a wretched Tarquin, unable to be anything but a king, or the heir of the
ruler of three kingdoms, the sport of all who would scorn his poverty, wandering from court to court in
search of help, and finding nothing but insults, for want of knowing any trade but one which he can no
longer practise.
  The man and the citizen, whoever he may be, has no property to invest in society but himself, all his
other goods belong to society in spite of himself, and when a man is rich, either he does not enjoy his
wealth, or the public enjoys it too; in the first case he robs others as well as himself; in the second he
gives them nothing. Thus his debt to society is still unpaid, while he only pays with his property. "But
my father was serving society while he was acquiring his wealth." Just so; he paid his own debt, not
yours. You owe more to others than if you had been born with nothing, since you were born under
favourable conditions. It is not fair that what one man has done for society should pay another's debt,
for since every man owes all that he is, he can only pay his own debt, and no father can transmit to his
son any right to be of no use to mankind. "But," you say, "this is just what he does when he leaves me
his wealth, the reward of his labour." The man who eats in idleness what he has not himself earned, is a
thief, and in my eyes, the man who lives on an income paid him by the state for doing nothing, differs
little from a highwayman who lives on those who travel his way. Outside the pale of society, thesolitary, owing nothing to any man, may live as he pleases, but in society either he lives at the cost of
others, or he owes them in labour the cost of his keep; there is no exception to this rule. Man in society
is bound to work; rich or poor, weak or strong, every idler is a thief.
  Now of all the pursuits by which a man may earn his living, the nearest to a state of nature is
manual labour; of all stations that of the artisan is least dependent on Fortune. The artisan depends on
his labour alone, he is a free man while the ploughman is a slave; for the latter depends on his field
where the crops may be destroyed by others. An enemy, a prince, a powerful neighbour, or a law-suit
may deprive him of his field; through this field he may be harassed in all sorts of ways. But if the
artisan is ill-treated his goods are soon packed and he takes himself off. Yet agriculture is the earliest,
the most honest of trades, and more useful than all the rest, and therefore more honourable for those
who  practise  it.  I  do  not  say  to  Emile,  "Study  agriculture,"  he  is  already  familiar  with  it.  He  is
acquainted with every kind of rural labour, it was his first occupation, and he returns to it continually.
So I say to him, "Cultivate your father's lands, but if you lose this inheritance, or if you have none to
lose, what will you do? Learn a trade."
  "A trade for my son! My son a working man! What are you thinking of, sir?" Madam, my thoughts
are wiser than yours; you want to make him fit for nothing but a lord, a marquis, or a prince; and some
day he may be less than nothing. I want to give him a rank which he cannot lose, a rank which will
always do him honour; I want to raise him to the status of a man, and, whatever you may say, he will
have fewer equals in that rank than in your own.
  The letter killeth, the spirit giveth life. Learning a trade matters less than overcoming the prejudices
he despises. You will never be reduced to earning your livelihood; so much the worse for you. No
matter; work for honour, not for need: stoop to the position of a working man, to rise above your own.
To conquer Fortune and everything else, begin by independence. To rule through public opinion, begin
by ruling over it.
  Remember I demand no talent, only a trade, a genuine trade, a mere mechanical art, in which the
hands work harder than the head, a trade which does not lead to fortune but makes you independent of
her. In households far removed from all danger of want I have known fathers carry prudence to such a
point as to provide their children not only with ordinary teaching but with knowledge by means of
which they could get a living if anything happened. These far-sighted parents thought they were doing
a great thing. It is nothing, for the resources they fancy they have secured depend on that very fortune
of  which  they  would  make  their  children  independent;  so  that  unless  they  found  themselves  in
circumstances fitted for the display of their talents, they would die of hunger as if they had none.
  As soon as it is a question of influence and intrigue you may as well use these means to keep
yourself in plenty, as to acquire, in the depths of poverty, the means of returning to your former
position. If you cultivate the arts which depend on the artist's reputation, if you fit yourself for posts
which are only obtained by favour, how will that help you when, rightly disgusted with the world, you
scorn the steps by which you must climb. You have studied politics and state-craft, so far so good; but
how will you use this knowledge, if you cannot gain the ear of the ministers, the favourites, or the
officials? if you have not the secret of winning their favour, if they fail to find you a rogue to their
taste? You are an architect or a painter; well and good; but your talents must be displayed. Do you
suppose you can exhibit in the salon without further ado? That is not the way to set about it. Lay aside
the rule and the pencil, take a cab and drive from door to door; there is the road to fame. Now you must
know  that  the  doors  of  the  great  are  guarded  by  porters  and  flunkeys,  who  only  understand  one
language, and their ears are in their palms. If you wish to teach what you have learned, geography,
mathematics, languages, music, drawing, even to find pupils, you must have friends who will sing your
praises. Learning, remember, gains more credit than skill, and with no trade but your own none will
believe in your skill. See how little you can depend on these fine "Resources," and how many other
resources are required before you can use what you have got. And what will become of you in your
degradation? Misfortune will make you worse rather than better. More than ever the sport of public
opinion, how will you rise above the prejudices on which your fate depends? How will you despise thevices and the baseness from which you get your living? You were dependent on wealth, now you are
dependent on the wealthy; you are still a slave and a poor man into the bargain. Poverty without
freedom, can a man sink lower than this!
  But if instead of this recondite learning adapted to feed the mind, not the body, you have recourse,
at  need,  to  your  hands  and  your  handiwork,  there  is  no  call  for  deceit,  your  trade  is  ready  when
required. Honour and honesty will not stand in the way of your living. You need no longer cringe and
lie to the great, nor creep and crawl before rogues, a despicable flatterer of both, a borrower or a thief,
for there is little to choose between them when you are penniless. Other people's opinions are no
concern of yours, you need not pay court to any one, there is no fool to flatter, no flunkey to bribe, no
woman to win over. Let rogues conduct the affairs of state; in your lowly rank you can still be an
honest man and yet get a living. You walk into the first workshop of your trade. "Master, I want work."
"Comrade, take your place and work." Before dinner-time you have earned your dinner. If you are
sober and industrious, before the week is out you will have earned your keep for another week; you will
have lived in freedom, health, truth, industry, and righteousness. Time is not wasted when it brings
these returns.
  Emile shall learn a trade. "An honest trade, at least," you say. What do you mean by honest? Is not
every useful trade honest? I would not make an embroiderer, a gilder, a polisher of him, like Locke's
young gentleman. Neither would I make him a musician, an actor, or an author.[Footnote: You are an
author yourself, you will reply. Yes, for my sins; and my ill deeds, which I think I have fully expiated,
are no reason why others should be like me. I do not write to excuse my faults, but to prevent my
readers from copying them.] With the exception of these and others like them, let him choose his own
trade, I do not mean to interfere with his choice. I would rather have him a shoemaker than a poet, I
would rather he paved streets than painted flowers on china. "But," you will say, "policemen, spies, and
hangmen are useful people." There would be no use for them if it were not for the government. But let
that pass. I was wrong. It is not enough to choose an honest trade, it must be a trade which does not
develop detestable qualities in the mind, qualities incompatible with humanity. To return to our original
expression, "Let us choose an honest trade," but let us remember there can be no honesty without
usefulness.
  A famous writer of this century, whose books are full of great schemes and narrow views, was
under  a  vow,  like  the  other  priests  of  his  communion,  not  to  take  a  wife.  Finding  himself  more
scrupulous than others with regard to his neighbour's wife, he decided, so they say, to employ pretty
servants, and so did his best to repair the wrong done to the race by his rash promise. He thought it the
duty of a citizen to breed children for the state, and he made his children artisans. As soon as they were
old enough they were taught whatever trade they chose; only idle or useless trades were excluded, such
as that of the wigmaker who is never necessary, and may any day cease to be required, so long as
nature does not get tired of providing us with hair.
  This spirit shall guide our choice of trade for Emile, or rather, not our choice but his; for the
maxims he has imbibed make him despise useless things, and he will never be content to waste his time
on vain labours; his trade must be of use to Robinson on his island.
  When we review with the child the productions of art and nature, when we stimulate his curiosity
and follow its lead, we have great opportunities of studying his tastes and inclinations, and perceiving
the first spark of genius, if he has any decided talent in any direction. You must, however, be on your
guard against the common error which mistakes the effects of environment for the ardour of genius, or
imagines there is a decided bent towards any one of the arts, when there is nothing more than that spirit
of emulation, common to men and monkeys, which impels them instinctively to do what they see others
doing, without knowing why. The world is full of artisans, and still fuller of artists, who have no native
gift for their calling, into which they were driven in early childhood, either through the conventional
ideas of other people, or because those about them were deceived by an appearance of zeal, which
would have led them to take to any other art they saw practised. One hears a drum and fancies he is a
general; another sees a building and wants to be an architect. Every one is drawn towards the trade hesees before him if he thinks it is held in honour.
I once knew a footman who watched his master drawing and painting and took it into his head to
become a designer and artist. He seized a pencil which he only abandoned for a paint-brush, to which
he stuck for the rest of his days. Without teaching or rules of art he began to draw everything he saw.
Three whole years were devoted to these daubs, from which nothing but his duties could stir him, nor
was he discouraged by the small progress resulting from his very mediocre talents. I have seen him
spend the whole of a broiling summer in a little ante-room towards the south, a room where one was
suffocated merely passing through it; there he was, seated or rather nailed all day to his chair, before a
globe, drawing it again and again and yet again, with invincible obstinacy till he had reproduced the
rounded surface to his own satisfaction. At last with his master's help and under the guidance of an
artist he got so far as to abandon his livery and live by his brush. Perseverance does instead of talent up
to  a  certain  point;  he  got  so  far,  but  no  further.  This  honest  lad's  perseverance  and  ambition  are
praiseworthy;  he  will  always  be  respected  for  his  industry  and  steadfastness  of  purpose,  but  his
paintings will always be third-rate. Who would not have been deceived by his zeal and taken it for real
talent! There is all the difference in the world between a liking and an aptitude. To make sure of real
genius or real taste in a child calls for more accurate observations than is generally suspected, for the
child displays his wishes not his capacity, and we judge by the former instead of considering the latter.
I wish some trustworthy person would give us a treatise on the art of child-study. This art is well worth
studying, but neither parents nor teachers have mastered its elements.
  Perhaps we are laying too much stress on the choice of a trade; as it is a manual occupation, Emile's
choice is no great matter, and his apprenticeship is more than half accomplished already, through the
exercises which have hitherto occupied him. What would you have him do? He is ready for anything.
He can handle the spade and hoe, he can use the lathe, hammer, plane, or file; he is already familiar
with these tools which are common to many trades. He only needs to acquire sufficient skill in the use
of any one of them to rival the speed, the familiarity, and the diligence of good workmen, and he will
have a great advantage over them in suppleness of body and limb, so that he can easily take any
position and can continue any kind of movements without effort. Moreover his senses are acute and
well-practised, he knows the principles of the various trades; to work like a master of his craft he only
needs experience, and experience comes with practice. To which of these trades which are open to us
will he give sufficient time to make himself master of it? That is the whole question.
  Give a man a trade befitting his sex, to a young man a trade befitting his age. Sedentary indoor
employments, which make the body tender and effeminate, are neither pleasing nor suitable. No lad
ever wanted to be a tailor. It takes some art to attract a man to this woman's work.[Footnote: There
were no tailors among the ancients; men's clothes were made at home by the women.] The same hand
cannot hold the needle and the sword. If I were king I would only allow needlework and dressmaking
to be done by women and cripples who are obliged to work at such trades. If eunuchs were required I
think the Easterns were very foolish to make them on purpose. Why not take those provided by nature,
that crowd of base persons without natural feeling? There would be enough and to spare. The weak,
feeble, timid man is condemned by nature to a sedentary life, he is fit to live among women or in their
fashion. Let him adopt one of their trades if he likes; and if there must be eunuchs let them take those
men who dishonour their sex by adopting trades unworthy of it. Their choice proclaims a blunder on
the part of nature; correct it one way or other, you will do no harm.
  An unhealthy trade I forbid to my pupil, but not a difficult or dangerous one. He will exercise
himself in strength and courage; such trades are for men not women, who claim no share in them, Are
not men ashamed to poach upon the women's trades?
  "Luctantur  paucae,  comedunt  coliphia  paucae.  Vos  lanam  trahitis,  calathisque  peracta  refertis
Vellera."--Juven. Sat. II. V. 55.
  Women are not seen in shops in Italy, and to persons accustomed to the streets of England and
France nothing could look gloomier. When I saw drapers selling ladies ribbons, pompons, net, and
chenille, I thought these delicate ornaments very absurd in the coarse hands fit to blow the bellows andstrike  the  anvil.  I  said  to  myself,  "In  this  country  women  should  set  up  as  steel-polishers  and
armourers." Let each make and sell the weapons of his or her own sex; knowledge is acquired through
use.
I know I have said too much for my agreeable contemporaries, but I sometimes let myself be
carried away by my argument. If any one is ashamed to be seen wearing a leathern apron or handling a
plane, I think him a mere slave of public opinion, ready to blush for what is right when people poke fun
at it. But let us yield to parents' prejudices so long as they do not hurt the children. To honour trades we
are not obliged to practise every one of them, so long as we do not think them beneath us. When the
choice is ours and we are under no compulsion, why not choose the pleasanter, more attractive and
more suitable trade. Metal work is useful, more useful, perhaps, than the rest, but unless for some
special reason Emile shall not be a blacksmith, a locksmith nor an iron-worker. I do not want to see him
a Cyclops at the forge. Neither would I have him a mason, still less a shoemaker. All trades must be
carried on, but when the choice is ours, cleanliness should be taken into account; this is not a matter of
class prejudice, our senses are our guides. In conclusion, I do not like those stupid trades in which the
workmen  mechanically  perform  the  same  action  without  pause  and  almost  without  mental  effort.
Weaving, stocking-knitting, stone-cutting; why employ intelligent men on such work? it is merely one
machine employed on another.
  All things considered, the trade I should choose for my pupil, among the trades he likes, is that of a
carpenter. It is clean and useful; it may be carried on at home; it gives enough exercise; it calls for skill
and industry, and while fashioning articles for everyday use, there is scope for elegance and taste. If
your pupil's talents happened to take a scientific turn, I should not blame you if you gave him a trade in
accordance with his tastes, for instance, he might learn to make mathematical instruments, glasses,
telescopes, etc.
  When Emile learns his trade I shall learn it too. I am convinced he will never learn anything
thoroughly unless we learn it together. So we shall both serve our apprenticeship, and we do not mean
to be treated as gentlemen, but as real apprentices who are not there for fun; why should not we actually
be apprenticed? Peter the Great was a ship's carpenter and drummer to his own troops; was not that
prince at least your equal in birth and merit? You understand this is addressed not to Emile but to you--
to you, whoever you may be.
  Unluckily we cannot spend the whole of our time at the workshop. We are not only 'prentice-
carpenters but 'prentice-men--a trade whose apprenticeship is longer and more exacting than the rest.
What shall we do? Shall we take a master to teach us the use of the plane and engage him by the hour
like the dancing-master? In that case we should be not apprentices but students, and our ambition is not
merely to learn carpentry but to be carpenters. Once or twice a week I think we should spend the whole
day at our master's; we should get up when he does, we should be at our work before him, we should
take our meals with him, work under his orders, and after having had the honour of supping at his table
we may if we please return to sleep upon our own hard beds. This is the way to learn several trades at
once, to learn to do manual work without neglecting our apprenticeship to life.
  Let us do what is right without ostentation; let us not fall into vanity through our efforts to resist it.
To pride ourselves on our victory over prejudice is to succumb to prejudice. It is said that in accordance
with an old custom of the Ottomans, the sultan is obliged to work with his hands, and, as every one
knows, the handiwork of a king is a masterpiece. So he royally distributes his masterpieces among the
great lords of the Porte and the price paid is in accordance with the rank of the workman. It is not this
so-called abuse to which I object; on the contrary, it is an advantage, and by compelling the lords to
share with him the spoils of the people it is so much the less necessary for the prince to plunder the
people himself. Despotism needs some such relaxation, and without it that hateful rule could not last.
  The real evil in such a custom is the idea it gives that poor man of his own worth. Like King Midas
he sees all things turn to gold at his touch, but he does not see the ass' ears growing. Let us keep Emile's
hands from money lest he should become an ass, let him take the work but not the wages. Never let his
work be judged by any standard but that of the work of a master. Let it be judged as work, not becauseit is his. If anything is well done, I say, "That is a good piece of work," but do not ask who did it. If he
is pleased and proud and says, "I did it," answer indifferently, "No matter who did it, it is well done."
  Good mother, be on your guard against the deceptions prepared for you. If your son knows many
things, distrust his knowledge; if he is unlucky enough to be rich and educated in Paris he is ruined. As
long as there are clever artists he will have every talent, but apart from his masters he will have none. In
Paris a rich man knows everything, it is the poor who are ignorant. Our capital is full of amateurs,
especially women, who do their work as M. Gillaume invents his colours. Among the men I know three
striking exceptions, among the women I know no exceptions, and I doubt if there are any. In a general
way a man becomes an artist and a judge of art as he becomes a Doctor of Laws and a magistrate.
  If then it is once admitted that it is a fine thing to have a trade, your children would soon have one
without learning it. They would become postmasters like the councillors of Zurich. Let us have no such
ceremonies for Emile; let it be the real thing not the sham. Do not say what he knows, let him learn in
silence. Let him make his masterpiece, but not be hailed as master; let him be a workman not in name
but in deed.
  If I have made my meaning clear you ought to realise how bodily exercise and manual work
unconsciously arouse thought and reflexion in my pupil, and counteract the idleness which might result
from his indifference to men's judgments, and his freedom from passion. He must work like a peasant
and think like a philosopher, if he is not to be as idle as a savage. The great secret of education is to use
exercise of mind and body as relaxation one to the other.
  But beware of anticipating teaching which demands more maturity of mind. Emile will not long be
a workman before he discovers those social inequalities he had not previously observed. He will want
to question me in turn on the maxims I have given him, maxims he is able to understand. When he
derives everything from me, when he is so nearly in the position of the poor, he will want to know why
I am so far removed from it. All of a sudden he may put scathing questions to me. "You are rich, you
tell me, and I see you are. A rich man owes his work to the community like the rest because he is a
man. What are you doing for the community?" What would a fine tutor say to that? I do not know. He
would perhaps be foolish enough to talk to the child of the care he bestows upon him. The workshop
will get me out of the difficulty. "My dear Emile that is a very good question; I will undertake to
answer for myself, when you can answer for yourself to your own satisfaction. Meanwhile I will take
care to give what I can spare to you and to the poor, and to make a table or a bench every week, so as
not to be quite useless."
  We have come back to ourselves. Having entered into possession of himself, our child is now ready
to cease to be a child. He is more than ever conscious of the necessity which makes him dependent on
things. After exercising his body and his senses you have exercised his mind and his judgment. Finally
we have joined together the use of his limbs and his faculties. We have made him a worker and a
thinker; we have now to make him loving and tender-hearted, to perfect reason through feeling. But
before we enter on this new order of things, let us cast an eye over the stage we are leaving behind us,
and perceive as clearly as we can how far we have got.
  At first our pupil had merely sensations, now he has ideas; he could only feel, now he reasons. For
from the comparison of many successive or simultaneous sensations and the judgment arrived at with
regard to them, there springs a sort of mixed or complex sensation which I call an idea.
  The way in which ideas are formed gives a character to the human mind. The mind which derives
its ideas from real relations is thorough; the mind which relies on apparent relations is superficial. He
who sees relations as they are has an exact mind; he who fails to estimate them aright has an inaccurate
mind; he who concocts imaginary relations, which have no real existence, is a madman; he who does
not perceive any relation at all is an imbecile. Clever men are distinguished from others by their greater
or less aptitude for the comparison of ideas and the discovery of relations between them.
  Simple ideas consist merely of sensations compared one with another. Simple sensations involve
judgments, as do the complex sensations which I call simple ideas. In the sensation the judgment is
purely  passive;  it  affirms  that  I  feel  what  I  feel.  In  the  percept  or  idea  the  judgment  is  active;  itconnects, compares, it discriminates between relations not perceived by the senses. That is the whole
difference; but it is a great difference. Nature never deceives us; we deceive ourselves.
I see some one giving an ice-cream to an eight-year-old child; he does not know what it is and puts
the spoon in his mouth. Struck by the cold he cries out, "Oh, it burns!" He feels a very keen sensation,
and the heat of the fire is the keenest sensation he knows, so he thinks that is what he feels. Yet he is
mistaken; cold hurts, but it does not burn; and these two sensations are different, for persons with more
experience do not confuse them. So it is not the sensation that is wrong, but the judgment formed with
regard to it.
  It is just the same with those who see a mirror or some optical instrument for the first time, or enter
a deep cellar in the depths of winter or at midsummer, or dip a very hot or cold hand into tepid water, or
roll a little ball between two crossed fingers. If they are content to say what they really feel, their
judgment, being purely passive, cannot go wrong; but when they judge according to appearances, their
judgment is active; it compares and establishes by induction relations which are not really perceived.
Then these inductions may or may not be mistaken. Experience is required to correct or prevent error.
  Show your pupil the clouds at night passing between himself and the moon; he will think the moon
is moving in the opposite direction and that the clouds are stationary. He will think this through a hasty
induction, because he generally sees small objects moving and larger ones at rest, and the clouds seems
larger than the moon, whose distance is beyond his reckoning. When he watches the shore from a
moving boat he falls into the opposite mistake and thinks the earth is moving because he does not feel
the motion of the boat and considers it along with the sea or river as one motionless whole, of which
the shore, which appears to move, forms no part.
  The first time a child sees a stick half immersed in water he thinks he sees a broken stick; the
sensation is true and would not cease to be true even if he knew the reason of this appearance. So if you
ask him what he sees, he replies, "A broken stick," for he is quite sure he is experiencing this sensation.
But when deceived by his judgment he goes further and, after saying he sees a broken stick, he affirms
that it really is broken he says what is not true. Why? Because he becomes active and judges no longer
by  observation  but  by  induction,  he  affirms  what  he  does  not  perceive,  i.e.,  that  the  judgment  he
receives through one of his senses would be confirmed by another.
  Since all our errors arise in our judgment, it is clear, that had we no need for judgment, we should
not need to learn; we should never be liable to mistakes, we should be happier in our ignorance than we
can be in our knowledge. Who can deny that a vast number of things are known to the learned, which
the unlearned will never know? Are the learned any nearer truth? Not so, the further they go the further
they get from truth, for their pride in their judgment increases faster than their progress in knowledge,
so that for every truth they acquire they draw a hundred mistaken conclusions. Every one knows that
the learned societies of Europe are mere schools of falsehood, and there are assuredly more mistaken
notions in the Academy of Sciences than in a whole tribe of American Indians.
  The more we know, the more mistakes we make; therefore ignorance is the only way to escape
error. Form no judgments and you will never be mistaken. This is the teaching both of nature and
reason. We come into direct contact with very few things, and these are very readily perceived; the rest
we regard with profound indifference. A savage will not turn his head to watch the working of the
finest machinery or all the wonders of electricity. "What does that matter to me?" is the common saying
of the ignorant; it is the fittest phrase for the wise.
  Unluckily this phrase will no longer serve our turn. Everything matters to us, as we are dependent
on  everything,  and  our  curiosity  naturally  increases  with  our  needs.  This  is  why  I  attribute  much
curiosity to the man of science and none to the savage. The latter needs no help from anybody; the
former requires every one, and admirers most of all.
  You will tell me I am going beyond nature. I think not. She chooses her instruments and orders
them, not according to fancy, but necessity. Now a man's needs vary with his circumstances. There is
all the difference in the world between a natural man living in a state of nature, and a natural man living
in society. Emile is no savage to be banished to the desert, he is a savage who has to live in the town.He must know how to get his living in a town, how to use its inhabitants, and how to live among them,
if not of them.
  In the midst of so many new relations and dependent on them, he must reason whether he wants to
or no. Let us therefore teach him to reason correctly.
  The best way of learning to reason aright is that which tends to simplify our experiences, or to
enable us to dispense with them altogether without falling into error. Hence it follows that we must
learn to confirm the experiences of each sense by itself, without recourse to any other, though we have
been  in  the  habit  of  verifying  the  experience  of  one  sense  by  that  of  another.  Then  each  of  our
sensations will become an idea, and this idea will always correspond to the truth. This is the sort of
knowledge I have tried to accumulate during this third phase of man's life.
  This method of procedure demands a patience and circumspection which few teachers possess;
without them the scholar will never learn to reason. For example, if you hasten to take the stick out of
the water when the child is deceived by its appearance, you may perhaps undeceive him, but what have
you taught him? Nothing more than he would soon have learnt for himself. That is not the right thing to
do. You have not got to teach him truths so much as to show him how to set about discovering them for
himself. To teach him better you must not be in such a hurry to correct his mistakes. Let us take Emile
and myself as an illustration.
  To begin with, any child educated in the usual way could not fail to answer the second of my
imaginary questions in the affirmative. He will say, "That is certainly a broken stick." I very much
doubt whether Emile will give the same reply. He sees no reason for knowing everything or pretending
to know it; he is never in a hurry to draw conclusions. He only reasons from evidence and on this
occasion  he  has  not  got  the  evidence.  He  knows  how  appearances  deceive  us,  if  only  through
perspective.
  Moreover, he knows by experience that there is always a reason for my slightest questions, though
he may not see it at once; so he has not got into the habit of giving silly answers; on the contrary, he is
on his guard, he considers things carefully and attentively before answering. He never gives me an
answer unless he is satisfied with it himself, and he is hard to please. Lastly we neither of us take any
pride in merely knowing a thing, but only in avoiding mistakes. We should be more ashamed to deceive
ourselves with bad reasoning, than to find no explanation at all. There is no phrase so appropriate to us,
or so often on our lips, as, "I do not know;" neither of us are ashamed to use it. But whether he gives
the silly answer or whether he avoids it by our convenient phrase "I do not know," my answer is the
same. "Let us examine it."
  This stick immersed half way in the water is fixed in an upright position. To know if it is broken,
how many things must be done before we take it out of the water or even touch it.
  1. First we walk round it, and we see that the broken part follows us. So it is only our eye that
changes it; looks do not make things move.
  2. We look straight down on that end of the stick which is above the water, the stick is no longer
bent, [Footnote: I have since found by more exact experiment that this is not the case. Refraction acts in
a circle, and the stick appears larger at the end which is in the water, but this makes no difference to the
strength of the argument, and the conclusion is correct.] the end near our eye exactly hides the other
end. Has our eye set the stick straight?
  3. We stir the surface of the water; we see the stick break into several pieces, it moves in zigzags
and follows the ripples of the water. Can the motion we gave the water suffice to break, soften, or melt
the stick like this?
  4. We draw the water off, and little by little we see the stick straightening itself as the water sinks.
Is not this more than enough to clear up the business and to discover refraction? So it is not true that
our eyes deceive us, for nothing more has been required to correct the mistakes attributed to it.
  Suppose the child were stupid enough not to perceive the result of these experiments, then you must
call touch to the help of sight. Instead of taking the stick out of the water, leave it where it is and let the
child pass his hand along it from end to end; he will feel no angle, therefore the stick is not broken.  You will tell me this is not mere judgment but formal reasoning. Just so; but do not you see that as
soon as the mind has got any ideas at all, every judgment is a process of reasoning? So that as soon as
we compare one sensation with another, we are beginning to reason. The art of judging and the art of
reasoning are one and the same.
  Emile will never learn dioptrics unless he learns with this stick. He will not have dissected insects
nor counted the spots on the sun; he will not know what you mean by a microscope or a telescope.
Your learned pupils will laugh at his ignorance and rightly, I intend him to invent these instruments
before he uses them, and you will expect that to take some time.
  This is the spirit of my whole method at this stage. If the child rolls a little ball between two crossed
fingers and thinks he feels two balls, I shall not let him look until he is convinced there is only one.
  This explanation will suffice, I hope, to show plainly the progress made by my pupil hitherto and
the route followed by him. But perhaps the number of things I have brought to his notice alarms you. I
shall crush his mind beneath this weight of knowledge. Not so, I am rather teaching him to be ignorant
of things than to know them. I am showing him the path of science, easy indeed, but long, far-reaching
and slow to follow. I am taking him a few steps along this path, but I do not allow him to go far.
  Compelled to learn for himself, he uses his own reason not that of others, for there must be no
submission to authority if you would have no submission to convention. Most of our errors are due to
others more than ourselves. This continual exercise should develop a vigour of mind like that acquired
by the body through labour and weariness. Another advantage is that his progress is in proportion to his
strength, neither mind nor body carries more than it can bear. When the understanding lays hold of
things before they are stored in the memory, what is drawn from that store is his own; while we are in
danger of never finding anything of our own in a memory over-burdened with undigested knowledge.
  Emile knows little, but what he knows is really his own; he has no half-knowledge. Among the few
things he knows and knows thoroughly this is the most valuable, that there are many things he does not
know now but may know some day, many more that other men know but he will never know, and an
infinite number which nobody will ever know. He is large-minded, not through knowledge, but through
the power of acquiring it; he is open-minded, intelligent, ready for anything, and, as Montaigne says,
capable of learning if not learned. I am content if he knows the "Wherefore" of his actions and the
"Why" of his beliefs. For once more my object is not to supply him with exact knowledge, but the
means of getting it when required, to teach him to value it at its true worth, and to love truth above all
things. By this method progress is slow but sure, and we never need to retrace our steps.
  Emile's knowledge is confined to nature and things. The very name of history is unknown to him,
along with metaphysics and morals. He knows the essential relations between men and things, but
nothing of the moral relations between man and man. He has little power of generalisation, he has no
skill in abstraction. He perceives that certain qualities are common to certain things, without reasoning
about these qualities themselves. He is acquainted with the abstract idea of space by the help of his
geometrical figures; he is acquainted with the abstract idea of quantity by the help of his algebraical
symbols. These figures and signs are the supports on which these ideas may be said to rest, the supports
on which his senses repose. He does not attempt to know the nature of things, but only to know things
in so far as they affect himself. He only judges what is outside himself in relation to himself, and his
judgment is exact and certain. Caprice and prejudice have no part in it. He values most the things which
are  of  use  to  himself,  and  as  he  never  departs  from  this  standard  of  values,  he  owes  nothing  to
prejudice.
  Emile is industrious, temperate, patient, stedfast, and full of courage. His imagination is still asleep,
so he has no exaggerated ideas of danger; the few ills he feels he knows how to endure in patience,
because he has not learnt to rebel against fate. As to death, he knows not what it means; but accustomed
as he is to submit without resistance to the law of necessity, he will die, if die he must, without a groan
and without a struggle; that is as much as we can demand of nature, in that hour which we all abhor. To
live in freedom, and to be independent of human affairs, is the best way to learn how to die.
  In a word Emile is possessed of all that portion of virtue which concerns himself. To acquire thesocial virtues he only needs a knowledge of the relations which make those virtues necessary; he only
lacks knowledge which he is quite ready to receive.
  He thinks not of others but of himself, and prefers that others should do the same. He makes no
claim upon them, and acknowledges no debt to them. He is alone in the midst of human society, he
depends on himself alone, for he is all that a boy can be at his age. He has no errors, or at least only
such as are inevitable; he has no vices, or only those from which no man can escape. His body is
healthy, his limbs are supple, his mind is accurate and unprejudiced, his heart is free and untroubled by
passion.  Pride,  the  earliest  and  the  most  natural  of  passions,  has  scarcely  shown  itself.  Without
disturbing the peace of others, he has passed his life contented, happy, and free, so far as nature allows.
Do you think that the earlier years of a child, who has reached his fifteenth year in this condition, have
been wasted?
 
 
  BOOK IV
  How swiftly life passes here below! The first quarter of it is gone before we know how to use it; the
last quarter finds us incapable of enjoying life. At first we do not know how to live; and when we know
how to live it is too late. In the interval between these two useless extremes we waste three-fourths of
our time sleeping, working, sorrowing, enduring restraint and every kind of suffering. Life is short, not
so much because of the short time it lasts, but because we are allowed scarcely any time to enjoy it. In
vain is there a long interval between the hour of death and that of birth; life is still too short, if this
interval is not well spent.
  We are born, so to speak, twice over; born into existence, and born into life; born a human being,
and born a man. Those who regard woman as an imperfect man are no doubt mistaken, but they have
external resemblance on their side. Up to the age of puberty children of both sexes have little to
distinguish them to the eye, the same face and form, the same complexion and voice, everything is the
same; girls are children and boys are children; one name is enough for creatures so closely resembling
one another. Males whose development is arrested preserve this resemblance all their lives; they are
always big children; and women who never lose this resemblance seem in many respects never to be
more than children.
  But, speaking generally, man is not meant to remain a child. He leaves childhood behind him at the
time  ordained  by  nature;  and  this  critical  moment,  short  enough  in  itself,  has  far-reaching
consequences.
  As the roaring of the waves precedes the tempest, so the murmur of rising passions announces this
tumultuous change; a suppressed excitement warns us of the approaching danger. A change of temper,
frequent outbreaks of anger, a perpetual stirring of the mind, make the child almost ungovernable. He
becomes deaf to the voice he used to obey; he is a lion in a fever; he distrusts his keeper and refuses to
be controlled.
  With the moral symptoms of a changing temper there are perceptible changes in appearance. His
countenance develops and takes the stamp of his character; the soft and sparse down upon his cheeks
becomes darker and stiffer. His voice grows hoarse or rather he loses it altogether. He is neither a child
nor a man and cannot speak like either of them. His eyes, those organs of the soul which till now were
dumb, find speech and meaning; a kindling fire illumines them, there is still a sacred innocence in their
ever brightening glance, but they have lost their first meaningless expression; he is already aware that
they can say too much; he is beginning to learn to lower his eyes and blush, he is becoming sensitive,
though he does not know what it is that he feels; he is uneasy without knowing why. All this may
happen gradually and give you time enough; but if his keenness becomes impatience, his eagerness
madness, if he is angry and sorry all in a moment, if he weeps without cause, if in the presence of
objects which are beginning to be a source of danger his pulse quickens and his eyes sparkle, if he
trembles when a woman's hand touches his, if he is troubled or timid in her presence, O Ulysses, wise
Ulysses! have a care! The passages you closed with so much pains are open; the winds are unloosed;keep your hand upon the helm or all is lost.
  This is the second birth I spoke of; then it is that man really enters upon life; henceforth no human
passion is a stranger to him. Our efforts so far have been child's play, now they are of the greatest
importance. This period when education is usually finished is just the time to begin; but to explain this
new plan properly, let us take up our story where we left it.
  Our passions are the chief means of self-preservation; to try to destroy them is therefore as absurd
as it is useless; this would be to overcome nature, to reshape God's handiwork. If God bade man
annihilate the passions he has given him, God would bid him be and not be; He would contradict
himself. He has never given such a foolish commandment, there is nothing like it written on the heart of
man, and what God will have a man do, He does not leave to the words of another man. He speaks
Himself; His words are written in the secret heart.
  Now I consider those who would prevent the birth of the passions almost as foolish as those who
would destroy them, and those who think this has been my object hitherto are greatly mistaken.
  But should we reason rightly, if from the fact that passions are natural to man, we inferred that all
the passions we feel in ourselves and behold in others are natural? Their source, indeed, is natural; but
they have been swollen by a thousand other streams; they are a great river which is constantly growing,
one in which we can scarcely find a single drop of the original stream. Our natural passions are few in
number; they are the means to freedom, they tend to self-preservation. All those which enslave and
destroy us have another source; nature does not bestow them on us; we seize on them in her despite.
  The origin of our passions, the root and spring of all the rest, the only one which is born with man,
which never leaves him as long as he lives, is self-love; this passion is primitive, instinctive, it precedes
all the rest, which are in a sense only modifications of it. In this sense, if you like, they are all natural.
But most of these modifications are the result of external influences, without which they would never
occur,  and  such  modifications,  far  from  being  advantageous  to  us,  are  harmful.  They  change  the
original purpose and work against its end; then it is that man finds himself outside nature and at strife
with himself.
  Self-love is always good, always in accordance with the order of nature. The preservation of our
own life is specially entrusted to each one of us, and our first care is, and must be, to watch over our
own life; and how can we continually watch over it, if we do not take the greatest interest in it?
  Self-preservation requires, therefore, that we shall love ourselves; we must love ourselves above
everything, and it follows directly from this that we love what contributes to our preservation. Every
child becomes fond of its nurse; Romulus must have loved the she-wolf who suckled him. At first this
attachment is quite unconscious; the individual is attracted to that which contributes to his welfare and
repelled  by  that  which  is  harmful;  this  is  merely  blind  instinct.  What  transforms  this  instinct  into
feeling, the liking into love, the aversion into hatred, is the evident intention of helping or hurting us.
We do not become passionately attached to objects without feeling, which only follow the direction
given them; but those from which we expect benefit or injury from their internal disposition, from their
will, those we see acting freely for or against us, inspire us with like feelings to those they exhibit
towards us. Something does us good, we seek after it; but we love the person who does us good;
something harms us and we shrink from it, but we hate the person who tries to hurt us.
  The child's first sentiment is self-love, his second, which is derived from it, is love of those about
him; for in his present state of weakness he is only aware of people through the help and attention
received from them. At first his affection for his nurse and his governess is mere habit. He seeks them
because he needs them and because he is happy when they are there; it is rather perception than kindly
feeling. It takes a long time to discover not merely that they are useful to him, but that they desire to be
useful to him, and then it is that he begins to love them.
  So a child is naturally disposed to kindly feeling because he sees that every one about him is
inclined to help him, and from this experience he gets the habit of a kindly feeling towards his species;
but with the expansion of his relations, his needs, his dependence, active or passive, the consciousness
of his relations to others is awakened, and leads to the sense of duties and preferences. Then the childbecomes masterful, jealous, deceitful, and vindictive. If he is not compelled to obedience, when he does
not see the usefulness of what he is told to do, he attributes it to caprice, to an intention of tormenting
him, and he rebels. If people give in to him, as soon as anything opposes him he regards it as rebellion,
as  a  determination  to  resist  him;  he  beats  the  chair  or  table  for  disobeying  him.  Self-love,  which
concerns itself only with ourselves, is content to satisfy our own needs; but selfishness, which is always
comparing self with others, is never satisfied and never can be; for this feeling, which prefers ourselves
to others, requires that they should prefer us to themselves, which is impossible. Thus the tender and
gentle passions spring from self-love, while the hateful and angry passions spring from selfishness. So
it is the fewness of his needs, the narrow limits within which he can compare himself with others, that
makes a man really good; what makes him really bad is a multiplicity of needs and dependence on the
opinions of others. It is easy to see how we can apply this principle and guide every passion of children
and men towards good or evil. True, man cannot always live alone, and it will be hard therefore to
remain good; and this difficulty will increase of necessity as his relations with others are extended. For
this reason, above all, the dangers of social life demand that the necessary skill and care shall be
devoted to guarding the human heart against the depravity which springs from fresh needs.
  Man's  proper  study  is  that  of  his  relation  to  his  environment.  So  long  as  he  only  knows  that
environment through his physical nature, he should study himself in relation to things; this is the
business of his childhood; when he begins to be aware of his moral nature, he should study himself in
relation to his fellow-men; this is the business of his whole life, and we have now reached the time
when that study should be begun.
  As soon as a man needs a companion he is no longer an isolated creature, his heart is no longer
alone. All his relations with his species, all the affections of his heart, come into being along with this.
His first passion soon arouses the rest.
  The direction of the instinct is uncertain. One sex is attracted by the other; that is the impulse of
nature. Choice, preferences, individual likings, are the work of reason, prejudice, and habit; time and
knowledge are required to make us capable of love; we do not love without reasoning or prefer without
comparison. These judgments are none the less real, although they are formed unconsciously. True
love, whatever you may say, will always be held in honour by mankind; for although its impulses lead
us astray, although it does not bar the door of the heart to certain detestable qualities, although it even
gives rise to these, yet it always presupposes certain worthy characteristics, without which we should be
incapable of love. This choice, which is supposed to be contrary to reason, really springs from reason.
We say Love is blind because his eyes are better than ours, and he perceives relations which we cannot
discern. All women would be alike to a man who had no idea of virtue or beauty, and the first comer
would always be the most charming. Love does not spring from nature, far from it; it is the curb and
law of her desires; it is love that makes one sex indifferent to the other, the loved one alone excepted.
  We wish to inspire the preference we feel; love must be mutual. To be loved we must be worthy of
love; to be preferred we must be more worthy than the rest, at least in the eyes of our beloved. Hence
we  begin  to  look  around  among  our  fellows;  we  begin  to  compare  ourselves  with  them,  there  is
emulation, rivalry, and jealousy. A heart full to overflowing loves to make itself known; from the need
of a mistress there soon springs the need of a friend He who feels how sweet it is to be loved, desires to
be loved by everybody; and there could be no preferences if there were not many that fail to find
satisfaction. With love and friendship there begin dissensions, enmity, and hatred. I behold deference to
other people's opinions enthroned among all these divers passions, and foolish mortals, enslaved by her
power, base their very existence merely on what other people think.
  Expand these ideas and you will see where we get that form of selfishness which we call natural
selfishness, and how selfishness ceases to be a simple feeling and becomes pride in great minds, vanity
in little ones, and in both feeds continually at our neighbour's cost. Passions of this kind, not having any
germ in the child's heart, cannot spring up in it of themselves; it is we who sow the seeds, and they
never take root unless by our fault. Not so with the young man; they will find an entrance in spite of us.
It is therefore time to change our methods.  Let  us  begin  with  some  considerations  of  importance  with  regard  to  the  critical  stage  under
discussion. The change from childhood to puberty is not so clearly determined by nature but that it
varies according to individual temperament and racial conditions. Everybody knows the differences
which have been observed with regard to this between hot and cold countries, and every one sees that
ardent temperaments mature earlier than others; but we may be mistaken as to the causes, and we may
often attribute to physical causes what is really due to moral: this is one of the commonest errors in the
philosophy of our times. The teaching of nature comes slowly; man's lessons are mostly premature. In
the former case, the senses kindle the imagination, in the latter the imagination kindles the senses; it
gives them a precocious activity which cannot fail to enervate the individual and, in the long run, the
race. It is a more general and more trustworthy fact than that of climatic influences, that puberty and
sexual power is always more precocious among educated and civilised races, than among the ignorant
and barbarous. [Footnote: "In towns," says M. Buffon, "and among the well-to-do classes, children
accustomed to plentiful and nourishing food sooner reach this state; in the country and among the poor,
children are more backward, because of their poor and scanty food." I admit the fact but not the
explanation, for in the districts where the food of the villagers is plentiful and good, as in the Valais and
even in some of the mountain districts of Italy, such as Friuli, the age of puberty for both sexes is quite
as much later than in the heart of the towns, where, in order to gratify their vanity, people are often
extremely parsimonious in the matter of food, and where most people, in the words of the proverb, have
a velvet coat and an empty belly. It is astonishing to find in these mountainous regions big lads as
strong as a man with shrill voices and smooth chins, and tall girls, well developed in other respects,
without any trace of the periodic functions of their sex. This difference is, in my opinion, solely due to
the fact that in the simplicity of their manners the imagination remains calm and peaceful, and does not
stir  the  blood  till  much  later,  and  thus  their  temperament  is  much  less  precocious.]  Children  are
preternaturally  quick  to  discern  immoral  habits  under  the  cloak  of  decency  with  which  they  are
concealed. The prim speech imposed upon them, the lessons in good behaviour, the veil of mystery you
profess to hang before their eyes, serve but to stimulate their curiosity. It is plain, from the way you set
about it, that they are meant to learn what you profess to conceal; and of all you teach them this is most
quickly assimilated.
  Consult experience and you will find how far this foolish method hastens the work of nature and
ruins the character. This is one of the chief causes of physical degeneration in our towns. The young
people, prematurely exhausted, remain small, puny, and misshapen, they grow old instead of growing
up, like a vine forced to bear fruit in spring, which fades and dies before autumn.
  To know how far a happy ignorance may prolong the innocence of children, you must live among
rude and simple people. It is a sight both touching and amusing to see both sexes, left to the protection
of their own hearts, continuing the sports of childhood in the flower of youth and beauty, showing by
their very familiarity the purity of their pleasures. When at length those delightful young people marry,
they bestow on each other the first fruits of their person, and are all the dearer therefore. Swarms of
strong and healthy children are the pledges of a union which nothing can change, and the fruit of the
virtue of their early years.
  If the age at which a man becomes conscious of his sex is deferred as much by the effects of
education as by the action of nature, it follows that this age may be hastened or retarded according to
the way in which the child is brought up; and if the body gains or loses strength in proportion as its
development is accelerated or retarded, it also follows that the more we try to retard it the stronger and
more vigorous will the young man be. I am still speaking of purely physical consequences; you will
soon see that this is not all.
  From these considerations I arrive at the solution of the question so often discussed--Should we
enlighten children at an early period as to the objects of their curiosity, or is it better to put them off
with decent shams? I think we need do neither. In the first place, this curiosity will not arise unless we
give it a chance. We must therefore take care not to give it an opportunity. In the next place, questions
one is not obliged to answer do not compel us to deceive those who ask them; it is better to bid thechild hold his tongue than to tell him a lie. He will not be greatly surprised at this treatment if you have
already accustomed him to it in matters of no importance. Lastly, if you decide to answer his questions,
let it be with the greatest plainness, without mystery or confusion, without a smile. It is much less
dangerous to satisfy a child's curiosity than to stimulate it.
  Let your answers be always grave, brief, decided, and without trace of hesitation. I need not add
that they should be true. We cannot teach children the danger of telling lies to men without realising, on
the man's part, the danger of telling lies to children. A single untruth on the part of the master will
destroy the results of his education.
  Complete ignorance with regard to certain matters is perhaps the best thing for children; but let
them learn very early what it is impossible to conceal from them permanently. Either their curiosity
must never be aroused, or it must be satisfied before the age when it becomes a source of danger. Your
conduct towards your pupil in this respect depends greatly on his individual circumstances, the society
in which he moves, the position in which he may find himself, etc. Nothing must be left to chance; and
if you are not sure of keeping him in ignorance of the difference between the sexes till he is sixteen,
take care you teach him before he is ten.
I do not like people to be too fastidious in speaking with children, nor should they go out of their
way to avoid calling a spade a spade; they are always found out if they do. Good manners in this
respect are always perfectly simple; but an imagination soiled by vice makes the ear over-sensitive and
compels us to be constantly refining our expressions. Plain words do not matter; it is lascivious ideas
which must be avoided.
  Although modesty is natural to man, it is not natural to children. Modesty only begins with the
knowledge of evil; and how should children without this knowledge of evil have the feeling which
results from it? To give them lessons in modesty and good conduct is to teach them that there are things
shameful and wicked, and to give them a secret wish to know what these things are. Sooner or later
they will find out, and the first spark which touches the imagination will certainly hasten the awakening
of the senses. Blushes are the sign of guilt; true innocence is ashamed of nothing.
  Children have not the same desires as men; but they are subject like them to the same disagreeable
needs which offend the senses, and by this means they may receive the same lessons in propriety.
Follow the mind of nature which has located in the same place the organs of secret pleasures and those
of disgusting needs; she teaches us the same precautions at different ages, sometimes by means of one
idea and sometimes by another; to the man through modesty, to the child through cleanliness.
I can only find one satisfactory way of preserving the child's innocence, to surround him by those
who respect and love him. Without this all our efforts to keep him in ignorance fail sooner or later; a
smile, a wink, a careless gesture tells him all we sought to hide; it is enough to teach him to perceive
that there is something we want to hide from him. The delicate phrases and expressions employed by
persons of politeness assume a knowledge which children ought not to possess, and they are quite out
of place with them, but when we truly respect the child's innocence we easily find in talking to him the
simple phrases which befit him. There is a certain directness of speech which is suitable and pleasing to
innocence;  this  is  the  right  tone  to  adopt  in  order  to  turn  the  child  from  dangerous  curiosity.  By
speaking simply to him about everything you do not let him suspect there is anything left unsaid. By
connecting coarse words with the unpleasant ideas which belong to them, you quench the first spark of
imagination; you do not forbid the child to say these words or to form these ideas; but without his
knowing it you make him unwilling to recall them. And how much confusion is spared to those who
speaking from the heart always say the right thing, and say it as they themselves have felt it!
  "Where  do  little  children  come  from?"  This  is  an  embarrassing  question,  which  occurs  very
naturally to children, one which foolishly or wisely answered may decide their health and their morals
for life. The quickest way for a mother to escape from it without deceiving her son is to tell him to hold
his tongue. That will serve its turn if he has always been accustomed to it in matters of no importance,
and if he does not suspect some mystery from this new way of speaking. But the mother rarely stops
there. "It is the married people's secret," she will say, "little boys should not be so curious." That is allvery well so far as the mother is concerned, but she may be sure that the little boy, piqued by her
scornful manner, will not rest till he has found out the married people's secret, which will very soon be
the case.
  Let me tell you a very different answer which I heard given to the same question, one which made
all the more impression on me, coming, as it did, from a woman, modest in speech and behaviour, but
one who was able on occasion, for the welfare of her child and for the cause of virtue, to cast aside the
false fear of blame and the silly jests of the foolish. Not long before the child had passed a small stone
which had torn the passage, but the trouble was over and forgotten. "Mamma," said the eager child,
"where do little children come from?" "My child," replied his mother without hesitation, "women pass
them with pains that sometimes cost their life." Let fools laugh and silly people be shocked; but let the
wise inquire if it is possible to find a wiser answer and one which would better serve its purpose.
  In the first place the thought of a need of nature with which the child is well acquainted turns his
thoughts from the idea of a mysterious process. The accompanying ideas of pain and death cover it with
a veil of sadness which deadens the imagination and suppresses curiosity; everything leads the mind to
the results, not the causes, of child-birth. This is the information to which this answer leads. If the
repugnance inspired by this answer should permit the child to inquire further, his thoughts are turned to
the  infirmities  of  human  nature,  disgusting  things,  images  of  pain.  What  chance  is  there  for  any
stimulation of desire in such a conversation? And yet you see there is no departure from truth, no need
to deceive the scholar in order to teach him.
  Your children read; in the course of their reading they meet with things they would never have
known without reading. Are they students, their imagination is stimulated and quickened in the silence
of the study. Do they move in the world of society, they hear a strange jargon, they see conduct which
makes  a  great  impression  on  them;  they  have  been  told  so  continually  that  they  are  men  that  in
everything men do in their presence they at once try to find how that will suit themselves; the conduct
of  others  must  indeed  serve  as  their  pattern  when  the  opinions  of  others  are  their  law.  Servants,
dependent on them, and therefore anxious to please them, flatter them at the expense of their morals;
giggling governesses say things to the four-year-old child which the most shameless woman would not
dare to say to them at fifteen. They soon forget what they said, but the child has not forgotten what he
heard.  Loose  conversation  prepares  the  way  for  licentious  conduct;  the  child  is  debauched  by  the
cunning lacquey, and the secret of the one guarantees the secret of the other.
  The child brought up in accordance with his age is alone. He knows no attachment but that of habit,
he loves his sister like his watch, and his friend like his dog. He is unconscious of his sex and his
species; men and women are alike unknown; he does not connect their sayings and doings with himself,
he neither sees nor hears, or he pays no heed to them; he is no more concerned with their talk than their
actions;  he  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  This  is  no  artificial  error  induced  by  our  method,  it  is  the
ignorance of nature. The time is at hand when that same nature will take care to enlighten her pupil, and
then only does she make him capable of profiting by the lessons without danger. This is our principle;
the details of its rules are outside my subject; and the means I suggest with regard to other matters will
still serve to illustrate this.
  Do you wish to establish law and order among the rising passions, prolong the period of their
development,  so  that  they  may  have  time  to  find  their  proper  place  as  they  arise.  Then  they  are
controlled by nature herself, not by man; your task is merely to leave it in her hands. If your pupil were
alone, you would have nothing to do; but everything about him enflames his imagination. He is swept
along on the torrent of conventional ideas; to rescue him you must urge him in the opposite direction.
Imagination must be curbed by feeling and reason must silence the voice of conventionality. Sensibility
is the source of all the passions, imagination determines their course. Every creature who is aware of
his relations must be disturbed by changes in these relations and when he imagines or fancies he
imagines others better adapted to his nature. It is the errors of the imagination which transmute into
vices the passions of finite beings, of angels even, if indeed they have passions; for they must needs
know the nature of every creature to realise what relations are best adapted to themselves.  This is the sum of human wisdom with regard to the use of the passions. First, to be conscious of
the true relations of man both in the species and the individual; second, to control all the affections in
accordance with these relations.
  But is man in a position to control his affections according to such and such relations? No doubt he
is, if he is able to fix his imagination on this or that object, or to form this or that habit. Moreover, we
are not so much concerned with what a man can do for himself, as with what we can do for our pupil
through our choice of the circumstances in which he shall be placed. To show the means by which he
may be kept in the path of nature is to show plainly enough how he might stray from that path.
  So long as his consciousness is confined to himself there is no morality in his actions; it is only
when it begins to extend beyond himself that he forms first the sentiments and then the ideas of good
and ill, which make him indeed a man, and an integral part of his species. To begin with we must
therefore confine our observations to this point.
  These observations are difficult to make, for we must reject the examples before our eyes, and seek
out those in which the successive developments follow the order of nature.
  A child sophisticated, polished, and civilised, who is only awaiting the power to put into practice
the precocious instruction he has received, is never mistaken with regard to the time when this power is
acquired. Far from awaiting it, he accelerates it; he stirs his blood to a premature ferment; he knows
what should be the object of his desires long before those desires are experienced. It is not nature which
stimulates him; it is he who forces the hand of nature; she has nothing to teach him when he becomes a
man; he was a man in thought long before he was a man in reality.
  The true course of nature is slower and more gradual. Little by little the blood grows warmer, the
faculties expand, the character is formed. The wise workman who directs the process is careful to
perfect every tool before he puts it to use; the first desires are preceded by a long period of unrest, they
are  deceived  by  a  prolonged  ignorance,  they  know  not  what  they  want.  The  blood  ferments  and
bubbles; overflowing vitality seeks to extend its sphere. The eye grows brighter and surveys others, we
begin to be interested in those about us, we begin to feel that we are not meant to live alone; thus the
heart is thrown open to human affection, and becomes capable of attachment.
  The first sentiment of which the well-trained youth is capable is not love but friendship. The first
work of his rising imagination is to make known to him his fellows; the species affects him before the
sex. Here is another advantage to be gained from prolonged innocence; you may take advantage of his
dawning  sensibility  to  sow  the  first  seeds  of  humanity  in  the  heart  of  the  young  adolescent.  This
advantage is all the greater because this is the only time in his life when such efforts may be really
successful.
I have always observed that young men, corrupted in early youth and addicted to women and
debauchery, are inhuman and cruel; their passionate temperament makes them impatient, vindictive,
and angry; their imagination fixed on one object only, refuses all others; mercy and pity are alike
unknown to them; they would have sacrificed father, mother, the whole world, to the least of their
pleasures. A young man, on the other hand, brought up in happy innocence, is drawn by the first
stirrings of nature to the tender and affectionate passions; his warm heart is touched by the sufferings of
his  fellow-creatures;  he  trembles  with  delight  when  he  meets  his  comrade,  his  arms  can  embrace
tenderly, his eyes can shed tears of pity; he learns to be sorry for offending others through his shame at
causing annoyance. If the eager warmth of his blood makes him quick, hasty, and passionate, a moment
later you see all his natural kindness of heart in the eagerness of his repentance; he weeps, he groans
over the wound he has given; he would atone for the blood he has shed with his own; his anger dies
away, his pride abases itself before the consciousness of his wrong-doing. Is he the injured party, in the
height of his fury an excuse, a word, disarms him; he forgives the wrongs of others as whole-heartedly
as he repairs his own. Adolescence is not the age of hatred or vengeance; it is the age of pity, mercy,
and generosity. Yes, I maintain, and I am not afraid of the testimony of experience, a youth of good
birth, one who has preserved his innocence up to the age of twenty, is at that age the best, the most
generous, the most loving, and the most lovable of men. You never heard such a thing; I can wellbelieve that philosophers such as you, brought up among the corruption of the public schools, are
unaware of it.
  Man's  weakness  makes  him  sociable.  Our  common  sufferings  draw  our  hearts  to  our  fellow-
creatures; we should have no duties to mankind if we were not men. Every affection is a sign of
insufficiency; if each of us had no need of others, we should hardly think of associating with them. So
our frail happiness has its roots in our weakness. A really happy man is a hermit; God only enjoys
absolute happiness; but which of us has any idea what that means? If any imperfect creature were self-
sufficing, what would he have to enjoy? To our thinking he would be wretched and alone. I do not
understand how one who has need of nothing could love anything, nor do I understand how he who
loves nothing can be happy.
  Hence it follows that we are drawn towards our fellow-creatures less by our feeling for their joys
than for their sorrows; for in them we discern more plainly a nature like our own, and a pledge of their
affection for us. If our common needs create a bond of interest our common sufferings create a bond of
affection. The sight of a happy man arouses in others envy rather than love, we are ready to accuse him
of usurping a right which is not his, of seeking happiness for himself alone, and our selfishness suffers
an additional pang in the thought that this man has no need of us. But who does not pity the wretch
when he beholds his sufferings? who would not deliver him from his woes if a wish could do it?
Imagination puts us more readily in the place of the miserable man than of the happy man; we feel that
the one condition touches us more nearly than the other. Pity is sweet, because, when we put ourselves
in the place of one who suffers, we are aware, nevertheless, of the pleasure of not suffering like him.
Envy is bitter, because the sight of a happy man, far from putting the envious in his place, inspires him
with regret that he is not there. The one seems to exempt us from the pains he suffers, the other seems
to deprive us of the good things he enjoys.
  Do you desire to stimulate and nourish the first stirrings of awakening sensibility in the heart of a
young man, do you desire to incline his disposition towards kindly deed and thought, do not cause the
seeds of pride, vanity, and envy to spring up in him through the misleading picture of the happiness of
mankind; do not show him to begin with the pomp of courts, the pride of palaces, the delights of
pageants; do not take him into society and into brilliant assemblies; do not show him the outside of
society till you have made him capable of estimating it at its true worth. To show him the world before
he is acquainted with men, is not to train him, but to corrupt him; not to teach, but to mislead.
  By nature men are neither kings, nobles, courtiers, nor millionaires. All men are born poor and
naked, all are liable to the sorrows of life, its disappointments, its ills, its needs, its suffering of every
kind; and all are condemned at length to die. This is what it really means to be a man, this is what no
mortal can escape. Begin then with the study of the essentials of humanity, that which really constitutes
mankind.
  At sixteen the adolescent knows what it is to suffer, for he himself has suffered; but he scarcely
realises that others suffer too; to see without feeling is not knowledge, and as I have said again and
again the child who does not picture the feelings of others knows no ills but his own; but when his
imagination is kindled by the first beginnings of growing sensibility, he begins to perceive himself in
his fellow-creatures, to be touched by their cries, to suffer in their sufferings. It is at this time that the
sorrowful picture of suffering humanity should stir his heart with the first touch of pity he has ever
known.
  If it is not easy to discover this opportunity in your scholars, whose fault is it? You taught them so
soon to play at feeling, you taught them so early its language, that speaking continually in the same
strain they turn your lessons against yourself, and give you no chance of discovering when they cease
to lie, and begin to feel what they say. But look at Emile; I have led him up to this age, and he has
neither felt nor pretended to feel. He has never said, "I love you dearly," till he knew what it was to
love; he has never been taught what expression to assume when he enters the room of his father, his
mother, or his sick tutor; he has not learnt the art of affecting a sorrow he does not feel. He has never
pretended to weep for the death of any one, for he does not know what it is to die. There is the sameinsensibility in his heart as in his manners. Indifferent, like every child, to every one but himself, he
takes no interest in any one; his only peculiarity is that he will not pretend to take such an interest; he is
less deceitful than others.
  Emile having thought little about creatures of feeling will be a long time before he knows what is
meant by pain and death. Groans and cries will begin to stir his compassion, he will turn away his eyes
at the sight of blood; the convulsions of a dying animal will cause him I know not what anguish before
he knows the source of these impulses. If he were still stupid and barbarous he would not feel them; if
he were more learned he would recognise their source; he has compared ideas too frequently already to
be insensible, but not enough to know what he feels.
  So pity is born, the first relative sentiment which touches the human heart according to the order of
nature. To become sensitive and pitiful the child must know that he has fellow-creatures who suffer as
he has suffered, who feel the pains he has felt, and others which he can form some idea of, being
capable of feeling them himself. Indeed, how can we let ourselves be stirred by pity unless we go
beyond ourselves, and identify ourselves with the suffering animal, by leaving, so to speak, our own
nature and taking his. We only suffer so far as we suppose he suffers; the suffering is not ours but his.
So no one becomes sensitive till his imagination is aroused and begins to carry him outside himself.
  What should we do to stimulate and nourish this growing sensibility, to direct it, and to follow its
natural bent? Should we not present to the young man objects on which the expansive force of his heart
may take effect, objects which dilate it, which extend it to other creatures, which take him outside
himself? should we not carefully remove everything that narrows, concentrates, and strengthens the
power of the human self? that is to say, in other words, we should arouse in him kindness, goodness,
pity, and beneficence, all the gentle and attractive passions which are naturally pleasing to man; those
passions prevent the growth of envy, covetousness, hatred, all the repulsive and cruel passions which
make our sensibility not merely a cipher but a minus quantity, passions which are the curse of those
who feel them.
I think I can sum up the whole of the preceding reflections in two or three maxims, definite,
straightforward, and easy to understand.
  FIRST MAXIM.--It is not in human nature to put ourselves in the place of those who are happier
than ourselves, but only in the place of those who can claim our pity.
  If you find exceptions to this rule, they are more apparent than real. Thus we do not put ourselves in
the place of the rich or great when we become fond of them; even when our affection is real, we only
appropriate  to  ourselves  a  part  of  their  welfare.  Sometimes  we  love  the  rich  man  in  the  midst  of
misfortunes; but so long as he prospers he has no real friend, except the man who is not deceived by
appearances, who pities rather than envies him in spite of his prosperity.
  The happiness belonging to certain states of life appeals to us; take, for instance, the life of a
shepherd in the country. The charm of seeing these good people so happy is not poisoned by envy; we
are genuinely interested in them. Why is this? Because we feel we can descend into this state of peace
and innocence and enjoy the same happiness; it is an alternative which only calls up pleasant thoughts,
so long as the wish is as good as the deed. It is always pleasant to examine our stores, to contemplate
our own wealth, even when we do not mean to spend it.
  From this we see that to incline a young man to humanity you must not make him admire the
brilliant lot of others; you must show him life in its sorrowful aspects and arouse his fears. Thus it
becomes clear that he must force his own way to happiness, without interfering with the happiness of
others.
  SECOND MAXIM.--We never pity another's woes unless we know we may suffer in like manner
ourselves.
  "Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco."--Virgil.
I know nothing go fine, so full of meaning, so touching, so true as these words.
  Why have kings no pity on their people? Because they never expect to be ordinary men. Why are
the rich so hard on the poor? Because they have no fear of becoming poor. Why do the nobles lookdown upon the people? Because a nobleman will never be one of the lower classes. Why are the Turks
generally kinder and more hospitable than ourselves? Because, under their wholly arbitrary system of
government, the rank and wealth of individuals are always uncertain and precarious, so that they do not
regard poverty and degradation as conditions with which they have no concern; to-morrow, any one
may himself be in the same position as those on whom he bestows alms to-day. This thought, which
occurs again and again in eastern romances, lends them a certain tenderness which is not to be found in
our pretentious and harsh morality.
  So do not train your pupil to look down from the height of his glory upon the sufferings of the
unfortunate, the labours of the wretched, and do not hope to teach him to pity them while he considers
them  as  far  removed  from  himself.  Make  him  thoroughly  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  fate  of  these
unhappy persons may one day be his own, that his feet are standing on the edge of the abyss, into which
he may be plunged at any moment by a thousand unexpected irresistible misfortunes. Teach him to put
no trust in birth, health, or riches; show him all the changes of fortune; find him examples--there are
only too many of them--in which men of higher rank than himself have sunk below the condition of
these wretched ones. Whether by their own fault or another's is for the present no concern of ours; does
he indeed know the meaning of the word fault? Never interfere with the order in which he acquires
knowledge, and teach him only through the means within his reach; it needs no great learning to
perceive that all the prudence of mankind cannot make certain whether he will be alive or dead in an
hour's time, whether before nightfall he will not be grinding his teeth in the pangs of nephritis, whether
a month hence he will be rich or poor, whether in a year's time he may not be rowing an Algerian galley
under the lash of the slave-driver. Above all do not teach him this, like his catechism, in cold blood; let
him see and feel the calamities which overtake men; surprise and startle his imagination with the perils
which lurk continually about a man's path; let him see the pitfalls all about him, and when he hears you
speak of them, let him cling more closely to you for fear lest he should fall. "You will make him timid
and cowardly," do you say? We shall see; let us make him kindly to begin with, that is what matters
most.
  THIRD MAXIM.--The pity we feel for others is proportionate, not to the amount of the evil, but to
the feelings we attribute to the sufferers.
  We only pity the wretched so far as we think they feel the need of pity. The bodily effect of our
sufferings is less than one would suppose; it is memory that prolongs the pain, imagination which
projects it into the future, and makes us really to be pitied. This is, I think, one of the reasons why we
are more callous to the sufferings of animals than of men, although a fellow-feeling ought to make us
identify  ourselves  equally  with  either.  We  scarcely  pity  the  cart-horse  in  his  shed,  for  we  do  not
suppose that while he is eating his hay he is thinking of the blows he has received and the labours in
store for him. Neither do we pity the sheep grazing in the field, though we know it is about to be
slaughtered, for we believe it knows nothing of the fate in store for it. In this way we also become
callous to the fate of our fellow-men, and the rich console themselves for the harm done by them to the
poor, by the assumption that the poor are too stupid to feel. I usually judge of the value any one puts on
the welfare of his fellow-creatures by what he seems to think of them. We naturally think lightly of the
happiness of those we despise. It need not surprise you that politicians speak so scornfully of the
people, and philosophers profess to think mankind so wicked.
  The people are mankind; those who do not belong to the people are so few in number that they are
not worth counting. Man is the same in every station of life; if that be so, those ranks to which most
men belong deserve most honour. All distinctions of rank fade away before the eyes of a thoughtful
person; he sees the same passions, the same feelings in the noble and the guttersnipe; there is merely a
slight difference in speech, and more or less artificiality of tone; and if there is indeed any essential
difference between them, the disadvantage is all on the side of those who are more sophisticated. The
people show themselves as they are, and they are not attractive; but the fashionable world is compelled
to adopt a disguise; we should be horrified if we saw it as it really is.
  There is, so our wiseacres tell us, the same amount of happiness and sorrow in every station. Thissaying is as deadly in its effects as it is incapable of proof; if all are equally happy why should I trouble
myself about any one? Let every one stay where he is; leave the slave to be ill-treated, the sick man to
suffer, and the wretched to perish; they have nothing to gain by any change in their condition. You
enumerate  the  sorrows  of  the  rich,  and  show  the  vanity  of  his  empty  pleasures;  what  barefaced
sophistry! The rich man's sufferings do not come from his position, but from himself alone when he
abuses it. He is not to be pitied were he indeed more miserable than the poor, for his ills are of his own
making, and he could be happy if he chose. But the sufferings of the poor man come from external
things, from the hardships fate has imposed upon him. No amount of habit can accustom him to the
bodily ills of fatigue, exhaustion, and hunger. Neither head nor heart can serve to free him from the
sufferings of his condition. How is Epictetus the better for knowing beforehand that his master will
break his leg for him; does he do it any the less? He has to endure not only the pain itself but the pains
of anticipation. If the people were as wise as we assume them to be stupid, how could they be other
than they are? Observe persons of this class; you will see that, with a different way of speaking, they
have as much intelligence and more common-sense than yourself. Have respect then for your species;
remember that it consists essentially of the people, that if all the kings and all the philosophers were
removed they would scarcely be missed, and things would go on none the worse. In a word, teach your
pupil to love all men, even those who fail to appreciate him; act in such way that he is not a member of
any class, but takes his place in all alike: speak in his hearing of the human race with tenderness, and
even with pity, but never with scorn. You are a man; do not dishonour mankind.
  It is by these ways and others like them--how different from the beaten paths--that we must reach
the heart of the young adolescent And stimulate in him the first impulses of nature; we must develop
that heart and open its doors to his fellow-creatures, and there must be as little self-interest as possible
mixed up with these impulses; above all, no vanity, no emulation, no boasting, none of those sentiments
which  force  us  to  compare  ourselves  with  others;  for  such  comparisons  are  never  made  without
arousing some measure of hatred against those who dispute our claim to the first place, were it only in
our own estimation. Then we must be either blind or angry, a bad man or a fool; let us try to avoid this
dilemma. Sooner or later these dangerous passions will appear, so you tell me, in spite of us. I do not
deny it. There is a time and place for everything; I am only saying that we should not help to arouse
these passions.
  This is the spirit of the method to be laid down. In this case examples and illustrations are useless,
for here we find the beginning of the countless differences of character, and every example I gave
would possibly apply to only one case in a hundred thousand. It is at this age that the clever teacher
begins his real business, as a student and a philosopher who knows how to probe the heart and strives to
guide it aright. While the young man has not learnt to pretend, while he does not even know the
meaning of pretence, you see by his look, his manner, his gestures, the impression he has received from
any object presented to him; you read in his countenance every impulse of his heart; by watching his
expression you learn to protect his impulses and actually to control them.
  It has been commonly observed that blood, wounds, cries and groans, the preparations for painful
operations,  and  everything  which  directs  the  senses  towards  things  connected  with  suffering,  are
usually the first to make an impression on all men. The idea of destruction, a more complex matter,
does not have so great an effect; the thought of death affects us later and less forcibly, for no one knows
from his own experience what it is to die; you must have seen corpses to feel the agonies of the dying.
But when once this idea is established in the mind, there is no spectacle more dreadful in our eyes,
whether because of the idea of complete destruction which it arouses through our senses, or because we
know that this moment must come for each one of us and we feel ourselves all the more keenly affected
by a situation from which we know there is no escape.
  These various impressions differ in manner and in degree, according to the individual character of
each one of us and his former habits, but they are universal and no one is altogether free from them.
There are other impressions less universal and of a later growth, impressions most suited to sensitive
souls, such impressions as we receive from moral suffering, inward grief, the sufferings of the mind,depression, and sadness. There are men who can be touched by nothing but groans and tears; the
suppressed sobs of a heart labouring under sorrow would never win a sigh; the sight of a downcast
visage, a pale and gloomy countenance, eyes which can weep no longer, would never draw a tear from
them. The sufferings of the mind are as nothing to them; they weigh them, their own mind feels
nothing; expect nothing from such persons but inflexible severity, harshness, cruelty. They may be just
and upright, but not merciful, generous, or pitiful. They may, I say, be just, if a man can indeed be just
without being merciful.
  But do not be in a hurry to judge young people by this standard, more especially those who have
been educated rightly, who have no idea of the moral sufferings they have never had to endure; for
once again they can only pity the ills they know, and this apparent insensibility is soon transformed into
pity when they begin to feel that there are in human life a thousand ills of which they know nothing. As
for Emile, if in childhood he was distinguished by simplicity and good sense, in his youth he will show
a warm and tender heart; for the reality of the feelings depends to a great extent on the accuracy of the
ideas.
  But why call him hither? More than one reader will reproach me no doubt for departing from my
first intention and forgetting the lasting happiness I promised my pupil. The sorrowful, the dying, such
sights of pain and woe, what happiness, what delight is this for a young heart on the threshold of life?
His gloomy tutor, who proposed to give him such a pleasant education, only introduces him to life that
he may suffer. This is what they will say, but what care I? I promised to make him happy, not to make
him seem happy. Am I to blame if, deceived as usual by the outward appearances, you take them for
the reality?
  Let us take two young men at the close of their early education, and let them enter the world by
opposite doors. The one mounts at once to Olympus, and moves in the smartest society; he is taken to
court, he is presented in the houses of the great, of the rich, of the pretty women. I assume that he is
everywhere made much of, and I do not regard too closely the effect of this reception on his reason; I
assume it can stand it. Pleasures fly before him, every day provides him with fresh amusements; he
flings himself into everything with an eagerness which carries you away. You find him busy, eager, and
curious; his first wonder makes a great impression on you; you think him happy; but behold the state of
his heart; you think he is rejoicing, I think he suffers.
  What does he see when first he opens his eyes? all sorts of so-called pleasures, hitherto unknown.
Most of these pleasures are only for a moment within his reach, and seem to show themselves only to
inspire regret for their loss. Does he wander through a palace; you see by his uneasy curiosity that he is
asking why his father's house is not like it. Every question shows you that he is comparing himself all
the time with the owner of this grand place. And all the mortification arising from this comparison at
once revolts and stimulates his vanity. If he meets a young man better dressed than himself, I find him
secretly complaining of his parents' meanness. If he is better dressed than another, he suffers because
the latter is his superior in birth or in intellect, and all his gold lace is put to shame by a plain cloth coat.
Does he shine unrivalled in some assembly, does he stand on tiptoe that they may see him better, who
is there who does not secretly desire to humble the pride and vanity of the young fop? Everybody is in
league  against  him;  the  disquieting  glances  of  a  solemn  man,  the  biting  phrases  of  some  satirical
person, do not fail to reach him, and if it were only one man who despised him, the scorn of that one
would poison in a moment the applause of the rest.
  Let us grant him everything, let us not grudge him charm and worth; let him be well-made, witty,
and attractive; the women will run after him; but by pursuing him before he is in love with them, they
will inspire rage rather than love; he will have successes, but neither rapture nor passion to enjoy them.
As his desires are always anticipated; they never have time to spring up among his pleasures, so he only
feels the tedium of restraint. Even before he knows it he is disgusted and satiated with the sex formed to
be the delight of his own; if he continues its pursuit it is only through vanity, and even should he really
be devoted to women, he will not be the only brilliant, the only attractive young man, nor will he
always find his mistresses prodigies of fidelity.I say nothing of the vexation, the deceit, the crimes, and the remorse of all kinds, inseparable from
such a life. We know that experience of the world disgusts us with it; I am speaking only of the
drawbacks belonging to youthful illusions.
  Hitherto the young man has lived in the bosom of his family and his friends, and has been the sole
object of their care; what a change to enter all at once into a region where he counts for so little; to find
himself plunged into another sphere, he who has been so long the centre of his own. What insults, what
humiliation, must he endure, before he loses among strangers the ideas of his own importance which
have been formed and nourished among his own people! As a child everything gave way to him,
everybody flocked to him; as a young man he must give place to every one, or if he preserves ever so
little of his former airs, what harsh lessons will bring him to himself! Accustomed to get everything he
wants without any difficulty, his wants are many, and he feels continual privations. He is tempted by
everything that flatters him; what others have, he must have too; he covets everything, he envies every
one, he would always be master. He is devoured by vanity, his young heart is enflamed by unbridled
passions, jealousy and hatred among the rest; all these violent passions burst out at once; their sting
rankles in him in the busy world, they return with him at night, he comes back dissatisfied with himself,
with others; he falls asleep among a thousand foolish schemes disturbed by a thousand fancies, and his
pride shows him even in his dreams those fancied pleasures; he is tormented by a desire which will
never be satisfied. So much for your pupil; let us turn to mine.
  If the first thing to make an impression on him is something sorrowful his first return to himself is a
feeling of pleasure. When he sees how many ills he has escaped he thinks he is happier than he fancied.
He shares the suffering of his fellow-creatures, but he shares it of his own free will and finds pleasure
in it. He enjoys at once the pity he feels for their woes and the joy of being exempt from them; he feels
in himself that state of vigour which projects us beyond ourselves, and bids us carry elsewhere the
superfluous activity of our well-being. To pity another's woes we must indeed know them, but we need
not feel them. When we have suffered, when we are in fear of suffering, we pity those who suffer; but
when we suffer ourselves, we pity none but ourselves. But if all of us, being subject ourselves to the ills
of life, only bestow upon others the sensibility we do not actually require for ourselves, it follows that
pity must be a very pleasant feeling, since it speaks on our behalf; and, on the other hand, a hard-
hearted man is always unhappy, since the state of his heart leaves him no superfluous sensibility to
bestow on the sufferings of others.
  We are too apt to judge of happiness by appearances; we suppose it is to be found in the most
unlikely places, we seek for it where it cannot possibly be; mirth is a very doubtful indication of its
presence. A merry man is often a wretch who is trying to deceive others and distract himself. The men
who are jovial, friendly, and contented at their club are almost always gloomy grumblers at home, and
their servants have to pay for the amusement they give among their friends. True contentment is neither
merry nor noisy; we are jealous of so sweet a sentiment, when we enjoy it we think about it, we delight
in it for fear it should escape us. A really happy man says little and laughs little; he hugs his happiness,
so to speak, to his heart. Noisy games, violent delight, conceal the disappointment of satiety. But
melancholy is the friend of pleasure; tears and pity attend our sweetest enjoyment, and great joys call
for tears rather than laughter.
  If at first the number and variety of our amusements seem to contribute to our happiness, if at first
the even tenor of a quiet life seems tedious, when we look at it more closely we discover that the
pleasantest habit of mind consists in a moderate enjoyment which leaves little scope for desire and
aversion. The unrest of passion causes curiosity and fickleness; the emptiness of noisy pleasures causes
weariness. We never weary of our state when we know none more delightful. Savages suffer less than
other  men  from  curiosity  and  from  tedium;  everything  is  the  same  to  them--themselves,  not  their
possessions--and they are never weary.
  The man of the world almost always wears a mask. He is scarcely ever himself and is almost a
stranger to himself; he is ill at ease when he is forced into his own company. Not what he is, but what
he seems, is all he cares for.I cannot help picturing in the countenance of the young man I have just spoken of an indefinable
but unpleasant impertinence, smoothness, and affectation, which is repulsive to a plain man, and in the
countenance of my own pupil a simple and interesting expression which indicates the real contentment
and the calm of his mind; an expression which inspires respect and confidence, and seems only to await
the establishment of friendly relations to bestow his own confidence in return. It is thought that the
expression is merely the development of certain features designed by nature. For my own part I think
that over and above this development a man's face is shaped, all unconsciously, by the frequent and
habitual influence of certain affections of the heart. These affections are shown on the face, there is
nothing more certain; and when they become habitual, they must surely leave lasting traces. This is
why I think the expression shows the character, and that we can sometimes read one another without
seeking mysterious explanations in powers we do not possess.
  A child has only two distinct feelings, joy and sorrow; he laughs or he cries; he knows no middle
course, and he is constantly passing from one extreme to the other. On account of these perpetual
changes there is no lasting impression on the face, and no expression; but when the child is older and
more sensitive, his feelings are keener or more permanent, and these deeper impressions leave traces
more difficult to erase; and the habitual state of the feelings has an effect on the features which in
course of time becomes ineffaceable. Still it is not uncommon to meet with men whose expression
varies with their age. I have met with several, and I have always found that those whom I could observe
and follow had also changed their habitual temper. This one observation thoroughly confirmed would
seem to me decisive, and it is not out of place in a treatise on education, where it is a matter of
importance, that we should learn to judge the feelings of the heart by external signs.
I do not know whether my young man will be any the less amiable for not having learnt to copy
conventional manners and to feign sentiments which are not his own; that does not concern me at
present, I only know he will be more affectionate; and I find it difficult to believe that he, who cares for
nobody but himself, can so far disguise his true feelings as to please as readily as he who finds fresh
happiness for himself in his affection for others. But with regard to this feeling of happiness, I think I
have  said  enough  already  for  the  guidance  of  any  sensible  reader,  and  to  show  that  I  have  not
contradicted myself.
I  return  to  my  system,  and  I  say,  when  the  critical  age  approaches,  present  to  young  people
spectacles which restrain rather than excite them; put off their dawning imagination with objects which,
far from inflaming their senses, put a check to their activity. Remove them from great cities, where the
flaunting attire and the boldness of the women hasten and anticipate the teaching of nature, where
everything presents to their view pleasures of which they should know nothing till they are of an age to
choose for themselves. Bring them back to their early home, where rural simplicity allows the passions
of their age to develop more slowly; or if their taste for the arts keeps them in town, guard them by
means of this very taste from a dangerous idleness. Choose carefully their company, their occupations,
and their pleasures; show them nothing but modest and pathetic pictures which are touching but not
seductive, and nourish their sensibility without stimulating their senses. Remember also, that the danger
of excess is not confined to any one place, and that immoderate passions always do irreparable damage.
You need not make your pupil a sick-nurse or a Brother of Pity; you need not distress him by the
perpetual sight of pain and suffering; you need not take him from one hospital to another, from the
gallows to the prison. He must be softened, not hardened, by the sight of human misery. When we have
seen a sight it ceases to impress us, use is second nature, what is always before our eyes no longer
appeals to the imagination, and it is only through the imagination that we can feel the sorrows of others;
this is why priests and doctors who are always beholding death and suffering become so hardened. Let
your pupil therefore know something of the lot of man and the woes of his fellow-creatures, but let him
not see them too often. A single thing, carefully selected and shown at the right time, will fill him with
pity and set him thinking for a month. His opinion about anything depends not so much on what he
sees, but on how it reacts on himself; and his lasting impression of any object depends less on the
object itself than on the point of view from which he regards it. Thus by a sparing use of examples,lessons, and pictures, you may blunt the sting of sense and delay nature while following her own lead.
  As he acquires knowledge, choose what ideas he shall attach to it; as his passions awake, select
scenes calculated to repress them. A veteran, as distinguished for his character as for his courage, once
told me that in early youth his father, a sensible man but extremely pious, observed that through his
growing sensibility he was attracted by women, and spared no pains to restrain him; but at last when, in
spite of all his care, his son was about to escape from his control, he decided to take him to a hospital,
and, without telling him what to expect, he introduced him into a room where a number of wretched
creatures were expiating, under a terrible treatment, the vices which had brought them into this plight.
This hideous and revolting spectacle sickened the young man. "Miserable libertine," said his father
vehemently, "begone; follow your vile tastes; you will soon be only too glad to be admitted to this
ward, and a victim to the most shameful sufferings, you will compel your father to thank God when you
are dead."
  These few words, together with the striking spectacle he beheld, made an impression on the young
man which could never be effaced. Compelled by his profession to pass his youth in garrison, he
preferred to face all the jests of his comrades rather than to share their evil ways. "I have been a man,"
he said to me, "I have had my weaknesses, but even to the present day the sight of a harlot inspires me
with  horror."  Say  little  to  your  pupil,  but  choose  time,  place,  and  people;  then  rely  on  concrete
examples for your teaching, and be sure it will take effect.
  The way childhood is spent is no great matter; the evil which may find its way is not irremediable,
and the good which may spring up might come later. But it is not so in those early years when a youth
really begins to live. This time is never long enough for what there is to be done, and its importance
demands unceasing attention; this is why I lay so much stress on the art of prolonging it. One of the
best rules of good farming is to keep things back as much as possible. Let your progress also be slow
and sure; prevent the youth from becoming a man all at once. While the body is growing the spirits
destined  to  give  vigour  to  the  blood  and  strength  to  the  muscles  are  in  process  of  formation  and
elaboration. If you turn them into another channel, and permit that strength which should have gone to
the perfecting of one person to go to the making of another, both remain in a state of weakness and the
work of nature is unfinished. The workings of the mind, in their turn, are affected by this change, and
the mind, as sickly as the body, functions languidly and feebly. Length and strength of limb are not the
same thing as courage or genius, and I grant that strength of mind does not always accompany strength
of  body,  when  the  means  of  connection  between  the  two  are  otherwise  faulty.  But  however  well
planned they may be, they will always work feebly if for motive power they depend upon an exhausted,
impoverished supply of blood, deprived of the substance which gives strength and elasticity to all the
springs of the machinery. There is generally more vigour of mind to be found among men whose early
years have been preserved from precocious vice, than among those whose evil living has begun at the
earliest opportunity; and this is no doubt the reason why nations whose morals are pure are generally
superior in sense and courage to those whose morals are bad. The latter shine only through I know not
what small and trifling qualities, which they call wit, sagacity, cunning; but those great and noble
features of goodness and reason, by which a man is distinguished and honoured through good deeds,
virtues, really useful efforts, are scarcely to be found except among the nations whose morals are pure.
  Teachers complain that the energy of this age makes their pupils unruly; I see that it is so, but are
not they themselves to blame? When once they have let this energy flow through the channel of the
senses, do they not know that they cannot change its course? Will the long and dreary sermons of the
pedant efface from the mind of his scholar the thoughts of pleasure when once they have found an
entrance; will they banish from his heart the desires by which it is tormented; will they chill the heat of
a passion whose meaning the scholar realises? Will not the pupil be roused to anger by the obstacles
opposed to the only kind of happiness of which he has any notion? And in the harsh law imposed upon
him before he can understand it, what will he see but the caprice and hatred of a man who is trying to
torment him? Is it strange that he rebels and hates you too?
I know very well that if one is easy-going one may be tolerated, and one may keep up a show ofauthority. But I fail to see the use of an authority over the pupil which is only maintained by fomenting
the vices it ought to repress; it is like attempting to soothe a fiery steed by making it leap over a
precipice.
  Far from being a hindrance to education, this enthusiasm of adolescence is its crown and coping-
stone; this it is that gives you a hold on the youth's heart when he is no longer weaker than you. His
first affections are the reins by which you control his movements; he was free, and now I behold him in
your power. So long as he loved nothing, he was independent of everything but himself and his own
necessities; as soon as he loves, he is dependent on his affections. Thus the first ties which unite him to
his species are already formed. When you direct his increasing sensibility in this direction, do not
expect that it will at once include all men, and that the word "mankind" will have any meaning for him.
Not so; this sensibility will at first confine itself to those like himself, and these will not be strangers to
him, but those he knows, those whom habit has made dear to him or necessary to him, those who are
evidently thinking and feeling as he does, those whom he perceives to be exposed to the pains he has
endured, those who enjoy the pleasures he has enjoyed; in a word, those who are so like himself that he
is the more disposed to self-love. It is only after long training, after much consideration as to his own
feelings and the feelings he observes in others, that he will be able to generalise his individual notions
under the abstract idea of humanity, and add to his individual affections those which may identify him
with the race.
  When he becomes capable of affection, he becomes aware of the affection of others, [Footnote:
Affection may be unrequited; not so friendship. Friendship is a bargain, a contract like any other;
though a bargain more sacred than the rest. The word "friend" has no other correlation. Any man who is
not the friend of his friend is undoubtedly a rascal; for one can only obtain friendship by giving it, or
pretending to give it.] and he is on the lookout for the signs of that affection. Do you not see how you
will acquire a fresh hold on him? What bands have you bound about his heart while he was yet unaware
of them! What will he feel, when he beholds himself and sees what you have done for him; when he
can compare himself with other youths, and other tutors with you! I say, "When he sees it," but beware
lest you tell him of it; if you tell him he will not perceive it. If you claim his obedience in return for the
care bestowed upon him, he will think you have over-reached him; he will see that while you profess to
have cared for him without reward, you meant to saddle him with a debt and to bind him to a bargain
which he never made. In vain you will add that what you demand is for his own good; you demand it,
and you demand it in virtue of what you have done without his consent. When a man down on his luck
accepts the shilling which the sergeant professes to give him, and finds he has enlisted without knowing
what he was about, you protest against the injustice; is it not still more unjust to demand from your
pupil the price of care which he has not even accepted!
  Ingratitude would be rarer if kindness were less often the investment of a usurer. We love those
who have done us a kindness; what a natural feeling! Ingratitude is not to be found in the heart of man,
but self-interest is there; those who are ungrateful for benefits received are fewer than those who do a
kindness for their own ends. If you sell me your gifts, I will haggle over the price; but if you pretend to
give, in order to sell later on at your own price, you are guilty of fraud; it is the free gift which is
beyond price. The heart is a law to itself; if you try to bind it, you lose it; give it its liberty, and you
make it your own.
  When the fisherman baits his line, the fish come round him without suspicion; but when they are
caught on the hook concealed in the bait, they feel the line tighten and they try to escape. Is the
fisherman  a  benefactor?  Is  the  fish  ungrateful?  Do  we  find  a  man  forgotten  by  his  benefactor,
unmindful of that benefactor? On the contrary, he delights to speak of him, he cannot think of him
without emotion; if he gets a chance of showing him, by some unexpected service, that he remembers
what he did for him, how delighted he is to satisfy his gratitude; what a pleasure it is to earn the
gratitude of his benefactor. How delightful to say, "It is my turn now." This is indeed the teaching of
nature; a good deed never caused ingratitude.
  If therefore gratitude is a natural feeling, and you do not destroy its effects by your blunders, besure your pupil, as he begins to understand the value of your care for him, will be grateful for it,
provided you have not put a price upon it; and this will give you an authority over his heart which
nothing can overthrow. But beware of losing this advantage before it is really yours, beware of insisting
on your own importance. Boast of your services and they become intolerable; forget them and they will
not be forgotten. Until the time comes to treat him as a man let there be no question of his duty to you,
but his duty to himself. Let him have his freedom if you would make him docile; hide yourself so that
he may seek you; raise his heart to the noble sentiment of gratitude by only speaking of his own
interest. Until he was able to understand I would not have him told that what was done was for his
good; he would only have understood such words to mean that you were dependent on him and he
would merely have made you his servant. But now that he is beginning to feel what love is, he also
knows what a tender affection may bind a man to what he loves; and in the zeal which keeps you busy
on his account, he now sees not the bonds of a slave, but the affection of a friend. Now there is nothing
which carries so much weight with the human heart as the voice of friendship recognised as such, for
we know that it never speaks but for our good. We may think our friend is mistaken, but we never
believe he is deceiving us. We may reject his advice now and then, but we never scorn it.
  We have reached the moral order at last; we have just taken the second step towards manhood. If
this were the place for it, I would try to show how the first impulses of the heart give rise to the first
stirrings of conscience, and how from the feelings of love and hatred spring the first notions of good
and evil. I would show that justice and kindness are no mere abstract terms, no mere moral conceptions
framed by the understanding, but true affections of the heart enlightened by reason, the natural outcome
of  our  primitive  affections;  that  by  reason  alone,  unaided  by  conscience,  we  cannot  establish  any
natural law, and that all natural right is a vain dream if it does not rest upon some instinctive need of the
human heart. [Footnote: The precept "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you" has no true
foundation but that of conscience and feeling; for what valid reason is there why I, being myself,
should do what I would do if I were some one else, especially when I am morally certain I never shall
find myself in exactly the same case; and who will answer for it that if I faithfully follow out this
maxim, I shall get others to follow it with regard to me? The wicked takes advantage both of the
uprightness of the just and of his own injustice; he will gladly have everybody just but himself. This
bargain, whatever you may say, is not greatly to the advantage of the just. But if the enthusiasm of an
overflowing heart identifies me with my fellow-creature, if I feel, so to speak, that I will not let him
suffer lest I should suffer too, I care for him because I care for myself, and the reason of the precept is
found in nature herself, which inspires me with the desire for my own welfare wherever I may be. From
this I conclude that it is false to say that the precepts of natural law are based on reason only; they have
a firmer and more solid foundation. The love of others springing from self-love, is the source of human
justice. The whole of morality is summed up in the gospel in this summary of the law.] But I do not
think it is my business at present to prepare treatises on metaphysics and morals, nor courses of study of
any kind whatsoever; it is enough if I indicate the order and development of our feelings and our
knowledge in relation to our growth. Others will perhaps work out what I have here merely indicated.
  Hitherto  my  Emile  has  thought  only  of  himself,  so  his  first  glance  at  his  equals  leads  him  to
compare himself with them; and the first feeling excited by this comparison is the desire to be first. It is
here that self-love is transformed into selfishness, and this is the starting point of all the passions which
spring from selfishness. But to determine whether the passions by which his life will be governed shall
be humane and gentle or harsh and cruel, whether they shall be the passions of benevolence and pity or
those of envy and covetousness, we must know what he believes his place among men to be, and what
sort of obstacles he expects to have to overcome in order to attain to the position he seeks.
  To guide him in this inquiry, after we have shown him men by means of the accidents common to
the species, we must now show him them by means of their differences. This is the time for estimating
inequality natural and civil, and for the scheme of the whole social order.
  Society must be studied in the individual and the individual in society; those who desire to treat
politics and morals apart from one another will never understand either. By confining ourselves at firstto the primitive relations, we see how men should be influenced by them and what passions should
spring from them; we see that it is in proportion to the development of these passions that a man's
relations with others expand or contract. It is not so much strength of arm as moderation of spirit which
makes men free and independent. The man whose wants are few is dependent on but few people, but
those who constantly confound our vain desires with our bodily needs, those who have made these
needs the basis of human society, are continually mistaking effects for causes, and they have only
confused themselves by their own reasoning.
  Since it is impossible in the state of nature that the difference between man and man should be great
enough  to  make  one  dependent  on  another,  there  is  in  fact  in  this  state  of  nature  an  actual  and
indestructible equality. In the civil state there is a vain and chimerical equality of right; the means
intended for its maintenance, themselves serve to destroy it; and the power of the community, added to
the power of the strongest for the oppression of the weak, disturbs the sort of equilibrium which nature
has established between them. [Footnote: The universal spirit of the laws of every country is always to
take the part of the strong against the weak, and the part of him who has against him who has not; this
defect is inevitable, and there is no exception to it.] From this first contradiction spring all the other
contradictions between the real and the apparent, which are to be found in the civil order. The many
will always be sacrificed to the few, the common weal to private interest; those specious words--justice
and subordination--will always serve as the tools of violence and the weapons of injustice; hence it
follows that the higher classes which claim to be useful to the rest are really only seeking their own
welfare at the expense of others; from this we may judge how much consideration is due to them
according to right and justice. It remains to be seen if the rank to which they have attained is more
favourable to their own happiness to know what opinion each one of us should form with regard to his
own lot. This is the study with which we are now concerned; but to do it thoroughly we must begin
with a knowledge of the human heart.
  If it were only a question of showing young people man in his mask, there would be no need to
point him out, and he would always be before their eyes; but since the mask is not the man, and since
they must not be led away by its specious appearance, when you paint men for your scholar, paint them
as they are, not that he may hate them, but that he may pity them and have no wish to be like them. In
my opinion that is the most reasonable view a man can hold with regard to his fellow-men.
  With this object in view we must take the opposite way from that hitherto followed, and instruct the
youth rather through the experience of others than through his own. If men deceive him he will hate
them; but, if, while they treat him with respect, he sees them deceiving each other, he will pity them.
"The spectacle of the world," said Pythagoras, "is like the Olympic games; some are buying and selling
and think only of their gains; others take an active part and strive for glory; others, and these not the
worst, are content to be lookers-on."
I would have you so choose the company of a youth that he should think well of those among
whom he lives, and I would have you so teach him to know the world that he should think ill of all that
takes place in it. Let him know that man is by nature good, let him feel it, let him judge his neighbour
by himself; but let him see how men are depraved and perverted by society; let him find the source of
all their vices in their preconceived opinions; let him be disposed to respect the individual, but to
despise the multitude; let him see that all men wear almost the same mask, but let him also know that
some faces are fairer than the mask that conceals them.
  It must be admitted that this method has its drawbacks, and it is not easy to carry it out; for if he
becomes too soon engrossed in watching other people, if you train him to mark too closely the actions
of others, you will make him spiteful and satirical, quick and decided in his judgments of others; he will
find a hateful pleasure in seeking bad motives, and will fail to see the good even in that which is really
good. He will, at least, get used to the sight of vice, he will behold the wicked without horror, just as we
get used to seeing the wretched without pity. Soon the perversity of mankind will be not so much a
warning as an excuse; he will say, "Man is made so," and he will have no wish to be different from the
rest.  But if you wish to teach him theoretically to make him acquainted, not only with the heart of man,
but also with the application of the external causes which turn our inclinations into vices; when you
thus transport him all at once from the objects of sense to the objects of reason, you employ a system of
metaphysics which he is not in a position to understand; you fall back into the error, so carefully
avoided  hitherto,  of  giving  him  lessons  which  are  like  lessons,  of  substituting  in  his  mind  the
experience and the authority of the master for his own experience and the development of his own
reason.
  To remove these two obstacles at once, and to bring the human heart within his reach without risk
of spoiling his own, I would show him men from afar, in other times or in other places, so that he may
behold the scene but cannot take part in it. This is the time for history; with its help he will read the
hearts of men without any lessons in philosophy; with its help he will view them as a mere spectator,
dispassionate and without prejudice; he will view them as their judge, not as their accomplice or their
accuser.
  To know men you must behold their actions. In society we hear them talk; they show their words
and hide their deeds; but in history the veil is drawn aside, and they are judged by their deeds. Their
sayings even help us to understand them; for comparing what they say and what they do, we see not
only what they are but what they would appear; the more they disguise themselves the more thoroughly
they stand revealed.
  Unluckily this study has its dangers, its drawbacks of several kinds. It is difficult to adopt a point of
view which will enable one to judge one's fellow-creatures fairly. It is one of the chief defects of
history to paint men's evil deeds rather than their good ones; it is revolutions and catastrophes that
make history interesting; so long as a nation grows and prospers quietly in the tranquillity of a peaceful
government, history says nothing; she only begins to speak of nations when, no longer able to be self-
sufficing, they interfere with their neighbours' business, or allow their neighbours to interfere with their
own; history only makes them famous when they are on the downward path; all our histories begin
where they ought to end. We have very accurate accounts of declining nations; what we lack is the
history of those nations which are multiplying; they are so happy and so good that history has nothing
to tell us of them; and we see indeed in our own times that the most successful governments are least
talked of. We only hear what is bad; the good is scarcely mentioned. Only the wicked become famous,
the good are forgotten or laughed to scorn, and thus history, like philosophy, is for ever slandering
mankind.
  Moreover, it is inevitable that the facts described in history should not give an exact picture of what
really happened; they are transformed in the brain of the historian, they are moulded by his interests
and coloured by his prejudices. Who can place the reader precisely in a position to see the event as it
really happened? Ignorance or partiality disguises everything. What a different impression may be
given  merely  by  expanding  or  contracting  the  circumstances  of  the  case  without  altering  a  single
historical incident. The same object may be seen from several points of view, and it will hardly seem
the same thing, yet there has been no change except in the eye that beholds it. Do you indeed do honour
to truth when what you tell me is a genuine fact, but you make it appear something quite different? A
tree more or less, a rock to the right or to the left, a cloud of dust raised by the wind, how often have
these decided the result of a battle without any one knowing it? Does that prevent history from telling
you the cause of defeat or victory with as much assurance as if she had been on the spot? But what are
the facts to me, while I am ignorant of their causes, and what lessons can I draw from an event, whose
true cause is unknown to me? The historian indeed gives me a reason, but he invents it; and criticism
itself, of which we hear so much, is only the art of guessing, the art of choosing from among several
lies, the lie that is most like truth.
  Have you ever read Cleopatra or Cassandra or any books of the kind? The author selects some well-
known event, he then adapts it to his purpose, adorns it with details of his own invention, with people
who never existed, with imaginary portraits; thus he piles fiction on fiction to lend a charm to his story.
I see little difference between such romances and your histories, unless it is that the novelist drawsmore on his own imagination, while the historian slavishly copies what another has imagined; I will
also admit, if you please, that the novelist has some moral purpose good or bad, about which the
historian scarcely concerns himself.
  You will tell me that accuracy in history is of less interest than a true picture of men and manners;
provided the human heart is truly portrayed, it matters little that events should be accurately recorded;
for after all you say, what does it matter to us what happened two thousand years ago? You are right if
the portraits are indeed truly given according to nature; but if the model is to be found for the most part
in  the  historian's  imagination,  are  you  not  falling  into  the  very  error  you  intended  to  avoid,  and
surrendering to the authority of the historian what you would not yield to the authority of the teacher? If
my pupil is merely to see fancy pictures, I would rather draw them myself; they will, at least, be better
suited to him.
  The worst historians for a youth are those who give their opinions. Facts! Facts! and let him decide
for himself; this is how he will learn to know mankind. If he is always directed by the opinion of the
author, he is only seeing through the eyes of another person, and when those ayes are no longer at his
disposal he can see nothing.
I leave modern history on one side, not only because it has no character and all our people are alike,
but because our historians, wholly taken up with effect, think of nothing but highly coloured portraits,
which often represent nothing. [Footnote: Take, for instance, Guicciardini, Streda, Solis, Machiavelli,
and sometimes even De Thou himself. Vertot is almost the only one who knows how to describe
without  giving  fancy  portraits.]  The  old  historians  generally  give  fewer  portraits  and  bring  more
intelligence and common-sense to their judgments; but even among them there is plenty of scope for
choice, and you must not begin with the wisest but with the simplest. I would not put Polybius or
Sallust into the hands of a youth; Tacitus is the author of the old, young men cannot understand him;
you must learn to see in human actions the simplest features of the heart of man before you try to sound
its depths. You must be able to read facts clearly before you begin to study maxims. Philosophy in the
form of maxims is only fit for the experienced. Youth should never deal with the general, all its
teaching should deal with individual instances.
  To my mind Thucydides is the true model of historians. He relates facts without giving his opinion;
but he omits no circumstance adapted to make us judge for ourselves. He puts everything that he relates
before his reader; far from interposing between the facts and the readers, he conceals himself; we seem
not to read but to see. Unfortunately he speaks of nothing but war, and in his stories we only see the
least instructive part of the world, that is to say the battles. The virtues and defects of the Retreat of the
Ten Thousand and the Commentaries of Caesar are almost the same. The kindly Herodotus, without
portraits, without maxims, yet flowing, simple, full of details calculated to delight and interest in the
highest degree, would be perhaps the best historian if these very details did not often degenerate into
childish folly, better adapted to spoil the taste of youth than to form it; we need discretion before we
can read him. I say nothing of Livy, his turn will come; but he is a statesman, a rhetorician, he is
everything which is unsuitable for a youth.
  History in general is lacking because it only takes note of striking and clearly marked facts which
may be fixed by names, places, and dates; but the slow evolution of these facts, which cannot be
definitely noted in this way, still remains unknown. We often find in some battle, lost or won, the
ostensible cause of a revolution which was inevitable before this battle took place. War only makes
manifest events already determined by moral causes, which few historians can perceive.
  The  philosophic  spirit  has  turned  the  thoughts  of  many  of  the  historians  of  our  times  in  this
direction;  but  I  doubt  whether  truth  has  profited  by  their  labours.  The  rage  for  systems  has  got
possession of all alike, no one seeks to see things as they are, but only as they agree with his system.
  Add to all these considerations the fact that history shows us actions rather than men, because she
only seizes men at certain chosen times in full dress; she only portrays the statesman when he is
prepared to be seen; she does not follow him to his home, to his study, among his family and his
friends; she only shows him in state; it is his clothes rather than himself that she describes.I would prefer to begin the study of the human heart with reading the lives of individuals; for then
the man hides himself in vain, the historian follows him everywhere; he never gives him a moment's
grace nor any corner where he can escape the piercing eye of the spectator; and when he thinks he is
concealing himself, then it is that the writer shows him up most plainly.
  "Those who write lives," says Montaigne, "in so far as they delight more in ideas than in events,
more in that which comes from within than in that which comes from without, these are the writers I
prefer; for this reason Plutarch is in every way the man for me."
  It is true that the genius of men in groups or nations is very different from the character of the
individual man, and that we have a very imperfect knowledge of the human heart if we do not also
examine it in crowds; but it is none the less true that to judge of men we must study the individual man,
and that he who had a perfect knowledge of the inclinations of each individual might foresee all their
combined effects in the body of the nation.
  We must go back again to the ancients, for the reasons already stated, and also because all the
details common and familiar, but true and characteristic, are banished by modern stylists, so that men
are as much tricked out by our modern authors in their private life as in public. Propriety, no less strict
in literature than in life, no longer permits us to say anything in public which we might not do in public;
and as we may only show the man dressed up for his part, we never see a man in our books any more
than we do on the stage. The lives of kings may be written a hundred times, but to no purpose; we shall
never have another Suetonius.
  The excellence of Plutarch consists in these very details which we are no longer permitted to
describe. With inimitable grace he paints the great man in little things; and he is so happy in the choice
of his instances that a word, a smile, a gesture, will often suffice to indicate the nature of his hero. With
a jest Hannibal cheers his frightened soldiers, and leads them laughing to the battle which will lay Italy
at his feet; Agesilaus riding on a stick makes me love the conqueror of the great king; Caesar passing
through a poor village and chatting with his friends unconsciously betrays the traitor who professed that
he only wished to be Pompey's equal. Alexander swallows a draught without a word--it is the finest
moment in his life; Aristides writes his own name on the shell and so justifies his title; Philopoemen,
his mantle laid aside, chops firewood in the kitchen of his host. This is the true art of portraiture. Our
disposition does not show itself in our features, nor our character in our great deeds; it is trifles that
show what we really are. What is done in public is either too commonplace or too artificial, and our
modern authors are almost too grand to tell us anything else.
  M. de Turenne was undoubtedly one of the greatest men of the last century. They have had the
courage to make his life interesting by the little details which make us know and love him; but how
many details have they felt obliged to omit which might have made us know and love him better still? I
will only quote one which I have on good authority, one which Plutarch would never have omitted, and
one which Ramsai would never have inserted had he been acquainted with it.
  On a hot summer's day Viscount Turenne in a little white vest and nightcap was standing at the
window of his antechamber; one of his men came up and, misled by the dress, took him for one of the
kitchen lads whom he knew. He crept up behind him and smacked him with no light hand. The man he
struck turned round hastily. The valet saw it was his master and trembled at the sight of his face. He fell
on his knees in desperation. "Sir, I thought it was George." "Well, even if it was George," exclaimed
Turenne rubbing the injured part, "you need not have struck so hard." You do not dare to say this, you
miserable writers! Remain for ever without humanity and without feeling; steel your hard hearts in your
vile propriety, make yourselves contemptible through your high-mightiness. But as for you, dear youth,
when you read this anecdote, when you are touched by all the kindliness displayed even on the impulse
of the moment, read also the littleness of this great man when it was a question of his name and birth.
Remember it was this very Turenne who always professed to yield precedence to his nephew, so that all
men might see that this child was the head of a royal house. Look on this picture and on that, love
nature, despise popular prejudice, and know the man as he was.
  There are few people able to realise what an effect such reading, carefully directed, will have uponthe unspoilt mind of a youth. Weighed down by books from our earliest childhood, accustomed to read
without thinking, what we read strikes us even less, because we already bear in ourselves the passions
and prejudices with which history and the lives of men are filled; all that they do strikes us as only
natural, for we ourselves are unnatural and we judge others by ourselves. But imagine my Emile, who
has been carefully guarded for eighteen years with the sole object of preserving a right judgment and a
healthy heart, imagine him when the curtain goes up casting his eyes for the first time upon the world's
stage; or rather picture him behind the scenes watching the actors don their costumes, and counting the
cords and pulleys which deceive with their feigned shows the eyes of the spectators. His first surprise
will soon give place to feelings of shame and scorn of his fellow-man; he will be indignant at the sight
of the whole human race deceiving itself and stooping to this childish folly; he will grieve to see his
brothers tearing each other limb from limb for a mere dream, and transforming themselves into wild
beasts because they could not be content to be men.
  Given the natural disposition of the pupil, there is no doubt that if the master exercises any sort of
prudence or discretion in his choice of reading, however little he may put him in the way of reflecting
on the subject-matter, this exercise will serve as a course in practical philosophy, a philosophy better
understood and more thoroughly mastered than all the empty speculations with which the brains of lads
are muddled in our schools. After following the romantic schemes of Pyrrhus, Cineas asks him what
real good he would gain by the conquest of the world, which he can never enjoy without such great
sufferings; this only arouses in us a passing interest as a smart saying; but Emile will think it a very
wise thought, one which had already occurred to himself, and one which he will never forget, because
there is no hostile prejudice in his mind to prevent it sinking in. When he reads more of the life of this
madman, he will find that all his great plans resulted in his death at the hands of a woman, and instead
of admiring this pinchbeck heroism, what will he see in the exploits of this great captain and the
schemes of this great statesman but so many steps towards that unlucky tile which was to bring life and
schemes alike to a shameful death?
  All conquerors have not been killed; all usurpers have not failed in their plans; to minds imbued
with vulgar prejudices many of them will seem happy, but he who looks below the surface and reckons
men's happiness by the condition of their hearts will perceive their wretchedness even in the midst of
their successes; he will see them panting after advancement and never attaining their prize, he will find
them like those inexperienced travellers among the Alps, who think that every height they see is the
last, who reach its summit only to find to their disappointment there are loftier peaks beyond.
  Augustus, when he had subdued his fellow-citizens and destroyed his rivals, reigned for forty years
over the greatest empire that ever existed; but all this vast power could not hinder him from beating his
head  against  the  walls,  and  filling  his  palace  with  his  groans  as  he  cried  to  Varus  to  restore  his
slaughtered legions. If he had conquered all his foes what good would his empty triumphs have done
him, when troubles of every kind beset his path, when his life was threatened by his dearest friends, and
when he had to mourn the disgrace or death of all near and dear to him? The wretched man desired to
rule the world and failed to rule his own household. What was the result of this neglect? He beheld his
nephew, his adopted child, his son-in-law, perish in the flower of youth, his grandson reduced to eat the
stuffing  of  his  mattress  to  prolong  his  wretched  existence  for  a  few  hours;  his  daughter  and  his
granddaughter, after they had covered him with infamy, died, the one of hunger and want on a desert
island, the other in prison by the hand of a common archer. He himself, the last survivor of his unhappy
house, found himself compelled by his own wife to acknowledge a monster as his heir. Such was the
fate of the master of the world, so famous for his glory and his good fortune. I cannot believe that any
one of those who admire his glory and fortune would accept them at the same price.
I have taken ambition as my example, but the play of every human passion offers similar lessons to
any one who will study history to make himself wise and good at the expense of those who went
before. The time is drawing near when the teaching of the life of Anthony will appeal more forcibly to
the youth than the life of Augustus. Emile will scarcely know where he is among the many strange
sights in his new studies; but he will know beforehand how to avoid the illusion of passions before theyarise, and seeing how in all ages they have blinded men's eyes, he will be forewarned of the way in
which they may one day blind his own should he abandon himself to them. [Footnote: It is always
prejudice which stirs up passion in our heart. He who only sees what really exists and only values what
he knows, rarely becomes angry. The errors of our judgment produce the warmth of our desires.] These
lessons,  I  know,  are  unsuited  to  him,  perhaps  at  need  they  may  prove  scanty  and  ill-timed;  but
remember they are not the lessons I wished to draw from this study. To begin with, I had quite another
end in view; and indeed, if this purpose is unfulfilled, the teacher will be to blame.
  Remember that, as soon as selfishness has developed, the self in its relations to others is always
with us, and the youth never observes others without coming back to himself and comparing himself
with them. From the way young men are taught to study history I see that they are transformed, so to
speak, into the people they behold, that you strive to make a Cicero, a Trajan, or an Alexander of them,
to discourage them when they are themselves again, to make every one regret that he is merely himself.
There are certain advantages in this plan which I do not deny; but, so far as Emile is concerned, should
it happen at any time when he is making these comparisons that he wishes to be any one but himself--
were it Socrates or Cato--I have failed entirely; he who begins to regard himself as a stranger will soon
forget himself altogether.
  It is not philosophers who know most about men; they only view them through the preconceived
ideas of philosophy, and I know no one so prejudiced as philosophers. A savage would judge us more
sanely. The philosopher is aware of his own vices, he is indignant at ours, and he says to himself, "We
are all bad alike;" the savage beholds us unmoved and says, "You are mad." He is right, for no one does
evil for evil's sake. My pupil is that savage, with this difference: Emile has thought more, he has
compared ideas, seen our errors at close quarters, he is more on his guard against himself, and only
judges of what he knows.
  It is our own passions that excite us against the passions of others; it is our self-interest which
makes us hate the wicked; if they did us no harm we should pity rather than hate them. We should
readily forgive their vices if we could perceive how their own heart punishes those vices. We are aware
of the offence, but we do not see the punishment; the advantages are plain, the penalty is hidden. The
man who thinks he is enjoying the fruits of his vices is no less tormented by them than if they had not
been successful; the object is different, the anxiety is the same; in vain he displays his good fortune and
hides his heart; in spite of himself his conduct betrays him; but to discern this, our own heart must be
utterly unlike his.
  We are led astray by those passions which we share; we are disgusted by those that militate against
our own interests; and with a want of logic due to these very passions, we blame in others what we fain
would imitate. Aversion and self-deception are inevitable when we are forced to endure at another's
hands what we ourselves would do in his place.
  What then is required for the proper study of men? A great wish to know men, great impartiality of
judgment, a heart sufficiently sensitive to understand every human passion, and calm enough to be free
from passion. If there is any time in our life when this study is likely to be appreciated, it is this that I
have chosen for Emile; before this time men would have been strangers to him; later on he would have
been like them. Convention, the effects of which he already perceives, has not yet made him its slave,
the passions, whose consequences he realises, have not yet stirred his heart. He is a man; he takes an
interest in his brethren; he is a just man and he judges his peers. Now it is certain that if he judges them
rightly he will not want to change places with any one of them, for the goal of all their anxious efforts
is the result of prejudices which he does not share, and that goal seems to him a mere dream. For his
own part, he has all he wants within his reach. How should he be dependent on any one when he is self-
sufficing and free from prejudice? Strong arms, good health, [Footnote: I think I may fairly reckon
health and strength among the advantages he has obtained by his education, or rather among the gifts of
nature which his education has preserved for him.] moderation, few needs, together with the means to
satisfy those needs, are his. He has been brought up in complete liberty and servitude is the greatest ill
he understands. He pities these miserable kings, the slaves of all who obey them; he pities these falseprophets fettered by their empty fame; he pities these rich fools, martyrs to their own pomp; he pities
these ostentatious voluptuaries, who spend their life in deadly dullness that they may seem to enjoy its
pleasures. He would pity the very foe who harmed him, for he would discern his wretchedness beneath
his cloak of spite. He would say to himself, "This man has yielded to his desire to hurt me, and this
need of his places him at my mercy."
  One step more and our goal is attained. Selfishness is a dangerous tool though a useful one; it often
wounds the hand that uses it, and it rarely does good unmixed with evil. When Emile considers his
place among men, when he finds himself so fortunately situated, he will be tempted to give credit to his
own reason for the work of yours, and to attribute to his own deserts what is really the result of his
good fortune. He will say to himself, "I am wise and other men are fools." He will pity and despise
them and will congratulate himself all the more heartily; and as he knows he is happier than they, he
will think his deserts are greater. This is the fault we have most to fear, for it is the most difficult to
eradicate. If he remained in this state of mind, he would have profited little by all our care; and if I had
to choose, I hardly know whether I would not rather choose the illusions of prejudice than those of
pride.
  Great men are under no illusion with respect to their superiority; they see it and know it, but they
are none the less modest. The more they have, the better they know what they lack. They are less vain
of their superiority over us than ashamed by the consciousness of their weakness, and among the good
things they really possess, they are too wise to pride themselves on a gift which is none of their getting.
The good man may be proud of his virtue for it is his own, but what cause for pride has the man of
intellect? What has Racine done that he is not Pradon, and Boileau that he is not Cotin?
  The circumstances with which we are concerned are quite different. Let us keep to the common
level. I assumed that my pupil had neither surpassing genius nor a defective understanding. I chose him
of an ordinary mind to show what education could do for man. Exceptions defy all rules. If, therefore,
as a result of my care, Emile prefers his way of living, seeing, and feeling to that of others, he is right;
but if he thinks because of this that he is nobler and better born than they, he is wrong; he is deceiving
himself; he must be undeceived, or rather let us prevent the mistake, lest it be too late to correct it.
  Provided a man is not mad, he can be cured of any folly but vanity; there is no cure for this but
experience, if indeed there is any cure for it at all; when it first appears we can at least prevent its
further growth. But do not on this account waste your breath on empty arguments to prove to the youth
that he is like other men and subject to the same weaknesses. Make him feel it or he will never know it.
This is another instance of an exception to my own rules; I must voluntarily expose my pupil to every
accident which may convince him that he is no wiser than we. The adventure with the conjurer will be
repeated again and again in different ways; I shall let flatterers take advantage of him; if rash comrades
draw him into some perilous adventure, I will let him run the risk; if he falls into the hands of sharpers
at the card-table, I will abandon him to them as their dupe.[Footnote: Moreover our pupil will be little
tempted by this snare; he has so many amusements about him, he has never been bored in his life, and
he scarcely knows the use of money. As children have been led by these two motives, self-interest and
vanity,  rogues  and  courtesans  use  the  same  means  to  get  hold  of  them  later.  When  you  see  their
greediness encouraged by prizes and rewards, when you find their public performances at ten years old
applauded at school or college, you see too how at twenty they will be induced to leave their purse in a
gambling hell and their health in a worse place. You may safely wager that the sharpest boy in the class
will become the greatest gambler and debauchee. Now the means which have not been employed in
childhood have not the same effect in youth. But we must bear in mind my constant plan and take the
thing at its worst. First I try to prevent the vice; then I assume its existence in order to correct it.] I will
let them flatter him, pluck him, and rob him; and when having sucked him dry they turn and mock him,
I will even thank them to his face for the lessons they have been good enough to give him. The only
snares from which I will guard him with my utmost care are the wiles of wanton women. The only
precaution I shall take will be to share all the dangers I let him run, and all the insults I let him receive.
I will bear everything in silence, without a murmur or reproach, without a word to him, and be sure thatif this wise conduct is faithfully adhered to, what he sees me endure on his account will make more
impression on his heart than what he himself suffers.
I cannot refrain at this point from drawing attention to the sham dignity of tutors, who foolishly
pretend to be wise, who discourage their pupils by always professing to treat them as children, and by
emphasising the difference between themselves and their scholars in everything they do. Far from
damping their youthful spirits in this fashion, spare no effort to stimulate their courage; that they may
become your equals, treat them as such already, and if they cannot rise to your level, do not scruple to
come down to theirs without being ashamed of it. Remember that your honour is no longer in your own
keeping but in your pupil's. Share his faults that you may correct them, bear his disgrace that you may
wipe it out; follow the example of that brave Roman who, unable to rally his fleeing soldiers, placed
himself at their head, exclaiming, "They do not flee, they follow their captain!" Did this dishonour him?
Not so; by sacrificing his glory he increased it. The power of duty, the beauty of virtue, compel our
respect in spite of all our foolish prejudices. If I received a blow in the course of my duties to Emile, far
from avenging it I would boast of it; and I doubt whether there is in the whole world a man so vile as to
respect me any the less on this account.
I do not intend the pupil to suppose his master to be as ignorant, or as liable to be led astray, as he is
himself. This idea is all very well for a child who can neither see nor compare things, who thinks
everything is within his reach, and only bestows his confidence on those who know how to come down
to his level. But a youth of Emile's age and sense is no longer so foolish as to make this mistake, and it
would not be desirable that he should. The confidence he ought to have in his tutor is of another kind; it
should rest on the authority of reason, and on superior knowledge, advantages which the young man is
capable  of  appreciating  while  he  perceives  how  useful  they  are  to  himself.  Long  experience  has
convinced him that his tutor loves him, that he is a wise and good man who desires his happiness and
knows how to procure it. He ought to know that it is to his own advantage to listen to his advice. But if
the master lets himself be taken in like the disciple, he will lose his right to expect deference from him,
and to give him instruction. Still less should the pupil suppose that his master is purposely letting him
fall into snares or preparing pitfalls for his inexperience. How can we avoid these two difficulties?
Choose the best and most natural means; be frank and straightforward like himself; warn him of the
dangers to which he is exposed, point them out plainly and sensibly, without exaggeration, without
temper, without pedantic display, and above all without giving your opinions in the form of orders,
until they have become such, and until this imperious tone is absolutely necessary. Should he still be
obstinate as he often will be, leave him free to follow his own choice, follow him, copy his example,
and that cheerfully and frankly; if possible fling yourself into things, amuse yourself as much as he
does. If the consequences become too serious, you are at hand to prevent them; and yet when this
young man has beheld your foresight and your kindliness, will he not be at once struck by the one and
touched by the other? All his faults are but so many hands with which he himself provides you to
restrain him at need. Now under these circumstances the great art of the master consists in controlling
events and directing his exhortations so that he may know beforehand when the youth will give in, and
when he will refuse to do so, so that all around him he may encompass him with the lessons of
experience, and yet never let him run too great a risk.
  Warn him of his faults before he commits them; do not blame him when once they are committed;
you would only stir his self-love to mutiny. We learn nothing from a lesson we detest. I know nothing
more foolish than the phrase, "I told you so." The best way to make him remember what you told him is
to seem to have forgotten it. Go further than this, and when you find him ashamed of having refused to
believe you, gently smooth away the shame with kindly words. He will indeed hold you dear when he
sees how you forget yourself on his account, and how you console him instead of reproaching him. But
if you increase his annoyance by your reproaches he will hate you, and will make it a rule never to heed
you, as if to show you that he does not agree with you as to the value of your opinion.
  The turn you give to your consolation may itself be a lesson to him, and all the more because he
does not suspect it. When you tell him, for example, that many other people have made the samemistakes, this is not what he was expecting; you are administering correction under the guise of pity;
for when one thinks oneself better than other people it is a very mortifying excuse to console oneself by
their example; it means that we must realise that the most we can say is that they are no better than we.
  The time of faults is the time for fables. When we blame the guilty under the cover of a story we
instruct without offending him; and he then understands that the story is not untrue by means of the
truth  he  finds  in  its  application  to  himself.  The  child  who  has  never  been  deceived  by  flattery
understands nothing of the fable I recently examined; but the rash youth who has just become the dupe
of a flatterer perceives only too readily that the crow was a fool. Thus he acquires a maxim from the
fact, and the experience he would soon have forgotten is engraved on his mind by means of the fable.
There is no knowledge of morals which cannot be acquired through our own experience or that of
others. When there is danger, instead of letting him try the experiment himself, we have recourse to
history. When the risk is comparatively slight, it is just as well that the youth should be exposed to it;
then by means of the apologue the special cases with which the young man is now acquainted are
transformed into maxims.
  It  is  not,  however,  my  intention  that  these  maxims  should  be  explained,  nor  even  formulated.
Nothing is so foolish and unwise as the moral at the end of most of the fables; as if the moral was not,
or ought not to be so clear in the fable itself that the reader cannot fail to perceive it. Why then add the
moral at the end, and go deprive him of the pleasure of discovering it for himself. The art of teaching
consists in making the pupil wish to learn. But if the pupil is to wish to learn, his mind must not remain
in such a passive state with regard to what you tell him that there is really nothing for him to do but
listen to you. The master's vanity must always give way to the scholars; he must be able to say, I
understand, I see it, I am getting at it, I am learning something. One of the things which makes the
Pantaloon in the Italian comedies so wearisome is the pains taken by him to explain to the audience the
platitudes they understand only too well already. We must always be intelligible, but we need not say
all there is to be said. If you talk much you will say little, for at last no one will listen to you. What is
the sense of the four lines at the end of La Fontaine's fable of the frog who puffed herself up. Is he
afraid we should not understand it? Does this great painter need to write the names beneath the things
he has painted? His morals, far from generalising, restrict the lesson to some extent to the examples
given, and prevent our applying them to others. Before I put the fables of this inimitable author into the
hands of a youth, I should like to cut out all the conclusions with which he strives to explain what he
has  just  said  so  clearly  and  pleasantly.  If  your  pupil  does  not  understand  the  fable  without  the
explanation, he will not understand it with it.
  Moreover, the fables would require to be arranged in a more didactic order, one more in agreement
with the feelings and knowledge of the young adolescent. Can you imagine anything so foolish as to
follow the mere numerical order of the book without regard to our requirements or our opportunities.
First the grasshopper, then the crow, then the frog, then the two mules, etc. I am sick of these two
mules; I remember seeing a child who was being educated for finance; they never let him alone, but
were always insisting on the profession he was to follow; they made him read this fable, learn it, say it,
repeat it again and again without finding in it the slightest argument against his future calling. Not only
have I never found children make any real use of the fables they learn, but I have never found anybody
who took the trouble to see that they made such a use of them. The study claims to be instruction in
morals; but the real aim of mother and child is nothing but to set a whole party watching the child while
he recites his fables; when he is too old to recite them and old enough to make use of them, they are
altogether forgotten. Only men, I repeat, can learn from fables, and Emile is now old enough to begin.
I do not mean to tell you everything, so I only indicate the paths which diverge from the right way,
so that you may know how to avoid them. If you follow the road I have marked out for you, I think
your pupil will buy his knowledge of mankind and his knowledge of himself in the cheapest market;
you will enable him to behold the tricks of fortune without envying the lot of her favourites, and to be
content with himself without thinking himself better than others. You have begun by making him an
actor that he may learn to be one of the audience; you must continue your task, for from the theatrethings are what they seem, from the stage they seem what they are. For the general effect we must get a
distant view, for the details we must observe more closely. But how can a young man take part in the
business of life? What right has he to be initiated into its dark secrets? His interests are confined within
the limits of his own pleasures, he has no power over others, it is much the same as if he had no power
at all. Man is the cheapest commodity on the market, and among all our important rights of property,
the rights of the individual are always considered last of all.
  When I see the studies of young men at the period of their greatest activity confined to purely
speculative matters, while later on they are suddenly plunged, without any sort of experience, into the
world of men and affairs, it strikes me as contrary alike to reason and to nature, and I cease to be
surprised that so few men know what to do. How strange a choice to teach us so many useless things,
while the art of doing is never touched upon! They profess to fit us for society, and we are taught as if
each of us were to live a life of contemplation in a solitary cell, or to discuss theories with persons
whom they did not concern. You think you are teaching your scholars how to live, and you teach them
certain bodily contortions and certain forms of words without meaning. I, too, have taught Emile how
to live; for I have taught him to enjoy his own society and, more than that, to earn his own bread. But
this is not enough. To live in the world he must know how to get on with other people, he must know
what forces move them, he must calculate the action and re-action of self-interest in civil society, he
must estimate the results so accurately that he will rarely fail in his undertakings, or he will at least
have tried in the best possible way. The law does not allow young people to manage their own affairs
nor to dispose of their own property; but what would be the use of these precautions if they never
gained any experience until they were of age. They would have gained nothing by the delay, and would
have no more experience at five-and-twenty than at fifteen. No doubt we must take precautions, so that
a youth, blinded by ignorance or misled by passion, may not hurt himself; but at any age there are
opportunities when deeds of kindness and of care for the weak may be performed under the direction of
a wise man, on behalf of the unfortunate who need help.
  Mothers and nurses grow fond of children because of the care they lavish on them; the practice of
social virtues touches the very heart with the love of humanity; by doing good we become good; and I
know no surer way to this end. Keep your pupil busy with the good deeds that are within his power, let
the cause of the poor be his own, let him help them not merely with his money, but with his service; let
him work for them, protect them, let his person and his time be at their disposal; let him be their agent;
he will never all his life long have a more honourable office. How many of the oppressed, who have
never got a hearing, will obtain justice when he demands it for them with that courage and firmness
which the practice of virtue inspires; when he makes his way into the presence of the rich and great,
when he goes, if need be, to the footstool of the king himself, to plead the cause of the wretched, the
cause of those who find all doors closed to them by their poverty, those who are so afraid of being
punished for their misfortunes that they do not dare to complain?
  But shall we make of Emile a knight-errant, a redresser of wrongs, a paladin? Shall he thrust
himself  into  public  life,  play  the  sage  and  the  defender  of  the  laws  before  the  great,  before  the
magistrates, before the king? Shall he lay petitions before the judges and plead in the law courts? That I
cannot say. The nature of things is not changed by terms of mockery and scorn. He will do all that he
knows to be useful and good. He will do nothing more, and he knows that nothing is useful and good
for him which is unbefitting his age. He knows that his first duty is to himself; that young men should
distrust themselves; that they should act circumspectly; that they should show respect to those older
than themselves, reticence and discretion in talking without cause, modesty in things indifferent, but
courage in well doing, and boldness to speak the truth. Such were those illustrious Romans who, having
been admitted into public life, spent their days in bringing criminals to justice and in protecting the
innocent, without any motives beyond those of learning, and of the furtherance of justice and of the
protection of right conduct.
  Emile is not fond of noise or quarrelling, not only among men, but among animals. [Footnote: "But
what will he do if any one seeks a quarrel with him?" My answer is that no one will ever quarrel withhim, he will never lend himself to such a thing. But, indeed, you continue, who can be safe from a
blow, or an insult from a bully, a drunkard, a bravo, who for the joy of killing his man begins by
dishonouring him? That is another matter. The life and honour of the citizens should not be at the
mercy of a bully, a drunkard, or a bravo, and one can no more insure oneself against such an accident
than  against  a  falling  tile.  A  blow  given,  or  a  lie  in  the  teeth,  if  he  submit  to  them,  have  social
consequences which no wisdom can prevent and no tribunal can avenge. The weakness of the laws,
therefore,  so  far  restores  a  man's  independence;  he  is  the  sole  magistrate  and  judge  between  the
offender and himself, the sole interpreter and administrator of natural law. Justice is his due, and he
alone can obtain it, and in such a case there is no government on earth so foolish as to punish him for so
doing. I do not say he must fight; that is absurd; I say justice is his due, and he alone can dispense it. If
I were king, I promise you that in my kingdom no one would ever strike a man or call him a liar, and
yet I would do without all those useless laws against duels; the means are simple and require no law
courts. However that may be, Emile knows what is due to himself in such a case, and the example due
from him to the safety of men of honour. The strongest of men cannot prevent insult, but he can take
good care that his adversary has no opportunity to boast of that insult.] He will never set two dogs to
fight, he will never set a dog to chase a cat. This peaceful spirit is one of the results of his education,
which has never stimulated self-love or a high opinion of himself, and so has not encouraged him to
seek his pleasure in domination and in the sufferings of others. The sight of suffering makes him suffer
too; this is a natural feeling. It is one of the after effects of vanity that hardens a young man and makes
him take a delight in seeing the torments of a living and feeling creature; it makes him consider himself
beyond the reach of similar sufferings through his superior wisdom or virtue. He who is beyond the
reach  of  vanity  cannot  fall  into  the  vice  which  results  from  vanity.  So  Emile  loves  peace.  He  is
delighted at the sight of happiness, and if he can help to bring it about, this is an additional reason for
sharing it. I do not assume that when he sees the unhappy he will merely feel for them that barren and
cruel pity which is content to pity the ills it can heal. His kindness is active and teaches him much he
would have learnt far more slowly, or he would never have learnt at all, if his heart had been harder. If
he finds his comrades at strife, he tries to reconcile them; if he sees the afflicted, he inquires as to the
cause of their sufferings; if he meets two men who hate each other, he wants to know the reason of their
enmity; if he finds one who is down-trodden groaning under the oppression of the rich and powerful, he
tries to discover by what means he can counteract this oppression, and in the interest he takes with
regard to all these unhappy persons, the means of removing their sufferings are never out of his sight.
What use shall we make of this disposition so that it may re-act in a way suited to his age? Let us direct
his efforts and his knowledge, and use his zeal to increase them.
I am never weary of repeating: let all the lessons of young people take the form of doing rather than
talking; let them learn nothing from books which they can learn from experience. How absurd to
attempt to give them practice in speaking when they have nothing to say, to expect to make them feel,
at their school desks, the vigour of the language of passion and all the force of the arts of persuasion
when they have nothing and nobody to persuade! All the rules of rhetoric are mere waste of words to
those who do not know how to use them for their own purposes. How does it concern a schoolboy to
know how Hannibal encouraged his soldiers to cross the Alps? If instead of these grand speeches you
showed him how to induce his prefect to give him a holiday, you may be sure he would pay more
attention to your rules.
  If I wanted to teach rhetoric to a youth whose passions were as yet undeveloped, I would draw his
attention continually to things that would stir his passions, and I would discuss with him how he should
talk to people so as to get them to regard his wishes favourably. But Emile is not in a condition so
favourable to the art of oratory. Concerned mainly with his physical well-being, he has less need of
others than they of him; and having nothing to ask of others on his own account, what he wants to
persuade them to do does not affect him sufficiently to awake any very strong feeling. From this it
follows that his language will be on the whole simple and literal. He usually speaks to the point and
only to make himself understood. He is not sententious, for he has not learnt to generalise; he does notspeak in figures, for he is rarely impassioned.
  Yet this is not because he is altogether cold and phlegmatic, neither his age, his character, nor his
tastes permit of this. In the fire of adolescence the life-giving spirits, retained in the blood and distilled
again and again, inspire his young heart with a warmth which glows in his eye, a warmth which is felt
in his words and perceived in his actions. The lofty feeling with which he is inspired gives him strength
and nobility; imbued with tender love for mankind his words betray the thoughts of his heart; I know
not how it is, but there is more charm in his open-hearted generosity than in the artificial eloquence of
others; or rather this eloquence of his is the only true eloquence, for he has only to show what he feels
to make others share his feelings.
  The more I think of it the more convinced I am that by thus translating our kindly impulses into
action, by drawing from our good or ill success conclusions as to their cause, we shall find that there is
little useful knowledge that cannot be imparted to a youth; and that together with such true learning as
may  be  got  at  college  he  will  learn  a  science  of  more  importance  than  all  the  rest  together,  the
application  of  what  he  has  learned  to  the  purposes  of  life.  Taking  such  an  interest  in  his  fellow-
creatures, it is impossible that he should fail to learn very quickly how to note and weigh their actions,
their tastes, their pleasures, and to estimate generally at their true value what may increase or diminish
the happiness of men; he should do this better than those who care for nobody and never do anything
for any one. The feelings of those who are always occupied with their own concerns are too keenly
affected for them to judge wisely of things. They consider everything as it affects themselves, they
form their ideas of good and ill solely on their own experience, their minds are filled with all sorts of
absurd prejudices, and anything which affects their own advantage ever so little, seems an upheaval of
the universe.
  Extend self-love to others and it is transformed into virtue, a virtue which has its root in the heart of
every one of us. The less the object of our care is directly dependent on ourselves, the less we have to
fear from the illusion of self-interest; the more general this interest becomes, the juster it is; and the
love of the human race is nothing but the love of justice within us. If therefore we desire Emile to be a
lover of truth, if we desire that he should indeed perceive it, let us keep him far from self-interest in all
his business. The more care he bestows upon the happiness of others the wiser and better he is, and the
fewer mistakes he will make between good and evil; but never allow him any blind preference founded
merely on personal predilection or unfair prejudice. Why should he harm one person to serve another?
What does it matter to him who has the greater share of happiness, providing he promotes the happiness
of all? Apart from self-interest this care for the general well-being is the first concern of the wise man,
for each of us forms part of the human race and not part of any individual member of that race.
  To prevent pity degenerating into weakness we must generalise it and extend it to mankind. Then
we only yield to it when it is in accordance with justice, since justice is of all the virtues that which
contributes most to the common good. Reason and self-love compel us to love mankind even more than
our neighbour, and to pity the wicked is to be very cruel to other men.
  Moreover, you must bear in mind that all these means employed to project my pupil beyond himself
have also a distinct relation to himself; since they not only cause him inward delight, but I am also
endeavouring to instruct him, while I am making him kindly disposed towards others.
  First I showed the means employed, now I will show the result. What wide prospects do I perceive
unfolding themselves before his mind! What noble feelings stifle the lesser passions in his heart! What
clearness of judgment, what accuracy in reasoning, do I see developing from the inclinations we have
cultivated,  from  the  experience  which  concentrates  the  desires  of  a  great  heart  within  the  narrow
bounds of possibility, so that a man superior to others can come down to their level if he cannot raise
them to his own! True principles of justice, true types of beauty, all moral relations between man and
man, all ideas of order, these are engraved on his understanding; he sees the right place for everything
and the causes which drive it from that place; he sees what may do good, and what hinders it. Without
having felt the passions of mankind, he knows the illusions they produce and their mode of action.
I proceed along the path which the force of circumstances compels me to tread, but I do not insistthat my readers shall follow me. Long ago they have made up their minds that I am wandering in the
land of chimeras, while for my part I think they are dwelling in the country of prejudice. When I
wander so far from popular beliefs I do not cease to bear them in mind; I examine them, I consider
them, not that I may follow them or shun them, but that I may weigh them in the balance of reason.
Whenever reason compels me to abandon these popular beliefs, I know by experience that my readers
will not follow my example; I know that they will persist in refusing to go beyond what they can see,
and that they will take the youth I am describing for the creation of my fanciful imagination, merely
because he is unlike the youths with whom they compare him; they forget that he must needs be
different, because he has been brought up in a totally different fashion; he has been influenced by
wholly different feelings, instructed in a wholly different manner, so that it would be far stranger if he
were like your pupils than if he were what I have supposed. He is a man of nature's making, not man's.
No wonder men find him strange.
  When I began this work I took for granted nothing but what could be observed as readily by others
as by myself; for our starting-point, the birth of man, is the same for all; but the further we go, while I
am seeking to cultivate nature and you are seeking to deprave it, the further apart we find ourselves. At
six years old my pupil was not so very unlike yours, whom you had not yet had time to disfigure; now
there is nothing in common between them; and when they reach the age of manhood, which is now
approaching, they will show themselves utterly different from each other, unless all my pains have been
thrown away. There may not be so very great a difference in the amount of knowledge they possess, but
there is all the difference in the world in the kind of knowledge. You are amazed to find that the one
has noble sentiments of which the others have not the smallest germ, but remember that the latter are
already philosophers and theologians while Emile does not even know what is meant by a philosopher
and has scarcely heard the name of God.
  But if you come and tell me, "There are no such young men, young people are not made that way;
they have this passion or that, they do this or that," it is as if you denied that a pear tree could ever be a
tall tree because the pear trees in our gardens are all dwarfs.
I beg these critics who are so ready with their blame to consider that I am as well acquainted as they
are with everything they say, that I have probably given more thought to it, and that, as I have no
private end to serve in getting them to agree with me, I have a right to demand that they should at least
take time to find out where I am mistaken. Let them thoroughly examine the nature of man, let them
follow the earliest growth of the heart in any given circumstances, so as to see what a difference
education may make in the individual; then let them compare my method of education with the results I
ascribe to it; and let them tell me where my reasoning is unsound, and I shall have no answer to give
them.
  It is this that makes me speak so strongly, and as I think with good excuse: I have not pledged
myself to any system, I depend as little as possible on arguments, and I trust to what I myself have
observed. I do not base my ideas on what I have imagined, but on what I have seen. It is true that I have
not confined my observations within the walls of any one town, nor to a single class of people; but
having compared men of every class and every nation which I have been able to observe in the course
of a life spent in this pursuit, I have discarded as artificial what belonged to one nation and not to
another, to one rank and not to another; and I have regarded as proper to mankind what was common to
all, at any age, in any station, and in any nation whatsoever.
  Now if in accordance with this method you follow from infancy the course of a youth who has not
been shaped to any special mould, one who depends as little as possible on authority and the opinions
of others, which will he most resemble, my pupil or yours? It seems to me that this is the question you
must answer if you would know if I am mistaken.
  It is not easy for a man to begin to think; but when once he has begun he will never leave off. Once
a thinker, always a thinker, and the understanding once practised in reflection will never rest. You may
therefore think that I do too much or too little; that the human mind is not by nature so quick to unfold;
and that after having given it opportunities it has not got, I keep it too long confined within a circle ofideas which it ought to have outgrown.
  But remember, in the first place, that when I want to train a natural man, I do not want to make him
a savage and to send him back to the woods, but that living in the whirl of social life it is enough that he
should not let himself be carried away by the passions and prejudices of men; let him see with his eyes
and feel with his heart, let him own no sway but that of reason. Under these conditions it is plain that
many things will strike him; the oft-recurring feelings which affect him, the different ways of satisfying
his real needs, must give him many ideas he would not otherwise have acquired or would only have
acquired much later. The natural progress of the mind is quickened but not reversed. The same man
who would remain stupid in the forests should become wise and reasonable in towns, if he were merely
a spectator in them. Nothing is better fitted to make one wise than the sight of follies we do not share,
and even if we share them, we still learn, provided we are not the dupe of our follies and provided we
do not bring to them the same mistakes as the others.
  Consider also that while our faculties are confined to the things of sense, we offer scarcely any hold
to the abstractions of philosophy or to purely intellectual ideas. To attain to these we require either to
free ourselves from the body to which we are so strongly bound, or to proceed step by step in a slow
and gradual course, or else to leap across the intervening space with a gigantic bound of which no child
is capable, one for which grown men even require many steps hewn on purpose for them; but I find it
very difficult to see how you propose to construct such steps.
  The Incomprehensible embraces all, he gives its motion to the earth, and shapes the system of all
creatures, but our eyes cannot see him nor can our hands search him out, he evades the efforts of our
senses; we behold the work, but the workman is hidden from our eyes. It is no small matter to know
that he exists, and when we have got so far, and when we ask. What is he? Where is he? our mind is
overwhelmed, we lose ourselves, we know not what to think.
  Locke would have us begin with the study of spirits and go on to that of bodies. This is the method
of superstition, prejudice, and error; it is not the method of nature, nor even that of well-ordered reason;
it is to learn to see by shutting our eyes. We must have studied bodies long enough before we can form
any true idea of spirits, or even suspect that there are such beings. The contrary practice merely puts
materialism on a firmer footing.
  Since our senses are the first instruments to our learning, corporeal and sensible bodies are the only
bodies  we  directly  apprehend.  The  word  "spirit"  has  no  meaning  for  any  one  who  has  not
philosophised. To the unlearned and to the child a spirit is merely a body. Do they not fancy that spirits
groan, speak, fight, and make noises? Now you must own that spirits with arms and voices are very like
bodies. This is why every nation on the face of the earth, not even excepting the Jews, have made to
themselves idols. We, ourselves, with our words, Spirit, Trinity, Persons, are for the most part quite
anthropomorphic. I admit that we are taught that God is everywhere; but we also believe that there is air
everywhere, at least in our atmosphere; and the word Spirit meant originally nothing more than breath
and wind. Once you teach people to say what they do not understand, it is easy enough to get them to
say anything you like.
  The perception of our action upon other bodies must have first induced us to suppose that their
action upon us was effected in like manner. Thus man began by thinking that all things whose action
affected him were alive. He did not recognise the limits of their powers, and he therefore supposed that
they were boundless; as soon as he had supplied them with bodies they became his gods. In the earliest
times men went in terror of everything and everything in nature seemed alive. The idea of matter was
developed as slowly as that of spirit, for the former is itself an abstraction.
  Thus the universe was peopled with gods like themselves. The stars, the winds and the mountains,
rivers, trees, and towns, their very dwellings, each had its soul, its god, its life. The teraphim of Laban,
the manitos of savages, the fetishes of the negroes, every work of nature and of man, were the first gods
of mortals; polytheism was their first religion and idolatry their earliest form of worship. The idea of
one God was beyond their grasp, till little by little they formed general ideas, and they rose to the idea
of  a  first  cause  and  gave  meaning  to  the  word  "substance,"  which  is  at  bottom  the  greatest  ofabstractions. So every child who believes in God is of necessity an idolater or at least he regards the
Deity  as  a  man,  and  when  once  the  imagination  has  perceived  God,  it  is  very  seldom  that  the
understanding conceives him. Locke's order leads us into this same mistake.
  Having arrived, I know not how, at the idea of substance, it is clear that to allow of a single
substance it must be assumed that this substance is endowed with incompatible and mutually exclusive
properties, such as thought and size, one of which is by its nature divisible and the other wholly
incapable of division. Moreover it is assumed that thought or, if you prefer it, feeling is a primitive
quality inseparable from the substance to which it belongs, that its relation to the substance is like the
relation between substance and size. Hence it is inferred that beings who lose one of these attributes
lose the substance to which it belongs, and that death is, therefore, but a separation of substances, and
that those beings in whom the two attributes are found are composed of the two substances to which
those two qualities belong.
  But consider what a gulf there still is between the idea of two substances and that of the divine
nature, between the incomprehensible idea of the influence of our soul upon our body and the idea of
the influence of God upon every living creature. The ideas of creation, destruction, ubiquity, eternity,
almighty power, those of the divine attributes--these are all ideas so confused and obscure that few men
succeed in grasping them; yet there is nothing obscure about them to the common people, because they
do not understand them in the least; how then should they present themselves in full force, that is to say
in all their obscurity, to the young mind which is still occupied with the first working of the senses, and
fails to realise anything but what it handles? In vain do the abysses of the Infinite open around us, a
child  does  not  know  the  meaning  of  fear;  his  weak  eyes  cannot  gauge  their  depths.  To  children
everything is infinite, they cannot assign limits to anything; not that their measure is so large, but
because their understanding is so small. I have even noticed that they place the infinite rather below
than above the dimensions known to them. They judge a distance to be immense rather by their feet
than by their eyes; infinity is bounded for them, not so much by what they can see, but how far they can
go. If you talk to them of the power of God, they will think he is nearly as strong as their father. As
their own knowledge is in everything the standard by which they judge of what is possible, they always
picture  what  is  described  to  them  as  rather  smaller  than  what  they  know.  Such  are  the  natural
reasonings of an ignorant and feeble mind. Ajax was afraid to measure his strength against Achilles, yet
he challenged Jupiter to combat, for he knew Achilles and did not know Jupiter. A Swiss peasant
thought himself the richest man alive; when they tried to explain to him what a king was, he asked with
pride, "Has the king got a hundred cows on the high pastures?"
I am aware that many of my readers will be surprised to find me tracing the course of my scholar
through his early years without speaking to him of religion. At fifteen he will not even know that he has
a soul, at eighteen even he may not be ready to learn about it. For if he learns about it too soon, there is
the risk of his never really knowing anything about it.
  If I had to depict the most heart-breaking stupidity, I would paint a pedant teaching children the
catechism;  if  I  wanted  to  drive  a  child  crazy  I  would  set  him  to  explain  what  he  learned  in  his
catechism. You will reply that as most of the Christian doctrines are mysteries, you must wait, not
merely till the child is a man, but till the man is dead, before the human mind will understand those
doctrines. To that I reply, that there are mysteries which the heart of man can neither conceive nor
believe,  and  I  see  no  use  in  teaching  them  to  children,  unless  you  want  to  make  liars  of  them.
Moreover,  I  assert  that  to  admit  that  there  are  mysteries,  you  must  at  least  realise  that  they  are
incomprehensible, and children are not even capable of this conception! At an age when everything is
mysterious, there are no mysteries properly so-called.
  "We must believe in God if we would be saved." This doctrine wrongly understood is the root of
bloodthirsty intolerance and the cause of all the futile teaching which strikes a deadly blow at human
reason by training it to cheat itself with mere words. No doubt there is not a moment to be lost if we
would deserve eternal salvation; but if the repetition of certain words suffices to obtain it, I do not see
why we should not people heaven with starlings and magpies as well as with children.  The obligation of faith assumes the possibility of belief. The philosopher who does not believe is
wrong, for he misuses the reason he has cultivated, and he is able to understand the truths he rejects.
But the child who professes the Christian faith--what does he believe? Just what he understands; and he
understands so little of what he is made to repeat that if you tell him to say just the opposite he will be
quite ready to do it. The faith of children and the faith of many men is a matter of geography. Will they
be rewarded for having been born in Rome rather than in Mecca? One is told that Mahomet is the
prophet of God and he says, "Mahomet is the prophet of God." The other is told that Mahomet is a
rogue and he says, "Mahomet is a rogue." Either of them would have said just the opposite had he stood
in the other's shoes. When they are so much alike to begin with, can the one be consigned to Paradise
and the other to Hell? When a child says he believes in God, it is not God he believes in, but Peter or
James  who  told  him  that  there  is  something  called  God,  and  he  believes  it  after  the  fashion  of
Euripides--
  "O Jupiter, of whom I know nothing but thy name."
  [Footnote: Plutarch. It is thus that the tragedy of Menalippus originally began, but the clamour of
the Athenians compelled Euripides to change these opening lines.]
  We hold that no child who dies before the age of reason will be deprived of everlasting happiness;
the Catholics believe the same of all children who have been baptised, even though they have never
heard of God. There are, therefore, circumstances in which one can be saved without belief in God, and
these circumstances occur in the case of children or madmen when the human mind is incapable of the
operations necessary to perceive the Godhead. The only difference I see between you and me is that
you profess that children of seven years old are able to do this and I do not think them ready for it at
fifteen.  Whether  I  am  right  or  wrong  depends,  not  on  an  article  of  the  creed,  but  on  a  simple
observation in natural history.
  From the same principle it is plain that any man having reached old age without faith in God will
not, therefore, be deprived of God's presence in another life if his blindness was not wilful; and I
maintain that it is not always wilful. You admit that it is so in the case of lunatics deprived by disease
of their spiritual faculties, but not of their manhood, and therefore still entitled to the goodness of their
Creator. Why then should we not admit it in the case of those brought up from infancy in seclusion,
those who have led the life of a savage and are without the knowledge that comes from intercourse with
other men. [Footnote: For the natural condition of the human mind and its slow development, cf. the
first part of the Discours sur Inegalite.] For it is clearly impossible that such a savage could ever raise
his thoughts to the knowledge of the true God. Reason tells that man should only be punished for his
wilful faults, and that invincible ignorance can never be imputed to him as a crime. Hence it follows
that in the sight of the Eternal Justice every man who would believe if he had the necessary knowledge
is counted a believer, and that there will be no unbelievers to be punished except those who have closed
their hearts against the truth.
  Let us beware of proclaiming the truth to those who cannot as yet comprehend it, for to do so is to
try to inculcate error. It would be better to have no idea at all of the Divinity than to have mean,
grotesque, harmful, and unworthy ideas; to fail to perceive the Divine is a lesser evil than to insult it.
The worthy Plutarch says, "I would rather men said, 'There is no such person as Plutarch,' than that they
should say, 'Plutarch is unjust, envious, jealous, and such a tyrant that he demands more than can be
performed.'"
  The chief harm which results from the monstrous ideas of God which are instilled into the minds of
children is that they last all their life long, and as men they understand no more of God than they did as
children. In Switzerland I once saw a good and pious mother who was so convinced of the truth of this
maxim that she refused to teach her son religion when he was a little child for fear lest he should be
satisfied with this crude teaching and neglect a better teaching when he reached the age of reason. This
child never heard the name of God pronounced except with reverence and devotion, and as soon as he
attempted to say the word he was told to hold his tongue, as if the subject were too sublime and great
for him. This reticence aroused his curiosity and his self-love; he looked forward to the time when hewould know this mystery so carefully hidden from him. The less they spoke of God to him, the less he
was  himself  permitted  to  speak  of  God,  the  more  he  thought  about  Him;  this  child  beheld  God
everywhere. What I should most dread as the result of this unwise affectation of mystery is this: by
over-stimulating the youth's imagination you may turn his head, and make him at the best a fanatic
rather than a believer.
  But we need fear nothing of the sort for Emile, who always declines to pay attention to what is
beyond his reach, and listens with profound indifference to things he does not understand. There are so
many things of which he is accustomed to say, "That is no concern of mine," that one more or less
makes little difference to him; and when he does begin to perplex himself with these great matters, it is
because the natural growth of his knowledge is turning his thoughts that way.
  We have seen the road by which the cultivated human mind approaches these mysteries, and I am
ready to admit that it would not attain to them naturally, even in the bosom of society, till a much later
age.  But  as  there  are  in  this  same  society  inevitable  causes  which  hasten  the  development  of  the
passions, if we did not also hasten the development of the knowledge which controls these passions we
should indeed depart from the path of nature and disturb her equilibrium. When we can no longer
restrain a precocious development in one direction we must promote a corresponding development in
another direction, so that the order of nature may not be inverted, and so that things should progress
together, not separately, so that the man, complete at every moment of his life, may never find himself
at one stage in one of his faculties and at another stage in another faculty.
  What a difficulty do I see before me! A difficulty all the greater because it depends less on actual
facts than on the cowardice of those who dare not look the difficulty in the face. Let us at least venture
to state our problem. A child should always be brought up in his father's religion; he is always given
plain proofs that this religion, whatever it may be, is the only true religion, that all others are ridiculous
and absurd. The force of the argument depends entirely on the country in which it is put forward. Let a
Turk, who thinks Christianity so absurd at Constantinople, come to Paris and see what they think of
Mahomet. It is in matters of religion more than in anything else that prejudice is triumphant. But when
we who profess to shake off its yoke entirely, we who refuse to yield any homage to authority, decline
to teach Emile anything which he could not learn for himself in any country, what religion shall we
give him, to what sect shall this child of nature belong? The answer strikes me as quite easy. We will
not attach him to any sect, but we will give him the means to choose for himself according to the right
use of his own reason.
  Incedo per ignes Suppositos cineri doloso.--Horace, lib. ii. ode I.
  No matter! Thus far zeal and prudence have taken the place of caution. I hope that these guardians
will not fail me now. Reader, do not fear lest I should take precautions unworthy of a lover of truth; I
shall never forget my motto, but I distrust my own judgment all too easily. Instead of telling you what I
think  myself,  I  will  tell  you  the  thoughts  of  one  whose  opinions  carry  more  weight  than  mine.  I
guarantee the truth of the facts I am about to relate; they actually happened to the author whose writings
I am about to transcribe; it is for you to judge whether we can draw from them any considerations
bearing on the matter in hand. I do not offer you my own idea or another's as your rule; I merely present
them for your examination.
  Thirty years ago there was a young man in an Italian town; he was an exile from his native land and
found himself reduced to the depths of poverty. He had been born a Calvinist, but the consequences of
his own folly had made him a fugitive in a strange land; he had no money and he changed his religion
for a morsel of bread. There was a hostel for proselytes in that town to which he gained admission. The
study of controversy inspired doubts he had never felt before, and he made acquaintance with evil
hitherto unsuspected by him; he heard strange doctrines and he met with morals still stranger to him; he
beheld this evil conduct and nearly fell a victim to it. He longed to escape, but he was locked up; he
complained, but his complaints were unheeded; at the mercy of his tyrants, he found himself treated as
a criminal because he would not share their crimes. The anger kindled in a young and untried heart by
the  first  experience  of  violence  and  injustice  may  be  realised  by  those  who  have  themselvesexperienced it. Tears of anger flowed from his eyes, he was wild with rage; he prayed to heaven and to
man, and his prayers were unheard; he spoke to every one and no one listened to him. He saw no one
but the vilest servants under the control of the wretch who insulted him, or accomplices in the same
crime who laughed at his resistance and encouraged him to follow their example. He would have been
ruined had not a worthy priest visited the hostel on some matter of business. He found an opportunity
of consulting him secretly. The priest was poor and in need of help himself, but the victim had more
need of his assistance, and he did not hesitate to help him to escape at the risk of making a dangerous
enemy.
  Having escaped from vice to return to poverty, the young man struggled vainly against fate: for a
moment he thought he had gained the victory. At the first gleam of good fortune his woes and his
protector were alike forgotten. He was soon punished for this ingratitude; all his hopes vanished; youth
indeed was on his side, but his romantic ideas spoiled everything. He had neither talent nor skill to
make his way easily, he could neither be commonplace nor wicked, he expected so much that he got
nothing. When he had sunk to his former poverty, when he was without food or shelter and ready to die
of hunger, he remembered his benefactor.
  He went back to him, found him, and was kindly welcomed; the sight of him reminded the priest of
a good deed he had done; such a memory always rejoices the heart. This man was by nature humane
and pitiful; he felt the sufferings of others through his own, and his heart had not been hardened by
prosperity; in a word, the lessons of wisdom and an enlightened virtue had reinforced his natural
kindness of heart. He welcomed the young man, found him a lodging, and recommended him; he
shared with him his living which was barely enough for two. He did more, he instructed him, consoled
him, and taught him the difficult art of bearing adversity in patience. You prejudiced people, would you
have expected to find all this in a priest and in Italy?
  This worthy priest was a poor Savoyard clergyman who had offended his bishop by some youthful
fault; he had crossed the Alps to find a position which he could not obtain in his own country. He
lacked neither wit nor learning, and with his interesting countenance he had met with patrons who
found him a place in the household of one of the ministers, as tutor to his son. He preferred poverty to
dependence, and he did not know how to get on with the great. He did not stay long with this minister,
and when he departed he took with him his good opinion; and as he lived a good life and gained the
hearts of everybody, he was glad to be forgiven by his bishop and to obtain from him a small parish
among the mountains, where he might pass the rest of his life. This was the limit of his ambition.
  He was attracted by the young fugitive and he questioned him closely. He saw that ill-fortune had
already  seared  his  heart,  that  scorn  and  disgrace  had  overthrown  his  courage,  and  that  his  pride,
transformed into bitterness and spite, led him to see nothing in the harshness and injustice of men but
their  evil  disposition  and  the  vanity  of  all  virtue.  He  had  seen  that  religion  was  but  a  mask  for
selfishness, and its holy services but a screen for hypocrisy; he had found in the subtleties of empty
disputations heaven and hell awarded as prizes for mere words; he had seen the sublime and primitive
idea of Divinity disfigured by the vain fancies of men; and when, as he thought, faith in God required
him to renounce the reason God himself had given him, he held in equal scorn our foolish imaginings
and the object with which they are concerned. With no knowledge of things as they are, without any
idea of their origins, he was immersed in his stubborn ignorance and utterly despised those who thought
they knew more than himself.
  The neglect of all religion soon leads to the neglect of a man's duties. The heart of this young
libertine was already far on this road. Yet his was not a bad nature, though incredulity and misery were
gradually stifling his natural disposition and dragging him down to ruin; they were leading him into the
conduct of a rascal and the morals of an atheist.
  The almost inevitable evil was not actually consummated. The young man was not ignorant, his
education had not been neglected. He was at that happy age when the pulse beats strongly and the heart
is warm, but is not yet enslaved by the madness of the senses. His heart had not lost its elasticity. A
native modesty, a timid disposition restrained him, and prolonged for him that period during which youwatch your pupil so carefully. The hateful example of brutal depravity, of vice without any charm, had
not merely failed to quicken his imagination, it had deadened it. For a long time disgust rather than
virtue preserved his innocence, which would only succumb to more seductive charms.
  The priest saw the danger and the way of escape. He was not discouraged by difficulties, he took a
pleasure in his task; he determined to complete it and to restore to virtue the victim he had snatched
from vice. He set about it cautiously; the beauty of the motive gave him courage and inspired him with
means worthy of his zeal. Whatever might be the result, his pains would not be wasted. We are always
successful when our sole aim is to do good.
  He began to win the confidence of the proselyte by not asking any price for his kindness, by not
intruding himself upon him, by not preaching at him, by always coming down to his level, and treating
him as an equal. It was, so I think, a touching sight to see a serious person becoming the comrade of a
young  scamp,  and  virtue  putting  up  with  the  speech  of  licence  in  order  to  triumph  over  it  more
completely. When the young fool came to him with his silly confidences and opened his heart to him,
the priest listened and set him at his ease; without giving his approval to what was bad, he took an
interest in everything; no tactless reproof checked his chatter or closed his heart; the pleasure which he
thought was given by his conversation increased his pleasure in telling everything; thus he made his
general confession without knowing he was confessing anything.
  After he had made a thorough study of his feelings and disposition, the priest saw plainly that,
although he was not ignorant for his age, he had forgotten everything that he most needed to know, and
that the disgrace which fortune had brought upon him had stifled in him all real sense of good and evil.
There is a stage of degradation which robs the soul of its life; and the inner voice cannot be heard by
one whose whole mind is bent on getting food. To protect the unlucky youth from the moral death
which threatened him, he began to revive his self-love and his good opinion of himself. He showed him
a happier future in the right use of his talents; he revived the generous warmth of his heart by stories of
the noble deeds of others; by rousing his admiration for the doers of these deeds he revived his desire to
do like deeds himself. To draw him gradually from his idle and wandering life, he made him copy out
extracts from well-chosen books; he pretended to want these extracts, and so nourished in him the
noble  feeling  of  gratitude.  He  taught  him  indirectly  through  these  books,  and  thus  he  made  him
sufficiently regain his good opinion of himself so that he would no longer think himself good for
nothing, and would not make himself despicable in his own eyes.
  A trifling incident will show how this kindly man tried, unknown to him, to raise the heart of his
disciple out of its degradation, without seeming to think of teaching. The priest was so well known for
his uprightness and his discretion, that many people preferred to entrust their alms to him, rather than to
the wealthy clergy of the town. One day some one had given him some money to distribute among the
poor, and the young man was mean enough to ask for some of it on the score of poverty. "No," said he,
"we are brothers, you belong to me and I must not touch the money entrusted to me." Then he gave him
the sum he had asked for out of his own pocket. Lessons of this sort seldom fail to make an impression
on the heart of young people who are not wholly corrupt.
I am weary of speaking in the third person, and the precaution is unnecessary; for you are well
aware, my dear friend, that I myself was this unhappy fugitive; I think I am so far removed from the
disorders  of  my  youth  that  I  may  venture  to  confess  them,  and  the  hand  which  rescued  me  well
deserves that I should at least do honour to its goodness at the cost of some slight shame.
  What struck me most was to see in the private life of my worthy master, virtue without hypocrisy,
humanity without weakness, speech always plain and straightforward, and conduct in accordance with
this  speech.  I  never  saw  him  trouble  himself  whether  those  whom  he  assisted  went  to  vespers  or
confession, whether they fasted at the appointed seasons and went without meat; nor did he impose
upon them any other like conditions, without which you might die of hunger before you could hope for
any help from the devout.
  Far from displaying before him the zeal of a new convert, I was encouraged by these observations
and I made no secret of my way of thinking, nor did he seem to be shocked by it. Sometimes I wouldsay to myself, he overlooks my indifference to the religion I have adopted because he sees I am equally
indifferent to the religion in which I was brought up; he knows that my scorn for religion is not
confined to one sect. But what could I think when I sometimes heard him give his approval to doctrines
contrary to those of the Roman Catholic Church, and apparently having but a poor opinion of its
ceremonies. I should have thought him a Protestant in disguise if I had not beheld him so faithful to
those very customs which he seemed to value so lightly; but I knew he fulfilled his priestly duties as
carefully in private as in public, and I knew not what to think of these apparent contradictions. Except
for  the  fault  which  had  formerly  brought  about  his  disgrace,  a  fault  which  he  had  only  partially
overcome, his life was exemplary, his conduct beyond reproach, his conversation honest and discreet.
While I lived on very friendly terms with him, I learnt day by day to respect him more; and when he
had completely won my heart by such great kindness, I awaited with eager curiosity the time when I
should learn what was the principle on which the uniformity of this strange life was based.
  This opportunity was a long time coming. Before taking his disciple into his confidence, he tried to
get the seeds of reason and kindness which he had sown in my heart to germinate. The most difficult
fault to overcome in me was a certain haughty misanthropy, a certain bitterness against the rich and
successful,  as  if  their  wealth  and  happiness  had  been  gained  at  my  own  expense,  and  as  if  their
supposed happiness had been unjustly taken from my own. The foolish vanity of youth, which kicks
against the pricks of humiliation, made me only too much inclined to this angry temper; and the self-
respect, which my mentor strove to revive, led to pride, which made men still more vile in my eyes, and
only added scorn to my hatred.
  Without directly attacking this pride, he prevented it from developing into hardness of heart; and
without depriving me of my self-esteem, he made me less scornful of my neighbours. By continually
drawing my attention from the empty show, and directing it to the genuine sufferings concealed by it,
he taught me to deplore the faults of my fellows and feel for their sufferings, to pity rather than envy
them. Touched with compassion towards human weaknesses through the profound conviction of his
own failings, he viewed all men as the victims of their own vices and those of others; he beheld the
poor groaning under the tyranny of the rich, and the rich under the tyranny of their own prejudices.
"Believe me," said he, "our illusions, far from concealing our woes, only increase them by giving value
to what is in itself valueless, in making us aware of all sorts of fancied privations which we should not
otherwise feel. Peace of heart consists in despising everything that might disturb that peace; the man
who clings most closely to life is the man who can least enjoy it; and the man who most eagerly desires
happiness is always most miserable."
  "What gloomy ideas!" I exclaimed bitterly. "If we must deny ourselves everything, we might as
well never have been born; and if we must despise even happiness itself who can be happy?" "I am,"
replied the priest one day, in a tone which made a great impression on me. "You happy! So little
favoured by fortune, so poor, an exile and persecuted, you are happy! How have you contrived to be
happy?" "My child," he answered, "I will gladly tell you."
  Thereupon he explained that, having heard my confessions, he would confess to me. "I will open
my whole heart to yours," he said, embracing me. "You will see me, if not as I am, at least as I seem to
myself. When you have heard my whole confession of faith, when you really know the condition of my
heart, you will know why I think myself happy, and if you think as I do, you will know how to be
happy too. But these explanations are not the affair of a moment, it will take time to show you all my
ideas about the lot of man and the true value of life; let us choose a fitting time and a place where we
may continue this conversation without interruption."
I showed him how eager I was to hear him. The meeting was fixed for the very next morning. It was
summer time; we rose at daybreak. He took me out of the town on to a high hill above the river Po,
whose course we beheld as it flowed between its fertile banks; in the distance the landscape was
crowned by the vast chain of the Alps; the beams of the rising sun already touched the plains and cast
across the fields long shadows of trees, hillocks, and houses, and enriched with a thousand gleams of
light  the  fairest  picture  which  the  human  eye  can  see.  You  would  have  thought  that  nature  wasdisplaying all her splendour before our eyes to furnish a text for our conversation. After contemplating
this scene for a space in silence, the man of peace spoke to me.
  THE CREED OF A SAVOYARD PRIEST
  My child, do not look to me for learned speeches or profound arguments. I am no great philosopher,
nor do I desire to be one. I have, however, a certain amount of common-sense and a constant devotion
to truth. I have no wish to argue with you nor even to convince you; it is enough for me to show you, in
all simplicity of heart, what I really think. Consult your own heart while I speak; that is all I ask. If I am
mistaken, I am honestly mistaken, and therefore my error will not be counted to me as a crime; if you,
too, are honestly mistaken, there is no great harm done. If I am right, we are both endowed with reason,
we have both the same motive for listening to the voice of reason. Why should not you think as I do?
  By birth I was a peasant and poor; to till the ground was my portion; but my parents thought it a
finer thing that I should learn to get my living as a priest and they found means to send me to college. I
am quite sure that neither my parents nor I had any idea of seeking after what was good, useful, or true;
we only sought what was wanted to get me ordained. I learned what was taught me, I said what I was
told to say, I promised all that was required, and I became a priest. But I soon discovered that when I
promised not to be a man, I had promised more than I could perform.
  Conscience, they tell us, is the creature of prejudice, but I know from experience that conscience
persists in following the order of nature in spite of all the laws of man. In vain is this or that forbidden;
remorse makes her voice heard but feebly when what we do is permitted by well-ordered nature, and
still more when we are doing her bidding. My good youth, nature has not yet appealed to your senses;
may you long remain in this happy state when her voice is the voice of innocence. Remember that to
anticipate her teaching is to offend more deeply against her than to resist her teaching; you must first
learn to resist, that you may know when to yield without wrong-doing.
  From my youth up I had reverenced the married state as the first and most sacred institution of
nature. Having renounced the right to marry, I was resolved not to profane the sanctity of marriage; for
in spite of my education and reading I had always led a simple and regular life, and my mind had
preserved  the  innocence  of  its  natural  instincts;  these  instincts  had  not  been  obscured  by  worldly
wisdom, while my poverty kept me remote from the temptations dictated by the sophistry of vice.
  This  very  resolution  proved  my  ruin.  My  respect  for  marriage  led  to  the  discovery  of  my
misconduct. The scandal must be expiated; I was arrested, suspended, and dismissed; I was the victim
of my scruples rather than of my incontinence, and I had reason to believe, from the reproaches which
accompanied my disgrace, that one can often escape punishment by being guilty of a worse fault.
  A thoughtful mind soon learns from such experiences. I found my former ideas of justice, honesty,
and every duty of man overturned by these painful events, and day by day I was losing my hold on one
or another of the opinions I had accepted. What was left was not enough to form a body of ideas which
could stand alone, and I felt that the evidence on which my principles rested was being weakened; at
last I knew not what to think, and I came to the same conclusion as yourself, but with this difference:
My lack of faith was the slow growth of manhood, attained with great difficulty, and all the harder to
uproot.
I was in that state of doubt and uncertainty which Descartes considers essential to the search for
truth. It is a state which cannot continue, it is disquieting and painful; only vicious tendencies and an
idle heart can keep us in that state. My heart was not so corrupt as to delight in it, and there is nothing
which so maintains the habit of thinking as being better pleased with oneself than with one's lot.
I pondered, therefore, on the sad fate of mortals, adrift upon this sea of human opinions, without
compass or rudder, and abandoned to their stormy passions with no guide but an inexperienced pilot
who does not know whence he comes or whither he is going. I said to myself, "I love truth, I seek her,
and cannot find her. Show me truth and I will hold her fast; why does she hide her face from the eager
heart that would fain worship her?"
  Although I have often experienced worse sufferings, I have never led a life so uniformly distressing
as this period of unrest and anxiety, when I wandered incessantly from one doubt to another, gainingnothing from my prolonged meditations but uncertainty, darkness, and contradiction with regard to the
source of my being and the rule of my duties.
I  cannot  understand  how  any  one  can  be  a  sceptic  sincerely  and  on  principle.  Either  such
philosophers do not exist or they are the most miserable of men. Doubt with regard to what we ought to
know is a condition too violent for the human mind; it cannot long be endured; in spite of itself the
mind decides one way or another, and it prefers to be deceived rather than to believe nothing.
  My perplexity was increased by the fact that I had been brought up in a church which decides
everything and permits no doubts, so that having rejected one article of faith I was forced to reject the
rest; as I could not accept absurd decisions, I was deprived of those which were not absurd. When I was
told to believe everything, I could believe nothing, and I knew not where to stop.
I consulted the philosophers, I searched their books and examined their various theories; I found
them  all  alike  proud,  assertive,  dogmatic,  professing,  even  in  their  so-called  scepticism,  to  know
everything, proving nothing, scoffing at each other. This last trait, which was common to all of them,
struck me as the only point in which they were right. Braggarts in attack, they are weaklings in defence.
Weigh their arguments, they are all destructive; count their voices, every one speaks for himself; they
are only agreed in arguing with each other. I could find no way out of my uncertainty by listening to
them.
I suppose this prodigious diversity of opinion is caused, in the first place, by the weakness of the
human intellect; and, in the second, by pride. We have no means of measuring this vast machine, we
are unable to calculate its workings; we know neither its guiding principles nor its final purpose; we do
not know ourselves, we know neither our nature nor the spirit that moves us; we scarcely know whether
man is one or many; we are surrounded by impenetrable mysteries. These mysteries are beyond the
region  of  sense,  we  think  we  can  penetrate  them  by  the  light  of  reason,  but  we  fall  back  on  our
imagination. Through this imagined world each forces a way for himself which he holds to be right;
none can tell whether his path will lead him to the goal. Yet we long to know and understand it all. The
one thing we do not know is the limit of the knowable. We prefer to trust to chance and to believe what
is not true, rather than to own that not one of us can see what really is. A fragment of some vast whole
whose bounds are beyond our gaze, a fragment abandoned by its Creator to our foolish quarrels, we are
vain enough to want to determine the nature of that whole and our own relations with regard to it.
  If the philosophers were in a position to declare the truth, which of them would care to do so? Every
one of them knows that his own system rests on no surer foundations than the rest, but he maintains it
because it is his own. There is not one of them who, if he chanced to discover the difference between
truth and falsehood, would not prefer his own lie to the truth which another had discovered. Where is
the philosopher who would not deceive the whole world for his own glory? If he can rise above the
crowd, if he can excel his rivals, what more does he want? Among believers he is an atheist; among
atheists he would be a believer.
  The first thing I learned from these considerations was to restrict my inquiries to what directly
concerned myself, to rest in profound ignorance of everything else, and not even to trouble myself to
doubt anything beyond what I required to know.
I also realised that the philosophers, far from ridding me of my vain doubts, only multiplied the
doubts that tormented me and failed to remove any one of them. So I chose another guide and said, "Let
me follow the Inner Light; it will not lead me so far astray as others have done, or if it does it will be
my own fault, and I shall not go so far wrong if I follow my own illusions as if I trusted to their
deceits."
I then went over in my mind the various opinions which I had held in the course of my life, and I
saw that although no one of them was plain enough to gain immediate belief, some were more probable
than others, and my inward consent was given or withheld in proportion to this improbability. Having
discovered this, I made an unprejudiced comparison of all these different ideas, and I perceived that the
first and most general of them was also the simplest and the most reasonable, and that it would have
been accepted by every one if only it had been last instead of first. Imagine all your philosophers,ancient and modern, having exhausted their strange systems of force, chance, fate, necessity, atoms, a
living world, animated matter, and every variety of materialism. Then comes the illustrious Clarke who
gives light to the world and proclaims the Being of beings and the Giver of things. What universal
admiration,  what  unanimous  applause  would  have  greeted  this  new  system--a  system  so  great,  so
illuminating, and so simple. Other systems are full of absurdities; this system seems to me to contain
fewer things which are beyond the understanding of the human mind. I said to myself, "Every system
has its insoluble problems, for the finite mind of man is too small to deal with them; these difficulties
are therefore no final arguments, against any system. But what a difference there is between the direct
evidence on which these systems are based! Should we not prefer that theory which alone explains all
the facts, when it is no more difficult than the rest?"
  Bearing thus within my heart the love of truth as my only philosophy, and as my only method a
clear and simple rule which dispensed with the need for vain and subtle arguments, I returned with the
help of this rule to the examination of such knowledge as concerned myself; I was resolved to admit as
self-evident all that I could not honestly refuse to believe, and to admit as true all that seemed to follow
directly from this; all the rest I determined to leave undecided, neither accepting nor rejecting it, nor yet
troubling myself to clear up difficulties which did not lead to any practical ends.
  But who am I? What right have I to decide? What is it that determines my judgments? If they are
inevitable,  if  they  are  the  results  of  the  impressions  I  receive,  I  am  wasting  my  strength  in  such
inquiries; they would be made or not without any interference of mine. I must therefore first turn my
eyes upon myself to acquaint myself with the instrument I desire to use, and to discover how far it is
reliable.
I exist, and I have senses through which I receive impressions. This is the first truth that strikes me
and I am forced to accept it. Have I any independent knowledge of my existence, or am I only aware of
it through my sensations? This is my first difficulty, and so far I cannot solve it. For I continually
experience sensations, either directly or indirectly through memory, so how can I know if the feeling of
self is something beyond these sensations or if it can exist independently of them?
  My sensations take place in myself, for they make me aware of my own existence; but their cause is
outside me, for they affect me whether I have any reason for them or not, and they are produced or
destroyed independently of me. So I clearly perceive that my sensation, which is within me, and its
cause or its object, which is outside me, are different things.
  Thus, not only do I exist, but other entities exist also, that is to say, the objects of my sensations;
and even if these objects are merely ideas, still these ideas are not me.
  But everything outside myself, everything which acts upon my senses, I call matter, and all the
particles of matter which I suppose to be united into separate entities I call bodies. Thus all the disputes
of the idealists and the realists have no meaning for me; their distinctions between the appearance and
the reality of bodies are wholly fanciful.
I am now as convinced of the existence of the universe as of my own. I next consider the objects of
my sensations, and I find that I have the power of comparing them, so I perceive that I am endowed
with an active force of which I was not previously aware.
  To perceive is to feel; to compare is to judge; to judge and to feel are not the same. Through
sensation objects present themselves to me separately and singly as they are in nature; by comparing
them I rearrange them, I shift them so to speak, I place one upon another to decide whether they are
alike or different, or more generally to find out their relations. To my mind, the distinctive faculty of an
active or intelligent being is the power of understanding this word "is." I seek in vain in the merely
sensitive entity that intelligent force which compares and judges; I can find no trace of it in its nature.
This passive entity will be aware of each object separately, it will even be aware of the whole formed
by the two together, but having no power to place them side by side it can never compare them, it can
never form a judgment with regard to them.
  To see two things at once is not to see their relations nor to judge of their differences; to perceive
several objects, one beyond the other, is not to relate them. I may have at the same moment an idea of abig stick and a little stick without comparing them, without judging that one is less than the other, just
as I can see my whole hand without counting my fingers. [Footnote: M. de le Cordamines' narratives
tell of a people who only know how to count up to three. Yet the men of this nation, having hands, have
often  seen  their  fingers  without  learning  to  count  up  to  five.]  These  comparative  ideas,  'greater',
'smaller', together with number ideas of 'one', 'two', etc. are certainly not sensations, although my mind
only produces them when my sensations occur.
  We  are  told  that  a  sensitive  being  distinguishes  sensations  from  each  other  by  the  inherent
differences in the sensations; this requires explanation. When the sensations are different, the sensitive
being distinguishes them by their differences; when they are alike, he distinguishes them because he is
aware of them one beyond the other. Otherwise, how could he distinguish between two equal objects
simultaneously experienced? He would necessarily confound the two objects and take them for one
object, especially under a system which professed that the representative sensations of space have no
extension.
  When we become aware of the two sensations to be compared, their impression is made, each
object is perceived, both are perceived, but for all that their relation is not perceived. If the judgment of
this relation were merely a sensation, and came to me solely from the object itself, my judgments would
never be mistaken, for it is never untrue that I feel what I feel.
  Why then am I mistaken as to the relation between these two sticks, especially when they are not
parallel? Why, for example, do I say the small stick is a third of the large, when it is only a quarter?
Why is the picture, which is the sensation, unlike its model which is the object? It is because I am
active when I judge, because the operation of comparison is at fault; because my understanding, which
judges of relations, mingles its errors with the truth of sensations, which only reveal to me things.
  Add to this a consideration which will, I feel sure, appeal to you when you have thought about it: it
is this--If we were purely passive in the use of our senses, there would be no communication between
them; it would be impossible to know that the body we are touching and the thing we are looking at is
the same. Either we should never perceive anything outside ourselves, or there would be for us five
substances perceptible by the senses, whose identity we should have no means of perceiving.
  This power of my mind which brings my sensations together and compares them may be called by
any name; let it be called attention, meditation, reflection, or what you will; it is still true that it is in me
and  not  in  things,  that  it  is  I  alone  who  produce  it,  though  I  only  produce  it  when  I  receive  an
impression from things. Though I am compelled to feel or not to feel, I am free to examine more or less
what I feel.
  Being now, so to speak, sure of myself, I begin to look at things outside myself, and I behold
myself with a sort of shudder flung at random into this vast universe, plunged as it were into the vast
number of entities, knowing nothing of what they are in themselves or in relation to me. I study them, I
observe them; and the first object which suggests itself for comparison with them is myself.
  All that I perceive through the senses is matter, and I deduce all the essential properties of matter
from the sensible qualities which make me perceive it, qualities which are inseparable from it. I see it
sometimes in motion, sometimes at rest, [Footnote: This repose is, if you prefer it, merely relative; but
as we perceive more or less of motion, we may plainly conceive one of two extremes, which is rest; and
we conceive it so clearly that we are even disposed to take for absolute rest what is only relative. But it
is not true that motion is of the essence of matter, if matter may be conceived of as at rest.] hence I infer
that neither motion nor rest is essential to it, but motion, being an action, is the result of a cause of
which rest is only the absence. When, therefore, there is nothing acting upon matter it does not move,
and for the very reason that rest and motion are indifferent to it, its natural state is a state of rest.
I perceive two sorts of motions of bodies, acquired motion and spontaneous or voluntary motion. In
the first the cause is external to the body moved, in the second it is within. I shall not conclude from
that that the motion, say of a watch, is spontaneous, for if no external cause operated upon the spring it
would run down and the watch would cease to go. For the same reason I should not admit that the
movements  of  fluids  are  spontaneous,  neither  should  I  attribute  spontaneous  motion  to  fire  whichcauses  their  fluidity.  [Footnote:  Chemists  regard  phlogiston  or  the  element  of  fire  as  diffused,
motionless, and stagnant in the compounds of which it forms part, until external forces set it free,
collect it and set it in motion, and change it into fire.]
  You  ask  me  if  the  movements  of  animals  are  spontaneous;  my  answer  is,  "I  cannot  tell,"  but
analogy points that way. You ask me again, how do I know that there are spontaneous movements? I
tell you, "I know it because I feel them." I want to move my arm and I move it without any other
immediate cause of the movement but my own will. In vain would any one try to argue me out of this
feeling, it is stronger than any proofs; you might as well try to convince me that I do not exist.
  If there were no spontaneity in men's actions, nor in anything that happens on this earth, it would be
all  the  more  difficult  to  imagine  a  first  cause  for  all  motion.  For  my  own  part,  I  feel  myself  so
thoroughly convinced that the natural state of matter is a state of rest, and that it has no power of action
in itself, that when I see a body in motion I at once assume that it is either a living body or that this
motion has been imparted to it. My mind declines to accept in any way the idea of inorganic matter
moving of its own accord, or giving rise to any action.
  Yet this visible universe consists of matter, matter diffused and dead, [Footnote: I have tried hard to
grasp the idea of a living molecule, but in vain. The idea of matter feeling without any senses seems to
me unintelligible and self-contradictory. To accept or reject this idea one must first understand it, and I
confess that so far I have not succeeded.] matter which has none of the cohesion, the organisation, the
common  feeling  of  the  parts  of  a  living  body,  for  it  is  certain  that  we  who  are  parts  have  no
consciousness of the whole. This same universe is in motion, and in its movements, ordered, uniform,
and subject to fixed laws, it has none of that freedom which appears in the spontaneous movements of
men and animals. So the world is not some huge animal which moves of its own accord; its movements
are therefore due to some external cause, a cause which I cannot perceive, but the inner voice makes
this cause so apparent to me that I cannot watch the course of the sun without imagining a force which
drives it, and when the earth revolves I think I see the hand that sets it in motion.
  If I must accept general laws whose essential relation to matter is unperceived by me, how much
further have I got? These laws, not being real things, not being substances, have therefore some other
basis unknown to me. Experiment and observation have acquainted us with the laws of motion; these
laws determine the results without showing their causes; they are quite inadequate to explain the system
of the world and the course of the universe. With the help of dice Descartes made heaven and earth; but
he could not set his dice in motion, nor start the action of his centrifugal force without the help of
rotation.  Newton  discovered  the  law  of  gravitation;  but  gravitation  alone  would  soon  reduce  the
universe to a motionless mass; he was compelled to add a projectile force to account for the elliptical
course of the celestial bodies; let Newton show us the hand that launched the planets in the tangent of
their orbits.
  The first causes of motion are not to be found in matter; matter receives and transmits motion, but
does not produce it. The more I observe the action and reaction of the forces of nature playing on one
another, the more I see that we must always go back from one effect to another, till we arrive at a first
cause in some will; for to assume an infinite succession of causes is to assume that there is no first
cause.  In  a  word,  no  motion  which  is  not  caused  by  another  motion  can  take  place,  except  by  a
spontaneous, voluntary action; inanimate bodies have no action but motion, and there is no real action
without will. This is my first principle. I believe, therefore, that there is a will which sets the universe in
motion and gives life to nature. This is my first dogma, or the first article of my creed.
  How does a will produce a physical and corporeal action? I cannot tell, but I perceive that it does so
in myself; I will to do something and I do it; I will to move my body and it moves, but if an inanimate
body, when at rest, should begin to move itself, the thing is incomprehensible and without precedent.
The will is known to me in its action, not in its nature. I know this will as a cause of motion, but to
conceive of matter as producing motion is clearly to conceive of an effect without a cause, which is not
to conceive at all.
  It is no more possible for me to conceive how my will moves my body than to conceive how mysensations affect my mind. I do not even know why one of these mysteries has seemed less inexplicable
than the other. For my own part, whether I am active or passive, the means of union of the two
substances seem to me absolutely incomprehensible. It is very strange that people make this very
incomprehensibility a step towards the compounding of the two substances, as if operations so different
in kind were more easily explained in one case than in two.
  The doctrine I have just laid down is indeed obscure; but at least it suggests a meaning and there is
nothing in it repugnant to reason or experience; can we say as much of materialism? Is it not plain that
if motion is essential to matter it would be inseparable from it, it would always be present in it in the
same degree, always present in every particle of matter, always the same in each particle of matter, it
would  not  be  capable  of  transmission,  it  could  neither  increase  nor  diminish,  nor  could  we  ever
conceive of matter at rest. When you tell me that motion is not essential to matter but necessary to it,
you try to cheat me with words which would be easier to refute if there was a little more sense in them.
For either the motion of matter arises from the matter itself and is therefore essential to it; or it arises
from an external cause and is not necessary to the matter, because the motive cause acts upon it; we
have got back to our original difficulty.
  The  chief  source  of  human  error  is  to  be  found  in  general  and  abstract  ideas;  the  jargon  of
metaphysics  has  never  led  to  the  discovery  of  any  single  truth,  and  it  has  filled  philosophy  with
absurdities of which we are ashamed as soon as we strip them of their long words. Tell me, my friend,
when they talk to you of a blind force diffused throughout nature, do they present any real idea to your
mind? They think they are saying something by these vague expressions--universal force, essential
motion--but  they  are  saying  nothing  at  all.  The  idea  of  motion  is  nothing  more  than  the  idea  of
transference from place to place; there is no motion without direction; for no individual can move all
ways at once. In what direction then does matter move of necessity? Has the whole body of matter a
uniform motion, or has each atom its own motion? According to the first idea the whole universe must
form a solid and indivisible mass; according to the second it can only form a diffused and incoherent
fluid, which would make the union of any two atoms impossible. What direction shall be taken by this
motion common to all matter? Shall it be in a straight line, in a circle, or from above downwards, to the
right or to the left? If each molecule has its own direction, what are the causes of all these directions
and all these differences? If every molecule or atom only revolved on its own axis, nothing would ever
leave its place and there would be no transmitted motion, and even then this circular movement would
require to follow some direction. To set matter in motion by an abstraction is to utter words without
meaning, and to attribute to matter a given direction is to assume a determining cause. The more
examples  I  take,  the  more  causes  I  have  to  explain,  without  ever  finding  a  common  agent  which
controls them. Far from being able to picture to myself an entire absence of order in the fortuitous
concurrence of elements, I cannot even imagine such a strife, and the chaos of the universe is less
conceivable to me than its harmony. I can understand that the mechanism of the universe may not be
intelligible to the human mind, but when a man sets to work to explain it, he must say what men can
understand.
  If matter in motion points me to a will, matter in motion according to fixed laws points me to an
intelligence; that is the second article of my creed. To act, to compare, to choose, are the operations of
an active, thinking being; so this being exists. Where do you find him existing, you will say? Not
merely in the revolving heavens, nor in the sun which gives us light, not in myself alone, but in the
sheep that grazes, the bird that flies, the stone that falls, and the leaf blown by the wind.
I judge of the order of the world, although I know nothing of its purpose, for to judge of this order it
is enough for me to compare the parts one with another, to study their co-operation, their relations, and
to observe their united action. I know not why the universe exists, but I see continually how it is
changed; I never fail to perceive the close connection by which the entities of which it consists lend
their aid one to another. I am like a man who sees the works of a watch for the first time; he is never
weary of admiring the mechanism, though he does not know the use of the instrument and has never
seen its face. I do not know what this is for, says he, but I see that each part of it is fitted to the rest, Iadmire the workman in the details of his work, and I am quite certain that all these wheels only work
together in this fashion for some common end which I cannot perceive.
  Let us compare the special ends, the means, the ordered relations of every kind, then let us listen to
the inner voice of feeling; what healthy mind can reject its evidence? Unless the eyes are blinded by
prejudices, can they fail to see that the visible order of the universe proclaims a supreme intelligence?
What sophisms must be brought together before we fail to understand the harmony of existence and the
wonderful  co-operation  of  every  part  for  the  maintenance  of  the  rest?  Say  what  you  will  of
combinations and probabilities; what do you gain by reducing me to silence if you cannot gain my
consent? And how can you rob me of the spontaneous feeling which, in spite of myself, continually
gives  you  the  lie?  If  organised  bodies  had  come  together  fortuitously  in  all  sorts  of  ways  before
assuming settled forms, if stomachs are made without mouths, feet without heads, hands without arms,
imperfect organs of every kind which died because they could not preserve their life, why do none of
these imperfect attempts now meet our eyes; why has nature at length prescribed laws to herself which
she did not at first recognise? I must not be surprised if that which is possible should happen, and if the
improbability of the event is compensated for by the number of the attempts. I grant this; yet if any one
told me that printed characters scattered broadcast had produced the Aeneid all complete, I would not
condescend to take a single step to verify this falsehood. You will tell me I am forgetting the multitude
of attempts. But how many such attempts must I assume to bring the combination within the bounds of
probability? For my own part the only possible assumption is that the chances are infinity to one that
the product is not the work of chance. In addition to this, chance combinations yield nothing but
products  of  the  same  nature  as  the  elements  combined,  so  that  life  and  organisation  will  not  be
produced by a flow of atoms, and a chemist when making his compounds will never give them thought
and feeling in his crucible. [Footnote: Could one believe, if one had not seen it, that human absurdity
could go so far? Amatus Lusitanus asserts that he saw a little man an inch long enclosed in a glass,
which Julius Camillus, like a second Prometheus, had made by alchemy. Paracelsis (De natura rerum)
teaches the method of making these tiny men, and he maintains that the pygmies, fauns, satyrs, and
nymphs have been made by chemistry. Indeed I cannot see that there is anything more to be done, to
establish the possibility of these facts, unless it is to assert that organic matter resists the heat of fire and
that its molecules can preserve their life in the hottest furnace.]
I was surprised and almost shocked when I read Neuwentit. How could this man desire to make a
book out of the wonders of nature, wonders which show the wisdom of the author of nature? His book
would have been as large as the world itself before he had exhausted his subject, and as soon as we
attempt to give details, that greatest wonder of all, the concord and harmony of the whole, escapes us.
The mere generation of living organic bodies is the despair of the human mind; the insurmountable
barrier raised by nature between the various species, so that they should not mix with one another, is
the clearest proof of her intention. She is not content to have established order, she has taken adequate
measures to prevent the disturbance of that order.
  There is not a being in the universe which may not be regarded as in some respects the common
centre of all, around which they are grouped, so that they are all reciprocally end and means in relation
to each other. The mind is confused and lost amid these innumerable relations, not one of which is itself
confused or lost in the crowd. What absurd assumptions are required to deduce all this harmony from
the blind mechanism of matter set in motion by chance! In vain do those who deny the unity of
intention manifested in the relations of all the parts of this great whole, in vain do they conceal their
nonsense under abstractions, co-ordinations, general principles, symbolic expressions; whatever they
do I find it impossible to conceive of a system of entities so firmly ordered unless I believe in an
intelligence that orders them. It is not in my power to believe that passive and dead matter can have
brought forth living and feeling beings, that blind chance has brought forth intelligent beings, that that
which does not think has brought forth thinking beings.
I believe, therefore, that the world is governed by a wise and powerful will; I see it or rather I feel
it, and it is a great thing to know this. But has this same world always existed, or has it been created? Isthere one source of all things? Are there two or many? What is their nature? I know not; and what
concern is it of mine? When these things become of importance to me I will try to learn them; till then I
abjure these idle speculations, which may trouble my peace, but cannot affect my conduct nor be
comprehended by my reason.
  Recollect that I am not preaching my own opinion but explaining it. Whether matter is eternal or
created, whether its origin is passive or not, it is still certain that the whole is one, and that it proclaims
a single intelligence; for I see nothing that is not part of the same ordered system, nothing which does
not co-operate to the same end, namely, the conservation of all within the established order. This being
who wills and can perform his will, this being active through his own power, this being, whoever he
may be, who moves the universe and orders all things, is what I call God. To this name I add the ideas
of  intelligence,  power,  will,  which  I  have  brought  together,  and  that  of  kindness  which  is  their
necessary consequence; but for all this I know no more of the being to which I ascribe them. He hides
himself alike from my senses and my understanding; the more I think of him, the more perplexed I am;
I know full well that he exists, and that he exists of himself alone; I know that my existence depends on
his, and that everything I know depends upon him also. I see God everywhere in his works; I feel him
within myself; I behold him all around me; but if I try to ponder him himself, if I try to find out where
he is, what he is, what is his substance, he escapes me and my troubled spirit finds nothing.
  Convinced of my unfitness, I shall never argue about the nature of God unless I am driven to it by
the feeling of his relations with myself. Such reasonings are always rash; a wise man should venture on
them with trembling, he should be certain that he can never sound their abysses; for the most insolent
attitude towards God is not to abstain from thinking of him, but to think evil of him.
  After the discovery of such of his attributes as enable me to conceive of his existence, I return to
myself, and I try to discover what is my place in the order of things which he governs, and I can myself
examine. At once, and beyond possibility of doubt, I discover my species; for by my own will and the
instruments I can control to carry out my will, I have more power to act upon all bodies about me,
either to make use of or to avoid their action at my pleasure, than any of them has power to act upon me
against my will by mere physical impulsion; and through my intelligence I am the only one who can
examine all the rest. What being here below, except man, can observe others, measure, calculate,
forecast their motions, their effects, and unite, so to speak, the feeling of a common existence with that
of his individual existence? What is there so absurd in the thought that all things are made for me, when
I alone can relate all things to myself?
  It is true, therefore, that man is lord of the earth on which he dwells; for not only does he tame all
the beasts, not only does he control its elements through his industry; but he alone knows how to
control it; by contemplation he takes possession of the stars which he cannot approach. Show me any
other creature on earth who can make a fire and who can behold with admiration the sun. What! can I
observe and know all creatures and their relations; can I feel what is meant by order, beauty, and virtue;
can I consider the universe and raise myself towards the hand that guides it; can I love good and
perform it; and should I then liken myself to the beasts? Wretched soul, it is your gloomy philosophy
which makes you like the beasts; or rather in vain do you seek to degrade yourself; your genius belies
your principles, your kindly heart belies your doctrines, and even the abuse of your powers proves their
excellence in your own despite.
  For myself, I am not pledged to the support of any system. I am a plain and honest man, one who is
not carried away by party spirit, one who has no ambition to be head of a sect; I am content with the
place where God has set me; I see nothing, next to God himself, which is better than my species; and if
I had to choose my place in the order of creation, what more could I choose than to be a man!
I am not puffed up by this thought, I am deeply moved by it; for this state was no choice of mine, it
was not due to the deserts of a creature who as yet did not exist. Can I behold myself thus distinguished
without congratulating myself on this post of honour, without blessing the hand which bestowed it? The
first return to self has given birth to a feeling of gratitude and thankfulness to the author of my species,
and this feeling calls forth my first homage to the beneficent Godhead. I worship his Almighty powerand my heart acknowledges his mercies. Is it not a natural consequence of our self-love to honour our
protector and to love our benefactor?
  But when, in my desire to discover my own place within my species, I consider its different ranks
and the men who fill them, where am I now? What a sight meets my eyes! Where is now the order I
perceived? Nature showed me a scene of harmony and proportion; the human race shows me nothing
but confusion and disorder. The elements agree together; men are in a state of chaos. The beasts are
happy; their king alone is wretched. O Wisdom, where are thy laws? O Providence, is this thy rule over
the world? Merciful God, where is thy Power? I behold the earth, and there is evil upon it.
  Would you believe it, dear friend, from these gloomy thoughts and apparent contradictions, there
was shaped in my mind the sublime idea of the soul, which all my seeking had hitherto failed to
discover? While I meditated upon man's nature, I seemed to discover two distinct principles in it; one of
them raised him to the study of the eternal truths, to the love of justice, and of true morality, to the
regions of the world of thought, which the wise delight to contemplate; the other led him downwards to
himself, made him the slave of his senses, of the passions which are their instruments, and thus opposed
everything suggested to him by the former principle. When I felt myself carried away, distracted by
these conflicting motives, I said, No; man is not one; I will and I will not; I feel myself at once a slave
and a free man; I perceive what is right, I love it, and I do what is wrong; I am active when I listen to
the voice of reason; I am passive when I am carried away by my passions; and when I yield, my worst
suffering is the knowledge that I might have resisted.
  Young  man,  hear  me  with  confidence.  I  will  always  be  honest  with  you.  If  conscience  is  the
creature of prejudice, I am certainly wrong, and there is no such thing as a proof of morality; but if to
put oneself first is an inclination natural to man, and if the first sentiment of justice is moreover inborn
in the human heart, let those who say man is a simple creature remove these contradictions and I will
grant that there is but one substance.
  You will note that by this term 'substance' I understand generally the being endowed with some
primitive quality, apart from all special and secondary modifications. If then all the primitive qualities
which are known to us can be united in one and the same being, we should only acknowledge one
substance;  but  if  there  are  qualities  which  are  mutually  exclusive,  there  are  as  many  different
substances as there are such exclusions. You will think this over; for my own part, whatever Locke may
say, it is enough for me to recognise matter as having merely extension and divisibility to convince
myself that it cannot think, and if a philosopher tells me that trees feel and rocks think [Footnote: It
seems to me that modern philosophy, far from saying that rocks think, has discovered that men do not
think. It perceives nothing more in nature than sensitive beings; and the only difference it finds between
a man and a stone is that a man is a sensitive being which experiences sensations, and a stone is a
sensitive being which does not experience sensations. But if it is true that all matter feels, where shall I
find the sensitive unit, the individual ego? Shall it be in each molecule of matter or in bodies as
aggregates  of  molecules?  Shall  I  place  this  unity  in  fluids  and  solids  alike,  in  compounds  and  in
elements? You tell me nature consists of individuals. But what are these individuals? Is that stone an
individual or an aggregate of individuals? Is it a single sensitive being, or are there as many beings in it
as there are grains of sand? If every elementary atom is a sensitive being, how shall I conceive of that
intimate communication by which one feels within the other, so that their two egos are blended in one?
Attraction may be a law of nature whose mystery is unknown to us; but at least we conceive that there
is nothing in attraction acting in proportion to mass which is contrary to extension and divisibility. Can
you conceive of sensation in the same way? The sensitive parts have extension, but the sensitive being
is one and indivisible; he cannot be cut in two, he is a whole or he is nothing; therefore the sensitive
being is not a material body. I know not how our materialists understand it, but it seems to me that the
same difficulties which have led them to reject thought, should have made them also reject feeling; and
I see no reason why, when the first step has been taken, they should not take the second too; what more
would it cost them? Since they are certain they do not think, why do they dare to affirm that they feel?]
in vain will he perplex me with his cunning arguments; I merely regard him as a dishonest sophist, whoprefers to say that stones have feeling rather than that men have souls.
  Suppose a deaf man denies the existence of sounds because he has never heard them. I put before
his  eyes  a  stringed  instrument  and  cause  it  to  sound  in  unison  by  means  of  another  instrument
concealed from him; the deaf man sees the chord vibrate. I tell him, "The sound makes it do that." "Not
at all," says he, "the string itself is the cause of the vibration; to vibrate in that way is a quality common
to all bodies." "Then show me this vibration in other bodies," I answer, "or at least show me its cause in
this string." "I cannot," replies the deaf man; "but because I do not understand how that string vibrates
why should I try to explain it by means of your sounds, of which I have not the least idea? It is
explaining one obscure fact by means of a cause still more obscure. Make me perceive your sounds; or
I say there are no such things."
  The more I consider thought and the nature of the human mind, the more likeness I find between
the arguments of the materialists and those of the deaf man. Indeed, they are deaf to the inner voice
which cries aloud to them, in a tone which can hardly be mistaken. A machine does not think, there is
neither movement nor form which can produce reflection; something within thee tries to break the
bands which confine it; space is not thy measure, the whole universe does not suffice to contain thee;
thy sentiments, thy desires, thy anxiety, thy pride itself, have another origin than this small body in
which thou art imprisoned.
  No material creature is in itself active, and I am active. In vain do you argue this point with me; I
feel it, and it is this feeling which speaks to me more forcibly than the reason which disputes it. I have a
body which is acted upon by other bodies, and it acts in turn upon them; there is no doubt about this
reciprocal action; but my will is independent of my senses; I consent or I resist; I yield or I win the
victory, and I know very well in myself when I have done what I wanted and when I have merely given
way to my passions. I have always the power to will, but not always the strength to do what I will.
When I yield to temptation I surrender myself to the action of external objects. When I blame myself
for this weakness, I listen to my own will alone; I am a slave in my vices, a free man in my remorse; the
feeling of freedom is never effaced in me but when I myself do wrong, and when I at length prevent the
voice of the soul from protesting against the authority of the body.
I am only aware of will through the consciousness of my own will, and intelligence is no better
known to me. When you ask me what is the cause which determines my will, it is my turn to ask what
cause determines my judgment; for it is plain that these two causes are but one; and if you understand
clearly that man is active in his judgments, that his intelligence is only the power to compare and judge,
you will see that his freedom is only a similar power or one derived from this; he chooses between
good and evil as he judges between truth and falsehood; if his judgment is at fault, he chooses amiss.
What  then  is  the  cause  that  determines  his  will?  It  is  his  judgment.  And  what  is  the  cause  that
determines  his  judgment?  It  is  his  intelligence,  his  power  of  judging;  the  determining  cause  is  in
himself. Beyond that, I understand nothing.
  No doubt I am not free not to desire my own welfare, I am not free to desire my own hurt; but my
freedom consists in this very thing, that I can will what is for my own good, or what I esteem as such,
without any external compulsion. Does it follow that I am not my own master because I cannot be other
than myself?
  The motive power of all action is in the will of a free creature; we can go no farther. It is not the
word freedom that is meaningless, but the word necessity. To suppose some action which is not the
effect of an active motive power is indeed to suppose effects without cause, to reason in a vicious
circle. Either there is no original impulse, or every original impulse has no antecedent cause, and there
is no will properly so-called without freedom. Man is therefore free to act, and as such he is animated
by an immaterial substance; that is the third article of my creed. From these three you will easily
deduce the rest, so that I need not enumerate them.
  If man is at once active and free, he acts of his own accord; what he does freely is no part of the
system marked out by Providence and it cannot be imputed to Providence. Providence does not will the
evil that man does when he misuses the freedom given to him; neither does Providence prevent himdoing it, either because the wrong done by so feeble a creature is as nothing in its eyes, or because it
could not prevent it without doing a greater wrong and degrading his nature. Providence has made him
free that he may choose the good and refuse the evil. It has made him capable of this choice if he uses
rightly the faculties bestowed upon him, but it has so strictly limited his powers that the misuse of his
freedom cannot disturb the general order. The evil that man does reacts upon himself without affecting
the system of the world, without preventing the preservation of the human species in spite of itself. To
complain that God does not prevent us from doing wrong is to complain because he has made man of
so excellent a nature, that he has endowed his actions with that morality by which they are ennobled,
that he has made virtue man's birthright. Supreme happiness consists in self-content; that we may gain
this self-content we are placed upon this earth and endowed with freedom, we are tempted by our
passions and restrained by conscience. What more could divine power itself have done on our behalf?
Could it have made our nature a contradiction, and have given the prize of well-doing to one who was
incapable of evil? To prevent a man from wickedness, should Providence have restricted him to instinct
and made him a fool? Not so, O God of my soul, I will never reproach thee that thou hast created me in
thine own image, that I may be free and good and happy like my Maker!
  It is the abuse of our powers that makes us unhappy and wicked. Our cares, our sorrows, our
sufferings are of our own making. Moral ills are undoubtedly the work of man, and physical ills would
be nothing but for our vices which have made us liable to them. Has not nature made us feel our needs
as a means to our preservation! Is not bodily suffering a sign that the machine is out of order and needs
attention? Death.... Do not the wicked poison their own life and ours? Who would wish to live for ever?
Death is the cure for the evils you bring upon yourself; nature would not have you suffer perpetually.
How few sufferings are felt by man living in a state of primitive simplicity! His life is almost entirely
free from suffering and from passion; he neither fears nor feels death; if he feels it, his sufferings make
him desire it; henceforth it is no evil in his eyes. If we were but content to be ourselves we should have
no cause to complain of our lot; but in the search for an imaginary good we find a thousand real ills. He
who  cannot  bear  a  little  pain  must  expect  to  suffer  greatly.  If  a  man  injures  his  constitution  by
dissipation, you try to cure him with medicine; the ill he fears is added to the ill he feels; the thought of
death makes it horrible and hastens its approach; the more we seek to escape from it, the more we are
aware of it; and we go through life in the fear of death, blaming nature for the evils we have inflicted on
ourselves by our neglect of her laws.
  O Man! seek no further for the author of evil; thou art he. There is no evil but the evil you do or the
evil you suffer, and both come from yourself. Evil in general can only spring from disorder, and in the
order of the world I find a never failing system. Evil in particular cases exists only in the mind of those
who experience it; and this feeling is not the gift of nature, but the work of man himself. Pain has little
power over those who, having thought little, look neither before nor after. Take away our fatal progress,
take away our faults and our vices, take away man's handiwork, and all is well.
  Where all is well, there is no such thing as injustice. Justice and goodness are inseparable; now
goodness is the necessary result of boundless power and of that self-love which is innate in all sentient
beings. The omnipotent projects himself, so to speak, into the being of his creatures. Creation and
preservation are the everlasting work of power; it does not act on that which has no existence; God is
not the God of the dead; he could not harm and destroy without injury to himself. The omnipotent can
only will what is good. [Footnote: The ancients were right when they called the supreme God Optimus
Maximus, but it would have been better to say Maximus Optimus, for his goodness springs from his
power, he is good because he is great.] Therefore he who is supremely good, because he is supremely
powerful, must also be supremely just, otherwise he would contradict himself; for that love of order
which creates order we call goodness and that love of order which preserves order we call justice.
  Men say God owes nothing to his creatures. I think he owes them all he promised when he gave
them their being. Now to give them the idea of something good and to make them feel the need of it, is
to promise it to them. The more closely I study myself, the more carefully I consider, the more plainly
do I read these words, "Be just and you will be happy." It is not so, however, in the present condition ofthings, the wicked prospers and the oppression of the righteous continues. Observe how angry we are
when  this  expectation  is  disappointed.  Conscience  revolts  and  murmurs  against  her  Creator;  she
exclaims with cries and groans, "Thou hast deceived me."
  "I have deceived thee, rash soul! Who told thee this? Is thy soul destroyed? Hast thou ceased to
exist? O Brutus! O my son! let there be no stain upon the close of thy noble life; do not abandon thy
hope and thy glory with thy corpse upon the plains of Philippi. Why dost thou say, 'Virtue is naught,'
when thou art about to enjoy the reward of virtue? Thou art about to die! Nay, thou shalt live, and thus
my promise is fulfilled."
  One might judge from the complaints of impatient men that God owes them the reward before they
have deserved it, that he is bound to pay for virtue in advance. Oh! let us first be good and then we shall
be happy. Let us not claim the prize before we have won it, nor demand our wages before we have
finished our work. "It is not in the lists that we crown the victors in the sacred games," says Plutarch, "it
is when they have finished their course."
  If the soul is immaterial, it may survive the body; and if it so survives, Providence is justified. Had I
no other proof of the immaterial nature of the soul, the triumph of the wicked and the oppression of the
righteous in this world would be enough to convince me. I should seek to resolve so appalling a discord
in the universal harmony. I should say to myself, "All is not over with life, everything finds its place at
death." I should still have to answer the question, "What becomes of man when all we know of him
through our senses has vanished?" This question no longer presents any difficulty to me when I admit
the two substances. It is easy to understand that what is imperceptible to those senses escapes me,
during my bodily life, when I perceive through my senses only. When the union of soul and body is
destroyed, I think one may be dissolved and the other may be preserved. Why should the destruction of
the one imply the destruction of the other? On the contrary, so unlike in their nature, they were during
their union in a highly unstable condition, and when this union comes to an end they both return to their
natural state; the active vital substance regains all the force which it expended to set in motion the
passive dead substance. Alas! my vices make me only too well aware that man is but half alive during
this life; the life of the soul only begins with the death of the body.
  But what is that life? Is the soul of man in its nature immortal? I know not. My finite understanding
cannot hold the infinite; what is called eternity eludes my grasp. What can I assert or deny, how can I
reason  with  regard  to  what  I  cannot  conceive?  I  believe  that  the  soul  survives  the  body  for  the
maintenance of order; who knows if this is enough to make it eternal? However, I know that the body is
worn out and destroyed by the division of its parts, but I cannot conceive a similar destruction of the
conscious nature, and as I cannot imagine how it can die, I presume that it does not die. As this
assumption is consoling and in itself not unreasonable, why should I fear to accept it?
I am aware of my soul; it is known to me in feeling and in thought; I know what it is without
knowing its essence; I cannot reason about ideas which are unknown to me. What I do know is this,
that my personal identity depends upon memory, and that to be indeed the same self I must remember
that I have existed. Now after death I could not recall what I was when alive unless I also remembered
what I felt and therefore what I did; and I have no doubt that this remembrance will one day form the
happiness of the good and the torment of the bad. In this world our inner consciousness is absorbed by
the crowd of eager passions which cheat remorse. The humiliation and disgrace involved in the practice
of virtue do not permit us to realise its charm. But when, freed from the illusions of the bodily senses,
we behold with joy the supreme Being and the eternal truths which flow from him; when all the powers
of our soul are alive to the beauty of order and we are wholly occupied in comparing what we have
done with what we ought to have done, then it is that the voice of conscience will regain its strength
and sway; then it is that the pure delight which springs from self-content, and the sharp regret for our
own degradation of that self, will decide by means of overpowering feeling what shall be the fate which
each has prepared for himself. My good friend, do not ask me whether there are other sources of
happiness or suffering; I cannot tell; that which my fancy pictures is enough to console me in this life
and to bid me look for a life to come. I do not say the good will be rewarded, for what greater good cana truly good being expect than to exist in accordance with his nature? But I do assert that the good will
be happy, because their maker, the author of all justice, who has made them capable of feeling, has not
made them that they may suffer; moreover, they have not abused their freedom upon earth and they
have not changed their fate through any fault of their own; yet they have suffered in this life and it will
be made up to them in the life to come. This feeling relies not so much on man's deserts as on the idea
of good which seems to me inseparable from the divine essence. I only assume that the laws of order
are constant and that God is true to himself.
  Do not ask me whether the torments of the wicked will endure for ever, whether the goodness of
their creator can condemn them to the eternal suffering; again, I cannot tell, and I have no empty
curiosity for the investigation of useless problems. How does the fate of the wicked concern me? I take
little interest in it. All the same I find it hard to believe that they will be condemned to everlasting
torments. If the supreme justice calls for vengeance, it claims it in this life. The nations of the world
with  their  errors  are  its  ministers.  Justice  uses  self-inflicted  ills  to  punish  the  crimes  which  have
deserved them. It is in your own insatiable souls, devoured by envy, greed, and ambition, it is in the
midst of your false prosperity, that the avenging passions find the due reward of your crimes. What
need to seek a hell in the future life? It is here in the breast of the wicked.
  When our fleeting needs are over, and our mad desires are at rest, there should also be an end of our
passions and our crimes. Can pure spirits be capable of any perversity? Having need of nothing, why
should  they  be  wicked?  If  they  are  free  from  our  gross  senses,  if  their  happiness  consists  in  the
contemplation of other beings, they can only desire what is good; and he who ceases to be bad can
never be miserable. This is what I am inclined to think though I have not been at the pains to come to
any decision. O God, merciful and good, whatever thy decrees may be I adore them; if thou shouldst
commit the wicked to everlasting punishment, I abandon my feeble reason to thy justice; but if the
remorse of these wretched beings should in the course of time be extinguished, if their sufferings
should come to an end, and if the same peace shall one day be the lot of all mankind, I give thanks to
thee for this. Is not the wicked my brother? How often have I been tempted to be like him? Let him be
delivered from his misery and freed from the spirit of hatred that accompanied it; let him be as happy as
I myself; his happiness, far from arousing my jealousy, will only increase my own.
  Thus it is that, in the contemplation of God in his works, and in the study of such of his attributes as
it concerned me to know, I have slowly grasped and developed the idea, at first partial and imperfect,
which I have formed of this Infinite Being. But if this idea has become nobler and greater it is also
more suited to the human reason. As I approach in spirit the eternal light, I am confused and dazzled by
its glory, and compelled to abandon all the earthly notions which helped me to picture it to myself. God
is no longer corporeal and sensible; the supreme mind which rules the world is no longer the world
itself; in vain do I strive to grasp his inconceivable essence. When I think that it is he that gives life and
movement to the living and moving substance which controls all living bodies; when I hear it said that
my soul is spiritual and that God is a spirit, I revolt against this abasement of the divine essence; as if
God and my soul were of one and the same nature! As if God were not the one and only absolute being,
the only really active, feeling, thinking, willing being, from whom we derive our thought, feeling,
motion, will, our freedom and our very existence! We are free because he wills our freedom, and his
inexplicable substance is to our souls what our souls are to our bodies. I know not whether he has
created matter, body, soul, the world itself. The idea of creation confounds me and eludes my grasp; so
far as I can conceive of it I believe it; but I know that he has formed the universe and all that is, that he
has made and ordered all things. No doubt God is eternal; but can my mind grasp the idea of eternity?
Why should I cheat myself with meaningless words? This is what I do understand; before things were--
God was; he will be when they are no more, and if all things come to an end he will still endure. That a
being beyond my comprehension should give life to other beings, this is merely difficult and beyond
my understanding; but that Being and Nothing should be convertible terms, this is indeed a palpable
contradiction, an evident absurdity.
  God is intelligent, but how? Man is intelligent when he reasons, but the Supreme Intelligence doesnot need to reason; there is neither premise nor conclusion for him, there is not even a proposition. The
Supreme Intelligence is wholly intuitive, it sees what is and what shall be; all truths are one for it, as all
places are but one point and all time but one moment. Man's power makes use of means, the divine
power is self-active. God can because he wills; his will is his power. God is good; this is certain; but
man finds his happiness in the welfare of his kind. God's happiness consists in the love of order; for it is
through order that he maintains what is, and unites each part in the whole. God is just; of this I am sure,
it is a consequence of his goodness; man's injustice is not God's work, but his own; that moral justice
which seems to the philosophers a presumption against Providence, is to me a proof of its existence.
But man's justice consists in giving to each his due; God's justice consists in demanding from each of
us an account of that which he has given us.
  If I have succeeded in discerning these attributes of which I have no absolute idea, it is in the form
of unavoidable deductions, and by the right use of my reason; but I affirm them without understanding
them, and at bottom that is no affirmation at all. In vain do I say, God is thus, I feel it, I experience it,
none the more do I understand how God can be thus.
  In a word: the more I strive to envisage his infinite essence the less do I comprehend it; but it is, and
that is enough for me; the less I understand, the more I adore. I abase myself, saying, "Being of beings,
I am because thou art; to fix my thoughts on thee is to ascend to the source of my being. The best use I
can make of my reason is to resign it before thee; my mind delights, my weakness rejoices, to feel
myself overwhelmed by thy greatness."
  Having thus deduced from the perception of objects of sense and from my inner consciousness,
which leads me to judge of causes by my native reason, the principal truths which I require to know, I
must now seek such principles of conduct as I can draw from them, and such rules as I must lay down
for my guidance in the fulfilment of my destiny in this world, according to the purpose of my Maker.
Still  following  the  same  method,  I  do  not  derive  these  rules  from  the  principles  of  the  higher
philosophy, I find them in the depths of my heart, traced by nature in characters which nothing can
efface. I need only consult myself with regard to what I wish to do; what I feel to be right is right, what
I  feel  to  be  wrong  is  wrong;  conscience  is  the  best  casuist;  and  it  is  only  when  we  haggle  with
conscience that we have recourse to the subtleties of argument. Our first duty is towards ourself; yet
how often does the voice of others tell us that in seeking our good at the expense of others we are doing
ill? We think we are following the guidance of nature, and we are resisting it; we listen to what she says
to our senses, and we neglect what she says to our heart; the active being obeys, the passive commands.
Conscience is the voice of the soul, the passions are the voice of the body. It is strange that these voices
often contradict each other? And then to which should we give heed? Too often does reason deceive us;
we have only too good a right to doubt her; but conscience never deceives us; she is the true guide of
man; it is to the soul what instinct is to the body, [Footnote: Modern philosophy, which only admits
what it can understand, is careful not to admit this obscure power called instinct which seems to guide
the animals to some end without any acquired experience. Instinct, according to some of our wise
philosophers, is only a secret habit of reflection, acquired by reflection; and from the way in which they
explain this development one ought to suppose that children reflect more than grown-up people: a
paradox strange enough to be worth examining. Without entering upon this discussion I must ask what
name I shall give to the eagerness with which my dog makes war on the moles he does not eat, or to the
patience with which he sometimes watches them for hours and the skill with which he seizes them,
throws them to a distance from their earth as soon as they emerge, and then kills them and leaves them.
Yet no one has trained him to this sport, nor even told him there were such things as moles. Again, I
ask, and this is a more important question, why, when I threatened this same dog for the first time, why
did he throw himself on the ground with his paws folded, in such a suppliant attitude .....calculated to
touch me, a position which he would have maintained if, without being touched by it, I had continued
to beat him in that position? What! Had my dog, little more than a puppy, acquired moral ideas? Did he
know the meaning of mercy and generosity? By what acquired knowledge did he seek to appease my
wrath by yielding to my discretion? Every dog in the world does almost the same thing in similarcircumstances,  and  I  am  asserting  nothing  but  what  any  one  can  verify  for  himself.  Will  the
philosophers, who so scornfully reject instinct, kindly explain this fact by the mere play of sensations
and experience which they assume we have acquired? Let them give an account of it which will satisfy
any sensible man; in that case I have nothing further to urge, and I will say no more of instinct.] he who
obeys his conscience is following nature and he need not fear that he will go astray. This is a matter of
great importance, continued my benefactor, seeing that I was about to interrupt him; let me stop awhile
to explain it more fully.
  The morality of our actions consists entirely in the judgments we ourselves form with regard to
them. If good is good, it must be good in the depth of our heart as well as in our actions; and the first
reward of justice is the consciousness that we are acting justly. If moral goodness is in accordance with
our nature, man can only be healthy in mind and body when he is good. If it is not so, and if man is by
nature evil, he cannot cease to be evil without corrupting his nature, and goodness in him is a crime
against nature. If he is made to do harm to his fellow-creatures, as the wolf is made to devour his prey,
a humane man would be as depraved a creature as a pitiful wolf; and virtue alone would cause remorse.
  My young friend, let us look within, let us set aside all personal prejudices and see whither our
inclinations lead us. Do we take more pleasure in the sight of the sufferings of others or their joys? Is it
pleasanter to do a kind action or an unkind action, and which leaves the more delightful memory behind
it? Why do you enjoy the theatre? Do you delight in the crimes you behold? Do you weep over the
punishment which overtakes the criminal? They say we are indifferent to everything but self-interest;
yet we find our consolation in our sufferings in the charms of friendship and humanity, and even in our
pleasures we should be too lonely and miserable if we had no one to share them with us. If there is no
such thing as morality in man's heart, what is the source of his rapturous admiration of noble deeds, his
passionate devotion to great men? What connection is there between self-interest and this enthusiasm
for virtue? Why should I choose to be Cato dying by his own hand, rather than Caesar in his triumphs?
Take from our hearts this love of what is noble and you rob us of the joy of life. The mean-spirited man
in whom these delicious feelings have been stifled among vile passions, who by thinking of no one but
himself comes at last to love no one but himself, this man feels no raptures, his cold heart no longer
throbs with joy, and his eyes no longer fill with the sweet tears of sympathy, he delights in nothing; the
wretch has neither life nor feeling, he is already dead.
  There are many bad men in this world, but there are few of these dead souls, alive only to self-
interest, and insensible to all that is right and good. We only delight in injustice so long as it is to our
own advantage; in every other case we wish the innocent to be protected. If we see some act of violence
or injustice in town or country, our hearts are at once stirred to their depths by an instinctive anger and
wrath, which bids us go to the help of the oppressed; but we are restrained by a stronger duty, and the
law deprives us of our right to protect the innocent. On the other hand, if some deed of mercy or
generosity meets our eye, what reverence and love does it inspire! Do we not say to ourselves, "I should
like to have done that myself"? What does it matter to us that two thousand years ago a man was just or
unjust? and yet we take the same interest in ancient history as if it happened yesterday. What are the
crimes of Cataline to me? I shall not be his victim. Why then have I the same horror of his crimes as if
he were living now? We do not hate the wicked merely because of the harm they do to ourselves, but
because they are wicked. Not only do we wish to be happy ourselves, we wish others to be happy too,
and if this happiness does not interfere with our own happiness, it increases it. In conclusion, whether
we will or not, we pity the unfortunate; when we see their suffering we suffer too. Even the most
depraved  are  not  wholly  without  this  instinct,  and  it  often  leads  them  to  self-contradiction.  The
highwayman who robs the traveller, clothes the nakedness of the poor; the fiercest murderer supports a
fainting man.
  Men speak of the voice of remorse, the secret punishment of hidden crimes, by which such are
often brought to light. Alas! who does not know its unwelcome voice? We speak from experience, and
we would gladly stifle this imperious feeling which causes us such agony. Let us obey the call of
nature; we shall see that her yoke is easy and that when we give heed to her voice we find a joy in theanswer of a good conscience. The wicked fears and flees from her; he delights to escape from himself;
his anxious eyes look around him for some object of diversion; without bitter satire and rude mockery
he would always be sorrowful; the scornful laugh is his one pleasure. Not so the just man, who finds his
peace within himself; there is joy not malice in his laughter, a joy which springs from his own heart; he
is as cheerful alone as in company, his satisfaction does not depend on those who approach him; it
includes them.
  Cast your eyes over every nation of the world; peruse every volume of its history; in the midst of all
these strange and cruel forms of worship, among this amazing variety of manners and customs, you will
everywhere find the same ideas of right and justice; everywhere the same principles of morality, the
same ideas of good and evil. The old paganism gave birth to abominable gods who would have been
punished as scoundrels here below, gods who merely offered, as a picture of supreme happiness, crimes
to be committed and lust to be gratified. But in vain did vice descend from the abode of the gods armed
with their sacred authority; the moral instinct refused to admit it into the heart of man. While the
debaucheries of Jupiter were celebrated, the continence of Xenocrates was revered; the chaste Lucrece
adored the shameless Venus; the bold Roman offered sacrifices to Fear; he invoked the god who
mutilated his father, and he died without a murmur at the hand of his own father. The most unworthy
gods were worshipped by the noblest men. The sacred voice of nature was stronger than the voice of
the gods, and won reverence upon earth; it seemed to relegate guilt and the guilty alike to heaven.
  There is therefore at the bottom of our hearts an innate principle of justice and virtue, by which, in
spite of our maxims, we judge our own actions or those of others to be good or evil; and it is this
principle that I call conscience.
  But at this word I hear the murmurs of all the wise men so-called. Childish errors, prejudices of our
upbringing, they exclaim in concert! There is nothing in the human mind but what it has gained by
experience; and we judge everything solely by means of the ideas we have acquired. They go further;
they even venture to reject the clear and universal agreement of all peoples, and to set against this
striking  unanimity  in  the  judgment  of  mankind,  they  seek  out  some  obscure  exception  known  to
themselves alone; as if the whole trend of nature were rendered null by the depravity of a single nation,
and as if the existence of monstrosities made an end of species. But to what purpose does the sceptic
Montaigne strive himself to unearth in some obscure corner of the world a custom which is contrary to
the ideas of justice? To what purpose does he credit the most untrustworthy travellers, while he refuses
to believe the greatest writers? A few strange and doubtful customs, based on local causes, unknown to
us; shall these destroy a general inference based on the agreement of all the nations of the earth,
differing from each other in all else, but agreed in this? O Montaigne, you pride yourself on your truth
and honesty; be sincere and truthful, if a philosopher can be so, and tell me if there is any country upon
earth where it is a crime to keep one's plighted word, to be merciful, helpful, and generous, where the
good man is scorned, and the traitor is held in honour.
  Self-interest, so they say, induces each of us to agree for the common good. But bow is it that the
good man consents to this to his own hurt? Does a man go to death from self-interest? No doubt each
man acts for his own good, but if there is no such thing as moral good to be taken into consideration,
self-interest will only enable you to account for the deeds of the wicked; possibly you will not attempt
to do more. A philosophy which could find no place for good deeds would be too detestable; you would
find yourself compelled either to find some mean purpose, some wicked motive, or to abuse Socrates
and slander Regulus. If such doctrines ever took root among us, the voice of nature, together with the
voice of reason, would constantly protest against them, till no adherent of such teaching could plead an
honest excuse for his partisanship.
  It is no part of my scheme to enter at present into metaphysical discussions which neither you nor I
can understand, discussions which really lead nowhere. I have told you already that I do not wish to
philosophise with you, but to help you to consult your own heart. If all the philosophers in the world
should prove that I am wrong, and you feel that I am right, that is all I ask.
  For this purpose it is enough to lead you to distinguish between our acquired ideas and our naturalfeelings; for feeling precedes knowledge; and since we do not learn to seek what is good for us and
avoid what is bad for us, but get this desire from nature, in the same way the love of good and the
hatred of evil are as natural to us as our self-love. The decrees of conscience are not judgments but
feelings. Although all our ideas come from without, the feelings by which they are weighed are within
us,  and  it  is  by  these  feelings  alone  that  we  perceive  fitness  or  unfitness  of  things  in  relation  to
ourselves, which leads us to seek or shun these things.
  To exist is to feel; our feeling is undoubtedly earlier than our intelligence, and we had feelings
before we had ideas.[Footnote: In some respects ideas are feelings and feelings are ideas. Both terms
are appropriate to any perception with which we are concerned, appropriate both to the object of that
perception and to ourselves who are affected by it; it is merely the order in which we are affected which
decides  the  appropriate  term.  When  we  are  chiefly  concerned  with  the  object  and  only  think  of
ourselves as it were by reflection, that is an idea; when, on the other hand, the impression received
excites our chief attention and we only think in the second place of the object which caused it, it is a
feeling.] Whatever may be the cause of our being, it has provided for our preservation by giving us
feelings suited to our nature; and no one can deny that these at least are innate. These feelings, so far as
the individual is concerned, are self-love, fear, pain, the dread of death, the desire for comfort. Again,
if, as it is impossible to doubt, man is by nature sociable, or at least fitted to become sociable, he can
only be so by means of other innate feelings, relative to his kind; for if only physical well-being were
considered, men would certainly be scattered rather than brought together. But the motive power of
conscience is derived from the moral system formed through this twofold relation to himself and to his
fellow-men. To know good is not to love it; this knowledge is not innate in man; but as soon as his
reason leads him to perceive it, his conscience impels him to love it; it is this feeling which is innate.
  So  I  do  not  think,  my  young  friend,  that  it  is  impossible  to  explain  the  immediate  force  of
conscience  as  a  result  of  our  own  nature,  independent  of  reason  itself.  And  even  should  it  be
impossible, it is unnecessary; for those who deny this principle, admitted and received by everybody
else in the world, do not prove that there is no such thing; they are content to affirm, and when we
affirm its existence we have quite as good grounds as they, while we have moreover the witness within
us, the voice of conscience, which speaks on its own behalf. If the first beams of judgment dazzle us
and confuse the objects we behold, let us wait till our feeble sight grows clear and strong, and in the
light of reason we shall soon behold these very objects as nature has already showed them to us. Or
rather let us be simpler and less pretentious; let us be content with the first feelings we experience in
ourselves, since science always brings us back to these, unless it has led us astray.
  Conscience! Conscience! Divine instinct, immortal voice from heaven; sure guide for a creature
ignorant and finite indeed, yet intelligent and free; infallible judge of good and evil, making man like to
God! In thee consists the excellence of man's nature and the morality of his actions; apart from thee, I
find nothing in myself to raise me above the beasts--nothing but the sad privilege of wandering from
one error to another, by the help of an unbridled understanding and a reason which knows no principle.
  Thank heaven we have now got rid of all that alarming show of philosophy; we may be men
without being scholars; now that we need not spend our life in the study of morality, we have found a
less costly and surer guide through this vast labyrinth of human thought. But it is not enough to be
aware that there is such a guide; we must know her and follow her. If she speaks to all hearts, how is it
that so few give heed to her voice? She speaks to us in the language of nature, and everything leads us
to forget that tongue. Conscience is timid, she loves peace and retirement; she is startled by noise and
numbers; the prejudices from which she is said to arise are her worst enemies. She flees before them or
she is silent; their noisy voices drown her words, so that she cannot get a hearing; fanaticism dares to
counterfeit her voice and to inspire crimes in her name. She is discouraged by ill-treatment; she no
longer speaks to us, no longer answers to our call; when she has been scorned so long, it is as hard to
recall her as it was to banish her.
  How often in the course of my inquiries have I grown weary of my own coldness of heart! How
often have grief and weariness poured their poison into my first meditations and made them hateful tome! My barren heart yielded nothing but a feeble zeal and a lukewarm love of truth. I said to myself:
Why should I strive to find what does not exist? Moral good is a dream, the pleasures of sense are the
only real good. When once we have lost the taste for the pleasures of the soul, how hard it is to recover
it! How much more difficult to acquire it if we have never possessed it! If there were any man so
wretched as never to have done anything all his life long which he could remember with pleasure, and
which would make him glad to have lived, that man would be incapable of self-knowledge, and for
want of knowledge of goodness, of which his nature is capable, he would be constrained to remain in
his wickedness and would be for ever miserable. But do you think there is any one man upon earth so
depraved that he has never yielded to the temptation of well-doing? This temptation is so natural, so
pleasant, that it is impossible always to resist it; and the thought of the pleasure it has once afforded is
enough to recall it constantly to our memory. Unluckily it is hard at first to find satisfaction for it; we
have any number of reasons for refusing to follow the inclinations of our heart; prudence, so called,
restricts the heart within the limits of the self; a thousand efforts are needed to break these bonds. The
joy of well-doing is the prize of having done well, and we must deserve the prize before we win it.
There is nothing sweeter than virtue; but we do not know this till we have tried it. Like Proteus in the
fable, she first assumes a thousand terrible shapes when we would embrace her, and only shows her
true self to those who refuse to let her go.
  Ever at strife between my natural feelings, which spoke of the common weal, and my reason, which
spoke of self, I should have drifted through life in perpetual uncertainty, hating evil, loving good, and
always at war with myself, if my heart had not received further light, if that truth which determined my
opinions had not also settled my conduct, and set me at peace with myself. Reason alone is not a
sufficient foundation for virtue; what solid ground can be found? Virtue we are told is love of order.
But can this love prevail over my love for my own well-being, and ought it so to prevail? Let them give
me clear and sufficient reason for this preference. Their so-called principle is in truth a mere playing
with words; for I also say that vice is love of order, differently understood. Wherever there is feeling
and intelligence, there is some sort of moral order. The difference is this: the good man orders his life
with regard to all men; the wicked orders it for self alone. The latter centres all things round himself;
the  other  measures  his  radius  and  remains  on  the  circumference.  Thus  his  place  depends  on  the
common centre, which is God, and on all the concentric circles which are His creatures. If there is no
God, the wicked is right and the good man is nothing but a fool.
  My child! May you one day feel what a burden is removed when, having fathomed the vanity of
human thoughts and tasted the bitterness of passion, you find at length near at hand the path of wisdom,
the prize of this life's labours, the source of that happiness which you despaired of. Every duty of
natural law, which man's injustice had almost effaced from my heart, is engraven there, for the second
time in the name of that eternal justice which lays these duties upon me and beholds my fulfilment of
them. I feel myself merely the instrument of the Omnipotent, who wills what is good, who performs it,
who will bring about my own good through the co-operation of my will with his own, and by the right
use of my liberty. I acquiesce in the order he establishes, certain that one day I shall enjoy that order
and find my happiness in it; for what sweeter joy is there than this, to feel oneself a part of a system
where all is good? A prey to pain, I bear it in patience, remembering that it will soon be over, and that it
results from a body which is not mine. If I do a good deed in secret, I know that it is seen, and my
conduct in this life is a pledge of the life to come. When I suffer injustice, I say to myself, the Almighty
who does all things well will reward me: my bodily needs, my poverty, make the idea of death less
intolerable. There will be all the fewer bonds to be broken when my hour comes.
  Why is my soul subjected to my senses, and imprisoned in this body by which it is enslaved and
thwarted? I know not; have I entered into the counsels of the Almighty? But I may, without rashness,
venture on a modest conjecture. I say to myself: If man's soul had remained in a state of freedom and
innocence, what merit would there have been in loving and obeying the order he found established, an
order which it would not have been to his advantage to disturb? He would be happy, no doubt, but his
happiness  would  not  attain  to  the  highest  point,  the  pride  of  virtue,  and  the  witness  of  a  goodconscience within him; he would be but as the angels are, and no doubt the good man will be more than
they. Bound to a mortal body, by bonds as strange as they are powerful, his care for the preservation of
this body tempts the soul to think only of self, and gives it an interest opposed to the general order of
things, which it is still capable of knowing and loving; then it is that the right use of his freedom
becomes at once the merit and the reward; then it is that it prepares for itself unending happiness, by
resisting its earthly passions and following its original direction.
  If even in the lowly position in which we are placed during our present life our first impulses are
always  good,  if  all  our  vices  are  of  our  own  making,  why  should  we  complain  that  they  are  our
masters? Why should we blame the Creator for the ills we have ourselves created, and the enemies we
ourselves have armed against us? Oh, let us leave man unspoilt; he will always find it easy to be good
and he will always be happy without remorse. The guilty, who assert that they are driven to crime, are
liars as well as evil-doers; how is it that they fail to perceive that the weakness they bewail is of their
own making; that their earliest depravity was the result of their own will; that by dint of wishing to
yield to temptations, they at length yield to them whether they will or no and make them irresistible?
No doubt they can no longer avoid being weak and wicked, but they need not have become weak and
wicked. Oh, how easy would it be to preserve control of ourselves and of our passions, even in this life,
if with habits still unformed, with a mind beginning to expand, we were able to keep to such things as
we ought to know, in order to value rightly what is unknown; if we really wished to learn, not that we
might shine before the eyes of others, but that we might be wise and good in accordance with our
nature, that we might be happy in the performance of our duty. This study seems tedious and painful to
us, for we do not attempt it till we are already corrupted by vice and enslaved by our passions. Our
judgments and our standards of worth are determined before we have the knowledge of good and evil;
and then we measure all things by this false standard, and give nothing its true worth.
  There is an age when the heart is still free, but eager, unquiet, greedy of a happiness which is still
unknown, a happiness which it seeks in curiosity and doubt; deceived by the senses it settles at length
upon the empty show of happiness and thinks it has found it where it is not. In my own case these
illusions endured for a long time. Alas! too late did I become aware of them, and I have not succeeded
in overcoming them altogether; they will last as long as this mortal body from which they arise. If they
lead me astray, I am at least no longer deceived by them; I know them for what they are, and even
when I give way to them, I despise myself; far from regarding them as the goal of my happiness, I
behold in them an obstacle to it. I long for the time when, freed from the fetters of the body, I shall be
myself, at one with myself, no longer torn in two, when I myself shall suffice for my own happiness.
Meanwhile I am happy even in this life, for I make small account of all its evils, in which I regard
myself as having little or no part, while all the real good that I can get out of this life depends on myself
alone.
  To raise myself so far as may be even now to this state of happiness, strength, and freedom, I
exercise myself in lofty contemplation. I consider the order of the universe, not to explain it by any
futile system, but to revere it without ceasing, to adore the wise Author who reveals himself in it. I hold
intercourse  with  him;  I  immerse  all  my  powers  in  his  divine  essence;  I  am  overwhelmed  by  his
kindness, I bless him and his gifts, but I do not pray to him. What should I ask of him--to change the
order of nature, to work miracles on my behalf? Should I, who am bound to love above all things the
order which he has established in his wisdom and maintained by his providence, should I desire the
disturbance of that order on my own account? No, that rash prayer would deserve to be punished rather
than to be granted. Neither do I ask of him the power to do right; why should I ask what he has given
me already? Has he not given me conscience that I may love the right, reason that I may perceive it,
and freedom that I may choose it? If I do evil, I have no excuse; I do it of my own free will; to ask him
to change my will is to ask him to do what he asks of me; it is to want him to do the work while I get
the wages; to be dissatisfied with my lot is to wish to be no longer a man, to wish to be other than what
I am, to wish for disorder and evil. Thou source of justice and truth, merciful and gracious God, in thee
do I trust, and the desire of my heart is--Thy will be done. When I unite my will with thine, I do whatthou doest; I have a share in thy goodness; I believe that I enjoy beforehand the supreme happiness
which is the reward of goodness.
  In my well-founded self-distrust the only thing that I ask of God, or rather expect from his justice, is
to correct my error if I go astray, if that error is dangerous to me. To be honest I need not think myself
infallible; my opinions, which seem to me true, may be so many lies; for what man is there who does
not cling to his own beliefs; and how many men are agreed in everything? The illusion which deceives
me may indeed have its source in myself, but it is God alone who can remove it. I have done all I can to
attain to truth; but its source is beyond my reach; is it my fault if my strength fails me and I can go no
further; it is for Truth to draw near to me.
  The good priest had spoken with passion; he and I were overcome with emotion. It seemed to me as
if I were listening to the divine Orpheus when he sang the earliest hymns and taught men the worship
of the gods. I saw any number of objections which might be raised; yet I raised none, for I perceived
that they were more perplexing than serious, and that my inclination took his part. When he spoke to
me according to his conscience, my own seemed to confirm what he said.
  "The novelty of the sentiments you have made known to me," said I, "strikes me all the more
because of what you confess you do not know, than because of what you say you believe. They seem to
be very like that theism or natural religion, which Christians profess to confound with atheism or
irreligion which is their exact opposite. But in the present state of my faith I should have to ascend
rather than descend to accept your views, and I find it difficult to remain just where you are unless I
were as wise as you. That I may be at least as honest, I want time to take counsel with myself. By your
own showing, the inner voice must be my guide, and you have yourself told me that when it has long
been silenced it cannot be recalled in a moment. I take what you have said to heart, and I must consider
it. If after I have thought things out, I am as convinced as you are, you will be my final teacher, and I
will be your disciple till death. Continue your teaching however; you have only told me half what I
must know. Speak to me of revelation, of the Scriptures, of those difficult doctrines among which I
have strayed ever since I was a child, incapable either of understanding or believing them, unable to
adopt or reject them."
  "Yes, my child," said he, embracing me, "I will tell you all I think; I will not open my heart to you
by halves; but the desire you express was necessary before I could cast aside all reserve. So far I have
told you nothing but what I thought would be of service to you, nothing but what I was quite convinced
of. The inquiry which remains to be made is very difficult. It seems to me full of perplexity, mystery,
and darkness; I bring to it only doubt and distrust. I make up my mind with trembling, and I tell you my
doubts rather than my convictions. If your own opinions were more settled I should hesitate to show
you mine; but in your present condition, to think like me would be gain. [Footnote: I think the worthy
clergyman might say this at the present time to the general public.] Moreover, give to my words only
the  authority  of  reason;  I  know  not  whether  I  am  mistaken.  It  is  difficult  in  discussion  to  avoid
assuming sometimes a dogmatic tone; but remember in this respect that all my assertions are but
reasons to doubt me. Seek truth for yourself, for my own part I only promise you sincerity.
  "In my exposition you find nothing but natural religion; strange that we should need more! How
shall I become aware of this need? What guilt can be mine so long as I serve God according to the
knowledge he has given to my mind, and the feelings he has put into my heart? What purity of morals,
what dogma useful to man and worthy of its author, can I derive from a positive doctrine which cannot
be derived without the aid of this doctrine by the right use of my faculties? Show me what you can add
to the duties of the natural law, for the glory of God, for the good of mankind, and for my own welfare;
and what virtue you will get from the new form of religion which does not result from mine. The
grandest ideas of the Divine nature come to us from reason only. Behold the spectacle of nature; listen
to the inner voice. Has not God spoken it all to our eyes, to our conscience, to our reason? What more
can man tell us? Their revelations do but degrade God, by investing him with passions like our own.
Far from throwing light upon the ideas of the Supreme Being, special doctrines seem to me to confuse
these  ideas;  far  from  ennobling  them,  they  degrade  them;  to  the  inconceivable  mysteries  whichsurround the Almighty, they add absurd contradictions, they make man proud, intolerant, and cruel;
instead of bringing peace upon earth, they bring fire and sword. I ask myself what is the use of it all,
and I find no answer. I see nothing but the crimes of men and the misery of mankind.
  "They tell me a revelation was required to teach men how God would be served; as a proof of this
they point to the many strange rites which men have instituted, and they do not perceive that this very
diversity springs from the fanciful nature of the revelations. As soon as the nations took to making God
speak, every one made him speak in his own fashion, and made him say what he himself wanted. Had
they listened only to what God says in the heart of man, there would have been but one religion upon
earth.
  "One form of worship was required; just so, but was this a matter of such importance as to require
all the power of the Godhead to establish it? Do not let us confuse the outward forms of religion with
religion itself. The service God requires is of the heart; and when the heart is sincere that is ever the
same. It is a strange sort of conceit which fancies that God takes such an interest in the shape of the
priest's vestments, the form of words he utters, the gestures he makes before the altar and all his
genuflections. Oh, my friend, stand upright, you will still be too near the earth. God desires to be
worshipped in spirit and in truth; this duty belongs to every religion, every country, every individual.
As to the form of worship, if order demands uniformity, that is only a matter of discipline and needs no
revelation.
  "These thoughts did not come to me to begin with. Carried away by the prejudices of my education,
and by that dangerous vanity which always strives to lift man out of his proper sphere, when I could not
raise my feeble thoughts up to the great Being, I tried to bring him down to my own level. I tried to
reduce the distance he has placed between his nature and mine. I desired more immediate relations,
more individual instruction; not content to make God in the image of man that I might be favoured
above my fellows, I desired supernatural knowledge; I required a special form of worship; I wanted
God to tell me what he had not told others, or what others had not understood like myself.
  "Considering the point I had now reached as the common centre from which all believers set out on
the quest for a more enlightened form of religion, I merely found in natural religion the elements of all
religion. I beheld the multitude of diverse sects which hold sway upon earth, each of which accuses the
other of falsehood and error; which of these, I asked, is the right? Every one replied, 'My own;' every
one said, 'I alone and those who agree with me think rightly, all the others are mistaken.' And how do
you know that your sect is in the right? Because God said so. And how do you know God said so?
[Footnote: "All men," said a wise and good priest, "maintain that they hold and believe their religion
(and all use the same jargon), not of man, nor of any creature, but of God. But to speak truly, without
pretence or flattery, none of them do so; whatever they may say, religions are taught by human hands
and means; take, for example, the way in which religions have been received by the world, the way in
which they are still received every day by individuals; the nation, the country, the locality gives the
religion; we belong to the religion of the place where we are born and brought up; we are baptised or
circumcised, we are Christians, Jews, Mohametans before we know that we are men; we do not pick
and choose our religion for see how ill the life and conduct agree with the religion, see for what slight
and human causes men go against the teaching of their religion."--Charron, De la Sagesse.--It seems
clear that the honest creed of the holy theologian of Condom would not have differed greatly from that
of the Savoyard priest.] And who told you that God said it? My pastor, who knows all about it. My
pastor tells me what to believe and I believe it; he assures me that any one who says anything else is
mistaken, and I give not heed to them.
  "What! thought I, is not truth one; can that which is true for me be false for you? If those who
follow the right path and those who go astray have the same method, what merit or what blame can be
assigned to one more than to the other? Their choice is the result of chance; it is unjust to hold them
responsible for it, to reward or punish them for being born in one country or another. To dare to say that
God judges us in this manner is an outrage on his justice.
  "Either all religions are good and pleasing to God, or if there is one which he prescribes for men, ifthey will be punished for despising it, he will have distinguished it by plain and certain signs by which
it can be known as the only true religion; these signs are alike in every time and place, equally plain to
all men, great or small, learned or unlearned, Europeans, Indians, Africans, savages. If there were but
one religion upon earth, and if all beyond its pale were condemned to eternal punishment, and if there
were in any corner of the world one single honest man who was not convinced by this evidence, the
God of that religion would be the most unjust and cruel of tyrants.
  "Let us therefore seek honestly after truth; let us yield nothing to the claims of birth, to the authority
of parents and pastors, but let us summon to the bar of conscience and of reason all that they have
taught us from our childhood. In vain do they exclaim, 'Submit your reason;' a deceiver might say as
much; I must have reasons for submitting my reason.
  "All the theology I can get for myself by observation of the universe and by the use of my faculties
is contained in what I have already told you. To know more one must have recourse to strange means.
These means cannot be the authority of men, for every man is of the same species as myself, and all
that a man knows by nature I am capable of knowing, and another may be deceived as much as I; when
I believe what he says, it is not because he says it but because he proves its truth. The witness of man is
therefore nothing more than the witness of my own reason, and it adds nothing to the natural means
which God has given me for the knowledge of truth.
  "Apostle of truth, what have you to tell me of which I am not the sole judge? God himself has
spoken; give heed to his revelation. That is another matter. God has spoken, these are indeed words
which demand attention. To whom has he spoken? He has spoken to men. Why then have I heard
nothing? He has instructed others to make known his words to you. I understand; it is men who come
and tell me what God has said. I would rather have heard the words of God himself; it would have been
as easy for him and I should have been secure from fraud. He protects you from fraud by showing that
his envoys come from him. How does he show this? By miracles. Where are these miracles? In the
books. And who wrote the books? Men. And who saw the miracles? The men who bear witness to
them. What! Nothing but human testimony! Nothing but men who tell me what others told them! How
many men between God and me! Let us see, however, let us examine, compare, and verify. Oh! if God
had but deigned to free me from all this labour, I would have served him with all my heart.
  "Consider, my friend, the terrible controversy in which I am now engaged; what vast learning is
required to go back to the remotest antiquity, to examine, weigh, confront prophecies, revelations, facts,
all the monuments of faith set forth throughout the world, to assign their date, place, authorship, and
occasion.  What  exactness  of  critical  judgment  is  needed  to  distinguish  genuine  documents  from
forgeries, to compare objections with their answers, translations with their originals; to decide as to the
impartiality of witnesses, their common-sense, their knowledge; to make sure that nothing has been
omitted,  nothing  added,  nothing  transposed,  altered,  or  falsified;  to  point  out  any  remaining
contradictions, to determine what weight should be given to the silence of our adversaries with regard
to the charges brought against them; how far were they aware of those charges; did they think them
sufficiently serious to require an answer; were books sufficiently well known for our books to reach
them; have we been honest enough to allow their books to circulate among ourselves and to leave their
strongest objections unaltered?
  "When the authenticity of all these documents is accepted, we must now pass to the evidence of
their authors' mission; we must know the laws of chance, and probability, to decide which prophecy
cannot be fulfilled without a miracle; we must know the spirit of the original languages, to distinguish
between prophecy and figures of speech; we must know what facts are in accordance with nature and
what facts are not, so that we may say how far a clever man may deceive the eyes of the simple and
may even astonish the learned; we must discover what are the characteristics of a prodigy and how its
authenticity may be established, not only so far as to gain credence, but so that doubt may be deserving
of  punishment;  we  must  compare  the  evidence  for  true  and  false  miracles,  and  find  sure  tests  to
distinguish between them; lastly we must say why God chose as a witness to his words means which
themselves require so much evidence on their behalf, as if he were playing with human credulity, andavoiding of set purpose the true means of persuasion.
  "Assuming that the divine majesty condescends so far as to make a man the channel of his sacred
will, is it reasonable, is it fair, to demand that the whole of mankind should obey the voice of this
minister without making him known as such? Is it just to give him as his sole credentials certain private
signs, performed in the presence of a few obscure persons, signs which everybody else can only know
by hearsay? If one were to believe all the miracles that the uneducated and credulous profess to have
seen in every country upon earth, every sect would be in the right; there would be more miracles than
ordinary events; and it would be the greatest miracle if there were no miracles wherever there were
persecuted fanatics. The unchangeable order of nature is the chief witness to the wise hand that guides
it; if there were many exceptions, I should hardly know what to think; for my own part I have too great
a faith in God to believe in so many miracles which are so little worthy of him.
  "Let a man come and say to us: Mortals, I proclaim to you the will of the Most Highest; accept my
words as those of him who has sent me; I bid the sun to change his course, the stars to range themselves
in a fresh order, the high places to become smooth, the floods to rise up, the earth to change her face.
By these miracles who will not recognise the master of nature? She does not obey impostors, their
miracles are wrought in holes and corners, in deserts, within closed doors, where they find easy dupes
among a small company of spectators already disposed to believe them. Who will venture to tell me
how  many  eye-witnesses  are  required  to  make  a  miracle  credible!  What  use  are  your  miracles,
performed if proof of your doctrine, if they themselves require so much proof! You might as well have
let them alone.
  "There still remains the most important inquiry of all with regard to the doctrine proclaimed; for
since those who tell us God works miracles in this world, profess that the devil sometimes imitates
them, when we have found the best attested miracles we have got very little further; and since the
magicians of Pharaoh dared in the presence of Moses to counterfeit the very signs he wrought at God's
command, why should they not, behind his back, claim a like authority? So when we have proved our
doctrine by means of miracles, we must prove our miracles by means of doctrine, [Footnote: This is
expressly stated in many passages of Scripture, among others in Deuteronomy xiii., where it is said that
when a prophet preaching strange gods confirms his words by means of miracles and what he foretells
comes to pass, far from giving heed to him, this prophet must be put to death. If then the heathen put
the apostles to death when they preached a strange god and confirmed their words by miracles which
came to pass I cannot see what grounds we have for complaint which they could not at once turn
against us. Now, what should be done in such a case? There is only one course; to return to argument
and let the miracles alone. It would have been better not to have had recourse to them at all. That is
plain  common-sense  which  can  only  be  obscured  by  great  subtlety  of  distinction.  Subtleties  in
Christianity! So Jesus Christ was mistaken when he promised the kingdom of heaven to the simple, he
was mistaken when he began his finest discourse with the praise of the poor in spirit, if so much wit is
needed to understand his teaching and to get others to believe in him. When you have convinced me
that submission is my duty, all will be well; but to convince me of this, come down to my level; adapt
your arguments to a lowly mind, or I shall not recognise you as a true disciple of your master, and it is
not his doctrine that you are teaching me.] for fear lest we should take the devil's doings for the
handiwork of God. What think you of this dilemma?
  "This doctrine, if it comes from God, should bear the sacred stamp of the godhead; not only should
it illumine the troubled thoughts which reason imprints on our minds, but it should also offer us a form
of worship, a morality, and rules of conduct in accordance with the attributes by means of which we
alone conceive of God's essence. If then it teaches us what is absurd and unreasonable, if it inspires us
with feelings of aversion for our fellows and terror for ourselves, if it paints us a God, angry, jealous,
revengeful, partial, hating men, a God of war and battles, ever ready to strike and to destroy, ever
speaking of punishment and torment, boasting even of the punishment of the innocent, my heart would
not be drawn towards this terrible God, I would take good care not to quit the realm of natural religion
to embrace such a religion as that; for you see plainly I must choose between them. Your God is notours. He who begins by selecting a chosen people, and proscribing the rest of mankind, is not our
common father; he who consigns to eternal punishment the greater part of his creatures, is not the
merciful and gracious God revealed to me by my reason.
  "Reason tells me that dogmas should be plain, clear, and striking in their simplicity. If there is
something lacking in natural religion, it is with respect to the obscurity in which it leaves the great
truths  it  teaches;  revelation  should  teach  us  these  truths  in  a  way  which  the  mind  of  man  can
understand; it should bring them within his reach, make him comprehend them, so that he may believe
them.  Faith  is  confirmed  and  strengthened  by  understanding;  the  best  religion  is  of  necessity  the
simplest.  He  who  hides  beneath  mysteries  and  contradictions  the  religion  that  he  preaches  to  me,
teaches me at the same time to distrust that religion. The God whom I adore is not the God of darkness,
he has not given me understanding in order to forbid me to use it; to tell me to submit my reason is to
insult the giver of reason. The minister of truth does not tyrannise over my reason, he enlightens it.
  "We have set aside all human authority, and without it I do not see how any man can convince
another by preaching a doctrine contrary to reason. Let them fight it out, and let us see what they have
to say with that harshness of speech which is common to both.
  "INSPIRATION: Reason tells you that the whole is greater than the part; but I tell you, in God's
name, that the part is greater than the whole.
  "REASON: And who are you to dare to tell me that God contradicts himself? And which shall I
choose to believe. God who teaches me, through my reason, the eternal truth, or you who, in his name,
proclaim an absurdity?
  "INSPIRATION: Believe me, for my teaching is more positive; and I will prove to you beyond all
manner of doubt that he has sent me.
  "REASON: What! you will convince me that God has sent you to bear witness against himself?
What sort of proofs will you adduce to convince me that God speaks more surely by your mouth than
through the understanding he has given me?
  "INSPIRATION: The understanding he has given you! Petty, conceited creature! As if you were the
first impious person who had been led astray through his reason corrupted by sin.
  "REASON: Man of God, you would not be the first scoundrel who asserts his arrogance as a proof
of his mission.
  "INSPIRATION: What! do even philosophers call names?
  "REASON: Sometimes, when the saints set them the example.
  "INSPIRATION: Oh, but I have a right to do it, for I am speaking on God's behalf.
  "REASON: You would do well to show your credentials before you make use of your privileges.
  "INSPIRATION: My credentials are authentic, earth and heaven will bear witness on my behalf.
Follow my arguments carefully, if you please.
  "REASON: Your arguments! You forget what you are saying. When you teach me that my reason
misleads me, do you not refute what it might have said on your behalf? He who denies the right of
reason, must convince me without recourse to her aid. For suppose you have convinced me by reason,
how am I to know that it is not my reason, corrupted by sin, which makes me accept what you say?
besides, what proof, what demonstration, can you advance, more self-evident than the axiom it is to
destroy? It is more credible that a good syllogism is a lie, than that the part is greater than the whole.
  "INSPIRATION: What a difference! There is no answer to my evidence; it is of a supernatural
kind.
  "REASON: Supernatural! What do you mean by the word? I do not understand it.
  "INSPIRATION: I mean changes in the order of nature, prophecies, signs, and wonders of every
kind.
  "REASON: Signs and wonders! I have never seen anything of the kind.
  "INSPIRATION:  Others  have  seen  them  for  you.  Clouds  of  witnesses--the  witness  of  whole
nations....
  "REASON: Is the witness of nations supernatural?  "INSPIRATION: No; but when it is unanimous, it is incontestable.
  "REASON: There is nothing so incontestable as the principles of reason, and one cannot accept an
absurdity on human evidence. Once more, let us see your supernatural evidence, for the consent of
mankind is not supernatural.
  "INSPIRATION: Oh, hardened heart, grace does not speak to you.
  "REASON: That is not my fault; for by your own showing, one must have already received grace
before one is able to ask for it. Begin by speaking to me in its stead.
  "INSPIRATION: But that is just what I am doing, and you will not listen. But what do you say to
prophecy?
  "REASON: In the first place, I say I have no more heard a prophet than I have seen a miracle. In the
next, I say that no prophet could claim authority over me.
  "INSPIRATION: Follower of the devil! Why should not the words of the prophets have authority
over you?
  "REASON: Because three things are required, three things which will never happen: firstly, I must
have heard the prophecy; secondly, I must have seen its fulfilment; and thirdly, it must be clearly
proved that the fulfilment of the prophecy could not by any possibility have been a mere coincidence;
for even if it was as precise, as plain, and clear as an axiom of geometry, since the clearness of a chance
prediction does not make its fulfilment impossible, this fulfilment when it does take place does not,
strictly speaking, prove what was foretold.
  "See what your so-called supernatural proofs, your miracles, your prophecies come to: believe all
this upon the word of another, Submit to the authority of men the authority of God which speaks to my
reason. If the eternal truths which my mind conceives of could suffer any shock, there would be no sort
of certainty for me; and far from being sure that you speak to me on God's behalf, I should not even be
sure that there is a God.
  "My child, here are difficulties enough, but these are not all. Among so many religions, mutually
excluding and proscribing each other, one only is true, if indeed any one of them is true. To recognise
the true religion we must inquire into, not one, but all; and in any question whatsoever we have no right
to condemn unheard. [Footnote: On the other hand, Plutarch relates that the Stoics maintained, among
other strange paradoxes, that it was no use hearing both sides; for, said they, the first either proves his
point  or  he  does  not  prove  it;  if  he  has  proved  it,  there  is  an  end  of  it,  and  the  other  should  be
condemned: if he has not proved it, he himself is in the wrong and judgment should be given against
him. I consider the method of those who accept an exclusive revelation very much like that of these
Stoics. When each of them claims to be the sole guardian of truth, we must hear them all before we can
choose between them without injustice.] The objections must be compared with the evidence; we must
know what accusation each brings against the other, and what answers they receive. The plainer any
feeling appears to us, the more we must try to discover why so many other people refuse to accept it.
We should be simple, indeed, if we thought it enough to hear the doctors on our own side, in order to
acquaint  ourselves  with  the  arguments  of  the  other.  Where  can  you  find  theologians  who  pride
themselves on their honesty? Where are those who, to refute the arguments of their opponents, do not
begin by making out that they are of little importance? A man may make a good show among his own
friends,  and  be  very  proud  of  his  arguments,  who  would  cut  a  very  poor  figure  with  those  same
arguments among those who are on the other side. Would you find out for yourself from books? What
learning you will need! What languages you must learn; what libraries you must ransack; what an
amount of reading must be got through! Who will guide me in such a choice? It will be hard to find the
best books on the opposite side in any one country, and all the harder to find those on all sides; when
found they would be easily answered. The absent are always in the wrong, and bad arguments boldly
asserted easily efface good arguments put forward with scorn. Besides books are often very misleading,
and scarcely express the opinions of their authors. If you think you can judge the Catholic faith from
the writings of Bossuet, you will find yourself greatly mistaken when you have lived among us. You
will see that the doctrines with which Protestants are answered are quite different from those of thepulpit. To judge a religion rightly, you must not study it in the books of its partisans, you must learn it
in their lives; this is quite another matter. Each religion has its own traditions, meaning, customs,
prejudices, which form the spirit of its creed, and must be taken in connection with it.
  "How many great nations neither print books of their own nor read ours! How shall they judge of
our opinions, or we of theirs? We laugh at them, they despise us; and if our travellers turn them into
ridicule, they need only travel among us to pay us back in our own coin. Are there not, in every
country, men of common-sense, honesty, and good faith, lovers of truth, who only seek to know what
truth is that they may profess it? Yet every one finds truth in his own religion, and thinks the religion of
other nations absurd; so all these foreign religions are not so absurd as they seem to us, or else the
reason we find for our own proves nothing.
  "We have three principal forms of religion in Europe. One accepts one revelation, another two, and
another three. Each hates the others, showers curses on them, accuses them of blindness, obstinacy,
hardness of heart, and falsehood. What fair-minded man will dare to decide between them without first
carefully weighing their evidence, without listening attentively to their arguments? That which accepts
only one revelation is the oldest and seems the best established; that which accepts three is the newest
and seems the most consistent; that which accepts two revelations and rejects the third may perhaps be
the best, but prejudice is certainly against it; its inconsistency is glaring.
  "In all three revelations the sacred books are written in languages unknown to the people who
believe in them. The Jews no longer understand Hebrew, the Christians understand neither Hebrew nor
Greek; the Turks and Persians do not understand Arabic, and the Arabs of our time do not speak the
language of Mahomet. Is not it a very foolish way of teaching, to teach people in an unknown tongue?
These books are translated, you say. What an answer! How am I to know that the translations are
correct, or how am I to make sure that such a thing as a correct translation is possible? If God has gone
so far as to speak to men, why should he require an interpreter?
  "I can never believe that every man is obliged to know what is contained in books, and that he who
is out of reach of these books, and of those who understand them, will be punished for an ignorance
which is no fault of his. Books upon books! What madness! As all Europe is full of books, Europeans
regard them as necessary, forgetting that they are unknown throughout three-quarters of the globe.
Were not all these books written by men? Why then should a man need them to teach him his duty, and
how did he learn his duty before these books were in existence? Either he must have learnt his duties
for himself, or his ignorance must have been excused.
  "Our Catholics talk loudly of the authority of the Church; but what is the use of it all, if they also
need just as great an array of proofs to establish that authority as the other seeks to establish their
doctrine? The Church decides that the Church has a right to decide. What a well-founded authority! Go
beyond it, and you are back again in our discussions.
  "Do you know many Christians who have taken the trouble to inquire what the Jews allege against
them? If any one knows anything at all about it, it is from the writings of Christians. What a way of
ascertaining the arguments of our adversaries! But what is to be done? If any one dared to publish in
our  day  books  which  were  openly  in  favour  of  the  Jewish  religion,  we  should  punish  the  author,
publisher, and bookseller. This regulation is a sure and certain plan for always being in the right. It is
easy to refute those who dare not venture to speak.
  "Those among us who have the opportunity of talking with Jews are little better off. These unhappy
people feel that they are in our power; the tyranny they have suffered makes them timid; they know that
Christian charity thinks nothing of injustice and cruelty; will they dare to run the risk of an outcry
against blasphemy? Our greed inspires us with zeal, and they are so rich that they must be in the wrong.
The more learned, the more enlightened they are, the more cautious. You may convert some poor
wretch whom you have paid to slander his religion; you get some wretched old-clothes-man to speak,
and he says what you want; you may triumph over their ignorance and cowardice, while all the time
their men of learning are laughing at your stupidity. But do you think you would get off so easily in any
place where they knew they were safe! At the Sorbonne it is plain that the Messianic prophecies refer toJesus Christ. Among the rabbis of Amsterdam it is just as clear that they have nothing to do with him. I
do not think I have ever heard the arguments of the Jews as to why they should not have a free state,
schools and universities, where they can speak and argue without danger. Then alone can we know
what they have to say.
  "At Constantinople the Turks state their arguments, but we dare not give ours; then it is our turn to
cringe. Can we blame the Turks if they require us to show the same respect for Mahomet, in whom we
do not believe, as we demand from the Jews with regard to Jesus Christ in whom they do not believe?
Are we right? On what grounds of justice can we answer this question?
  "Two-thirds of mankind are neither Jews, Mahometans, nor Christians; and how many millions of
men have never heard the name of Moses, Jesus Christ, or Mahomet? They deny it; they maintain that
our missionaries go everywhere. That is easily said. But do they go into the heart of Africa, still
undiscovered, where as yet no European has ever ventured? Do they go to Eastern Tartary to follow on
horseback the wandering tribes, whom no stranger approaches, who not only know nothing of the pope,
but have scarcely heard tell of the Grand Lama! Do they penetrate into the vast continents of America,
where there are still whole nations unaware that the people of another world have set foot on their
shores? Do they go to Japan, where their intrigues have led to their perpetual banishment, where their
predecessors are only known to the rising generation as skilful plotters who came with feigned zeal to
take possession in secret of the empire? Do they reach the harems of the Asiatic princes to preach the
gospel  to  those  thousands  of  poor  slaves?  What  have  the  women  of  those  countries  done  that  no
missionary may preach the faith to them? Will they all go to hell because of their seclusion?
  "If it were true that the gospel is preached throughout the world, what advantage would there be?
The day before the first missionary set foot in any country, no doubt somebody died who could not hear
him. Now tell me what we shall do with him? If there were a single soul in the whole world, to whom
Jesus Christ had never been preached, this objection would be as strong for that man as for a quarter of
the human race.
  "If the ministers of the gospel have made themselves heard among far-off nations, what have they
told  them  which  might  reasonably  be  accepted  on  their  word,  without  further  and  more  exact
verification? You preach to me God, born and dying, two thousand years ago, at the other end of the
world, in some small town I know not where; and you tell me that all who have not believed this
mystery are damned. These are strange things to be believed so quickly on the authority of an unknown
person. Why did your God make these things happen so far off, if he would compel me to know about
them? Is it a crime to be unaware of what is happening half a world away? Could I guess that in another
hemisphere there was a Hebrew nation and a town called Jerusalem? You might as well expect me to
know what was happening in the moon. You say you have come to teach me; but why did you not
come and teach my father, or why do you consign that good old man to damnation because he knew
nothing of all this? Must he be punished everlastingly for your laziness, he who was so kind and
helpful, he who sought only for truth? Be honest; put yourself in my place; see if I ought to believe, on
your word alone, all these incredible things which you have told me, and reconcile all this injustice
with the just God you proclaim to me. At least allow me to go and see this distant land where such
wonders, unheard of in my own country, took place; let me go and see why the inhabitants of Jerusalem
put their God to death as a robber. You tell me they did not know he was God. What then shall I do, I
who  have  only  heard  of  him  from  you?  You  say  they  have  been  punished,  dispersed,  oppressed,
enslaved; that none of them dare approach that town. Indeed they richly deserved it; but what do its
present inhabitants say of their crime in slaying their God! They deny him; they too refuse to recognise
God as God. They are no better than the children of the original inhabitants.
  "What! In the very town where God was put to death, neither the former nor the latter inhabitants
knew him, and you expect that I should know him, I who was born two thousand years after his time,
and two thousand leagues away? Do you not see that before I can believe this book which you call
sacred, but which I do not in the least understand, I must know from others than yourself when and by
whom it was written, how it has been preserved, how it came into your possession, what they say aboutit in those lands where it is rejected, and what are their reasons for rejecting it, though they know as
well as you what you are telling me? You perceive I must go to Europe, Asia, Palestine, to examine
these things for myself; it would be madness to listen to you before that.
  "Not only does this seem reasonable to me, but I maintain that it is what every wise man ought to
say in similar circumstances; that he ought to banish to a great distance the missionary who wants to
instruct and baptise him all of a sudden before the evidence is verified. Now I maintain that there is no
revelation against which these or similar objections cannot be made, and with more force than against
Christianity. Hence it follows that if there is but one true religion and if every man is bound to follow it
under  pain  of  damnation,  he  must  spend  his  whole  life  in  studying,  testing,  comparing  all  these
religions, in travelling through the countries in which they are established. No man is free from a man's
first duty; no one has a right to depend on another's judgment. The artisan who earns his bread by his
daily toil, the ploughboy who cannot read, the delicate and timid maiden, the invalid who can scarcely
leave his bed, all without exception must study, consider, argue, travel over the whole world; there will
be no more fixed and settled nations; the whole earth will swarm with pilgrims on their way, at great
cost of time and trouble, to verify, compare, and examine for themselves the various religions to be
found.  Then  farewell  to  the  trades,  the  arts,  the  sciences  of  mankind,  farewell  to  all  peaceful
occupations; there can be no study but that of religion, even the strongest, the most industrious, the
most intelligent, the oldest, will hardly be able in his last years to know where he is; and it will be a
wonder if he manages to find out what religion he ought to live by, before the hour of his death.
  "Hard pressed by these arguments, some prefer to make God unjust and to punish the innocent for
the sins of their fathers, rather than to renounce their barbarous dogmas. Others get out of the difficulty
by kindly sending an angel to instruct all those who in invincible ignorance have lived a righteous life.
A good idea, that angel! Not content to be the slaves of their own inventions they expect God to make
use of them also!
  "Behold, my son, the absurdities to which pride and intolerance bring us, when everybody wants
others to think as he does, and everybody fancies that he has an exclusive claim upon the rest of
mankind. I call to witness the God of Peace whom I adore, and whom I proclaim to you, that my
inquiries were honestly made; but when I discovered that they were and always would be unsuccessful,
and that I was embarked upon a boundless ocean, I turned back, and restricted my faith within the
limits of my primitive ideas. I could never convince myself that God would require such learning of me
under pain of hell. So I closed all my books. There is one book which is open to every one--the book of
nature. In this good and great volume I learn to serve and adore its Author. There is no excuse for not
reading this book, for it speaks to all in a language they can understand. Suppose I had been born in a
desert island, suppose I had never seen any man but myself, suppose I had never heard what took place
in olden days in a remote corner of the world; yet if I use my reason, if I cultivate it, if I employ rightly
the innate faculties which God bestows upon me, I shall learn by myself to know and love him, to love
his works, to will what he wills, and to fulfil all my duties upon earth, that I may do his pleasure. What
more can all human learning teach me?
  "With regard to revelation, if I were a more accomplished disputant, or a more learned person,
perhaps I should feel its truth, its usefulness for those who are happy enough to perceive it; but if I find
evidence for it which I cannot combat, I also find objections against it which I cannot overcome. There
are so many weighty reasons for and against that I do not know what to decide, so that I neither accept
nor reject it. I only reject all obligation to be convinced of its truth; for this so-called obligation is
incompatible with God's justice, and far from removing objections in this way it would multiply them,
and would make them insurmountable for the greater part of mankind. In this respect I maintain an
attitude of reverent doubt. I do not presume to think myself infallible; other men may have been able to
make up their minds though the matter seems doubtful to myself; I am speaking for myself, not for
them; I neither blame them nor follow in their steps; their judgment may be superior to mine, but it is
no fault of mine that my judgment does not agree with it.
  "I own also that the holiness of the gospel speaks to my heart, and that this is an argument which Ishould be sorry to refute. Consider the books of the philosophers with all their outward show; how
petty they are in comparison! Can a book at once so grand and so simple be the work of men? Is it
possible that he whose history is contained in this book is no more than man? Is the tone of this book,
the tone of the enthusiast or the ambitious sectary? What gentleness and purity in his actions, what a
touching grace in his teaching, how lofty are his sayings, how profoundly wise are his sermons, how
ready, how discriminating, and how just are his answers! What man, what sage, can live, suffer, and die
without weakness or ostentation? When Plato describes his imaginary good man, overwhelmed with the
disgrace of crime, and deserving of all the rewards of virtue, every feature of the portrait is that of
Christ; the resemblance is so striking that it has been noticed by all the Fathers, and there can be no
doubt about it. What prejudices and blindness must there be before we dare to compare the son of
Sophronisca with the son of Mary. How far apart they are! Socrates dies a painless death, he is not put
to open shame, and he plays his part easily to the last; and if this easy death had not done honour to his
life, we might have doubted whether Socrates, with all his intellect, was more than a mere sophist. He
invented morality, so they say; others before him had practised it; he only said what they had done, and
made use of their example in his teaching. Aristides was just before Socrates defined justice; Leonidas
died for his country before Socrates declared that patriotism was a virtue; Sparta was sober before
Socrates extolled sobriety; there were plenty of virtuous men in Greece before he defined virtue. But
among the men of his own time where did Jesus find that pure and lofty morality of which he is both
the teacher and pattern? [Footnote: Cf. in the Sermon on the Mount the parallel he himself draws
between the teaching of Moses and his own.--Matt. v.] The voice of loftiest wisdom arose among the
fiercest fanaticism, the simplicity of the most heroic virtues did honour to the most degraded of nations
One could wish no easier death than that of Socrates, calmly discussing philosophy with his friends;
one could fear nothing worse than that of Jesus, dying in torment, among the insults, the mockery, the
curses of the whole nation. In the midst of these terrible sufferings, Jesus prays for his cruel murderers.
Yes, if the life and death of Socrates are those of a philosopher, the life and death of Christ are those of
a God. Shall we say that the gospel story is the work of the imagination? My friend, such things are not
imagined; and the doings of Socrates, which no one doubts, are less well attested than those of Jesus
Christ. At best, you only put the difficulty from you; it would be still more incredible that several
persons should have agreed together to invent such a book, than that there was one man who supplied
its subject matter. The tone and morality of this story are not those of any Jewish authors, and the
gospel indeed contains characters so great, so striking, so entirely inimitable, that their invention would
be more astonishing than their hero. With all this the same gospel is full of incredible things, things
repugnant to reason, things which no natural man can understand or accept. What can you do among so
many contradictions? You can be modest and wary, my child; respect in silence what you can neither
reject nor understand, and humble yourself in the sight of the Divine Being who alone knows the truth.
  "This is the unwilling scepticism in which I rest; but this scepticism is in no way painful to me, for
it does not extend to matters of practice, and I am well assured as to the principles underlying all my
duties. I serve God in the simplicity of my heart; I only seek to know what affects my conduct. As to
those dogmas which have no effect upon action or morality, dogmas about which so many men torment
themselves, I give no heed to them. I regard all individual religions as so many wholesome institutions
which prescribe a uniform method by which each country may do honour to God in public worship;
institutions which may each have its reason in the country, the government, the genius of the people, or
in other local causes which make one preferable to another in a given time or place. I think them all
good alike, when God is served in a fitting manner. True worship is of the heart. God rejects no
homage,  however  offered,  provided  it  is  sincere.  Called  to  the  service  of  the  Church  in  my  own
religion, I fulfil as scrupulously as I can all the duties prescribed to me, and my conscience would
reproach me if I were knowingly wanting with regard to any point. You are aware that after being
suspended for a long time, I have, through the influence of M. Mellarede, obtained permission to
resume my priestly duties, as a means of livelihood. I used to say Mass with the levity that comes from
long experience even of the most serious matters when they are too familiar to us; with my newprinciples I now celebrate it with more reverence; I dwell upon the majesty of the Supreme Being, his
presence, the insufficiency of the human mind, which so little realises what concerns its Creator. When
I consider how I present before him the prayers of all the people in a form laid down for me, I carry out
the whole ritual exactly; I give heed to what I say, I am careful not to omit the least word, the least
ceremony; when the moment of the consecration approaches, I collect my powers, that I may do all
things as required by the Church and by the greatness of this sacrament; I strive to annihilate my own
reason before the Supreme Mind; I say to myself, Who art thou to measure infinite power? I reverently
pronounce the sacramental words, and I give to their effect all the faith I can bestow. Whatever may be
this mystery which passes understanding, I am not afraid that at the day of judgment I shall be punished
for having profaned it in my heart."
  Honoured with the sacred ministry, though in its lowest ranks, I will never do or say anything
which may make me unworthy to fulfil these sublime duties. I will always preach virtue and exhort
men to well-doing; and so far as I can I will set them a good example. It will be my business to make
religion attractive; it will be my business to strengthen their faith in those doctrines which are really
useful, those which every man must believe; but, please God, I shall never teach them to hate their
neighbour,  to  say  to  other  men,  You  will  be  damned;  to  say,  No  salvation  outside  the  Church.
[Footnote: The duty of following and loving the religion of our country does not go so far as to require
us to accept doctrines contrary to good morals, such as intolerance. This horrible doctrine sets men in
arms against their fellow-men, and makes them all enemies of mankind. The distinction between civil
toleration and theological toleration is vain and childish. These two kinds of toleration are inseparable,
and we cannot accept one without the other. Even the angels could not live at peace with men whom
they regarded as the enemies of God.] If I were in a more conspicuous position, this reticence might get
me into trouble; but I am too obscure to have much to fear, and I could hardly sink lower than I am.
Come what may, I will never blaspheme the justice of God, nor lie against the Holy Ghost.
  "I have long desired to have a parish of my own; it is still my ambition, but I no longer hope to
attain it. My dear friend, I think there is nothing so delightful as to be a parish priest. A good clergyman
is a minister of mercy, as a good magistrate is a minister of justice. A clergyman is never called upon to
do evil; if he cannot always do good himself, it is never out of place for him to beg for others, and he
often gets what he asks if he knows how to gain respect. Oh! if I should ever have some poor mountain
parish where I might minister to kindly folk, I should be happy indeed; for it seems to me that I should
make my parishioners happy. I should not bring them riches, but I should share their poverty; I should
remove from them the scorn and opprobrium which are harder to bear than poverty. I should make
them love peace and equality, which often remove poverty, and always make it tolerable. When they
saw that I was in no way better off than themselves, and that yet I was content with my lot, they would
learn to put up with their fate and to be content like me. In my sermons I would lay more stress on the
spirit of the gospel than on the spirit of the church; its teaching is simple, its morality sublime; there is
little in it about the practices of religion, but much about works of charity. Before I teach them what
they ought to do, I would try to practise it myself, that they might see that at least I think what I say. If
there were Protestants in the neighbourhood or in my parish, I would make no difference between them
and my own congregation so far as concerns Christian charity; I would get them to love one another, to
consider themselves brethren, to respect all religions, and each to live peaceably in his own religion. To
ask any one to abandon the religion in which he was born is, I consider, to ask him to do wrong, and
therefore to do wrong oneself. While we await further knowledge, let us respect public order; in every
country let us respect the laws, let us not disturb the form of worship prescribed by law; let us not lead
its citizens into disobedience; for we have no certain knowledge that it is good for them to abandon
their own opinions for others, and on the other hand we are quite certain that it is a bad thing to disobey
the law.
  "My young friend, I have now repeated to you my creed as God reads it in my heart; you are the
first to whom I have told it; perhaps you will be the last. As long as there is any true faith left among
men, we must not trouble quiet souls, nor scare the faith of the ignorant with problems they cannotsolve, with difficulties which cause them uneasiness, but do not give them any guidance. But when
once  everything  is  shaken,  the  trunk  must  be  preserved  at  the  cost  of  the  branches.  Consciences,
restless, uncertain, and almost quenched like yours, require to be strengthened and aroused; to set the
feet again upon the foundation of eternal truth, we must remove the trembling supports on which they
think they rest.
  "You are at that critical age when the mind is open to conviction, when the heart receives its form
and character, when we decide our own fate for life, either for good or evil. At a later date, the material
has hardened and fresh impressions leave no trace. Young man, take the stamp of truth upon your heart
which is not yet hardened, if I were more certain of myself, I should have adopted a more decided and
dogmatic tone; but I am a man ignorant and. liable to error; what could I do? I have opened my heart
fully to you; and I have told what I myself hold for certain and sure; I have told you my doubts as
doubts, my opinions as opinions; I have given you my reasons both for faith and doubt. It is now your
turn to judge; you have asked for time; that is a wise precaution and it makes me think well of you.
Begin by bringing your conscience into that state in which it desires to see clearly; be honest with
yourself. Take to yourself such of my opinions as convince you, reject the rest. You are not yet so
depraved by vice as to run the risk of choosing amiss. I would offer to argue with you, but as soon as
men dispute they lose their temper; pride and obstinacy come in, and there is an end of honesty. My
friend, never argue; for by arguing we gain no light for ourselves or for others. So far as I myself am
concerned, I have only made up my mind after many years of meditation; here I rest, my conscience is
at peace, my heart is satisfied. If I wanted to begin afresh the examination of my feelings, I should not
bring to the task a purer love of truth; and my mind, which is already less active, would be less able to
perceive the truth. Here I shall rest, lest the love of contemplation, developing step by step into an idle
passion, should make me lukewarm in the performance of my duties, lest I should fall into my former
scepticism without strength to struggle out of it. More than half my life is spent; I have barely time to
make good use of what is left, to blot out my faults by my virtues. If I am mistaken, it is against my
will. He who reads my inmost heart knows that I have no love for my blindness. As my own knowledge
is powerless to free me from this blindness, my only way out of it is by a good life; and if God from the
very stones can raise up children to Abraham, every man has a right to hope that he may be taught the
truth, if he makes himself worthy of it.
  "If my reflections lead you to think as I do, if you share my feelings, if we have the same creed, I
give you this advice: Do not continue to expose your life to the temptations of poverty and despair, nor
waste it in degradation and at the mercy of strangers; no longer eat the shameful bread of charity.
Return to your own country, go back to the religion of your fathers, and follow it in sincerity of heart,
and never forsake it; it is very simple and very holy; I think there is no other religion upon earth whose
morality is purer, no other more satisfying to the reason. Do not trouble about the cost of the journey,
that will be provided for you. Neither do you fear the false shame of a humiliating return; we should
blush to commit a fault, not to repair it. You are still at an age when all is forgiven, but when we cannot
go on sinning with impunity. If you desire to listen to your conscience, a thousand empty objections
will disappear at her voice. You will feel that, in our present state of uncertainty, it is an inexcusable
presumption  to  profess  any  faith  but  that  we  were  born  into,  while  it  is  treachery  not  to  practise
honestly the faith we profess. If we go astray, we deprive ourselves of a great excuse before the tribunal
of the sovereign judge. Will he not pardon the errors in which we were brought up, rather than those of
our own choosing?
  "My son, keep your soul in such a state that you always desire that there should be a God and you
will never doubt it. Moreover, whatever decision you come to, remember that the real duties of religion
are independent of human institutions; that a righteous heart is the true temple of the Godhead; that in
every land, in every sect, to love God above all things and to love our neighbour as ourself is the whole
law; remember there is no religion which absolves us from our moral duties; that these alone are really
essential, that the service of the heart is the first of these duties, and that without faith there is no such
thing as true virtue.  "Shun those who, under the pretence of explaining nature, sow destructive doctrines in the heart of
men, those whose apparent scepticism is a hundredfold more self-assertive and dogmatic than the firm
tone of their opponents. Under the arrogant claim, that they alone are enlightened, true, honest, they
subject us imperiously to their far-reaching decisions, and profess to give us, as the true principles of all
things, the unintelligible systems framed by their imagination. Moreover, they overthrow, destroy, and
trample under foot all that men reverence; they rob the afflicted of their last consolation in their misery;
they deprive the rich and powerful of the sole bridle of their passions; they tear from the very depths of
man's heart all remorse for crime, and all hope of virtue; and they boast, moreover, that they are the
benefactors of the human race. Truth, they say, can never do a man harm. I think so too, and to my
mind that is strong evidence that what they teach is not true. [Footnote: The rival parties attack each
other with so many sophistries that it would be a rash and overwhelming enterprise to attempt to deal
with all of them; it is difficult enough to note some of them as they occur. One of the commonest errors
among the partisans of philosophy is to contrast a nation of good philosophers with a nation of bad
Christians; as if it were easier to make a nation of good philosophers than a nation of good Christians. I
know not whether in individual cases it is easier to discover one rather than the other; but I am quite
certain that, as far as nations are concerned, we must assume that there will be those who misuse their
philosophy without religion, just as our people misuse their religion without philosophy, and that seems
to put quite a different face upon the matter.]--Bayle has proved very satisfactorily that fanaticism is
more harmful than atheism, and that cannot be denied; but what he has not taken the trouble to say,
though it is none the less true, is this: Fanaticism, though cruel and bloodthirsty, is still a great and
powerful passion, which stirs the heart of man, teaching him to despise death, and giving him an
enormous motive power, which only needs to be guided rightly to produce the noblest virtues; while
irreligion, and the argumentative philosophic spirit generally, on the other hand, assaults the life and
enfeebles it, degrades the soul, concentrates all the passions in the basest self-interest, in the meanness
of the human self; thus it saps unnoticed the very foundations of all society, for what is common to all
these private interests is so small that it will never outweigh their opposing interests.--If atheism does
not lead to bloodshed, it is less from love of peace than from indifference to what is good; as if it
mattered little what happened to others, provided the sage remained undisturbed in his study. His
principles do not kill men, but they prevent their birth, by destroying the morals by which they were
multiplied, by detaching them from their fellows, by reducing all their affections to a secret selfishness,
as fatal to population as to virtue. The indifference of the philosopher is like the peace in a despotic
state; it is the repose of death; war itself is not more destructive.--Thus fanaticism though its immediate
results are more fatal than those of what is now called the philosophic mind, is much less fatal in its
after effects. Moreover, it is an easy matter to exhibit fine maxims in books; but the real question is--
Are they really in accordance with your teaching, are they the necessary consequences of it? and this
has not been clearly proved so far. It remains to be seen whether philosophy, safely enthroned, could
control  successfully  man's  petty  vanity,  his  self-interest,  his  ambition,  all  the  lesser  passions  of
mankind, and whether it would practise that sweet humanity which it boasts of, pen in hand.--In theory,
there is no good which philosophy can bring about which is not equally secured by religion, while
religion secures much that philosophy cannot secure.--In practice, it is another matter; but still we must
put it to the proof. No man follows his religion in all things, even if his religion is true; most people
have hardly any religion, and they do not in the least follow what they have; that is still more true; but
still there are some people who have a religion and follow it, at least to some extent; and beyond doubt
religious motives do prevent them from wrong-doing, and win from them virtues, praiseworthy actions,
which would not have existed but for these motives.--A monk denies that money was entrusted to him;
what of that? It only proves that the man who entrusted the money to him was a fool. If Pascal had done
the same, that would have proved that Pascal was a hypocrite. But a monk! Are those who make a trade
of religion religious people? All the crimes committed by the clergy, as by other men, do not prove that
religion is useless, but that very few people are religious.--Most certainly our modern governments owe
to  Christianity  their  more  stable  authority,  their  less  frequent  revolutions;  it  has  made  thosegovernments less bloodthirsty; this can be shown by comparing them with the governments of former
times. Apart from fanaticism, the best known religion has given greater gentleness to Christian conduct.
This change is not the result of learning; for wherever learning has been most illustrious humanity has
been no more respected on that account; the cruelties of the Athenians, the Egyptians, the Roman
emperors, the Chinese bear witness to this. What works of mercy spring from the gospel! How many
acts of restitution, reparation, confession does the gospel lead to among Catholics! Among ourselves, as
the times of communion draw near, do they not lead us to reconciliation and to alms-giving? Did not
the Hebrew Jubilee make the grasping less greedy, did it not prevent much poverty? The brotherhood
of the Law made the nation one; no beggar was found among them. Neither are there beggars among
the  Turks,  where  there  are  countless  pious  institutions;  from  motives  of  religion  they  even  show
hospitality to the foes of their religion.--"The Mahometans say, according to Chardin, that after the
interrogation which will follow the general resurrection, all bodies will traverse a bridge called Poul-
Serrho, which is thrown across the eternal fires, a bridge which may be called the third and last test of
the great Judgment, because it is there that the good and bad will be separated, etc.--"The Persians,
continues Chardin, make a great point of this bridge; and when any one suffers a wrong which he can
never hope to wipe out by any means or at any time, he finds his last consolation in these words: 'By
the living God, you will pay me double at the last day; you will never get across the Poul-Serrho if you
do not first do me justice; I will hold the hem of your garment, I will cling about your knees.' I have
seen many eminent men, of every profession, who for fear lest this hue and cry should be raised against
them  as  they  cross  that  fearful  bridge,  beg  pardon  of  those  who  complained  against  them;  it  has
happened to me myself on many occasions. Men of rank, who had compelled me by their importunity
to do what I did not wish to do, have come to me when they thought my anger had had time to cool,
and have said to me; I pray you "Halal becon antchisra," that is, "Make this matter lawful and right."
Some of them have even sent gifts and done me service, so that I might forgive them and say I did it
willingly; the cause of this is nothing else but this belief that they will not be able to get across the
bridge of hell until they have paid the uttermost farthing to the oppressed."--Must I think that the idea
of this bridge where so many iniquities are made good is of no avail? If the Persians were deprived of
this idea, if they were persuaded that there was no Poul-Serrho, nor anything of the kind, where the
oppressed were avenged of their tyrants after death, is it not clear that they would be very much at their
ease, and they would be freed from the care of appeasing the wretched? But it is false to say that this
doctrine is hurtful; yet it would not be true.--O Philosopher, your moral laws are all very fine; but
kindly show me their sanction. Cease to shirk the question, and tell me plainly what you would put in
the place of Poul-Serrho.
  "My good youth, be honest and humble; learn how to be ignorant, then you will never deceive
yourself or others. If ever your talents are so far cultivated as to enable you to speak to other men,
always speak according to your conscience, without oaring for their applause. The abuse of knowledge
causes incredulity. The learned always despise the opinions of the crowd; each of them must have his
own opinion. A haughty philosophy leads to atheism just as blind devotion leads to fanaticism. Avoid
these extremes; keep steadfastly to the path of truth, or what seems to you truth, in simplicity of heart,
and  never  let  yourself  be  turned  aside  by  pride  or  weakness.  Dare  to  confess  God  before  the
philosophers; dare to preach humanity to the intolerant. It may be you will stand alone, but you will
bear within you a witness which will make the witness of men of no account with you. Let them love or
hate, let them read your writings or despise them; no matter. Speak the truth and do the right; the one
thing that really matters is to do one's duty in this world; and when we forget ourselves we are really
working for ourselves. My child, self-interest misleads us; the hope of the just is the only sure guide."
I have transcribed this document not as a rule for the sentiments we should adopt in matters of
religion, but as an example of the way in which we may reason with our pupil without forsaking the
method I have tried to establish. So long as we yield nothing to human authority, nor to the prejudices
of our native land, the light of reason alone, in a state of nature, can lead us no further than to natural
religion; and this is as far as I should go with Emile. If he must have any other religion, I have no rightto be his guide; he must choose for himself.
  We are working in agreement with nature, and while she is shaping the physical man, we are
striving to shape his moral being, but we do not make the same progress. The body is already strong
and vigorous, the soul is still frail and delicate, and whatever can be done by human art, the body is
always ahead of the mind. Hitherto all our care has been devoted to restrain the one and stimulate the
other, so that the man might be as far as possible at one with himself. By developing his individuality,
we have kept his growing susceptibilities in check; we have controlled it by cultivating his reason.
Objects of thought moderate the influence of objects of sense. By going back to the causes of things,
we have withdrawn him from the sway of the senses; it is an easy thing to raise him from the study of
nature to the search for the author of nature.
  When we have reached this point, what a fresh hold we have got over our pupil; what fresh ways of
speaking to his heart! Then alone does he find a real motive for being good, for doing right when he is
far from every human eye, and when he is not driven to it by law. To be just in his own eyes and in the
sight of God, to do his duty, even at the cost of life itself, and to bear in his heart virtue, not only for the
love of order which we all subordinate to the love of self, but for the love of the Author of his being, a
love which mingles with that self-love, so that he may at length enjoy the lasting happiness which the
peace of a good conscience and the contemplation of that supreme being promise him in another life,
after  he  has  used  this  life  aright.  Go  beyond  this,  and  I  see  nothing  but  injustice,  hypocrisy,  and
falsehood among men; private interest, which in competition necessarily prevails over everything else,
teaches all things to adorn vice with the outward show of virtue. Let all men do what is good for me at
the cost of what is good for themselves; let everything depend on me alone; let the whole human race
perish, if needs be, in suffering and want, to spare me a moment's pain or hunger. Yes, I shall always
maintain that whoso says in his heart, "There is no God," while he takes the name of God upon his lips,
is either a liar or a madman.
  Reader, it is all in vain; I perceive that you and I shall never see Emile with the same eyes; you will
always fancy him like your own young people, hasty, impetuous, flighty, wandering from fete to fete,
from amusement to amusement, never able to settle to anything. You smile when I expect to make a
thinker, a philosopher, a young theologian, of an ardent, lively, eager, and fiery young man, at the most
impulsive period of youth. This dreamer, you say, is always in pursuit of his fancy; when he gives us a
pupil of his own making, he does not merely form him, he creates him, he makes him up out of his own
head; and while he thinks he is treading in the steps of nature, he is getting further and further from her.
As for me, when I compare my pupil with yours, I can scarcely find anything in common between
them. So differently brought up, it is almost a miracle if they are alike in any respect. As his childhood
was passed in the freedom they assume in youth, in his youth he begins to bear the yoke they bore as
children; this yoke becomes hateful to them, they are sick of it, and they see in it nothing but their
masters' tyranny; when they escape from childhood, they think they must shake off all control, they
make up for the prolonged restraint imposed upon them, as a prisoner, freed from his fetters, moves and
stretches and shakes his limbs. [Footnote: There is no one who looks down upon childhood with such
lofty scorn as those who are barely grown-up; just as there is no country where rank is more strictly
regarded than that where there is little real inequality; everybody is afraid of being confounded with his
inferiors.] Emile, however, is proud to be a man, and to submit to the yoke of his growing reason; his
body, already well grown, no longer needs so much action, and begins to control itself, while his half-
fledged mind tries its wings on every occasion. Thus the age of reason becomes for the one the age of
licence; for the other, the age of reasoning.
  Would  you  know  which  of  the  two  is  nearer  to  the  order  of  nature!  Consider  the  differences
between those who are more or less removed from a state of nature. Observe young villagers and see if
they are as undisciplined as your scholars. The Sieur de Beau says that savages in childhood are always
active, and ever busy with sports that keep the body in motion; but scarcely do they reach adolescence
than they become quiet and dreamy; they no longer devote themselves to games of skill or chance.
Emile, who has been brought up in full freedom like young peasants and savages, should behave likethem and change as he grows up. The whole difference is in this, that instead of merely being active in
sport or for food, he has, in the course of his sports, learned to think. Having reached this stage, and by
this road, he is quite ready to enter upon the next stage to which I introduce him; the subjects I suggest
for his consideration rouse his curiosity, because they are fine in themselves, because they are quite
new to him, and because he is able to understand them. Your young people, on the other hand, are
weary and overdone with your stupid lessons, your long sermons, and your tedious catechisms; why
should they not refuse to devote their minds to what has made them sad, to the burdensome precepts
which have been continually piled upon them, to the thought of the Author of their being, who has been
represented as the enemy of their pleasures? All this has only inspired in them aversion, disgust, and
weariness; constraint has set them against it; why then should they devote themselves to it when they
are beginning to choose for themselves? They require novelty, you must not repeat what they learned as
children. Just so with my own pupil, when he is a man I speak to him as a man, and only tell him what
is new to him; it is just because they are tedious to your pupils that he will find them to his taste.
  This is how I doubly gain time for him by retarding nature to the advantage of reason. But have I
indeed retarded the progress of nature? No, I have only prevented the imagination from hastening it; I
have employed another sort of teaching to counterbalance the precocious instruction which the young
man receives from other sources. When he is carried away by the flood of existing customs and I draw
him in the opposite direction by means of other customs, this is not to remove him from his place, but
to keep him in it.
  Nature's due time comes at length, as come it must. Since man must die, he must reproduce himself,
so that the species may endure and the order of the world continue. When by the signs I have spoken of
you perceive that the critical moment is at hand, at once abandon for ever your former tone. He is still
your disciple, but not your scholar. He is a man and your friend; henceforth you must treat him as such.
  What! Must I abdicate my authority when most I need it? Must I abandon the adult to himself just
when he least knows how to control himself, when he may fall into the gravest errors! Must I renounce
my rights when it matters most that I should use them on his behalf? Who bids you renounce them; he
is only just becoming conscious of them. Hitherto all you have gained has been won by force or guile;
authority, the law of duty, were unknown to him, you had to constrain or deceive him to gain his
obedience. But see what fresh chains you have bound about his heart. Reason, friendship, affection,
gratitude, a thousand bonds of affection, speak to him in a voice he cannot fail to hear. His ears are not
yet dulled by vice, he is still sensitive only to the passions of nature. Self-love, the first of these,
delivers him into your hands; habit confirms this. If a passing transport tears him from you, regret
restores  him  to  you  without  delay;  the  sentiment  which  attaches  him  to  you  is  the  only  lasting
sentiment, all the rest are fleeting and self-effacing. Do not let him become corrupt, and he will always
be docile; he will not begin to rebel till he is already perverted.
I grant you, indeed, that if you directly oppose his growing desires and foolishly treat as crimes the
fresh needs which are beginning to make themselves felt in him, he will not listen to you for long; but
as soon as you abandon my method I cannot be answerable for the consequences. Remember that you
are nature's minister; you will never be her foe.
  But what shall we decide to do? You see no alternative but either to favour his inclinations or to
resist them; to tyrannise or to wink at his misconduct; and both of these may lead to such dangerous
results that one must indeed hesitate between them.
  The first way out of the difficulty is a very early marriage; this is undoubtedly the safest and most
natural plan. I doubt, however, whether it is the best or the most useful. I will give my reasons later;
meanwhile I admit that young men should marry when they reach a marriageable age. But this age
comes too soon; we have made them precocious; marriage should be postponed to maturity.
  If it were merely a case of listening to their wishes and following their lead it would be an easy
matter; but there are so many contradictions between the rights of nature and the laws of society that to
conciliate  them  we  must  continually  contradict  ourselves.  Much  art  is  required  to  prevent  man  in
society from being altogether artificial.  For the reasons just stated, I consider that by the means I have indicated and others like them the
young man's desires may be kept in ignorance and his senses pure up to the age of twenty. This is so
true that among the Germans a young man who lost his virginity before that age was considered
dishonoured; and the writers justly attribute the vigour of constitution and the number of children
among the Germans to the continence of these nations during youth.
  This period may be prolonged still further, and a few centuries ago nothing was more common even
in France. Among other well-known examples, Montaigne's father, a man no less scrupulously truthful
than strong and healthy, swore that his was a virgin marriage at three and thirty, and he had served for a
long time in the Italian wars. We may see in the writings of his son what strength and spirit were shown
by the father when he was over sixty. Certainly the contrary opinion depends rather on our own morals
and our own prejudices than on the experience of the race as a whole.
I may, therefore, leave on one side the experience of our young people; it proves nothing for those
who have been educated in another fashion. Considering that nature has fixed no exact limits which
cannot be advanced or postponed, I think I may, without going beyond the law of nature, assume that
under my care Emil has so far remained in his first innocence, but I see that this happy period is
drawing to a close. Surrounded by ever-increasing perils, he will escape me at the first opportunity in
spite of all my efforts, and this opportunity will not long be delayed; he will follow the blind instinct of
his senses; the chances are a thousand to one on his ruin. I have considered the morals of mankind too
profoundly not to be aware of the irrevocable influence of this first moment on all the rest of his life. If
I dissimulate and pretend to see nothing, he will take advantage of my weakness; if he thinks he can
deceive me, he will despise me, and I become an accomplice in his destruction. If I try to recall him, the
time is past, he no longer heeds me, he finds me tiresome, hateful, intolerable; it will not be long before
he is rid of me. There is therefore only one reasonable course open to me; I must make him accountable
for his own actions, I must at least preserve him from being taken unawares, and I must show him
plainly  the  dangers  which  beset  his  path.  I  have  restrained  him  so  far  through  his  ignorance;
henceforward his restraint must be his own knowledge.
  This new teaching is of great importance, and we will take up our story where we left it. This is the
time to present my accounts, to show him how his time and mine have been spent, to make known to
him what he is and what I am; what I have done, and what he has done; what we owe to each other; all
his moral relations, all the undertakings to which he is pledged, all those to which others have pledged
themselves in respect to him; the stage he has reached in the development of his faculties, the road that
remains to be travelled, the difficulties he will meet, and the way to overcome them; how I can still help
him and how he must henceforward help himself; in a word, the critical time which he has reached, the
new dangers round about him, and all the valid reasons which should induce him to keep a close watch
upon himself before giving heed to his growing desires.
  Remember that to guide a grown man you must reverse all that you did to guide the child. Do not
hesitate to speak to him of those dangerous mysteries which you have so carefully concealed from him
hitherto. Since he must become aware of them, let him not learn them from another, nor from himself,
but from you alone; since he must henceforth fight against them, let him know his enemy, that he may
not be taken unawares.
  Young people who are found to be aware of these matters, without our knowing how they obtained
their  knowledge,  have  not  obtained  it  with  impunity.  This  unwise  teaching,  which  can  have  no
honourable  object,  stains  the  imagination  of  those  who  receive  it  if  it  does  nothing  worse,  and  it
inclines  them  to  the  vices  of  their  instructors.  This  is  not  all;  servants,  by  this  means,  ingratiate
themselves with a child, gain his confidence, make him regard his tutor as a gloomy and tiresome
person; and one of the favourite subjects of their secret colloquies is to slander him. When the pupil has
got so far, the master may abandon his task; he can do no good.
  But why does the child choose special confidants? Because of the tyranny of those who control
him. Why should he hide himself from them if he were not driven to it? Why should he complain if he
had nothing to complain of? Naturally those who control him are his first confidants; you can see fromhis eagerness to tell them what he thinks that he feels he has only half thought till he has told his
thoughts to them. You may be sure that when the child knows you will neither preach nor scold, he will
always tell you everything, and that no one will dare to tell him anything he must conceal from you, for
they will know very well that he will tell you everything.
  What makes me most confident in my method is this: when I follow it out as closely as possible, I
find no situation in the life of my scholar which does not leave me some pleasing memory of him. Even
when he is carried away by his ardent temperament or when he revolts against the hand that guides
him, when he struggles and is on the point of escaping from me, I still find his first simplicity in his
agitation and his anger; his heart as pure as his body, he has no more knowledge of pretence than of
vice; reproach and scorn have not made a coward of him; base fears have never taught him the art of
concealment. He has all the indiscretion of innocence; he is absolutely out-spoken; he does not even
know the use of deceit. Every impulse of his heart is betrayed either by word or look, and I often know
what he is feeling before he is aware of it himself.
  So long as his heart is thus freely opened to me, so long as he delights to tell me what he feels, I
have nothing to fear; the danger is not yet at hand; but if he becomes more timid, more reserved, if I
perceive in his conversation the first signs of confusion and shame, his instincts are beginning to
develop, he is beginning to connect the idea of evil with these instincts, there is not a moment to lose,
and if I do not hasten to instruct him, he will learn in spite of me.
  Some of my readers, even of those who agree with me, will think that it is only a question of a
conversation with the young man at any time. Oh, this is not the way to control the human heart. What
we say has no meaning unless the opportunity has been carefully chosen. Before we sow we must till
the ground; the seed of virtue is hard to grow; and a long period of preparation is required before it will
take root. One reason why sermons have so little effect is that they are offered to everybody alike,
without discrimination or choice. How can any one imagine that the same sermon could be suitable for
so many hearers, with their different dispositions, so unlike in mind, temper, age, sex, station, and
opinion. Perhaps there are not two among those to whom what is addressed to all is really suitable; and
all our affections are so transitory that perhaps there are not even two occasions in the life of any man
when the same speech would have the same effect on him. Judge for yourself whether the time when
the eager senses disturb the understanding and tyrannise over the will, is the time to listen to the solemn
lessons of wisdom. Therefore never reason with young men, even when they have reached the age of
reason, unless you have first prepared the way. Most lectures miss their mark more through the master's
fault than the disciple's. The pedant and the teacher say much the same; but the former says it at
random, and the latter only when he is sure of its effect.
  As a somnambulist, wandering in his sleep, walks along the edge of a precipice, over which he
would fall if he were awake, so my Emile, in the sleep of ignorance, escapes the perils which he does
not see; were I to wake him with a start, he might fall. Let us first try to withdraw him from the edge of
the precipice, and then we will awake him to show him it from a distance.
  Reading, solitude, idleness, a soft and sedentary life, intercourse with women and young people,
these are perilous paths for a young man, and these lead him constantly into danger. I divert his senses
by other objects of sense; I trace another course for his spirits by which I distract them from the course
they  would  have  taken;  it  is  by  bodily  exercise  and  hard  work  that  I  check  the  activity  of  the
imagination, which was leading him astray. When the arms are hard at work, the imagination is quiet;
when the body is very weary, the passions are not easily inflamed. The quickest and easiest precaution
is to remove him from immediate danger. At once I take him away from towns, away from things
which might lead him into temptation. But that is not enough; in what desert, in what wilds, shall he
escape from the thoughts which pursue him? It is not enough to remove dangerous objects; if I fail to
remove the memory of them, if I fail to find a way to detach him from everything, if I fail to distract
him from himself, I might as well have left him where he was.
  Emile has learned a trade, but we do not have recourse to it; he is fond of farming and understands
it, but farming is not enough; the occupations he is acquainted with degenerate into routine; when he isengaged in them he is not really occupied; he is thinking of other things; head and hand are at work on
different  subjects.  He  must  have  some  fresh  occupation  which  has  the  interest  of  novelty--an
occupation which keeps him busy, diligent, and hard at work, an occupation which he may become
passionately fond of, one to which he will devote himself entirely. Now the only one which seems to
possess all these characteristics is the chase. If hunting is ever an innocent pleasure, if it is ever worthy
of a man, now is the time to betake ourselves to it. Emile is well-fitted to succeed in it. He is strong,
skilful, patient, unwearied. He is sure to take a fancy to this sport; he will bring to it all the ardour of
youth; in it he will lose, at least for a time, the dangerous inclinations which spring from softness. The
chase hardens the heart a well as the body; we get used to the sight of blood and cruelty. Diana is
represented as the enemy of love; and the allegory is true to life; the languors of love are born of soft
repose, and tender feelings are stifled by violent exercise. In the woods and fields, the lover and the
sportsman are so diversely affected that they receive very different impressions. The fresh shade, the
arbours, the pleasant resting-places of the one, to the other are but feeding grounds, or places where the
quarry will hide or turn to bay. Where the lover hears the flute and the nightingale, the hunter hears the
horn and the hounds; one pictures to himself the nymphs and dryads, the other sees the horses, the
huntsman,  and  the  pack.  Take  a  country  walk  with  one  or  other  of  these  men;  their  different
conversation will soon show you that they behold the earth with other eyes, and that the direction of
their thoughts is as different as their favourite pursuit.
I understand how these tastes may be combined, and that at last men find time for both. But the
passions of youth cannot be divided in this way. Give the youth a single occupation which he loves, and
the rest will soon be forgotten. Varied desires come with varied knowledge, and the first pleasures we
know are the only ones we desire for long enough. I would not have the whole of Emile's youth spent in
killing creatures, and I do not even profess to justify this cruel passion; it is enough for me that it serves
to delay a more dangerous passion, so that he may listen to me calmly when I speak of it, and give me
time to describe it without stimulating it.
  There are moments in human life which can never be forgotten. Such is the time when Emile
receives the instruction of which I have spoken; its influence should endure all his life through. Let us
try to engrave it on his memory so that it may never fade away. It is one of the faults of our age to rely
too much on cold reason, as if men were all mind. By neglecting the language of expression we have
lost the most forcible mode of speech. The spoken word is always weak, and we speak to the heart
rather through the eyes than the ears. In our attempt to appeal to reason only, we have reduced our
precepts to words, we have not embodied them in deed. Mere reason is not active; occasionally she
restrains, more rarely she stimulates, but she never does any great thing. Small minds have a mania for
reasoning.  Strong  souls  speak  a  very  different  language,  and  it  is  by  this  language  that  men  are
persuaded and driven to action.
I observe that in modern times men only get a hold over others by force or self-interest, while the
ancients  did  more  by  persuasion,  by  the  affections  of  the  heart;  because  they  did  not  neglect  the
language; of symbolic expression. All agreements were drawn up solemnly, so that they might be more
inviolable; before the reign of force, the gods were the judges of mankind; in their presence, individuals
made their treaties and alliances, and pledged themselves to perform their promises; the face of the
earth was the book in which the archives were preserved. The leaves of this book were rocks, trees,
piles of stones, made sacred by these transactions, and regarded with reverence by barbarous men; and
these pages were always open before their eyes. The well of the oath, the well of the living and seeing
one; the ancient oak of Mamre, the stones of witness, such were the simple but stately monuments of
the sanctity of contracts; none dared to lay a sacrilegious hand on these monuments, and man's faith
was more secure under the warrant of these dumb witnesses than it is to-day upon all the rigour of the
law.
  In government the people were over-awed by the pomp and splendour of royal power. The symbols
of greatness, a throne, a sceptre, a purple robe, a crown, a fillet, these were sacred in their sight. These
symbols, and the respect which they inspired, led them to reverence the venerable man whom theybeheld adorned with them; without soldiers and without threats, he spoke and was obeyed. [Footnote:
The Roman Catholic clergy have very wisely retained these symbols, and certain republics, such as
Venice, have followed their example. Thus the Venetian government, despite the fallen condition of the
state, still enjoys, under the trappings of its former greatness, all the affection, all the reverence of the
people; and next to the pope in his triple crown, there is perhaps no king, no potentate, no person in the
world so much respected as the Doge of Venice; he has no power, no authority, but he is rendered
sacred by his pomp, and he wears beneath his ducal coronet a woman's flowing locks. That ceremony
of the Bucentaurius, which stirs the laughter of fools, stirs the Venetian populace to shed its life-blood
for the maintenance of this tyrannical government.] In our own day men profess to do away with these
symbols. What are the consequences of this contempt? The kingly majesty makes no impression on all
hearts, kings can only gain obedience by the help of troops, and the respect of their subjects is based
only on the fear of punishment. Kings are spared the trouble of wearing their crowns, and our nobles
escape from the outward signs of their station, but they must have a hundred thousand men at their
command if their orders are to be obeyed. Though this may seem a finer thing, it is easy to see that in
the long run they will gain nothing.
  It is amazing what the ancients accomplished with the aid of eloquence; but this eloquence did not
merely consist in fine speeches carefully prepared; and it was most effective when the orator said least.
The most startling speeches were expressed not in words but in signs; they were not uttered but shown.
A thing beheld by the eyes kindles the imagination, stirs the curiosity, and keeps the mind on the alert
for what we are about to say, and often enough the thing tells the whole story. Thrasybulus and Tarquin
cutting off the heads of the poppies, Alexander placing his seal on the lips of his favourite, Diogenes
marching before Zeno, do not these speak more plainly than if they had uttered long orations? What
flow of words could have expressed the ideas as clearly? Darius, in the course of the Scythian war,
received from the king of the Scythians a bird, a frog, a mouse, and five arrows. The ambassador
deposited this gift and retired without a word. In our days he would have been taken for a madman.
This terrible speech was understood, and Darius withdrew to his own country with what speed he
could. Substitute a letter for these symbols and the more threatening it was the less terror it would
inspire; it would have been merely a piece of bluff, to which Darius would have paid no attention.
  What heed the Romans gave to the language of signs! Different ages and different ranks had their
appropriate garments, toga, tunic, patrician robes, fringes and borders, seats of honour, lictors, rods and
axes, crowns of gold, crowns of leaves, crowns of flowers, ovations, triumphs, everything had its pomp,
its observances, its ceremonial, and all these spoke to the heart of the citizens. The state regarded it as a
matter of importance that the populace should assemble in one place rather than another, that they
should or should not behold the Capitol, that they should or should not turn towards the Senate, that this
day or that should be chosen for their deliberations. The accused wore a special dress, so did the
candidates for election; warriors did not boast of their exploits, they showed their scars. I can fancy one
of our orators at the death of Caesar exhausting all the commonplaces of rhetoric to give a pathetic
description of his wounds, his blood, his dead body; Anthony was an orator, but he said none of this; he
showed the murdered Caesar. What rhetoric was this!
  But this digression, like many others, is drawing me unawares away from my subject; and my
digressions are too frequent to be borne with patience. I therefore return to the point.
  Do not reason coldly with youth. Clothe your reason with a body, if you would make it felt. Let the
mind speak the language of the heart, that it may be understood. I say again our opinions, not our
actions, may be influenced by cold argument; they set us thinking, not doing; they show us what we
ought to think, not what we ought to do. If this is true of men, it is all the truer of young people who are
still enwrapped in their senses and cannot think otherwise than they imagine.
  Even after the preparations of which I have spoken, I shall take good care not to go all of a sudden
to Emile's room and preach a long and heavy sermon on the subject in which he is to be instructed. I
shall begin by rousing his imagination; I shall choose the time, place, and surroundings most favourable
to  the  impression  I  wish  to  make;  I  shall,  so  to  speak,  summon  all  nature  as  witness  to  ourconversations; I shall call upon the eternal God, the Creator of nature, to bear witness to the truth of
what I say. He shall judge between Emile and myself; I will make the rocks, the woods, the mountains
round about us, the monuments of his promises and mine; eyes, voice, and gesture shall show the
enthusiasm I desire to inspire. Then I will speak and he will listen, and his emotion will be stirred by
my own. The more impressed I am by the sanctity of my duties, the more sacred he will regard his own.
I will enforce the voice of reason with images and figures, I will not give him long-winded speeches or
cold precepts, but my overflowing feelings will break their bounds; my reason shall be grave and
serious, but my heart cannot speak too warmly. Then when I have shown him all that I have done for
him, I will show him how he is made for me; he will see in my tender affection the cause of all my care.
How greatly shall I surprise and disturb him when I change my tone. Instead of shrivelling up his soul
by always talking of his own interests, I shall henceforth speak of my own; he will be more deeply
touched by this. I will kindle in his young heart all the sentiments of affection, generosity, and gratitude
which I have already called into being, and it will indeed be sweet to watch their growth. I will press
him to my bosom, and weep over him in my emotion; I will say to him: "You are my wealth, my child,
my handiwork; my happiness is bound up in yours; if you frustrate my hopes, you rob me of twenty
years of my life, and you bring my grey hairs with sorrow to the grave." This is the way to gain a
hearing and to impress what is said upon the heart and memory of the young man.
  Hitherto I have tried to give examples of the way in which a tutor should instruct his pupil in cases
of difficulty. I have tried to do so in this instance; but after many attempts I have abandoned the task,
convinced that the French language is too artificial to permit in print the plainness of speech required
for the first lessons in certain subjects.
  They say French is more chaste than other languages; for my own part I think it more obscene; for
it seems to me that the purity of a language does not consist in avoiding coarse expressions but in
having none. Indeed, if we are to avoid them, they must be in our thoughts, and there is no language in
which it is so difficult to speak with purity on every subject than French. The reader is always quicker
to detect than the author to avoid a gross meaning, and he is shocked and startled by everything. How
can what is heard by impure ears avoid coarseness? On the other hand, a nation whose morals are pure
has fit terms for everything, and these terms are always right because they are rightly used. One could
not imagine more modest language than that of the Bible, just because of its plainness of speech. The
same things translated into French would become immodest. What I ought to say to Emile will sound
pure and honourable to him; but to make the same impression in print would demand a like purity of
heart in the reader.
I should even think that reflections on true purity of speech and the sham delicacy of vice might
find a useful place in the conversations as to morality to which this subject brings us; for when he
learns the language of plain-spoken goodness, he must also learn the language of decency, and he must
know why the two are so different. However this may be, I maintain that if instead of the empty
precepts which are prematurely dinned into the ears of children, only to be scoffed at when the time
comes when they might prove useful, if instead of this we bide our time, if we prepare the way for a
hearing, if we then show him the laws of nature in all their truth, if we show him the sanction of these
laws in the physical and moral evils which overtake those who neglect them, if while we speak to him
of this great mystery of generation, we join to the idea of the pleasure which the Author of nature has
given to this act the idea of the exclusive affection which makes it delightful, the idea of the duties of
faithfulness and modesty which surround it, and redouble its charm while fulfilling its purpose; if we
paint  to  him  marriage,  not  only  as  the  sweetest  form  of  society,  but  also  as  the  most  sacred  and
inviolable of contracts, if we tell him plainly all the reasons which lead men to respect this sacred bond,
and to pour hatred and curses upon him who dares to dishonour it; if we give him a true and terrible
picture of the horrors of debauch, of its stupid brutality, of the downward road by which a first act of
misconduct leads from bad to worse, and at last drags the sinner to his ruin; if, I say, we give him
proofs that on a desire for chastity depends health, strength, courage, virtue, love itself, and all that is
truly good for man--I maintain that this chastity will be so dear and so desirable in his eyes, that hismind will be ready to receive our teaching as to the way to preserve it; for so long as we are chaste we
respect chastity; it is only when we have lost this virtue that we scorn it.
  It is not true that the inclination to evil is beyond our control, and that we cannot overcome it until
we have acquired the habit of yielding to it. Aurelius Victor says that many men were mad enough to
purchase a night with Cleopatra at the price of their life, and this is not incredible in the madness of
passion. But let us suppose the maddest of men, the man who has his senses least under control; let him
see the preparations for his death, let him realise that he will certainly die in torment a quarter of an
hour later; not only would that man, from that time forward, become able to resist temptation, he would
even find it easy to do so; the terrible picture with which they are associated will soon distract his
attention from these temptations, and when they are continually put aside they will cease to recur. The
sole cause of our weakness is the feebleness of our will, and we have always strength to perform what
we strongly desire. "Volenti nihil difficile!" Oh! if only we hated vice as much as we love life, we
should abstain as easily from a pleasant sin as from a deadly poison in a delicious dish.
  How is it that you fail to perceive that if all the lessons given to a young man on this subject have
no effect, it is because they are not adapted to his age, and that at every age reason must be presented in
a shape which will win his affection? Speak seriously to him if required, but let what you say to him
always have a charm which will compel him to listen. Do not coldly oppose his wishes; do not stifle his
imagination, but direct it lest it should bring forth monsters. Speak to him of love, of women, of
pleasure; let him find in your conversation a charm which delights his youthful heart; spare no pains to
make yourself his confidant; under this name alone will you really be his master. Then you need not
fear he will find your conversation tedious; he will make you talk more than you desire.
  If I have managed to take all the requisite precautions in accordance with these maxims, and have
said the right things to Emile at the age he has now reached, I am quite convinced that he will come of
his own accord to the point to which I would lead him, and will eagerly confide himself to my care.
When he sees the dangers by which he is surrounded, he will say to me with all the warmth of youth,
"Oh, my friend, my protector, my master! resume the authority you desire to lay aside at the very time
when I most need it; hitherto my weakness has given you this power. I now place it in your hands of
my own free-will, and it will be all the more sacred in my eyes. Protect me from all the foes which are
attacking me, and above all from the traitors within the citadel; watch over your work, that it may still
be worthy of you. I mean to obey your laws, I shall ever do so, that is my steadfast purpose; if I ever
disobey you, it will be against my will; make me free by guarding me against the passions which do me
violence; do not let me become their slave; compel me to be my own master and to obey, not my
senses, but my reason."
  When you have led your pupil so far (and it will be your own fault if you fail to do so), beware of
taking him too readily at his word, lest your rule should seem too strict to him, and lest he should think
he has a right to escape from it, by accusing you of taking him by surprise. This is the time for reserve
and seriousness; and this attitude will have all the more effect upon him seeing that it is the first time
you have adopted it towards him.
  You will say to him therefore: "Young man, you readily make promises which are hard to keep; you
must understand what they mean before you have a right to make them; you do not know how your
fellows are drawn by their passions into the whirlpool of vice masquerading as pleasure. You are
honourable, I know; you will never break your word, but how often will you repent of having given it?
How often will you curse your friend, when, in order to guard you from the ills which threaten you, he
finds himself compelled to do violence to your heart. Like Ulysses who, hearing the song of the Sirens,
cried aloud to his rowers to unbind him, you will break your chains at the call of pleasure; you will
importune me with your lamentations, you will reproach me as a tyrant when I have your welfare most
at heart; when I am trying to make you happy, I shall incur your hatred. Oh, Emile, I can never bear to
be hateful in your eyes; this is too heavy a price to pay even for your happiness. My dear young man,
do you not see that when you undertake to obey me, you compel me to promise to be your guide, to
forget myself in my devotion to you, to refuse to listen to your murmurs and complaints, to wageunceasing war against your wishes and my own. Before we either of us undertake such a task, let us
count our resources; take your time, give me time to consider, and be sure that the slower we are to
promise, the more faithfully will our promises be kept."
  You may be sure that the more difficulty he finds in getting your promise, the easier you will find it
to carry it out. The young man must learn that he is promising a great deal, and that you are promising
still more. When the time is come, when he has, so to say, signed the contract, then change your tone,
and make your rule as gentle as you said it would be severe. Say to him, "My young friend, it is
experience that you lack; but I have taken care that you do not lack reason. You are ready to see the
motives of my conduct in every respect; to do this you need only wait till you are free from excitement.
Always obey me first, and then ask the reasons for my commands; I am always ready to give my
reasons so soon as you are ready to listen to them, and I shall never be afraid to make you the judge
between us. You promise to follow my teaching, and I promise only to use your obedience to make you
the happiest of men. For proof of this I have the life you have lived hitherto. Show me any one of your
age who has led as happy a life as yours, and I promise you nothing more."
  When my authority is firmly established, my first care will be to avoid the necessity of using it. I
shall spare no pains to become more and more firmly established in his confidence, to make myself the
confidant of his heart and the arbiter of his pleasures. Far from combating his youthful tastes, I shall
consult them that I may be their master; I will look at things from his point of view that I may be his
guide; I will not seek a remote distant good at the cost of his present happiness. I would always have
him happy always if that may be.
  Those who desire to guide young people rightly and to preserve them from the snares of sense give
them a disgust for love, and would willingly make the very thought of it a crime, as if love were for the
old. All these mistaken lessons have no effect; the heart gives the lie to them. The young man, guided
by a surer instinct, laughs to himself over the gloomy maxims which he pretends to accept, and only
awaits the chance of disregarding them. All that is contrary to nature. By following the opposite course
I reach the same end more safely. I am not afraid to encourage in him the tender feeling for which he is
so eager, I shall paint it as the supreme joy of life, as indeed it is; when I picture it to him, I desire that
he shall give himself up to it; by making him feel the charm which the union of hearts adds to the
delights of sense, I shall inspire him with a disgust for debauchery; I shall make him a lover and a good
man.
  How narrow-minded to see nothing in the rising desires of a young heart but obstacles to the
teaching of reason. In my eyes, these are the right means to make him obedient to that very teaching.
Only through passion can we gain the mastery over passions; their tyranny must be controlled by their
legitimate power, and nature herself must furnish us with the means to control her.
  Emile is not made to live alone, he is a member of society, and must fulfil his duties as such. He is
made to live among his fellow-men and he must get to know them. He knows mankind in general; he
has still to learn to know individual men. He knows what goes on in the world; he has now to learn how
men live in the world. It is time to show him the front of that vast stage, of which he already knows the
hidden  workings.  It  will  not  arouse  in  him  the  foolish  admiration  of  a  giddy  youth,  but  the
discrimination of an exact and upright spirit. He may no doubt be deceived by his passions; who is
there who yields to his passions without being led astray by them? At least he will not be deceived by
the passions of other people. If he sees them, he will regard them with the eye of the wise, and will
neither be led away by their example nor seduced by their prejudices.
  As there is a fitting age for the study of the sciences, so there is a fitting age for the study of the
ways of the world. Those who learn these too soon, follow them throughout life, without choice or
consideration, and although they follow them fairly well they never really know what they are about.
But he who studies the ways of the world and sees the reason for them, follows them with more insight,
and therefore more exactly and gracefully. Give me a child of twelve who knows nothing at all; at
fifteen I will restore him to you knowing as much as those who have been under instruction from
infancy; with this difference, that your scholars only know things by heart, while mine knows how touse his knowledge. In the same way plunge a young man of twenty into society; under good guidance,
in a year's time, he will be more charming and more truly polite than one brought up in society from
childhood.  For  the  former  is  able  to  perceive  the  reasons  for  all  the  proceedings  relating  to  age,
position, and sex, on which the customs of society depend, and can reduce them to general principles,
and apply them to unforeseen emergencies; while the latter, who is guided solely by habit, is at a loss
when habit fails him.
  Young French ladies are all brought up in convents till they are married. Do they seem to find any
difficulty in acquiring the ways which are so new to them, and is it possible to accuse the ladies of Paris
of awkward and embarrassed manners or of ignorance of the ways of society, because they have not
acquired them in infancy! This is the prejudice of men of the world, who know nothing of more
importance than this trifling science, and wrongly imagine that you cannot begin to acquire it too soon.
  On the other hand, it is quite true that we must not wait too long. Any one who has spent the whole
of his youth far from the great world is all his life long awkward, constrained, out of place; his manners
will be heavy and clumsy, no amount of practice will get rid of this, and he will only make himself
more ridiculous by trying to do so. There is a time for every kind of teaching and we ought to recognise
it, and each has its own dangers to be avoided. At this age there are more dangers than at any other; but
I do not expose my pupil to them without safeguards.
  When my method succeeds completely in attaining one object, and when in avoiding one difficulty
it also provides against another, I then consider that it is a good method, and that I am on the right
track. This seems to be the case with regard to the expedient suggested by me in the present case. If I
desire to be stern and cold towards my pupil, I shall lose his confidence, and he will soon conceal
himself from me. If I wish to be easy and complaisant, to shut my eyes, what good does it do him to be
under my care? I only give my authority to his excesses, and relieve his conscience at the expense of
my own. If I introduce him into society with no object but to teach him, he will learn more than I want.
If I keep him apart from society, what will he have learnt from me? Everything perhaps, except the one
art absolutely necessary to a civilised man, the art of living among his fellow-men. If I try to attend to
this at a distance, it will be of no avail; he is only concerned with the present. If I am content to supply
him with amusement, he will acquire habits of luxury and will learn nothing.
  We will have none of this. My plan provides for everything. Your heart, I say to the young man,
requires a companion; let us go in search of a fitting one; perhaps we shall not easily find such a one,
true worth is always rare, but we will be in no hurry, nor will we be easily discouraged. No doubt there
is such a one, and we shall find her at last, or at least we shall find some one like her. With an end so
attractive to himself, I introduce him into society. What more need I say? Have I not achieved my
purpose?
  By describing to him his future mistress, you may imagine whether I shall gain a hearing, whether I
shall succeed in making the qualities he ought to love pleasing and dear to him, whether I shall sway
his feelings to seek or shun what is good or bad for him. I shall be the stupidest of men if I fail to make
him in love with he knows not whom. No matter that the person I describe is imaginary, it is enough to
disgust  him  with  those  who  might  have  attracted  him;  it  is  enough  if  it  is  continually  suggesting
comparisons which make him prefer his fancy to the real people he sees; and is not love itself a fancy, a
falsehood, an illusion? We are far more in love with our own fancy than with the object of it. If we saw
the object of our affections as it is, there would be no such thing as love. When we cease to love, the
person we used to love remains unchanged, but we no longer see with the same eyes; the magic veil is
drawn aside, and love disappears. But when I supply the object of imagination, I have control over
comparisons, and I am able easily to prevent illusion with regard to realities.
  For all that I would not mislead a young man by describing a model of perfection which could
never exist; but I would so choose the faults of his mistress that they will suit him, that he will be
pleased by them, and they may serve to correct his own. Neither would I lie to him and affirm that there
really is such a person; let him delight in the portrait, he will soon desire to find the original. From
desire to belief the transition is easy; it is a matter of a little skilful description, which under moreperceptible features will give to this imaginary object an air of greater reality. I would go so far as to
give her a name; I would say, smiling. Let us call your future mistress Sophy; Sophy is a name of good
omen; if it is not the name of the lady of your choice at least she will be worthy of the name; we may
honour  her  with  it  meanwhile.  If  after  all  these  details,  without  affirming  or  denying,  we  excuse
ourselves from giving an answer, his suspicions will become certainty; he will think that his destined
bride is purposely concealed from him, and that he will see her in good time. If once he has arrived at
this conclusion and if the characteristics to be shown to him have been well chosen, the rest is easy;
there will be little risk in exposing him to the world; protect him from his senses, and his heart is safe.
  But whether or no he personifies the model I have contrived to make so attractive to him, this
model, if well done, will attach him none the less to everything that resembles itself, and will give him
as great a distaste for all that is unlike it as if Sophy really existed. What a means to preserve his heart
from the dangers to which his appearance would expose him, to repress his senses by means of his
imagination, to rescue him from the hands of those women who profess to educate young men, and
make them pay so dear for their teaching, and only teach a young man manners by making him utterly
shameless. Sophy is so modest? What would she think of their advances! Sophy is so simple! How
would she like their airs? They are too far from his thoughts and his observations to be dangerous.
  Every  one  who  deals  with  the  control  of  children  follows  the  same  prejudices  and  the  same
maxima, for their observation is at fault, and their reflection still more so. A young man is led astray in
the first place neither by temperament nor by the senses, but by popular opinion. If we were concerned
with boys brought up in boarding schools or girls in convents, I would show that this applies even to
them; for the first lessons they learn from each other, the only lessons that bear fruit, are those of vice;
and it is not nature that corrupts them but example. But let us leave the boarders in schools and
convents to their bad morals; there is no cure for them. I am dealing only with home training. Take a
young man carefully educated in his father's country house, and examine him when he reaches Paris
and makes his entrance into society; you will find him thinking clearly about honest matters, and you
will find his will as wholesome as his reason. You will find scorn of vice and disgust for debauchery;
his face will betray his innocent horror at the very mention of a prostitute. I maintain that no young man
could make up his mind to enter the gloomy abodes of these unfortunates by himself, if indeed he were
aware of their purpose and felt their necessity.
  See the same young man six months later, you will not know him; from his bold conversation, his
fashionable maxims, his easy air, you would take him for another man, if his jests over his former
simplicity and his shame when any one recalls it did not show that it is he indeed and that he is
ashamed of himself. How greatly has he changed in so short a time! What has brought about so sudden
and complete a change? His physical development? Would not that have taken place in his father's
house, and certainly he would not have acquired these maxims and this tone at home? The first charms
of sense? On the contrary; those who are beginning to abandon themselves to these pleasures are timid
and anxious, they shun the light and noise. The first pleasures are always mysterious, modesty gives
them their savour, and modesty conceals them; the first mistress does not make a man bold but timid.
Wholly absorbed in a situation so novel to him, the young man retires into himself to enjoy it, and
trembles for fear it should escape him. If he is noisy he knows neither passion nor love; however he
may boast, he has not enjoyed.
  These changes are merely the result of changed ideas. His heart is the same, but his opinions have
altered. His feelings, which change more slowly, will at length yield to his opinions and it is then that
he is indeed corrupted. He has scarcely made his entrance into society before he receives a second
education quite unlike the first, which teaches him to despise what he esteemed, and esteem what he
despised; he learns to consider the teaching of his parents and masters as the jargon of pedants, and the
duties they have instilled into him as a childish morality, to be scorned now that he is grown up. He
thinks he is bound in honour to change his conduct; he becomes forward without desire, and he talks
foolishly from false shame. He rails against morality before he has any taste for vice, and prides himself
on debauchery without knowing how to set about it. I shall never forget the confession of a youngofficer in the Swiss Guards, who was utterly sick of the noisy pleasures of his comrades, but dared not
refuse to take part in them lest he should be laughed at. "I am getting used to it," he said, "as I am
getting used to taking snuff; the taste will come with practice; it will not do to be a child for ever."
  So a young man when he enters society must be preserved from vanity rather than from sensibility;
he  succumbs  rather  to  the  tastes  of  others  than  to  his  own,  and  self-love  is  responsible  for  more
libertines than love.
  This being granted, I ask you. Is there any one on earth better armed than my pupil against all that
may attack his morals, his sentiments, his principles; is there any one more able to resist the flood?
What seduction is there against which he is not forearmed? If his desires attract him towards women, he
fails to find what he seeks, and his heart, already occupied, holds him back. If he is disturbed and urged
onward by his senses, where will he find satisfaction? His horror of adultery and debauch keeps him at
a distance from prostitutes and married women, and the disorders of youth may always be traced to one
or other of these. A maiden may be a coquette, but she will not be shameless, she will not fling herself
at the head of a young man who may marry her if he believes in her virtue; besides she is always under
supervision. Emile, too, will not be left entirely to himself; both of them will be under the guardianship
of  fear  and  shame,  the  constant  companions  of  a  first  passion;  they  will  not  proceed  at  once  to
misconduct, and they will not have time to come to it gradually without hindrance. If he behaves
otherwise, he must have taken lessons from his comrades, he must have learned from them to despise
his self-control, and to imitate their boldness. But there is no one in the whole world so little given to
imitation as Emile. What man is there who is so little influenced by mockery as one who has no
prejudices himself and yields nothing to the prejudices of others. I have laboured twenty years to arm
him  against  mockery;  they  will  not  make  him  their  dupe  in  a  day;  for  in  his  eyes  ridicule  is  the
argument of fools, and nothing makes one less susceptible to raillery than to be beyond the influence of
prejudice. Instead of jests he must have arguments, and while he is in this frame of mind, I am not
afraid that he will be carried away by young fools; conscience and truth are on my side. If prejudice is
to enter into the matter at all, an affection of twenty years' standing counts for something; no one will
ever convince him that I have wearied him with vain lessons; and in a heart so upright and so sensitive
the voice of a tried and trusted friend will soon efface the shouts of twenty libertines. As it is therefore
merely a question of showing him that he is deceived, that while they pretend to treat him as a man they
are really treating him as a child, I shall choose to be always simple but serious and plain in my
arguments, so that he may feel that I do indeed treat him as a man. I will say to him, You will see that
your welfare, in which my own is bound up, compels me to speak; I can do nothing else. But why do
these young men want to persuade you? Because they desire to seduce you; they do not care for you,
they take no real interest in you; their only motive is a secret spite because they see you are better than
they; they want to drag you down to their own level, and they only reproach you with submitting to
control that they may themselves control you. Do you think you have anything to gain by this? Are they
so much wiser than I, is the affection of a day stronger than mine? To give any weight to their jests they
must give weight to their authority; and by what experience do they support their maxima above ours?
They have only followed the example of other giddy youths, as they would have you follow theirs. To
escape from the so-called prejudices of their fathers, they yield to those of their comrades. I cannot see
that they are any the better off; but I see that they lose two things of value--the affection of their
parents, whose advice is that of tenderness and truth, and the wisdom of experience which teaches us to
judge by what we know; for their fathers have once been young, but the young men have never been
fathers.
  But you think they are at least sincere in their foolish precepts. Not so, dear Emile; they deceive
themselves in order to deceive you; they are not in agreement with themselves; their heart continually
revolts, and their very words often contradict themselves. This man who mocks at everything good
would be in despair if his wife held the same views. Another extends his indifference to good morals
even to his future wife, or he sinks to such depths of infamy as to be indifferent to his wife's conduct;
but go a step further; speak to him of his mother; is he willing to be treated as the child of an adulteressand the son of a woman of bad character, is he ready to assume the name of a family, to steal the
patrimony of the true heir, in a word will he bear being treated as a bastard? Which of them will permit
his daughter to be dishonoured as he dishonours the daughter of another? There is not one of them who
would not kill you if you adopted in your conduct towards him all the principles he tries to teach you.
Thus they prove their inconsistency, and we know they do not believe what they say. Here are reasons,
dear Emile; weigh their arguments if they have any, and compare them with mine. If I wished to have
recourse like them to scorn and mockery, you would see that they lend themselves to ridicule as much
or more than myself. But I am not afraid of serious inquiry. The triumph of mockers is soon over; truth
endures, and their foolish laughter dies away.
  You do not think that Emile, at twenty, can possibly be docile. How differently we think! I cannot
understand how he could be docile at ten, for what hold have I on him at that age? It took me fifteen
years  of  careful  preparation  to  secure  that  hold.  I  was  not  educating  him,  but  preparing  him  for
education. He is now sufficiently educated to be docile; he recognises the voice of friendship and he
knows how to obey reason. It is true I allow him a show of freedom, but he was never more completely
under control, because he obeys of his own free will. So long as I could not get the mastery over his
will, I retained my control over his person; I never left him for a moment. Now I sometimes leave him
to  himself  because  I  control  him  continually.  When  I  leave  him  I  embrace  him  and  I  say  with
confidence: Emile, I trust you to my friend, I leave you to his honour; he will answer for you.
  To corrupt healthy affections which have not been previously depraved, to efface principles which
are directly derived from our own reasoning, is not the work of a moment. If any change takes place
during my absence, that absence will not be long, he will never be able to conceal himself from me, so
that I shall perceive the danger before any harm comes of it, and I shall be in time to provide a remedy.
As we do not become depraved all at once, neither do we learn to deceive all at once; and if ever there
was a man unskilled in the art of deception it is Emile, who has never had any occasion for deceit.
  By means of these precautions and others like them, I expect to guard him so completely against
strange sights and vulgar precepts that I would rather see him in the worst company in Paris than alone
in his room or in a park left to all the restlessness of his age. Whatever we may do, a young man's worst
enemy is himself, and this is an enemy we cannot avoid. Yet this is an enemy of our own making, for,
as I have said again and again, it is the imagination which stirs the senses. Desire is not a physical need;
it is not true that it is a need at all. If no lascivious object had met our eye, if no unclean thought had
entered our mind, this so-called need might never have made itself felt, and we should have remained
chaste, without temptation, effort, or merit. We do not know how the blood of youth is stirred by
certain situations and certain sights, while the youth himself does not understand the cause of his
uneasiness-an uneasiness difficult to subdue and certain to recur. For my own part, the more I consider
this serious crisis and its causes, immediate and remote, the more convinced I am that a solitary brought
up in some desert, apart from books, teaching, and women, would die a virgin, however long he lived.
  But we are not concerned with a savage of this sort. When we educate a man among his fellow-men
and for social life, we cannot, and indeed we ought not to, bring him up in this wholesome ignorance,
and half knowledge is worse than none. The memory of things we have observed, the ideas we have
acquired, follow us into retirement and people it, against our will, with images more seductive than the
things themselves, and these make solitude as fatal to those who bring such ideas with them as it is
wholesome for those who have never left it.
  Therefore, watch carefully over the young man; he can protect himself from all other foes, but it is
for you to protect him against himself. Never leave him night or day, or at least share his room; never
let him go to bed till he is sleepy, and let him rise as soon as he wakes. Distrust instinct as soon as you
cease to rely altogether upon it. Instinct was good while he acted under its guidance only; now that he is
in the midst of human institutions, instinct is not to be trusted; it must not be destroyed, it must be
controlled, which is perhaps a more difficult matter. It would be a dangerous matter if instinct taught
your pupil to abuse his senses; if once he acquires this dangerous habit he is ruined. From that time
forward, body and soul will be enervated; he will carry to the grave the sad effects of this habit, themost fatal habit which a young man can acquire. If you cannot attain to the mastery of your passions,
dear Emile, I pity you; but I shall not hesitate for a moment, I will not permit the purposes of nature to
be evaded. If you must be a slave, I prefer to surrender you to a tyrant from whom I may deliver you;
whatever happens, I can free you more easily from the slavery of women than from yourself.
  Up  to  the  age  of  twenty,  the  body  is  still  growing  and  requires  all  its  strength;  till  that  age
continence is the law of nature, and this law is rarely violated without injury to the constitution. After
twenty, continence is a moral duty; it is an important duty, for it teaches us to control ourselves, to be
masters of our own appetites. But moral duties have their modifications, their exceptions, their rules.
When human weakness makes an alternative inevitable, of two evils choose the least; in any case it is
better to commit a misdeed than to contract a vicious habit.
  Remember, I am not talking of my pupil now, but of yours. His passions, to which you have given
way, are your master; yield to them openly and without concealing his victory. If you are able to show
him it in its true light, he will be ashamed rather than proud of it, and you will secure the right to guide
him in his wanderings, at least so as to avoid precipices. The disciple must do nothing, not even evil,
without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  his  master;  it  is  a  hundredfold  better  that  the  tutor  should
approve of a misdeed than that he should deceive himself or be deceived by his pupil, and the wrong
should be done without his knowledge. He who thinks he must shut his eyes to one thing, must soon
shut them altogether; the first abuse which is permitted leads to others, and this chain of consequences
only ends in the complete overthrow of all order and contempt for every law.
  There is another mistake which I have already dealt with, a mistake continually made by narrow-
minded  persons;  they  constantly  affect  the  dignity  of  a  master,  and  wish  to  be  regarded  by  their
disciples as perfect. This method is just the contrary of what should be done. How is it that they fail to
perceive that when they try to strengthen their authority they are really destroying it; that to gain a
hearing one must put oneself in the place of our hearers, and that to speak to the human heart, one must
be a man. All these perfect people neither touch nor persuade; people always say, "It is easy for them to
fight against passions they do not feel." Show your pupil your own weaknesses if you want to cure his;
let him see in you struggles like his own; let him learn by your example to master himself and let him
not say like other young men, "These old people, who are vexed because they are no longer young,
want to treat all young people as if they were old; and they make a crime of our passions because their
own passions are dead."
  Montaigne tells us that he once asked Seigneur de Langey how often, in his negotiations with
Germany, he had got drunk in his king's service. I would willingly ask the tutor of a certain young man
how often he has entered a house of ill-fame for his pupil's sake. How often? I am wrong. If the first
time has not cured the young libertine of all desire to go there again, if he does not return penitent and
ashamed, if he does not shed torrents of tears upon your bosom, leave him on the spot; either he is a
monster or you are a fool; you will never do him any good. But let us have done with these last
expedients, which are as distressing as they are dangerous; our kind of education has no need of them.
  What  precautions  we  must  take  with  a  young  man  of  good  birth  before  exposing  him  to  the
scandalous manners of our age! These precautions are painful but necessary; negligence in this matter
is the ruin of all our young men; degeneracy is the result of youthful excesses, and it is these excesses
which make men what they are. Old and base in their vices, their hearts are shrivelled, because their
worn-out bodies were corrupted at an early age; they have scarcely strength to stir. The subtlety of their
thoughts betrays a mind lacking in substance; they are incapable of any great or noble feeling, they
have neither simplicity nor vigour; altogether abject and meanly wicked, they are merely frivolous,
deceitful, and false; they have not even courage enough to be distinguished criminals. Such are the
despicable men produced by early debauchery; if there were but one among them who knew how to be
sober and temperate, to guard his heart, his body, his morals from the contagion of bad example, at the
age of thirty he would crush all these insects, and would become their master with far less trouble than
it cost him to become master of himself.
  However little Emile owes to birth and fortune, he might be this man if he chose; but he despisessuch people too much to condescend to make them his slaves. Let us now watch him in their midst, as
he enters into society, not to claim the first place, but to acquaint himself with it and to seek a helpmeet
worthy of himself.
  Whatever his rank or birth, whatever the society into which he is introduced, his entrance into that
society will be simple and unaffected; God grant he may not be unlucky enough to shine in society; the
qualities which make a good impression at the first glance are not his, he neither possesses them, nor
desires to possess them. He cares too little for the opinions of other people to value their prejudices, and
he is indifferent whether people esteem him or not until they know him. His address is neither shy nor
conceited, but natural and sincere, he knows nothing of constraint or concealment, and he is just the
same among a group of people as he is when he is alone. Will this make him rude, scornful, and
careless of others? On the contrary; if he were not heedless of others when he lived alone, why should
he be heedless of them now that he is living among them? He does not prefer them to himself in his
manners, because he does not prefer them to himself in his heart, but neither does he show them an
indifference which he is far from feeling; if he is unacquainted with the forms of politeness, he is not
unacquainted with the attentions dictated by humanity. He cannot bear to see any one suffer; he will not
give up his place to another from mere external politeness, but he will willingly yield it to him out of
kindness  if  he  sees  that  he  is  being  neglected  and  that  this  neglect  hurts  him;  for  it  will  be  less
disagreeable to Emile to remain standing of his own accord than to see another compelled to stand.
  Although Emile has no very high opinion of people in general, he does not show any scorn of them,
because he pities them and is sorry for them. As he cannot give them a taste for what is truly good, he
leaves them the imaginary good with which they are satisfied, lest by robbing them of this he should
leave them worse off than before. So he neither argues nor contradicts; neither does he flatter nor agree;
he  states  his  opinion  without  arguing  with  others,  because  he  loves  liberty  above  all  things,  and
freedom is one of the fairest gifts of liberty.
  He says little, for he is not anxious to attract attention; for the same reason he only says what is to
the point; who could induce him to speak otherwise? Emile is too well informed to be a chatter-box. A
great flow of words comes either from a pretentious spirit, of which I shall speak presently, or from the
value laid upon trifles which we foolishly think to be as important in the eyes of others as in our own.
He who knows enough of things to value them at their true worth never says too much; for he can also
judge of the attention bestowed on him and the interest aroused by what he says. People who know
little are usually great talkers, while men who know much say little. It is plain that an ignorant person
thinks everything he does know important, and he tells it to everybody. But a well-educated man is not
so ready to display his learning; he would have too much to say, and he sees that there is much more to
be said, so he holds his peace.
  Far from disregarding the ways of other people, Emile conforms to them readily enough; not that he
may appear to know all about them, nor yet to affect the airs of a man of fashion, but on the contrary
for fear lest he should attract attention, and in order to pass unnoticed; he is most at his ease when no
one pays any attention to him.
  Although when he makes his entrance into society he knows nothing of its customs, this does not
make him shy or timid; if he keeps in the background, it is not because he is embarrassed, but because,
if you want to see, you must not be seen; for he scarcely troubles himself at all about what people think
of him, and he is not the least afraid of ridicule. Hence he is always quiet and self-possessed and is not
troubled with shyness. All he has to do is done as well as he knows how to do it, whether people are
looking at him or not; and as he is always on the alert to observe other people, he acquires their ways
with an ease impossible to the slaves of other people's opinions. We might say that he acquires the
ways of society just because he cares so little about them.
  But do not make any mistake as to his bearing; it is not to be compared with that of your young
dandies. It is self-possessed, not conceited; his manners are easy, not haughty; an insolent look is the
mark of a slave, there is nothing affected in independence. I never saw a man of lofty soul who showed
it in his bearing; this affectation is more suited to vile and frivolous souls, who have no other means ofasserting themselves. I read somewhere that a foreigner appeared one day in the presence of the famous
Marcel, who asked him what country he came from. "I am an Englishman," replied the stranger. "You
are an Englishman!" replied the dancer, "You come from that island where the citizens have a share in
the government, and form part of the sovereign power? [Footnote: As if there were citizens who were
not part of the city and had not, as such, a share in sovereign power! But the French, who have thought
fit to usurp the honourable name of citizen which was formerly the right of the members of the Gallic
cities, have degraded the idea till it has no longer any sort of meaning. A man who recently wrote a
number  of  silly  criticisms  on  the  "Nouvelle  Heloise"  added  to  his  signature  the  title  "Citizen  of
Paimboeuf," and he thought it a capital joke.] No, sir, that modest bearing, that timid glance, that
hesitating manner, proclaim only a slave adorned with the title of an elector."
I cannot say whether this saying shows much knowledge of the true relation between a man's
character and his appearance. I have not the honour of being a dancing master, and I should have
thought just the opposite. I should have said, "This Englishman is no courtier; I never heard that
courtiers  have  a  timid  bearing  and  a  hesitating  manner.  A  man  whose  appearance  is  timid  in  the
presence of a dancer might not be timid in the House of Commons." Surely this M. Marcel must take
his fellow-countrymen for so many Romans.
  He who loves desires to be loved, Emile loves his fellows and desires to please them. Even more
does he wish to please the women; his age, his character, the object he has in view, all increase this
desire. I say his character, for this has a great effect; men of good character are those who really adore
women.  They  have  not  the  mocking  jargon  of  gallantry  like  the  rest,  but  their  eagerness  is  more
genuinely tender, because it comes from the heart. In the presence of a young woman, I could pick out
a young man of character and self-control from among a hundred thousand libertines. Consider what
Emile must be, with all the eagerness of early youth and so many reasons for resistance! For in the
presence of women I think he will sometimes be shy and timid; but this shyness will certainly not be
displeasing, and the least foolish of them will only too often find a way to enjoy it and augment it.
Moreover, his eagerness will take a different shape according to those he has to do with. He will be
more modest and respectful to married women, more eager and tender towards young girls. He never
loses sight of his purpose, and it is always those who most recall it to him who receive the greater share
of his attentions.
  No one could be more attentive to every consideration based upon the laws of nature, and even on
the laws of good society; but the former are always preferred before the latter, and Emile will show
more respect to an elderly person in private life than to a young magistrate of his own age. As he is
generally one of the youngest in the company, he will always be one of the most modest, not from the
vanity which apes humility, but from a natural feeling founded upon reason. He will not have the
effrontery of the young fop, who speaks louder than the wise and interrupts the old in order to amuse
the company. He will never give any cause for the reply given to Louis XV by an old gentleman who
was asked whether he preferred this century or the last: "Sire, I spent my youth in reverence towards
the old; I find myself compelled to spend my old age in reverence towards the young."
  His heart is tender and sensitive, but he cares nothing for the weight of popular opinion, though he
loves to give pleasure to others; so he will care little to be thought a person of importance. Hence he
will be affectionate rather than polite, he will never be pompous or affected, and he will be always
more touched by a caress than by much praise. For the same reasons he will never be careless of his
manners or his clothes; perhaps he will be rather particular about his dress, not that he may show
himself a man of taste, but to make his appearance more pleasing; he will never require a gilt frame,
and he will never spoil his style by a display of wealth.
  All this demands, as you see, no stock of precepts from me; it is all the result of his early education.
People make a great mystery of the ways of society, as if, at the age when these ways are acquired, we
did not take to them quite naturally, and as if the first laws of politeness were not to be found in a
kindly heart. True politeness consists in showing our goodwill towards men; it shows its presence
without any difficulty; those only who lack this goodwill are compelled to reduce the outward signs ofit to an art.
  "The worst effect of artificial politeness is that it teaches us how to dispense with the virtues it
imitates. If our education teaches us kindness and humanity, we shall be polite, or we shall have no
need of politeness.
  "If we have not those qualities which display themselves gracefully we shall have those which
proclaim the honest man and the citizen; we shall have no need for falsehood.
  "Instead of seeking to please by artificiality, it will suffice that we are kindly; instead of flattering
the weaknesses of others by falsehood, it will suffice to tolerate them.
  "Those with whom we have to do will neither be puffed up nor corrupted by such intercourse; they
will only be grateful and will be informed by it." [Footnote: Considerations sur les moeurs de ce siecle,
par M. Duclos.]
  It seems to me that if any education is calculated to produce the sort of politeness required by M.
Duclos in this passage, it is the education I have already described.
  Yet I admit that with such different teaching Emile will not be just like everybody else, and heaven
preserve him from such a fate! But where he is unlike other people, he will neither cause annoyance nor
will he be absurd; the difference will be perceptible but not unpleasant. Emile will be, if you like, an
agreeable foreigner. At first his peculiarities will be excused with the phrase, "He will learn." After a
time people will get used to his ways, and seeing that he does not change they will still make excuses
for him and say, "He is made that way."
  He will not be feted as a charming man, but every one will like him without knowing why; no one
will praise his intellect, but every one will be ready to make him the judge between men of intellect; his
own intelligence will be clear and limited, his mind will be accurate, and his judgment sane. As he
never runs after new ideas, he cannot pride himself on his wit. I have convinced him that all wholesome
ideas, ideas which are really useful to mankind, were among the earliest known, that in all times they
have formed the true bonds of society, and that there is nothing left for ambitious minds but to seek
distinction for themselves by means of ideas which are injurious and fatal to mankind. This way of
winning admiration scarcely appeals to him; he knows how he ought to seek his own happiness in life,
and how he can contribute to the happiness of others. The sphere of his knowledge is restricted to what
is profitable. His path is narrow and clearly defined; as he has no temptation to leave it, he is lost in the
crowd; he will neither distinguish himself nor will he lose his way. Emile is a man of common sense
and he has no desire to be anything more; you may try in vain to insult him by applying this phrase to
him; he will always consider it a title of honour.
  Although from his wish to please he is no longer wholly indifferent to the opinion of others, he only
considers  that  opinion  so  far  as  he  himself  is  directly  concerned,  without  troubling  himself  about
arbitrary values, which are subject to no law but that of fashion or conventionality. He will have pride
enough to wish to do well in everything that he undertakes, and even to wish to do it better than others;
he will want to be the swiftest runner, the strongest wrestler, the cleverest workman, the readiest in
games of skill; but he will not seek advantages which are not in themselves clear gain, but need to be
supported by the opinion of others, such as to be thought wittier than another, a better speaker, more
learned, etc.; still less will he trouble himself with those which have nothing to do with the man
himself,  such  as  higher  birth,  a  greater  reputation  for  wealth,  credit,  or  public  estimation,  or  the
impression created by a showy exterior.
  As he loves his fellows because they are like himself, he will prefer him who is most like himself,
because he will feel that he is good; and as he will judge of this resemblance by similarity of taste in
morals, in all that belongs to a good character, he will be delighted to win approval. He will not say to
himself in so many words, "I am delighted to gain approval," but "I am delighted because they say I
have done right; I am delighted because the men who honour me are worthy of honour; while they
judge so wisely, it is a fine thing to win their respect."
  As  he  studies  men  in  their  conduct  in  society,  just  as  he  formerly  studied  them  through  their
passions in history, he will often have occasion to consider what it is that pleases or offends the humanheart. He is now busy with the philosophy of the principles of taste, and this is the most suitable subject
for his present study.
  The further we seek our definitions of taste, the further we go astray; taste is merely the power of
judging what is pleasing or displeasing to most people. Go beyond this, and you cannot say what taste
is. It does not follow that the men of taste are in the majority; for though the majority judges wisely
with regard to each individual thing, there are few men who follow the judgment of the majority in
everything; and though the most general agreement in taste constitutes good taste, there are few men of
good taste just as there are few beautiful people, although beauty consists in the sum of the most usual
features.
  It must be observed that we are not here concerned with what we like because it is serviceable, or
hate because it is harmful to us. Taste deals only with things that are indifferent to us, or which affect at
most our amusements, not those which relate to our needs; taste is not required to judge of these,
appetite only is sufficient. It is this which makes mere decisions of taste so difficult and as it seems so
arbitrary; for beyond the instinct they follow there appears to be no reason whatever for them. We must
also make a distinction between the laws of good taste in morals and its laws in physical matters. In the
latter the laws of taste appear to be absolutely inexplicable. But it must be observed that there is a moral
element in everything which involves imitation.[Footnote: This is demonstrated in an "Essay on the
Origin of Languages" which will be found in my collected works.] This is the explanation of beauties
which seem to be physical, but are not so in reality. I may add that taste has local rules which make it
dependent in many respects on the country we are in, its manners, government, institutions; it has other
rules which depend upon age, sex, and character, and it is in this sense that we must not dispute over
matters of taste.
  Taste is natural to men; but all do not possess it in the same degree, it is not developed to the same
extent in every one; and in every one it is liable to be modified by a variety of causes. Such taste as we
may possess depends on our native sensibility; its cultivation and its form depend upon the society in
which we have lived. In the first place we must live in societies of many different kinds, so as to
compare much. In the next place, there must be societies for amusement and idleness, for in business
relations, interest, not pleasure, is our rule. Lastly, there must be societies in which people are fairly
equal, where the tyranny of public opinion may be moderate, where pleasure rather than vanity is
queen; where this is not so, fashion stifles taste, and we seek what gives distinction rather than delight.
  In the latter case it is no longer true that good taste is the taste of the majority. Why is this? Because
the purpose is different. Then the crowd has no longer any opinion of its own, it only follows the
judgment of those who are supposed to know more about it; its approval is bestowed not on what is
good, but on what they have already approved. At any time let every man have his own opinion, and
what is most pleasing in itself will always secure most votes.
  Every beauty that is to be found in the works of man is imitated. All the true models of taste are to
be found in nature. The further we get from the master, the worse are our pictures. Then it is that we
find our models in what we ourselves like, and the beauty of fancy, subject to caprice and to authority,
is nothing but what is pleasing to our leaders.
  Those leaders are the artists, the wealthy, and the great, and they themselves follow the lead of self-
interest or pride. Some to display their wealth, others to profit by it, they seek eagerly for new ways of
spending it. This is how luxury acquires its power and makes us love what is rare and costly; this so-
called beauty consists, not in following nature, but in disobeying her. Hence luxury and bad taste are
inseparable. Wherever taste is lavish, it is bad.
  Taste,  good  or  bad,  takes  its  shape  especially  in  the  intercourse  between  the  two  sexes;  the
cultivation of taste is a necessary consequence of this form of society. But when enjoyment is easily
obtained, and the desire to please becomes lukewarm, taste must degenerate; and this is, in my opinion,
one of the best reasons why good taste implies good morals.
  Consult the women's opinions in bodily matters, in all that concerns the senses; consult the men in
matters of morality and all that concerns the understanding. When women are what they ought to be,they will keep to what they can understand, and their judgment will be right; but since they have set
themselves up as judges of literature, since they have begun to criticise books and to make them with
might and main, they are altogether astray. Authors who take the advice of blue-stockings will always
be ill-advised; gallants who consult them about their clothes will always be absurdly dressed. I shall
presently have an opportunity of speaking of the real talents of the female sex, the way to cultivate
these talents, and the matters in regard to which their decisions should receive attention.
  These are the elementary considerations which I shall lay down as principles when I discuss with
Emile this matter which is by no means indifferent to him in his present inquiries. And to whom should
it be a matter of indifference? To know what people may find pleasant or unpleasant is not only
necessary to any one who requires their help, it is still more necessary to any one who would help them;
you must please them if you would do them service; and the art of writing is no idle pursuit if it is used
to make men hear the truth.
  If in order to cultivate my pupil's taste, I were compelled to choose between a country where this
form of culture has not yet arisen and those in which it has already degenerated, I would progress
backwards; I would begin his survey with the latter and end with the former. My reason for this choice
is, that taste becomes corrupted through excessive delicacy, which makes it sensitive to things which
most men do not perceive; this delicacy leads to a spirit of discussion, for the more subtle is our
discrimination of things the more things there are for us. This subtlety increases the delicacy and
decreases the uniformity of our touch. So there are as many tastes as there are people. In disputes as to
our preferences, philosophy and knowledge are enlarged, and thus we learn to think. It is only men
accustomed to plenty of society who are capable of very delicate observations, for these observations
do not occur to us till the last, and people who are unused to all sorts of society exhaust their attention
in the consideration of the more conspicuous features. There is perhaps no civilised place upon earth
where the common taste is so bad as in Paris. Yet it is in this capital that good taste is cultivated, and it
seems that few books make any impression in Europe whose authors have not studied in Paris. Those
who think it is enough to read our books are mistaken; there is more to be learnt from the conversation
of authors than from their books; and it is not from the authors that we learn most. It is the spirit of
social life which develops a thinking mind, and carries the eye as far as it can reach. If you have a spark
of genius, go and spend a year in Paris; you will soon be all that you are capable of becoming, or you
will never be good for anything at all.
  One may learn to think in places where bad taste rules supreme; but we must not think like those
whose taste is bad, and it is very difficult to avoid this if we spend much time among them. We must
use their efforts to perfect the machinery of judgment, but we must be careful not to make the same use
of it. I shall take care not to polish Emile's judgment so far as to transform it, and when he has acquired
discernment enough to feel and compare the varied tastes of men, I shall lead him to fix his own taste
upon simpler matters.
I will go still further in order to keep his taste pure and wholesome. In the tumult of dissipation I
shall find opportunities for useful conversation with him; and while these conversations are always
about  things  in  which  he  takes  a  delight,  I  shall  take  care  to  make  them  as  amusing  as  they  are
instructive. Now is the time to read pleasant books; now is the time to teach him to analyse speech and
to appreciate all the beauties of eloquence and diction. It is a small matter to learn languages, they are
less useful than people think; but the study of languages leads us on to that of grammar in general. We
must learn Latin if we would have a thorough knowledge of French; these two languages must be
studied and compared if we would understand the rules of the art of speaking.
  There is, moreover, a certain simplicity of taste which goes straight to the heart; and this is only to
be found in the classics. In oratory, poetry, and every kind of literature, Emile will find the classical
authors as he found them in history, full of matter and sober in their judgment. The authors of our own
time, on the contrary, say little and talk much. To take their judgment as our constant law is not the way
to form our own judgment. These differences of taste make themselves felt in all that is left of classical
times and even on their tombs. Our monuments are covered with praises, theirs recorded facts.  "Sta, viator; heroem calcas."
  If I had found this epitaph on an ancient monument, I should at once have guessed it was modern;
for there is nothing so common among us as heroes, but among the ancients they were rare. Instead of
saying a man was a hero, they would have said what he had done to gain that name. With the epitaph of
this hero compare that of the effeminate Sardanapalus--
  "Tarsus and Anchiales I built in a day, and now I am dead."
  Which do you think says most? Our inflated monumental style is only fit to trumpet forth the
praises of pygmies. The ancients showed men as they were, and it was plain that they were men indeed.
Xenophon did honour to the memory of some warriors who were slain by treason during the retreat of
the Ten Thousand. "They died," said he, "without stain in war and in love." That is all, but think how
full was the heart of the author of this short and simple elegy. Woe to him who fails to perceive its
charm. The following words were engraved on a tomb at Thermopylae--
  "Go, Traveller, tell Sparta that here we fell in obedience to her laws."
  It is pretty clear that this was not the work of the Academy of Inscriptions.
  If I am not mistaken, the attention of my pupil, who sets so small value upon words, will be directed
in the first place to these differences, and they will affect his choice in his reading. He will be carried
away by the manly eloquence of Demosthenes, and will say, "This is an orator;" but when he reads
Cicero, he will say, "This is a lawyer."
  Speaking generally Emile will have more taste for the books of the ancients than for our own, just
because they were the first, and therefore the ancients are nearer to nature and their genius is more
distinct. Whatever La Motte and the Abbe Terrasson may say, there is no real advance in human
reason, for what we gain in one direction we lose in another; for all minds start from the same point,
and as the time spent in learning what others have thought is so much time lost in learning to think for
ourselves, we have more acquired knowledge and less vigour of mind. Our minds like our arms are
accustomed to use tools for everything, and to do nothing for themselves. Fontenelle used to say that all
these disputes as to the ancients and the moderns came to this--Were the trees in former times taller
than they are now. If agriculture had changed, it would be worth our while to ask this question.
  After I have led Emile to the sources of pure literature, I will also show him the channels into the
reservoirs of modern compilers; journals, translations, dictionaries, he shall cast a glance at them all,
and then leave them for ever. To amuse him he shall hear the chatter of the academies; I will draw his
attention to the fast that every member of them is worth more by himself than he is as a member of the
society; he will then draw his own conclusions as to the utility of these fine institutions.
I take him to the theatre to study taste, not morals; for in the theatre above all taste is revealed to
those who can think. Lay aside precepts and morality, I should say; this is not the place to study them.
The stage is not made for truth; its object is to flatter and amuse: there is no place where one can learn
so completely the art of pleasing and of interesting the human heart. The study of plays leads to the
study of poetry; both have the same end in view. If he has the least glimmering of taste for poetry, how
eagerly will he study the languages of the poets, Greek, Latin, and Italian! These studies will afford him
unlimited amusement and will be none the less valuable; they will be a delight to him at an age and in
circumstances when the heart finds so great a charm in every kind of beauty which affects it. Picture to
yourself on the one hand Emile, on the other some young rascal from college, reading the fourth book
of the Aeneid, or Tibollus, or the Banquet of Plato: what a difference between them! What stirs the
heart of Emile to its depths, makes not the least impression on the other! Oh, good youth, stay, make a
pause in your reading, you are too deeply moved; I would have you find pleasure in the language of
love, but I would not have you carried away by it; be a wise man, but be a good man too. If you are
only one of these, you are nothing. After this let him win fame or not in dead languages, in literature, in
poetry, I care little. He will be none the worse if he knows nothing of them, and his education is not
concerned with these mere words.
  My main object in teaching him to feel and love beauty of every kind is to fix his affections and his
taste on these, to prevent the corruption of his natural appetites, lest he should have to seek some day inthe midst of his wealth for the means of happiness which should be found close at hand. I have said
elsewhere that taste is only the art of being a connoisseur in matters of little importance, and this is
quite true; but since the charm of life depends on a tissue of these matters of little importance, such
efforts are no small thing; through their means we learn how to fill our life with the good things within
our reach, with as much truth as they may hold for us. I do not refer to the morally good which depends
on a good disposition of the heart, but only to that which depends on the body, on real delight, apart
from the prejudices of public opinion.
  The better to unfold my idea, allow me for a moment to leave Emile, whose pure and wholesome
heart cannot be taken as a rule for others, and to seek in my own memory for an illustration better
suited to the reader and more in accordance with his own manners.
  There are professions which seem to change a man's nature, to recast, either for better or worse, the
men who adopt them. A coward becomes a brave man in the regiment of Navarre. It is not only in the
army that esprit de corps is acquired, and its effects are not always for good. I have thought again and
again with terror that if I had the misfortune to fill a certain post I am thinking of in a certain country,
before to-morrow I should certainly be a tyrant, an extortioner, a destroyer of the people, harmful to my
king, and a professed enemy of mankind, a foe to justice and every kind of virtue.
  In the same way, if I were rich, I should have done all that is required to gain riches; I should
therefore be insolent and degraded, sensitive and feeling only on my own behalf, harsh and pitiless to
all besides, a scornful spectator of the sufferings of the lower classes; for that is what I should call the
poor, to make people forget that I was once poor myself. Lastly I should make my fortune a means to
my own pleasures with which I should be wholly occupied; and so far I should be just like other people.
  But in one respect I should be very unlike them; I should be sensual and voluptuous rather than
proud and vain, and I should give myself up to the luxury of comfort rather than to that of ostentation. I
should even be somewhat ashamed to make too great a show of my wealth, and if I overwhelmed the
envious with my pomp I should always fancy I heard him saying, "Here is a rascal who is greatly afraid
lest we should take him for anything but what he is."
  In the vast profusion of good things upon this earth I should seek what I like best, and what I can
best appropriate to myself.
  To this end, the first use I should make of my wealth would be to purchase leisure and freedom, to
which I would add health, if it were to be purchased; but health can only be bought by temperance, and
as there is no real pleasure without health, I should be temperate from sensual motives.
I should also keep as close as possible to nature, to gratify the senses given me by nature, being
quite convinced that, the greater her share in my pleasures, the more real I shall find them. In the choice
of models for imitation I shall always choose nature as my pattern; in my appetites I will give her the
preference; in my tastes she shall always be consulted; in my food I will always choose what most owes
its charm to her, and what has passed through the fewest possible hands on its way to table. I will be on
my guard against fraudulent shams; I will go out to meet pleasure. No cook shall grow rich on my gross
and foolish greediness; he shall not poison me with fish which cost its weight in gold, my table shall
not be decked with fetid splendour or putrid flesh from far-off lands. I will take any amount of trouble
to gratify my sensibility, since this trouble has a pleasure of its own, a pleasure more than we expect. If
I wished to taste a food from the ends of the earth, I would go, like Apicius, in search of it, rather than
send for it; for the daintiest dishes always lack a charm which cannot be brought along with them, a
flavour which no cook can give them--the air of the country where they are produced.
  For the same reason I would not follow the example of those who are never well off where they are,
but are always setting the seasons at nought, and confusing countries and their seasons; those who seek
winter in summer and summer in winter, and go to Italy to be cold and to the north to be warm, do not
consider that when they think they are escaping from the severity of the seasons, they are going to meet
that severity in places where people are not prepared for it. I shall stay in one place, or I shall adopt just
the opposite course; I should like to get all possible enjoyment out of one season to discover what is
peculiar to any given country. I would have a variety of pleasures, and habits quite unlike one another,but each according to nature; I would spend the summer at Naples and the winter in St. Petersburg;
sometimes I would breathe the soft zephyr lying in the cool grottoes of Tarentum, and again I would
enjoy the illuminations of an ice palace, breathless and wearied with the pleasures of the dance.
  In the service of my table and the adornment of my dwelling I would imitate in the simplest
ornaments the variety of the seasons, and draw from each its charm without anticipating its successor.
There is no taste but only difficulty to be found in thus disturbing the order of nature; to snatch from
her unwilling gifts, which she yields regretfully, with her curse upon them; gifts which have neither
strength nor flavour, which can neither nourish the body nor tickle the palate. Nothing is more insipid
than forced fruits. A wealthy man in Paris, with all his stoves and hot-houses, only succeeds in getting
all the year round poor fruit and poor vegetables for his table at a very high price. If I had cherries in
frost, and golden melons in the depths of winter, what pleasure should I find in them when my palate
did not need moisture or refreshment. Would the heavy chestnut be very pleasant in the heat of the dog-
days; should I prefer to have it hot from the stove, rather than the gooseberry, the strawberry, the
refreshing fruits which the earth takes care to provide for me. A mantelpiece covered in January with
forced vegetation, with pale and scentless flowers, is not winter adorned, but spring robbed of its
beauty; we deprive ourselves of the pleasure of seeking the first violet in the woods, of noting the
earliest buds, and exclaiming in a rapture of delight, "Mortals, you are not forsaken, nature is living
still."
  To be well served I would have few servants; this has been said before, but it is worth saying again.
A tradesman gets more real service from his one man than a duke from the ten gentlemen round about
him.  It  has  often  struck  me  when  I  am  sitting  at  table  with  my  glass  beside  me  that  I  can  drink
whenever I please; whereas, if I were dining in state, twenty men would have to call for "Wine" before
I could quench my thirst. You may be sure that whatever is done for you by other people is ill done. I
would not send to the shops, I would go myself; I would go so that my servants should not make their
own terms with the shopkeepers, and to get a better choice and cheaper prices; I would go for the sake
of pleasant exercise and to get a glimpse of what was going on out of doors; this is amusing and
sometimes instructive; lastly I would go for the sake of the walk; there is always something in that. A
sedentary life is the source of tedium; when we walk a good deal we are never dull. A porter and
footmen are poor interpreters, I should never wish to have such people between the world and myself,
nor would I travel with all the fuss of a coach, as if I were afraid people would speak to me. Shanks'
mare is always ready; if she is tired or ill, her owner is the first to know it; he need not be afraid of
being kept at home while his coachman is on the spree; on the road he will not have to submit to all
sorts of delays, nor will he be consumed with impatience, nor compelled to stay in one place a moment
longer than he chooses. Lastly, since no one serves us so well as we serve ourselves, had we the power
of Alexander and the wealth of Croesus we should accept no services from others, except those we
cannot perform for ourselves.
I would not live in a palace; for even in a palace I should only occupy one room; every room which
is common property belongs to nobody, and the rooms of each of my servants would be as strange to
me  as  my  neighbour's.  The  Orientals,  although  very  voluptuous,  are  lodged  in  plain  and  simply
furnished dwellings. They consider life as a journey, and their house as an inn. This reason scarcely
appeals to us rich people who propose to live for ever; but I should find another reason which would
have the same effect. It would seem to me that if I settled myself in one place in the midst of such
splendour, I should banish myself from every other place, and imprison myself, so to speak, in my
palace. The world is a palace fair enough for any one; and is not everything at the disposal of the rich
man when he seeks enjoyment? "Ubi bene, ibi patria," that is his motto; his home is anywhere where
money  will  carry  him,  his  country  is  anywhere  where  there  is  room  for  his  strong-box,  as  Philip
considered as his own any place where a mule laden with silver could enter. [Footnote: A stranger,
splendidly clad, was asked in Athens what country he belonged to. "I am one of the rich," was his
answer; and a very good answer in my opinion.] Why then should we shut ourselves up within walls
and gates as if we never meant to leave them? If pestilence, war, or rebellion drive me from one place, Igo to another, and I find my hotel there before me. Why should I build a mansion for myself when the
world is already at my disposal? Why should I be in such a hurry to live, to bring from afar delights
which I can find on the spot? It is impossible to make a pleasant life for oneself when one is always at
war with oneself. Thus Empedocles reproached the men of Agrigentum with heaping up pleasures as if
they had but one day to live, and building as if they would live for ever.
  And what use have I for so large a dwelling, as I have so few people to live in it, and still fewer
goods to fill it? My furniture would be as simple as my tastes; I would have neither picture-gallery nor
library, especially if I was fond of reading and knew something about pictures. I should then know that
such collections are never complete, and that the lack of that which is wanting causes more annoyance
than if one had nothing at all. In this respect abundance is the cause of want, as every collector knows
to his cost. If you are an expert, do not make a collection; if you know how to use your cabinets, you
will not have any to show.
  Gambling is no sport for the rich, it is the resource of those who have nothing to do; I shall be so
busy with my pleasures that I shall have no time to waste. I am poor and lonely and I never play, unless
it is a game of chess now and then, and that is more than enough. If I were rich I would play even less,
and for very low stakes, so that I should not be disappointed myself, nor see the disappointment of
others. The wealthy man has no motive for play, and the love of play will not degenerate into the
passion for gambling unless the disposition is evil. The rich man is always more keenly aware of his
losses  than  his  gains,  and  as  in  games  where  the  stakes  are  not  high  the  winnings  are  generally
exhausted in the long run, he will usually lose more than he gains, so that if we reason rightly we shall
scarcely take a great fancy to games where the odds are against us. He who flatters his vanity so far as
to believe that Fortune favours him can seek her favour in more exciting ways; and her favours are just
as clearly shown when the stakes are low as when they are high. The taste for play, the result of greed
and dullness, only lays hold of empty hearts and heads; and I think I should have enough feeling and
knowledge to dispense with its help. Thinkers are seldom gamblers; gambling interrupts the habit of
thought and turns it towards barren combinations; thus one good result, perhaps the only good result of
the taste for science, is that it deadens to some extent this vulgar passion; people will prefer to try to
discover the uses of play rather than to devote themselves to it. I should argue with the gamblers against
gambling, and I should find more delight in scoffing at their losses than in winning their money.
I should be the same in private life as in my social intercourse. I should wish my fortune to bring
comfort in its train, and never to make people conscious of inequalities of wealth. Showy dress is
inconvenient in many ways. To preserve as much freedom as possible among other men, I should like
to be dressed in such a way that I should not seem out of place among all classes, and should not attract
attention in any; so that without affectation or change I might mingle with the crowd at the inn or with
the nobility at the Palais Royal. In this way I should be more than ever my own master, and should be
free to enjoy the pleasures of all sorts and conditions of men. There are women, so they say, whose
doors are closed to embroidered cuffs, women who will only receive guests who wear lace ruffles; I
should spend my days elsewhere; though if these women were young and pretty I might sometimes put
on lace ruffles to spend an evening or so in their company.
  Mutual affection, similarity of tastes, suitability of character; these are the only bonds between my
companions and myself; among them I would be a man, not a person of wealth; the charm of their
society should never be embittered by self-seeking. If my wealth had not robbed me of all humanity, I
would scatter my benefits and my services broadcast, but I should want companions about me, not
courtiers, friends, not proteges; I should wish my friends to regard me as their host, not their patron.
Independence and equality would leave to my relations with my friends the sincerity of goodwill; while
duty and self-seeking would have no place among us, and we should know no law but that of pleasure
and friendship.
  Neither a friend nor a mistress can be bought. Women may be got for money, but that road will
never lead to love. Love is not only not for sale; money strikes it dead. If a man pays, were he indeed
the most lovable of men, the mere fact of payment would prevent any lasting affection. He will soon bepaying for some one else, or rather some one else will get his money; and in this double connection
based on self-seeking and debauchery, without love, honour, or true pleasure, the woman is grasping,
faithless, and unhappy, and she is treated by the wretch to whom she gives her money as she treats the
fool who gives his money to her; she has no love for either. It would be sweet to lie generous towards
one we love, if that did not make a bargain of love. I know only one way of gratifying this desire with
the woman one loves without embittering love; it is to bestow our all upon her and to live at her
expense. It remains to be seen whether there is any woman with regard to whom such conduct would
not be unwise.
  He who said, "Lais is mine, but I am not hers," was talking nonsense. Possession which is not
mutual is nothing at all; at most it is the possession of the sex not of the individual. But where there is
no morality in love, why make such ado about the rest? Nothing is so easy to find. A muleteer is in this
respect as near to happiness as a millionaire.
  Oh, if we could thus trace out the unreasonableness of vice, how often should we find that, when it
has attained its object, it discovers it is not what it seemed! Why is there this cruel haste to corrupt
innocence, to make, a victim of a young creature whom we ought to protect, one who is dragged by this
first false step into a gulf of misery from which only death can release her? Brutality, vanity, folly,
error, and nothing more. This pleasure itself is unnatural; it rests on popular opinion, and popular
opinion at its worst, since it depends on scorn of self. He who knows he is the basest of men fears
comparison with others, and would be the first that he may be less hateful. See if those who are most
greedy in pursuit of such fancied pleasures are ever attractive young men--men worthy of pleasing, men
who might have some excuse if they were hard to please. Not so; any one with good looks, merit, and
feeling has little fear of his mistress' experience; with well-placed confidence he says to her, "You
know what pleasure is, what is that to me? my heart assures me that this is not so."
  But an aged satyr, worn out with debauchery, with no charm, no consideration, no thought for any
but himself, with no shred of honour, incapable and unworthy of finding favour in the eyes of any
woman who knows anything of men deserving of love, expects to make up for all this with an innocent
girl by trading on her inexperience and stirring her emotions for the first time. His last hope is to find
favour as a novelty; no doubt this is the secret motive of this desire; but he is mistaken, the horror he
excites is just as natural as the desires he wishes to arouse. He is also mistaken in his foolish attempt;
that very nature takes care to assert her rights; every girl who sells herself is no longer a maid; she has
given herself to the man of her choice, and she is making the very comparison he dreads. The pleasure
purchased is imaginary, but none the less hateful.
  For my own part, however riches may change me, there is one matter in which I shall never change.
If I have neither morals nor virtue, I shall not be wholly without taste, without sense, without delicacy;
and this will prevent me from spending my fortune in the pursuit of empty dreams, from wasting my
money and my strength in teaching children to betray me and mock at me. If I were young, I would
seek the pleasures of youth; and as I would have them at their best I would not seek them in the guise of
a rich man. If I were at my present age, it would be another matter; I would wisely confine myself to
the pleasures of my age; I would form tastes which I could enjoy, and I would stifle those which could
only cause suffering. I would not go and offer my grey beard to the scornful jests of young girls; I
could never bear to sicken them with my disgusting caresses, to furnish them at my expense with the
most absurd stories, to imagine them describing the vile pleasures of the old ape, so as to avenge
themselves for what they had endured. But if habits unresisted had changed my former desires into
needs, I would perhaps satisfy those needs, but with shame and blushes. I would distinguish between
passion and necessity, I would find a suitable mistress and would keep to her. I would not make a
business of my weakness, and above all I would only have one person aware of it. Life has other
pleasures when these fail us; by hastening in vain after those that fly us, we deprive ourselves of those
that remain. Let our tastes change with our years, let us no more meddle with age than with the seasons.
We should be ourselves at all times, instead of struggling against nature; such vain attempts exhaust our
strength and prevent the right use of life.  The lower classes are seldom dull, their life is full of activity; if there is little variety in their
amusements they do not recur frequently; many days of labour teach them to enjoy their rare holidays.
Short intervals of leisure between long periods of labour give a spice to the pleasures of their station.
The chief curse of the rich is dullness; in the midst of costly amusements, among so many men striving
to give them pleasure, they are devoured and slain by dullness; their life is spent in fleeing from it and
in being overtaken by it; they are overwhelmed by the intolerable burden; women more especially, who
do not know how to work or play, are a prey to tedium under the name of the vapours; with them it
takes the shape of a dreadful disease, which robs them of their reason and even of their life. For my
own part I know no more terrible fate than that of a pretty woman in Paris, unless it is that of the pretty
manikin who devotes himself to her, who becomes idle and effeminate like her, and so deprives himself
twice over of his manhood, while he prides himself on his successes and for their sake endures the
longest and dullest days which human being ever put up with.
  Proprieties, fashions, customs which depend on luxury and breeding, confine the course of life
within the limits of the most miserable uniformity. The pleasure we desire to display to others is a
pleasure lost; we neither enjoy it ourselves, nor do others enjoy it. [Footnote: Two ladies of fashion,
who wished to seem to be enjoying themselves greatly, decided never to go to bed before five o'clock
in the morning. In the depths of winter their servants spent the night in the street waiting for them, and
with great difficulty kept themselves from freezing. One night, or rather one morning, some one entered
the room where these merry people spent their hours without knowing how time passed. He found them
quite alone; each of them was asleep in her arm-chair.] Ridicule, which public opinion dreads more
than anything, is ever at hand to tyrannise, and punish. It is only ceremony that makes us ridiculous; if
we can vary our place and our pleasures, to-day's impressions can efface those of yesterday; in the mind
of men they are as if they had never been; but we enjoy ourselves for we throw ourselves into every
hour and everything. My only set rule would be this: wherever I was I would pay no heed to anything
else. I would take each day as it came, as if there were neither yesterday nor to-morrow. As I should be
a man of the people, with the populace, I should be a countryman in the fields; and if I spoke of
farming, the peasant should not laugh at my expense. I would not go and build a town in the country
nor erect the Tuileries at the door of my lodgings. On some pleasant shady hill-side I would have a little
cottage, a white house with green shutters, and though a thatched roof is the best all the year round, I
would be grand enough to have, not those gloomy slates, but tiles, because they look brighter and more
cheerful than thatch, and the houses in my own country are always roofed with them, and so they would
recall to me something of the happy days of my youth. For my courtyard I would have a poultry-yard,
and for my stables a cowshed for the sake of the milk which I love. My garden should be a kitchen-
garden, and my park an orchard, like the one described further on. The fruit would be free to those who
walked in the orchard, my gardener should neither count it nor gather it; I would not, with greedy show,
display before your eyes superb espaliers which one scarcely dare touch. But this small extravagance
would not be costly, for I would choose my abode in some remote province where silver is scarce and
food plentiful, where plenty and poverty have their seat.
  There I would gather round me a company, select rather than numerous, a band of friends who
know  what  pleasure  is,  and  how  to  enjoy  it,  women  who  can  leave  their  arm-chairs  and  betake
themselves to outdoor sports, women who can exchange the shuttle or the cards for the fishing line or
the bird-trap, the gleaner's rake or grape-gatherer's basket. There all the pretensions of the town will be
forgotten, and we shall be villagers in a village; we shall find all sorts of different sports and we shall
hardly know how to choose the morrow's occupation. Exercise and an active life will improve our
digestion and modify our tastes. Every meal will be a feast, where plenty will be more pleasing than
any delicacies. There are no such cooks in the world as mirth, rural pursuits, and merry games; and the
finest made dishes are quite ridiculous in the eyes of people who have been on foot since early dawn.
Our  meals  will  be  served  without  regard  to  order  or  elegance;  we  shall  make  our  dining-room
anywhere, in the garden, on a boat, beneath a tree; sometimes at a distance from the house on the banks
of a running stream, on the fresh green grass, among the clumps of willow and hazel; a long processionof guests will carry the material for the feast with laughter and singing; the turf will be our chairs and
table, the banks of the stream our side-board, and our dessert is hanging on the trees; the dishes will be
served in any order, appetite needs no ceremony; each one of us, openly putting himself first, would
gladly see every one else do the same; from this warm-hearted and temperate familiarity there would
arise, without coarseness, pretence, or constraint, a laughing conflict a hundredfold more delightful than
politeness, and more likely to cement our friendship. No tedious flunkeys to listen to our words, to
whisper criticisms on our behaviour, to count every mouthful with greedy eyes, to amuse themselves by
keeping us waiting for our wine, to complain of the length of our dinner. We will be our own servants,
in order to be our own masters. Time will fly unheeded, our meal will be an interval of rest during the
heat of the day. If some peasant comes our way, returning from his work with his tools over his
shoulder, I will cheer his heart with kindly words, and a glass or two of good wine, which will help him
to bear his poverty more cheerfully; and I too shall have the joy of feeling my heart stirred within me,
and I should say to myself--I too am a man.
  If the inhabitants of the district assembled for some rustic feast, I and my friends would be there
among the first; if there were marriages, more blessed than those of towns, celebrated near my home,
every one would know how I love to see people happy, and I should be invited. I would take these good
folks some gift as simple as themselves, a gift which would be my share of the feast; and in exchange I
should obtain gifts beyond price, gifts so little known among my equals, the gifts of freedom and true
pleasure. I should sup gaily at the head of their long table; I should join in the chorus of some rustic
song and I should dance in the barn more merrily than at a ball in the Opera House.
  "This is all very well so far," you will say, "but what about the shooting! One must have some sport
in the country." Just so; I only wanted a farm, but I was wrong. I assume I am rich, I must keep my
pleasures to myself, I must be free to kill something; this is quite another matter. I must have estates,
woods, keepers, rents, seignorial rights, particularly incense and holy water.
  Well and good. But I shall have neighbours about my estate who are jealous of their rights and
anxious to encroach on those of others; our keepers will quarrel, and possibly their masters will quarrel
too; this means altercations, disputes, ill-will, or law-suits at the least; this in itself is not very pleasant.
My tenants will not enjoy finding my hares at work upon their corn, or my wild boars among their
beans. As they dare not kill the enemy, every one of them will try to drive him from their fields; when
the day has been spent in cultivating the ground, they will be compelled to sit up at night to watch it;
they will have watch-dogs, drums, horns, and bells; my sleep will be disturbed by their racket. Do what
I will, I cannot help thinking of the misery of these poor people, and I cannot help blaming myself for
it. If I had the honour of being a prince, this would make little impression on me; but as I am a self-
made man who has only just come into his property, I am still rather vulgar at heart.
  That is not all; abundance of game attracts trespassers; I shall soon have poachers to punish; I shall
require prisons, gaolers, guards, and galleys; all this strikes me as cruel. The wives of those miserable
creatures will besiege my door and disturb me with their crying; they must either be driven away or
roughly handled. The poor people who are not poachers, whose harvest has been destroyed by my
game, will come next with their complaints. Some people will be put to death for killing the game, the
rest will be punished for having spared it; what a choice of evils! On every side I shall find nothing but
misery and hear nothing but groans. So far as I can see this must greatly disturb the pleasure of slaying
at one's ease heaps of partridges and hares which are tame enough to run about one's feet.
  If you would have pleasure without pain let there be no monopoly; the more you leave it free to
everybody, the purer will be your own enjoyment. Therefore I should not do what I have just described,
but without change of tastes I would follow those which seem likely to cause me least pain. I would fix
my rustic abode in a district where game is not preserved, and where I can have my sport without
hindrance. Game will be less plentiful, but there will be more skill in finding it, and more pleasure in
securing it. I remember the start of delight with which my father watched the rise of his first partridge
and the rapture with which he found the hare he had sought all day long. Yes, I declare, that alone with
his dog, carrying his own gun, cartridges, and game bag together with his hare, he came home atnightfall, worn out with fatigue and torn to pieces by brambles, but better pleased with his day's sport
than all your ordinary sportsmen, who on a good horse, with twenty guns ready for them, merely take
one gun after another, and shoot and kill everything that comes their way, without skill, without glory,
and almost without exercise. The pleasure is none the less, and the difficulties are removed; there is no
estate to be preserved, no poacher to be punished, and no wretches to be tormented; here are solid
grounds for preference. Whatever you do, you cannot torment men for ever without experiencing some
amount of discomfort; and sooner or later the muttered curses of the people will spoil the flavour of
your game.
  Again, monopoly destroys pleasure. Real pleasures are those which we share with the crowd; we
lose what we try to keep to ourselves alone. If the walls I build round my park transform it into a
gloomy prison, I have only deprived myself, at great expense, of the pleasure of a walk; I must now
seek that pleasure at a distance. The demon of property spoils everything he lays hands upon. A rich
man wants to be master everywhere, and he is never happy where he is; he is continually driven to flee
from himself. I shall therefore continue to do in my prosperity what I did in my poverty. Henceforward,
richer in the wealth of others than I ever shall be in my own wealth, I will take possession of everything
in my neighbourhood that takes my fancy; no conqueror is so determined as I; I even usurp the rights of
princes; I take possession of every open place that pleases me, I give them names; this is my park, chat
is my terrace, and I am their owner; henceforward I wander among them at will; I often return to
maintain my proprietary rights; I make what use I choose of the ground to walk upon, and you will
never convince me that the nominal owner of the property which I have appropriated gets better value
out of the money it yields him than I do out of his land. No matter if I am interrupted by hedges and
ditches, I take my park on my back, and I carry it elsewhere; there will be space enough for it near at
hand, and I may plunder my neighbours long enough before I outstay my welcome.
  This is an attempt to show what is meant by good taste in the choice of pleasant occupations for our
leisure hours; this is the spirit of enjoyment; all else is illusion, fancy, and foolish pride. He who
disobeys these rules, however rich he may be, will devour his gold on a dung-hill, and will never know
what it is to live.
  You will say, no doubt, that such amusements lie within the reach of all, that we need not be rich to
enjoy them. That is the very point I was coming to. Pleasure is ours when we want it; it is only social
prejudice which makes everything hard to obtain, and drives pleasure before us. To be happy is a
hundredfold easier than it seems. If he really desires to enjoy himself the man of taste has no need of
riches; all he wants is to be free and to be his own master. With health and daily bread we are rich
enough, if we will but get rid of our prejudices; this is the "Golden Mean" of Horace. You folks with
your strong-boxes may find some other use for your wealth, for it cannot buy you pleasure. Emile
knows this as well as I, but his heart is purer and more healthy, so he will feel it more strongly, and all
that he has beheld in society will only serve to confirm him in this opinion.
  While our time is thus employed, we are ever on the look-out for Sophy, and we have not yet found
her. It was not desirable that she should be found too easily, and I have taken care to look for her where
I knew we should not find her.
  The time is come; we must now seek her in earnest, lest Emile should mistake some one else for
Sophy, and only discover his error when it is too late. Then farewell Paris, far-famed Paris, with all
your noise and smoke and dirt, where the women have ceased to believe in honour and the men in
virtue. We are in search of love, happiness, innocence; the further we go from Paris the better.
 
 
  BOOK V
  We have reached the last act of youth's drams; we are approaching its closing scene.
  It is not good that man should be alone. Emile is now a man, and we must give him his promised
helpmeet. That helpmeet is Sophy. Where is her dwelling-place, where shall she be found? We must
know beforehand what she is, and then we can decide where to look for her. And when she is found,our task is not ended. "Since our young gentleman," says Locke, "is about to marry, it is time to leave
him with his mistress." And with these words he ends his book. As I have not the honour of educating
"A young gentleman," I shall take care not to follow his example.
  SOPHY, OR WOMAN
  Sophy should be as truly a woman as Emile is a man, i.e., she must possess all those characters of
her sex which are required to enable her to play her part in the physical and moral order. Let us inquire
to begin with in what respects her sex differs from our own.
  But for her sex, a woman is a man; she has the same organs, the same needs, the same faculties. The
machine is the same in its construction; its parts, its working, and its appearance are similar. Regard it
as you will the difference is only in degree.
  Yet where sex is concerned man and woman are unlike; each is the complement of the other; the
difficulty in comparing them lies in our inability to decide, in either case, what is a matter of sex, and
what  is  not.  General  differences  present  themselves  to  the  comparative  anatomist  and  even  to  the
superficial observer; they seem not to be a matter of sex; yet they are really sex differences, though the
connection eludes our observation. How far such differences may extend we cannot tell; all we know
for certain is that where man and woman are alike we have to do with the characteristics of the species;
where  they  are  unlike,  we  have  to  do  with  the  characteristics  of  sex.  Considered  from  these  two
standpoints, we find so many instances of likeness and unlikeness that it is perhaps one of the greatest
of marvels how nature has contrived to make two beings so like and yet so different.
  These resemblances and differences must have an influence on the moral nature; this inference is
obvious, and it is confirmed by experience; it shows the vanity of the disputes as to the superiority or
the equality of the sexes; as if each sex, pursuing the path marked out for it by nature, were not more
perfect in that very divergence than if it more closely resembled the other. A perfect man and a perfect
woman should no more be alike in mind than in face, and perfection admits of neither less nor more.
  In the union of the sexes each alike contributes to the common end, but in different ways. From this
diversity springs the first difference which may be observed between man and woman in their moral
relations. The man should be strong and active; the woman should be weak and passive; the one must
have both the power and the will; it is enough that the other should offer little resistance.
  When this principle is admitted, it follows that woman is specially made for man's delight. If man in
his turn ought to be pleasing in her eyes, the necessity is less urgent, his virtue is in his strength, he
pleases because he is strong. I grant you this is not the law of love, but it is the law of nature, which is
older than love itself.
  If woman is made to please and to be in subjection to man, she ought to make herself pleasing in his
eyes and not provoke him to anger; her strength is in her charms, by their means she should compel him
to discover and use his strength. The surest way of arousing this strength is to make it necessary by
resistance. Thus pride comes to the help of desire and each exults in the other's victory. This is the
origin of attack and defence, of the boldness of one sex and the timidity of the other, and even of the
shame and modesty with which nature has armed the weak for the conquest of the strong.
  Who can possibly suppose that nature has prescribed the same advances to the one sex as to the
other, or that the first to feel desire should be the first to show it? What strange depravity of judgment!
The consequences of the act being so different for the two sexes, is it natural that they should enter
upon it with equal boldness? How can any one fail to see that when the share of each is so unequal, if
the one were not controlled by modesty as the other is controlled by nature, the result would be the
destruction  of  both,  and  the  human  race  would  perish  through  the  very  means  ordained  for  its
continuance?
  Women so easily stir a man's senses and fan the ashes of a dying passion, that if philosophy ever
succeeded in introducing this custom into any unlucky country, especially if it were a warm country
where more women are born than men, the men, tyrannised over by the women, would at last become
their victims, and would be dragged to their death without the least chance of escape.
  Female animals are without this sense of shame, but what of that? Are their desires as boundless asthose of women, which are curbed by this shame? The desires of the animals are the result of necessity,
and when the need is satisfied, the desire ceases; they no longer make a feint of repulsing the male, they
do it in earnest. Their seasons of complaisance are short and soon over. Impulse and restraint are alike
the work of nature. But what would take the place of this negative instinct in women if you rob them of
their modesty?
  The  Most  High  has  deigned  to  do  honour  to  mankind;  he  has  endowed  man  with  boundless
passions, together with a law to guide them, so that man may be alike free and self-controlled; though
swayed by these passions man is endowed with reason by which to control them. Woman is also
endowed with boundless passions; God has given her modesty to restrain them. Moreover, he has given
to both a present reward for the right use of their powers, in the delight which springs from that right
use of them, i.e., the taste for right conduct established as the law of our behaviour. To my mind this is
far higher than the instinct of the beasts.
  Whether the woman shares the man's passion or not, whether she is willing or unwilling to satisfy
it, she always repulses him and defends herself, though not always with the same vigour, and therefore
not always with the same success. If the siege is to be successful, the besieged must permit or direct the
attack. How skilfully can she stimulate the efforts of the aggressor. The freest and most delightful of
activities does not permit of any real violence; reason and nature are alike against it; nature, in that she
has given the weaker party strength enough to resist if she chooses; reason, in that actual violence is not
only most brutal in itself, but it defeats its own ends, not only because the man thus declares war
against his companion and thus gives her a right to defend her person and her liberty even at the cost of
the enemy's life, but also because the woman alone is the judge of her condition, and a child would
have no father if any man might usurp a father's rights.
  Thus the different constitution of the two sexes leads us to a third conclusion, that the stronger party
seems to be master, but is as a matter of fact dependent on the weaker, and that, not by any foolish
custom of gallantry, nor yet by the magnanimity of the protector, but by an inexorable law of nature.
For nature has endowed woman with a power of stimulating man's passions in excess of man's power of
satisfying those passions, and has thus made him dependent on her goodwill, and compelled him in his
turn to endeavour to please her, so that she may be willing to yield to his superior strength. Is it
weakness which yields to force, or is it voluntary self-surrender? This uncertainty constitutes the chief
charm of the man's victory, and the woman is usually cunning enough to leave him in doubt. In this
respect the woman's mind exactly resembles her body; far from being ashamed of her weakness, she is
proud of it; her soft muscles offer no resistance, she professes that she cannot lift the lightest weight;
she would be ashamed to be strong. And why? Not only to gain an appearance of refinement; she is too
clever for that; she is providing herself beforehand with excuses, with the right to be weak if she
chooses.
  The experience we have gained through our vices has considerably modified the views held in older
times; we rarely hear of violence for which there is so little occasion that it would hardly be credited,
Yet such stories are common enough among the Jews and ancient Greeks; for such views belong to the
simplicity of nature, and have only been uprooted by our profligacy. If fewer deeds of violence are
quoted in our days, it is not that men are more temperate, but because they are less credulous, and a
complaint which would have been believed among a simple people would only excite laughter among
ourselves; therefore silence is the better course. There is a law in Deuteronomy, under which the
outraged maiden was punished, along with her assailant, if the crime were committed in a town; but if
in the country or in a lonely place, the latter alone was punished. "For," says the law, "the maiden cried
for help, and there was none to hear." From this merciful interpretation of the law, girls learnt not to let
themselves be surprised in lonely places.
  This change in public opinion has had a perceptible effect on our morals. It has produced our
modern  gallantry.  Men  have  found  that  their  pleasures  depend,  more  than  they  expected,  on  the
goodwill of the fair sex, and have secured this goodwill by attentions which have had their reward.
  See how we find ourselves led unconsciously from the physical to the moral constitution, how fromthe grosser union of the sexes spring the sweet laws of love. Woman reigns, not by the will of man, but
by the decrees of nature herself; she had the power long before she showed it. That same Hercules who
proposed to violate all the fifty daughters of Thespis was compelled to spin at the feet of Omphale, and
Samson, the strong man, was less strong than Delilah. This power cannot be taken from woman; it is
hers by right; she would have lost it long ago, were it possible.
  The consequences of sex are wholly unlike for man and woman. The male is only a male now and
again, the female is always a female, or at least all her youth; everything reminds her of her sex; the
performance of her functions requires a special constitution. She needs care during pregnancy and
freedom from work when her child is born; she must have a quiet, easy life while she nurses her
children;  their  education  calls  for  patience  and  gentleness,  for  a  zeal  and  love  which  nothing  can
dismay; she forms a bond between father and child, she alone can win the father's love for his children
and convince him that they are indeed his own. What loving care is required to preserve a united
family! And there should be no question of virtue in all this, it must be a labour of love, without which
the human race would be doomed to extinction.
  The mutual duties of the two sexes are not, and cannot be, equally binding on both. Women do
wrong to complain of the inequality of man-made laws; this inequality is not of man's making, or at any
rate it is not the result of mere prejudice, but of reason. She to whom nature has entrusted the care of
the children must hold herself responsible for them to their father. No doubt every breach of faith is
wrong, and every faithless husband, who robs his wife of the sole reward of the stern duties of her sex,
is cruel and unjust; but the faithless wife is worse; she destroys the family and breaks the bonds of
nature; when she gives her husband children who are not his own, she is false both to him and them, her
crime is not infidelity but treason. To my mind, it is the source of dissension and of crime of every
kind. Can any position be more wretched than that of the unhappy father who, when he clasps his child
to  his  breast,  is  haunted  by  the  suspicion  that  this  is  the  child  of  another,  the  badge  of  his  own
dishonour, a thief who is robbing his own children of their inheritance. Under such circumstances the
family is little more than a group of secret enemies, armed against each other by a guilty woman, who
compels them to pretend to love one another.
  Thus  it  is  not  enough  that  a  wife  should  be  faithful;  her  husband,  along  with  his  friends  and
neighbours, must believe in her fidelity; she must be modest, devoted, retiring; she should have the
witness not only of a good conscience, but of a good reputation. In a word, if a father must love his
children, he must be able to respect their mother. For these reasons it is not enough that the woman
should be chaste, she must preserve her reputation and her good name. From these principles there
arises not only a moral difference between the sexes, but also a fresh motive for duty and propriety,
which prescribes to women in particular the most scrupulous attention to their conduct, their manners,
their behaviour. Vague assertions as to the equality of the sexes and the similarity of their duties are
only empty words; they are no answer to my argument.
  It is a poor sort of logic to quote isolated exceptions against laws so firmly established. Women,
you say, are not always bearing children. Granted; yet that is their proper business. Because there are a
hundred or so of large towns in the world where women live licentiously and have few children, will
you maintain that it is their business to have few children? And what would become of your towns if
the remote country districts, with their simpler and purer women, did not make up for the barrenness of
your fine ladies? There are plenty of country places where women with only four or five children are
reckoned unfruitful. In conclusion, although here and there a woman may have few children, what
difference  does  it  make?  [Footnote:  Without  this  the  race  would  necessarily  diminish;  all  things
considered, for its preservation each woman ought to have about four children, for about half the
children born die before they can become parents, and two must survive to replace the father and
mother. See whether the towns will supply them?] Is it any the less a woman's business to be a mother?
And to not the general laws of nature and morality make provision for this state of things?
  Even if there were these long intervals, which you assume, between the periods of pregnancy, can a
woman suddenly change her way of life without danger? Can she be a nursing mother to-day and asoldier to-morrow? Will she change her tastes and her feelings as a chameleon changes his colour? Will
she pass at once from the privacy of household duties and indoor occupations to the buffeting of the
winds, the toils, the labours, the perils of war? Will she be now timid, [Footnote: Women's timidity is
yet another instinct of nature against the double risk she runs during pregnancy.] now brave, now
fragile, now robust? If the young men of Paris find a soldier's life too hard for them, how would a
woman put up with it, a woman who has hardly ventured out of doors without a parasol and who has
scarcely put a foot to the ground? Will she make a good soldier at an age when even men are retiring
from this arduous business?
  There are countries, I grant you, where women bear and rear children with little or no difficulty, but
in those lands the men go half-naked in all weathers, they strike down the wild beasts, they carry a
canoe as easily as a knapsack, they pursue the chase for 700 or 800 leagues, they sleep in the open on
the bare ground, they bear incredible fatigues and go many days without food. When women become
strong, men become still stronger; when men become soft, women become softer; change both the
terms and the ratio remains unaltered.
I am quite aware that Plato, in the Republic, assigns the same gymnastics to women and men.
Having got rid of the family there is no place for women in his system of government, so he is forced to
turn them into men. That great genius has worked out his plans in detail and has provided for every
contingency; he has even provided against a difficulty which in all likelihood no one would ever have
raised;  but  he  has  not  succeeded  in  meeting  the  real  difficulty.  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  alleged
community  of  wives  which  has  often  been  laid  to  his  charge;  this  assertion  only  shows  that  his
detractors  have  never  read  his  works.  I  refer  to  that  political  promiscuity  under  which  the  same
occupations are assigned to both sexes alike, a scheme which could only lead to intolerable evils; I refer
to  that  subversion  of  all  the  tenderest  of  our  natural  feelings,  which  he  sacrificed  to  an  artificial
sentiment which can only exist by their aid. Will the bonds of convention hold firm without some
foundation in nature? Can devotion to the state exist apart from the love of those near and dear to us?
Can patriotism thrive except in the soil of that miniature fatherland, the home? Is it not the good son,
the good husband, the good father, who makes the good citizen?
  When once it is proved that men and women are and ought to be unlike in constitution and in
temperament, it follows that their education must be different. Nature teaches us that they should work
together, but that each has its own share of the work; the end is the same, but the means are different, as
are also the feelings which direct them. We have attempted to paint a natural man, let us try to paint a
helpmeet for him.
  You must follow nature's guidance if you would walk aright. The native characters of sex should be
respected as nature's handiwork. You are always saying, "Women have such and such faults, from
which we are free." You are misled by your vanity; what would be faults in you are virtues in them; and
things  would  go  worse,  if  they  were  without  these  so-called  faults.  Take  care  that  they  do  not
degenerate into evil, but beware of destroying them.
  On the other hand, women are always exclaiming that we educate them for nothing but vanity and
coquetry, that we keep them amused with trifles that we may be their masters; we are responsible, so
they say, for the faults we attribute to them. How silly! What have men to do with the education of
girls? What is there to hinder their mothers educating them as they please? There are no colleges for
girls; so much the better for them! Would God there were none for the boys, their education would be
more sensible and more wholesome. Who is it that compels a girl to waste her time on foolish trifles?
Are they forced, against their will, to spend half their time over their toilet, following the example set
them by you? Who prevents you teaching them, or having them taught, whatever seems good in your
eyes? Is it our fault that we are charmed by their beauty and delighted by their airs and graces, if we are
attracted and flattered by the arts they learn from you, if we love to see them prettily dressed, if we let
them display at leisure the weapons by which we are subjugated? Well then, educate them like men.
The more women are like men, the less influence they will have over men, and then men will be
masters indeed.  All the faculties common to both sexes are not equally shared between them, but taken as a whole
they are fairly divided. Woman is worth more as a woman and less as a man; when she makes a good
use of her own rights, she has the best of it; when she tries to usurp our rights, she is our inferior. It is
impossible to controvert this, except by quoting exceptions after the usual fashion of the partisans of the
fair sex.
  To cultivate the masculine virtues in women and to neglect their own is evidently to do them an
injury. Women are too clear-sighted to be thus deceived; when they try to usurp our privileges they do
not abandon their own; with this result: they are unable to make use of two incompatible things, so they
fall below their own level as women, instead of rising to the level of men. If you are a sensible mother
you will take my advice. Do not try to make your daughter a good man in defiance of nature. Make her
a good woman, and be sure it will be better both for her and us.
  Does this mean that she must be brought up in ignorance and kept to housework only? Is she to be
man's handmaid or his help-meet? Will he dispense with her greatest charm, her companionship? To
keep her a slave will he prevent her knowing and feeling? Will he make an automaton of her? No,
indeed, that is not the teaching of nature, who has given women such a pleasant easy wit. On the
contrary, nature means them to think, to will, to love, to cultivate their minds as well as their persons;
she puts these weapons in their hands to make up for their lack of strength and to enable them to direct
the strength of men. They should learn many things, but only such things as are suitable.
  When I consider the special purpose of woman, when I observe her inclinations or reckon up her
duties, everything combines to indicate the mode of education she requires. Men and women are made
for each other, but their mutual dependence differs in degree; man is dependent on woman through his
desires; woman is dependent on man through her desires and also through her needs; he could do
without her better than she can do without him. She cannot fulfil her purpose in life without his aid,
without his goodwill, without his respect; she is dependent on our feelings, on the price we put upon
her virtue, and the opinion we have of her charms and her deserts. Nature herself has decreed that
woman, both for herself and her children, should be at the mercy of man's judgment.
  Worth alone will not suffice, a woman must be thought worthy; nor beauty, she must be admired;
nor virtue, she must be respected. A woman's honour does not depend on her conduct alone, but on her
reputation, and no woman who permits herself to be considered vile is really virtuous. A man has no
one but himself to consider, and so long as he does right he may defy public opinion; but when a
woman does right her task is only half finished, and what people think of her matters as much as what
she really is. Hence her education must, in this respect, be different from man's education. "What will
people think" is the grave of a man's virtue and the throne of a woman's.
  The children's health depends in the first place on the mother's, and the early education of man is
also in a woman's hands; his morals, his passions, his tastes, his pleasures, his happiness itself, depend
on her. A woman's education must therefore be planned in relation to man. To be pleasing in his sight,
to win his respect and love, to train him in childhood, to tend him in manhood, to counsel and console,
to make his life pleasant and happy, these are the duties of woman for all time, and this is what she
should be taught while she is young. The further we depart from this principle, the further we shall be
from our goal, and all our precepts will fail to secure her happiness or our own.
  Every woman desires to be pleasing in men's eyes, and this is right; but there is a great difference
between wishing to please a man of worth, a really lovable man, and seeking to please those foppish
manikins who are a disgrace to their own sex and to the sex which they imitate. Neither nature nor
reason can induce a woman to love an effeminate person, nor will she win love by imitating such a
person.
  If  a  woman  discards  the  quiet  modest  bearing  of  her  sex,  and  adopts  the  airs  of  such  foolish
creatures, she is not following her vocation, she is forsaking it; she is robbing herself of the rights to
which she lays claim. "If we were different," she says, "the men would not like us." She is mistaken.
Only a fool likes folly; to wish to attract such men only shows her own foolishness. If there were no
frivolous men, women would soon make them, and women are more responsible for men's follies thanmen are for theirs. The woman who loves true manhood and seeks to find favour in its sight will adopt
means adapted to her ends. Woman is a coquette by profession, but her coquetry varies with her aims;
let these aims be in accordance with those of nature, and a woman will receive a fitting education.
  Even the tiniest little girls love finery; they are not content to be pretty, they must be admired; their
little airs and graces show that their heads are full of this idea, and as soon as they can understand they
are controlled by "What will people think of you?" If you are foolish enough to try this way with little
boys, it will not have the same effect; give them their freedom and their sports, and they care very little
what people think; it is a work of time to bring them under the control of this law.
  However acquired, this early education of little girls is an excellent thing in itself. As the birth of
the body must precede the birth of the mind, so the training of the body must precede the cultivation of
the mind. This is true of both sexes; but the aim of physical training for boys and girls is not the same;
in the one case it is the development of strength, in the other of grace; not that these qualities should be
peculiar to either sex, but that their relative values should be different. Women should be strong enough
to do anything gracefully; men should be skilful enough to do anything easily.
  The exaggeration of feminine delicacy leads to effeminacy in men. Women should not be strong
like men but for them, so that their sons may be strong. Convents and boarding-schools, with their plain
food and ample opportunities for amusements, races, and games in the open air and in the garden, are
better in this respect than the home, where the little girl is fed on delicacies, continually encouraged or
reproved, where she is kept sitting in a stuffy room, always under her mother's eye, afraid to stand or
walk or speak or breathe, without a moment's freedom to play or jump or run or shout, or to be her
natural, lively, little self; there is either harmful indulgence or misguided severity, and no trace of
reason. In this fashion heart and body are alike destroyed.
  In Sparta the girls used to take part in military sports just like the boys, not that they might go to
war, but that they might bear sons who could endure hardship. That is not what I desire. To provide the
state with soldiers it is not necessary that the mother should carry a musket and master the Prussian
drill. Yet, on the whole, I think the Greeks were very wise in this matter of physical training. Young
girls frequently appeared in public, not with the boys, but in groups apart. There was scarcely a festival,
a sacrifice, or a procession without its bands of maidens, the daughters of the chief citizens. Crowned
with flowers, chanting hymns, forming the chorus of the dance, bearing baskets, vases, offerings, they
presented a charming spectacle to the depraved senses of the Greeks, a spectacle well fitted to efface
the evil effects of their unseemly gymnastics. Whatever this custom may have done for the Greek men,
it was well fitted to develop in the Greek women a sound constitution by means of pleasant, moderate,
and healthy exercise; while the desire to please would develop a keen and cultivated taste without risk
to character.
  When the Greek women married, they disappeared from public life; within the four walls of their
home they devoted themselves to the care of their household and family. This is the mode of life
prescribed for women alike by nature and reason. These women gave birth to the healthiest, strongest,
and best proportioned men who ever lived, and except in certain islands of ill repute, no women in the
whole world, not even the Roman matrons, were ever at once so wise and so charming, so beautiful and
so virtuous, as the women of ancient Greece.
  It is admitted that their flowing garments, which did not cramp the figure, preserved in men and
women alike the fine proportions which are seen in their statues. These are still the models of art,
although nature is so disfigured that they are no longer to be found among us. The Gothic trammels, the
innumerable bands which confine our limbs as in a press, were quite unknown. The Greek women were
wholly unacquainted with those frames of whalebone in which our women distort rather than display
their figures. It seems to me that this abuse, which is carried to an incredible degree of folly in England,
must sooner or later lead to the production of a degenerate race. Moreover, I maintain that the charm
which these corsets are supposed to produce is in the worst possible taste; it is not a pleasant thing to
see a woman cut in two like a wasp--it offends both the eye and the imagination. A slender waist has its
limits, like everything else, in proportion and suitability, and beyond these limits it becomes a defect.This defect would be a glaring one in the nude; why should it be beautiful under the costume?
I will not venture upon the reasons which induce women to incase themselves in these coats of
mail. A clumsy figure, a large waist, are no doubt very ugly at twenty, but at thirty they cease to offend
the eye, and as we are bound to be what nature has made us at any given age, and as there is no
deceiving the eye of man, such defects are less offensive at any age than the foolish affectations of a
young thing of forty.
  Everything which cramps and confines nature is in bad taste; this is as true of the adornments of the
person as of the ornaments of the mind. Life, health, common-sense, and comfort must come first; there
is no grace in discomfort, languor is not refinement, there is no charm in ill-health; suffering may excite
pity, but pleasure and delight demand the freshness of health.
  Boys and girls have many games in common, and this is as it should be; do they not play together
when they are grown up? They have also special tastes of their own. Boys want movement and noise,
drums, tops, toy-carts; girls prefer things which appeal to the eye, and can be used for dressing-up--
mirrors, jewellery, finery, and specially dolls. The doll is the girl's special plaything; this shows her
instinctive  bent  towards  her  life's  work.  The  art  of  pleasing  finds  its  physical  basis  in  personal
adornment, and this physical side of the art is the only one which the child can cultivate.
  Here is a little girl busy all day with her doll; she is always changing its clothes, dressing and
undressing it, trying new combinations of trimmings well or ill matched; her fingers are clumsy, her
taste is crude, but there is no mistaking her bent; in this endless occupation time flies unheeded, the
hours slip away unnoticed, even meals are forgotten. She is more eager for adornment than for food.
"But she is dressing her doll, not herself," you will say. Just so; she sees her doll, she cannot see
herself; she cannot do anything for herself, she has neither the training, nor the talent, nor the strength;
as yet she herself is nothing, she is engrossed in her doll and all her coquetry is devoted to it. This will
not always be so; in due time she will be her own doll.
  We have here a very early and clearly-marked bent; you have only to follow it and train it. What the
little girl most clearly desires is to dress her doll, to make its bows, its tippets, its sashes, and its
tuckers; she is dependent on other people's kindness in all this, and it would be much pleasanter to be
able to do it herself. Here is a motive for her earliest lessons, they are not tasks prescribed, but favours
bestowed. Little girls always dislike learning to read and write, but they are always ready to learn to
sew. They think they are grown up, and in imagination they are using their knowledge for their own
adornment.
  The way is open and it is easy to follow it; cutting out, embroidery, lace-making follow naturally.
Tapestry is not popular; furniture is too remote from the child's interests, it has nothing to do with the
person, it depends on conventional tastes. Tapestry is a woman's amusement; young girls never care for
it.
  This voluntary course is easily extended to include drawing, an art which is closely connected with
taste in dress; but I would not have them taught landscape and still less figure painting. Leaves, fruit,
flowers, draperies, anything that will make an elegant trimming for the accessories of the toilet, and
enable the girl to design her own embroidery if she cannot find a pattern to her taste; that will be quite
enough. Speaking generally, if it is desirable to restrict a man's studies to what is useful, this is even
more necessary for women, whose life, though less laborious, should be even more industrious and
more uniformly employed in a variety of duties, so that one talent should not be encouraged at the
expense of others.
  Whatever may be said by the scornful, good sense belongs to both sexes alike. Girls are usually
more docile than boys, and they should be subjected to more authority, as I shall show later on, but that
is no reason why they should be required to do things in which they can see neither rhyme nor reason.
The mother's art consists in showing the use of everything they are set to do, and this is all the easier as
the girl's intelligence is more precocious than the boy's. This principle banishes, both for boys and girls,
not only those pursuits which never lead to any appreciable results, not even increasing the charms of
those who have pursued them, but also those studies whose utility is beyond the scholar's present ageand can only be appreciated in later years. If I object to little boys being made to learn to read, still
more do I object to it for little girls until they are able to see the use of reading; we generally think more
of our own ideas than theirs in our attempts to convince them of the utility of this art. After all, why
should a little girl know how to read and write! Has she a house to manage? Most of them make a bad
use of this fatal knowledge, and girls are so full of curiosity that few of them will fail to learn without
compulsion. Possibly cyphering should come first; there is nothing so obviously useful, nothing which
needs so much practice or gives so much opportunity for error as reckoning. If the little girl does not
get the cherries for her lunch without an arithmetical exercise, she will soon learn to count.
I once knew a little girl who learnt to write before she could read, and she began to write with her
needle. To begin with, she would write nothing but O's; she was always making O's, large and small, of
all kinds and one within another, but always drawn backwards. Unluckily one day she caught a glimpse
of herself in the glass while she was at this useful work, and thinking that the cramped attitude was not
pretty, like another Minerva she flung away her pen and declined to make any more O's. Her brother
was no fonder of writing, but what he disliked was the constraint, not the look of the thing. She was
induced to go on with her writing in this way. The child was fastidious and vain; she could not bear her
sisters to wear her clothes. Her things had been marked, they declined to mark them any more, she must
learn to mark them herself; there is no need to continue the story.
  Show  the  sense  of  the  tasks  you  set  your  little  girls,  but  keep  them  busy.  Idleness  and
insubordination are two very dangerous faults, and very hard to cure when once established. Girls
should be attentive and industrious, but this is not enough by itself; they should early be accustomed to
restraint. This misfortune, if such it be, is inherent in their sex, and they will never escape from it,
unless to endure more cruel sufferings. All their life long, they will have to submit to the strictest and
most enduring restraints, those of propriety. They must be trained to bear the yoke from the first, so that
they may not feel it, to master their own caprices and to submit themselves to the will of others. If they
were always eager to be at work, they should sometimes be compelled to do nothing. Their childish
faults, unchecked and unheeded, may easily lead to dissipation, frivolity, and inconstancy. To guard
against this, teach them above all things self-control. Under our senseless conditions, the life of a good
woman is a perpetual struggle against self; it is only fair that woman should bear her share of the ills
she has brought upon man.
  Beware lest your girls become weary of their tasks and infatuated with their amusements; this often
happens under our ordinary methods of education, where, as Fenelon says, all the tedium is on one side
and all the pleasure on the other. If the rules already laid down are followed, the first of these dangers
will be avoided, unless the child dislikes those about her. A little girl who is fond of her mother or her
friend will work by her side all day without getting tired; the chatter alone will make up for any loss of
liberty.  But  if  her  companion  is  distasteful  to  her,  everything  done  under  her  direction  will  be
distasteful too. Children who take no delight in their mother's company are not likely to turn out well;
but to judge of their real feelings you must watch them and not trust to their words alone, for they are
flatterers and deceitful and soon learn to conceal their thoughts. Neither should they be told that they
ought to love their mother. Affection is not the result of duty, and in this respect constraint is out of
place. Continual intercourse, constant care, habit itself, all these will lead a child to love her mother, if
the mother does nothing to deserve the child's ill-will. The very control she exercises over the child, if
well directed, will increase rather than diminish the affection, for women being made for dependence,
girls feel themselves made to obey.
  Just because they have, or ought to have, little freedom, they are apt to indulge themselves too fully
with  regard  to  such  freedom  as  they  have;  they  carry  everything  to  extremes,  and  they  devote
themselves  to  their  games  with  an  enthusiasm  even  greater  than  that  of  boys.  This  is  the  second
difficulty to which I referred. This enthusiasm must be kept in check, for it is the source of several vices
commonly found among women, caprice and that extravagant admiration which leads a woman to
regard a thing with rapture to-day and to be quite indifferent to it to-morrow. This fickleness of taste is
as dangerous as exaggeration; and both spring from the same cause. Do not deprive them of mirth,laughter, noise, and romping games, but do not let them tire of one game and go off to another; do not
leave them for a moment without restraint. Train them to break off their games and return to their other
occupations without a murmur. Habit is all that is needed, as you have nature on your side.
  This habitual restraint produces a docility which woman requires all her life long, for she will
always be in subjection to a man, or to man's judgment, and she will never be free to set her own
opinion above his. What is most wanted in a woman is gentleness; formed to obey a creature so
imperfect  as  man,  a  creature  often  vicious  and  always  faulty,  she  should  early  learn  to  submit  to
injustice and to suffer the wrongs inflicted on her by her husband without complaint; she must be gentle
for her own sake, not his. Bitterness and obstinacy only multiply the sufferings of the wife and the
misdeeds of the husband; the man feels that these are not the weapons to be used against him. Heaven
did not make women attractive and persuasive that they might degenerate into bitterness, or meek that
they should desire the mastery; their soft voice was not meant for hard words, nor their delicate features
for the frowns of anger. When they lose their temper they forget themselves; often enough they have
just cause of complaint; but when they scold they always put themselves in the wrong. We should each
adopt the tone which befits our sex; a soft-hearted husband may make an overbearing wife, but a man,
unless he is a perfect monster, will sooner or later yield to his wife's gentleness, and the victory will be
hers.
  Daughters must always be obedient, but mothers need not always be harsh. To make a girl docile
you need not make her miserable; to make her modest you need not terrify her; on the contrary, I
should  not  be  sorry  to  see  her  allowed  occasionally  to  exercise  a  little  ingenuity,  not  to  escape
punishment for her disobedience, but to evade the necessity for obedience. Her dependence need not be
made unpleasant, it is enough that she should realise that she is dependent. Cunning is a natural gift of
woman, and so convinced am I that all our natural inclinations are right, that I would cultivate this
among others, only guarding against its abuse.
  For  the  truth  of  this  I  appeal  to  every  honest  observer.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  question  women
themselves,  our  cramping  institutions  may  compel  them  to  sharpen  their  wits;  I  would  have  you
examine girls, little girls, newly-born so to speak; compare them with boys of the same age, and I am
greatly mistaken if you do not find the little boys heavy, silly, and foolish, in comparison. Let me give
one illustration in all its childish simplicity.
  Children are commonly forbidden to ask for anything at table, for people think they can do nothing
better in the way of education than to burden them with useless precepts; as if a little bit of this or that
were not readily given or refused without leaving a poor child dying of greediness intensified by hope.
Every one knows how cunningly a little boy brought up in this way asked for salt when he had been
overlooked at table. I do not suppose any one will blame him for asking directly for salt and indirectly
for meat; the neglect was so cruel that I hardly think he would have been punished had he broken the
rule  and  said  plainly  that  he  was  hungry.  But  this  is  what  I  saw  done  by  a  little  girl  of  six;  the
circumstances were much more difficult, for not only was she strictly forbidden to ask for anything
directly or indirectly, but disobedience would have been unpardonable, for she had eaten of every dish;
one only had been overlooked, and on this she had set her heart. This is what she did to repair the
omission without laying herself open to the charge of disobedience; she pointed to every dish in turn,
saying, "I've had some of this; I've had some of this;" however she omitted the one dish so markedly
that some one noticed it and said, "Have not you had some of this?" "Oh, no," replied the greedy little
girl with soft voice and downcast eyes. These instances are typical of the cunning of the little boy and
girl.
  What is, is good, and no general law can be bad. This special skill with which the female sex is
endowed is a fair equivalent for its lack of strength; without it woman would be man's slave, not his
helpmeet.  By  her  superiority  in  this  respect  she  maintains  her  equality  with  man,  and  rules  in
obedience. She has everything against her, our faults and her own weakness and timidity; her beauty
and her wiles are all that she has. Should she not cultivate both? Yet beauty is not universal; it may be
destroyed by all sorts of accidents, it will disappear with years, and habit will destroy its influence. Awoman's real resource is her wit; not that foolish wit which is so greatly admired in society, a wit which
does nothing to make life happier; but that wit which is adapted to her condition, the art of taking
advantage  of  our  position  and  controlling  us  through  our  own  strength.  Words  cannot  tell  how
beneficial this is to man, what a charm it gives to the society of men and women, how it checks the
petulant child and restrains the brutal husband; without it the home would be a scene of strife; with it, it
is the abode of happiness. I know that this power is abused by the sly and the spiteful; but what is there
that is not liable to abuse? Do not destroy the means of happiness because the wicked use them to our
hurt.
  The toilet may attract notice, but it is the person that wins our hearts. Our finery is not us; its very
artificiality often offends, and that which is least noticeable in itself often wins the most attention. The
education  of  our  girls  is,  in  this  respect,  absolutely  topsy-turvy.  Ornaments  are  promised  them  as
rewards, and they are taught to delight in elaborate finery. "How lovely she is!" people say when she is
most dressed up. On the contrary, they should be taught that so much finery is only required to hide
their defects, and that beauty's real triumph is to shine alone. The love of fashion is contrary to good
taste, for faces do not change with the fashion, and while the person remains unchanged, what suits it at
one time will suit it always.
  If I saw a young girl decked out like a little peacock, I should show myself anxious about her figure
so disguised, and anxious what people would think of her; I should say, "She is over-dressed with all
those ornaments; what a pity! Do you think she could do with something simpler? Is she pretty enough
to do without this or that?" Possibly she herself would be the first to ask that her finery might be taken
off and that we should see how she looked without it. In that case her beauty should receive such praise
as it deserves. I should never praise her unless simply dressed. If she only regards fine clothes as an aid
to personal beauty, and as a tacit confession that she needs their aid, she will not be proud of her finery,
she will be humbled by it; and if she hears some one say, "How pretty she is," when she is smarter than
usual, she will blush for shame.
  Moreover, though there are figures that require adornment there are none that require expensive
clothes.  Extravagance  in  dress  is  the  folly  of  the  class  rather  than  the  individual,  it  is  merely
conventional. Genuine coquetry is sometimes carefully thought out, but never sumptuous, and Juno
dressed herself more magnificently than Venus. "As you cannot make her beautiful you are making her
fine," said Apelles to an unskilful artist who was painting Helen loaded with jewellery. I have also
noticed that the smartest clothes proclaim the plainest women; no folly could be more misguided. If a
young girl has good taste and a contempt for fashion, give her a few yards of ribbon, muslin, and gauze,
and a handful of flowers, without any diamonds, fringes, or lace, and she will make herself a dress a
hundredfold more becoming than all the smart clothes of La Duchapt.
  Good is always good, and as you should always look your best, the women who know what they are
about select a good style and keep to it, and as they are not always changing their style they think less
about dress than those who can never settle to any one style. A genuine desire to dress becomingly does
not require an elaborate toilet. Young girls rarely give much time to dress; needlework and lessons are
the business of the day; yet, except for the rouge, they are generally as carefully dressed as older
women and often in better taste. Contrary to the usual opinion, the real cause of the abuse of the toilet is
not vanity but lack of occupation. The woman who devotes six hours to her toilet is well aware that she
is no better dressed than the woman who took half an hour, but she has got rid of so many of the
tedious hours and it is better to amuse oneself with one's clothes than to be sick of everything. Without
the toilet how would she spend the time between dinner and supper. With a crowd of women about her,
she can at least cause them annoyance, which is amusement of a kind; better still she avoids a tete-a-
tete with the husband whom she never sees at any other time; then there are the tradespeople, the
dealers in bric-a-brac, the fine gentlemen, the minor poets with their songs, their verses, and their
pamphlets; how could you get them together but for the toilet. Its only real advantage is the chance of a
little more display than is permitted by full dress, and perhaps this is less than it seems and a woman
gains less than she thinks. Do not be afraid to educate your women as women; teach them a woman'sbusiness, that they be modest, that they may know how to manage their house and look after their
family; the grand toilet will soon disappear, and they will be more tastefully dressed.
  Growing girls perceive at once that all this outside adornment is not enough unless they have
charms of their own. They cannot make themselves beautiful, they are too young for coquetry, but they
are not too young to acquire graceful gestures, a pleasing voice, a self-possessed manner, a light step, a
graceful bearing, to choose whatever advantages are within their reach. The voice extends its range, it
grows stronger and more resonant, the arms become plumper, the bearing more assured, and they
perceive that it is easy to attract attention however dressed. Needlework and industry suffice no longer,
fresh gifts are developing and their usefulness is already recognised.
I know that stern teachers would have us refuse to teach little girls to sing or dance, or to acquire
any of the pleasing arts. This strikes me as absurd. Who should learn these arts--our boys? Are these to
be the favourite accomplishments of men or women? Of neither, say they; profane songs are simply so
many crimes, dancing is an invention of the Evil One; her tasks and her prayers we all the amusement a
young girl should have. What strange amusements for a child of ten! I fear that these little saints who
have been forced to spend their childhood in prayers to God will pass their youth in another fashion;
when they are married they will try to make up for lost time. I think we must consider age as well as
sex; a young girl should not live like her grandmother; she should be lively, merry, and eager; she
should sing and dance to her heart's content, and enjoy all the innocent pleasures of youth; the time will
come, all too soon, when she must settle down and adopt a more serious tone.
  But is this change in itself really necessary? Is it not merely another result of our own prejudices?
By making good women the slaves of dismal duties, we have deprived marriage of its charm for men.
Can we wonder that the gloomy silence they find at home drives them elsewhere, or inspires little
desire to enter a state which offers so few attractions? Christianity, by exaggerating every duty, has
made our duties impracticable and useless; by forbidding singing, dancing, and amusements of every
kind,  it  renders  women  sulky,  fault-finding,  and  intolerable  at  home.  There  is  no  religion  which
imposes such strict duties upon married life, and none in which such a sacred engagement is so often
profaned. Such pains has been taken to prevent wives being amiable, that their husbands have become
indifferent to them. This should not be, I grant you, but it will be, since husbands are but men. I would
have  an  English  maiden  cultivate  the  talents  which  will  delight  her  husband  as  zealously  as  the
Circassian cultivates the accomplishments of an Eastern harem. Husbands, you say, care little for such
accomplishments. So I should suppose, when they are employed, not for the husband, but to attract the
young rakes who dishonour the home. But imagine a virtuous and charming wife, adorned with such
accomplishments and devoting them to her husband's amusement; will she not add to his happiness?
When he leaves his office worn out with the day's work, will she not prevent him seeking recreation
elsewhere? Have we not all beheld happy families gathered together, each contributing to the general
amusement? Are not the confidence and familiarity thus established, the innocence and the charm of
the pleasures thus enjoyed, more than enough to make up for the more riotous pleasures of public
entertainments?
  Pleasant accomplishments have been made too formal an affair of rules and precepts, so that young
people find them very tedious Instead of a mere amusement or a merry game as they ought to be.
Nothing can be more absurd than an elderly singing or dancing master frowning upon young people,
whose one desire is to laugh, and adopting a more pedantic and magisterial manner in teaching his
frivolous art than if he were teaching the catechism. Take the case of singing; does this art depend on
reading music; cannot the voice be made true and flexible, can we not learn to sing with taste and even
to play an accompaniment without knowing a note? Does the same kind of singing suit all voices alike?
Is the same method adapted to every mind? You will never persuade me that the same attitudes, the
same steps, the same movements, the same gestures, the same dances will suit a lively little brunette
and a tall fair maiden with languishing eyes. So when I find a master giving the same lessons to all his
pupils I say, "He has his own routine, but he knows nothing of his art!"
  Should young girls have masters or mistresses? I cannot say; I wish they could dispense with both; Iwish they could learn of their own accord what they are already so willing to learn. I wish there were
fewer of these dressed-up old ballet masters promenading our streets. I fear our young people will get
more harm from intercourse with such people than profit from their instruction, and that their jargon,
their tone, their airs and graces, will instil a precocious taste for the frivolities which the teacher thinks
so important, and to which the scholars are only too likely to devote themselves.
  Where pleasure is the only end in view, any one may serve as teacher--father, mother, brother,
sister, friend, governess, the girl's mirror, and above all her own taste. Do not offer to teach, let her ask;
do not make a task of what should be a reward, and in these studies above all remember that the wish to
succeed is the first step. If formal instruction is required I leave it to you to choose between a master
and a mistress. How can I tell whether a dancing master should take a young pupil by her soft white
hand, make her lift her skirt and raise her eyes, open her arms and advance her throbbing bosom? but
this I know, nothing on earth would induce me to be that master.
  Taste is formed partly by industry and partly by talent, and by its means the mind is unconsciously
opened to the idea of beauty of every kind, till at length it attains to those moral ideas which are so
closely related to beauty. Perhaps this is one reason why ideas of propriety and modesty are acquired
earlier  by  girls  than  by  boys,  for  to  suppose  that  this  early  feeling  is  due  to  the  teaching  of  the
governesses would show little knowledge of their style of teaching and of the natural development of
the human mind. The art of speaking stands first among the pleasing arts; it alone can add fresh charms
to those which have been blunted by habit. It is the mind which not only gives life to the body, but
renews, so to speak, its youth; the flow of feelings and ideas give life and variety to the countenance,
and the conversation to which it gives rise arouses and sustains attention, and fixes it continuously on
one object. I suppose this is why little girls so soon learn to prattle prettily, and why men enjoy
listening to them even before the child can understand them; they are watching for the first gleam of
intelligence and sentiment.
  Women have ready tongues; they talk earlier, more easily, and more pleasantly than men. They are
also said to talk more; this may be true, but I am prepared to reckon it to their credit; eyes and mouth
are equally busy and for the same cause. A man says what he knows, a woman says what will please;
the one needs knowledge, the other taste; utility should be the man's object; the woman speaks to give
pleasure. There should be nothing in common but truth.
  You should not check a girl's prattle like a boy's by the harsh question, "What is the use of that?"
but by another question at least as difficult to answer, "What effect will that have?" At this early age
when they know neither good nor evil, and are incapable of judging others, they should make this their
rule and never say anything which is unpleasant to those about them; this rule is all the more difficult to
apply because it must always be subordinated to our first rule, "Never tell a lie."
I can see many other difficulties, but they belong to a later stage. For the present it is enough for
your little girls to speak the truth without grossness, and as they are naturally averse to what is gross,
education easily teaches them to avoid it. In social intercourse I observe that a man's politeness is
usually more helpful and a woman's more caressing. This distinction is natural, not artificial. A man
seeks to serve, a woman seeks to please. Hence a woman's politeness is less insincere than ours,
whatever we may think of her character; for she is only acting upon a fundamental instinct; but when a
man professes to put my interests before his own, I detect the falsehood, however disguised. Hence it is
easy for women to be polite, and easy to teach little girls politeness. The first lessons come by nature;
art only supplements them and determines the conventional form which politeness shall take. The
courtesy of woman to woman is another matter; their manner is so constrained, their attentions so
chilly, they find each other so wearisome, that they take little pains to conceal the fact, and seem
sincere  even  in  their  falsehood,  since  they  take  so  little  pains  to  conceal  it.  Still  young  girls  do
sometimes become sincerely attached to one another. At their age good spirits take the place of a good
disposition,  and  they  are  so  pleased  with  themselves  that  they  are  pleased  with  every  one  else.
Moreover,  it  is  certain  that  they  kiss  each  other  more  affectionately  and  caress  each  other  more
gracefully in the presence of men, for they are proud to be able to arouse their envy without danger tothemselves by the sight of favours which they know will arouse that envy.
  If young boys must not be allowed to ask unsuitable questions, much more must they be forbidden
to little girls; if their curiosity is satisfied or unskilfully evaded it is a much more serious matter, for
they are so keen to guess the mysteries concealed from them and so skilful to discover them. But while
I would not permit them to ask questions, I would have them questioned frequently, and pains should
be taken to make them talk; let them be teased to make them speak freely, to make them answer readily,
to loosen mind and tongue while it can be done without danger. Such conversation always leading to
merriment, yet skilfully controlled and directed, would form a delightful amusement at this age and
might instil into these youthful hearts the first and perhaps the most helpful lessons in morals which
they will ever receive, by teaching them in the guise of pleasure and fun what qualities are esteemed by
men and what is the true glory and happiness of a good woman.
  If boys are incapable of forming any true idea of religion, much more is it beyond the grasp of girls;
and for this reason I would speak of it all the sooner to little girls, for if we wait till they are ready for a
serious discussion of these deep subjects we should be in danger of never speaking of religion at all. A
woman's reason is practical, and therefore she soon arrives at a given conclusion, but she fails to
discover it for herself. The social relation of the sexes is a wonderful thing. This relation produces a
moral person of which woman is the eye and man the hand, but the two are so dependent on one
another that the man teaches the woman what to see, while she teaches him what to do. If women could
discover principles and if men had as good heads for detail, they would be mutually independent, they
would live in perpetual strife, and there would be an end to all society. But in their mutual harmony
each contributes to a common purpose; each follows the other's lead, each commands and each obeys.
  As a woman's conduct is controlled by public opinion, so is her religion ruled by authority. The
daughter should follow her mother's religion, the wife her husband's. Were that religion false, the
docility which leads mother and daughter to submit to nature's laws would blot out the sin of error in
the sight of God. Unable to judge for themselves they should accept the judgment of father and husband
as that of the church.
  While women unaided cannot deduce the rules of their faith, neither can they assign limits to that
faith by the evidence of reason; they allow themselves to be driven hither and thither by all sorts of
external influences, they are ever above or below the truth. Extreme in everything, they are either
altogether reckless or altogether pious; you never find them able to combine virtue and piety. Their
natural exaggeration is not wholly to blame; the ill-regulated control exercised over them by men is
partly responsible. Loose morals bring religion into contempt; the terrors of remorse make it a tyrant;
this is why women have always too much or too little religion.
  As a woman's religion is controlled by authority it is more important to show her plainly what to
believe than to explain the reasons for belief; for faith attached to ideas half-understood is the main
source of fanaticism, and faith demanded on behalf of what is absurd leads to madness or unbelief.
Whether our catechisms tend to produce impiety rather than fanaticism I cannot say, but I do know that
they lead to one or other.
  In the first place, when you teach religion to little girls never make it gloomy or tiresome, never
make it a task or a duty, and therefore never give them anything to learn by heart, not even their
prayers. Be content to say your own prayers regularly in their presence, but do not compel them to join
you. Let their prayers be short, as Christ himself has taught us. Let them always be said with becoming
reverence and respect; remember that if we ask the Almighty to give heed to our words, we should at
least give heed to what we mean to say.
  It does not much matter that a girl should learn her religion young, but it does matter that she should
learn it thoroughly, and still more that she should learn to love it. If you make religion a burden to her,
if you always speak of God's anger, if in the name of religion you impose all sorts of disagreeable
duties, duties which she never sees you perform, what can she suppose but that to learn one's catechism
and to say one's prayers is only the duty of a little girl, and she will long to be grown-up to escape, like
you, from these duties. Example! Example! Without it you will never succeed in teaching childrenanything.
  When you explain the Articles of Faith let it be by direct teaching, not by question and answer.
Children should only answer what they think, not what has been drilled into them. All the answers in
the catechism are the wrong way about; it is the scholar who instructs the teacher; in the child's mouth
they are a downright lie, since they explain what he does not understand, and affirm what he cannot
believe.  Find  me,  if  you  can,  an  intelligent  man  who  could  honestly  say  his  catechism.  The  first
question I find in our catechism is as follows: "Who created you and brought you into the world?" To
which the girl, who thinks it was her mother, replies without hesitation, "It was God." All she knows is
that she is asked a question which she only half understands and she gives an answer she does not
understand at all.
I  wish  some  one  who  really  understands  the  development  of  children's  minds  would  write  a
catechism for them. It might be the most useful book ever written, and, in my opinion, it would do its
author no little honour. This at least is certain--if it were a good book it would be very unlike our
catechisms.
  Such a catechism will not be satisfactory unless the child can answer the questions of its own
accord without having to learn the answers; indeed the child will often ask the questions itself. An
example is required to make my meaning plain and I feel how ill equipped I am to furnish such an
example. I will try to give some sort of outline of my meaning.
  To get to the first question in our catechism I suppose we must begin somewhat after the following
fashion.
  NURSE: Do you remember when your mother was a little girl?
  CHILD: No, nurse.
  NURSE: Why not, when you have such a good memory?
  CHILD: I was not alive.
  NURSE: Then you were not always alive!
  CHILD: No.
  NURSE: Will you live for ever!
  CHILD: Yes.
  NURSE: Are you young or old?
  CHILD: I am young.
  NURSE: Is your grandmamma old or young?
  CHILD: She is old.
  NURSE: Was she ever young?
  CHILD: Yes.
  NURSE: Why is she not young now?
  CHILD: She has grown old.
  NURSE: Will you grow old too?
  CHILD: I don't know.
  NURSE: Where are your last year's frocks?
  CHILD: They have been unpicked.
  NURSE: Why!
  CHILD: Because they were too small for me.
  NURSE: Why were they too small?
  CHILD: I have grown bigger.
  NURSE: Will you grow any more!
  CHILD: Oh, yes.
  NURSE: And what becomes of big girls?
  CHILD: They grow into women.
  NURSE: And what becomes of women!
  CHILD: They are mothers.  NURSE: And what becomes of mothers?
  CHILD: They grow old.
  NURSE: Will you grow old?
  CHILD: When I am a mother.
  NURSE: And what becomes of old people?
  CHILD: I don't know.
  NURSE: What became of your grandfather?
  CHILD: He died. [Footnote: The child will say this because she has heard it said; but you must
make sure she knows what death is, for the idea is not so simple and within the child's grasp as people
think. In that little poem "Abel" you will find an example of the way to teach them. This charming
work breathes a delightful simplicity with which one should feed one's own mind so as to talk with
children.]
  NURSE: Why did he die?
  CHILD: Because he was so old.
  NURSE: What becomes of old people!
  CHILD: They die.
  NURSE: And when you are old----?
  CHILD: Oh nurse! I don't want to die!
  NURSE: My dear, no one wants to die, and everybody dies.
  CHILD: Why, will mamma die too!
  NURSE: Yes, like everybody else. Women grow old as well as men, and old age ends in death.
  CHILD: What must I do to grow old very, very slowly?
  NURSE: Be good while you are little.
  CHILD: I will always be good, nurse.
  NURSE: So much the better. But do you suppose you will live for ever?
  CHILD: When I am very, very old----
  NURSE: Well?
  CHILD: When we are so very old you say we must die?
  NURSE: You must die some day.
  CHILD: Oh dear! I suppose I must.
  NURSE: Who lived before you?
  CHILD: My father and mother.
  NURSE: And before them?
  CHILD: Their father and mother.
  NURSE: Who will live after you?
  CHILD: My children.
  NURSE: Who will live after them?
  CHILD: Their children.
  In this way, by concrete examples, you will find a beginning and end for the human race like
everything else--that is to say, a father and mother who never had a father and mother, and children
who will never have children of their own.
  It is only after a long course of similar questions that we are ready for the first question in the
catechism; then alone can we put the question and the child may be able to understand it. But what a
gap there is between the first and the second question which is concerned with the definitions of the
divine nature. When will this chasm be bridged? "God is a spirit." "And what is a spirit?" Shall I start
the child upon this difficult question of metaphysics which grown men find so hard to understand?
These are no questions for a little girl to answer; if she asks them, it is as much or more than we can
expect. In that case I should tell her quite simply, "You ask me what God is; it is not easy to say; we
can neither hear nor see nor handle God; we can only know Him by His works. To learn what He is,
you must wait till you know what He has done."  If our dogmas are all equally true, they are not equally important. It makes little difference to the
glory of God that we should perceive it everywhere, but it does make a difference to human society,
and to every member of that society, that a man should know and do the duties which are laid upon him
by the law of God, his duty to his neighbour and to himself. This is what we should always be teaching
one another, and it is this which fathers and mothers are specially bound to teach their little ones.
Whether a virgin became the mother of her Creator, whether she gave birth to God, or merely to a man
into whom God has entered, whether the Father and the Son are of the same substance or of like
substance only, whether the Spirit proceeded from one or both of these who are but one, or from both
together, however important these questions may seem, I cannot see that it is any more necessary for
the human race to come to a decision with regard to them than to know what day to keep Easter, or
whether we should tell our beads, fast, and refuse to eat meat, speak Latin or French in church, adorn
the walls with statues, hear or say mass, and have no wife of our own. Let each think as he pleases; I
cannot see that it matters to any one but himself; for my own part it is no concern of mine. But what
does concern my fellow-creatures and myself alike is to know that there is indeed a judge of human
fate, that we are all His children, that He bids us all be just, He bids us love one another, He bids us be
kindly and merciful, He bids us keep our word with all men, even with our own enemies and His; we
must know that the apparent happiness of this world is naught; that there is another life to come, in
which this Supreme Being will be the rewarder of the just and the judge of the unjust. Children need to
be taught these doctrines and others like them and all citizens require to be persuaded of their truth.
Whoever sets his face against these doctrines is indeed guilty; he is the disturber of the peace, the
enemy of society. Whoever goes beyond these doctrines and seeks to make us the slaves of his private
opinions, reaches the same goal by another way; to establish his own kind of order he disturbs the
peace; in his rash pride he makes himself the interpreter of the Divine, and in His name demands the
homage and the reverence of mankind; so far as may be, he sets himself in God's place; he should
receive the punishment of sacrilege if he is not punished for his intolerance.
  Give no heed, therefore, to all those mysterious doctrines which are words without ideas for us, all
those strange teachings, the study of which is too often offered as a substitute for virtue, a study which
more often makes men mad rather than good. Keep your children ever within the little circle of dogmas
which are related to morality. Convince them that the only useful learning is that which teaches us to
act rightly. Do not make your daughters theologians and casuists; only teach them such things of
heaven as conduce to human goodness; train them to feel that they are always in the presence of God,
who sees their thoughts and deeds, their virtue and their pleasures; teach them to do good without
ostentation and because they love it, to suffer evil without a murmur, because God will reward them; in
a word to be all their life long what they will be glad to have been when they appear in His presence.
This is true religion; this alone is incapable of abuse, impiety, or fanaticism. Let those who will, teach a
religion more sublime, but this is the only religion I know.
  Moreover, it is as well to observe that, until the age when the reason becomes enlightened, when
growing emotion gives a voice to conscience, what is wrong for young people is what those about have
decided to be wrong. What they are told to do is good; what they are forbidden to do is bad; that is all
they ought to know: this shows how important it is for girls, even more than for boys, that the right
people should be chosen to be with them and to have authority over them. At last there comes a time
when  they  begin  to  judge  things  for  themselves,  and  that  is  the  time  to  change  your  method  of
education.
  Perhaps I have said too much already. To what shall we reduce the education of our women if we
give them no law but that of conventional prejudice? Let us not degrade so far the set which rules over
us, and which does us honour when we have not made it vile. For all mankind there is a law anterior to
that of public opinion. All other laws should bend before the inflexible control of this law; it is the
judge of public opinion, and only in so far as the esteem of men is in accordance with this law has it
any claim on our obedience.
  This law is our individual conscience. I will not repeat what has been said already; it is enough topoint out that if these two laws clash, the education of women will always be imperfect. Right feeling
without respect for public opinion will not give them that delicacy of soul which lends to right conduct
the charm of social approval; while respect for public opinion without right feeling will only make false
and wicked women who put appearances in the place of virtue.
  It is, therefore, important to cultivate a faculty which serves as judge between the two guides, which
does not permit conscience to go astray and corrects the errors of prejudice. That faculty is reason. But
what a crowd of questions arise at this word. Are women capable of solid reason; should they cultivate
it, can they cultivate it successfully? Is this culture useful in relation to the functions laid upon them? Is
it compatible with becoming simplicity?
  The different ways of envisaging and answering these questions lead to two extremes; some would
have us keep women indoors sewing and spinning with their maids; thus they make them nothing more
than the chief servant of their master. Others, not content to secure their rights, lead them to usurp ours;
for to make woman our superior in all the qualities proper to her sex, and to make her our equal in all
the  rest,  what  is  this  but  to  transfer  to  the  woman  the  superiority  which  nature  has  given  to  her
husband? The reason which teaches a man his duties is not very complex; the reason which teaches a
woman hers is even simpler. The obedience and fidelity which she owes to her husband, the tenderness
and care due to her children, are such natural and self-evident consequences of her position that she
cannot honestly refuse her consent to the inner voice which is her guide, nor fail to discern her duty in
her natural inclination.
I would not altogether blame those who would restrict a woman to the labours of her sex and would
leave her in profound ignorance of everything else; but that would require a standard of morality at
once very simple and very healthy, or a life withdrawn from the world. In great towns, among immoral
men, such a woman would be too easily led astray; her virtue would too often be at the mercy of
circumstances; in this age of philosophy, virtue must be able to resist temptation; she must know
beforehand what she may hear and what she should think of it.
  Moreover, in submission to man's judgment she should deserve his esteem; above all she should
obtain the esteem of her husband; she should not only make him love her person, she should make him
approve her conduct; she should justify his choice before the world, and do honour to her husband
through the honour given to the wife. But how can she set about this task if she is ignorant of our
institutions,  our  customs,  our  notions  of  propriety,  if  she  knows  nothing  of  the  source  of  man's
judgment, nor the passions by which it is swayed! Since she depends both on her own conscience and
on public opinion, she must learn to know and reconcile these two laws, and to put her own conscience
first only when the two are opposed to each other. She becomes the judge of her own judges, she
decides when she should obey and when she should refuse her obedience. She weighs their prejudices
before she accepts or rejects them; she learns to trace them to their source, to foresee what they will be,
and to turn them in her own favour; she is careful never to give cause for blame if duty allows her to
avoid it. This cannot be properly done without cultivating her mind and reason.
I always come back to my first principle and it supplies the solution of all my difficulties. I study
what is, I seek its cause, and I discover in the end that what is, is good. I go to houses where the master
and mistress do the honours together. They are equally well educated, equally polite, equally well
equipped with wit and good taste, both of them are inspired with the same desire to give their guests a
good reception and to send every one away satisfied. The husband omits no pains to be attentive to
every one; he comes and goes and sees to every one and takes all sorts of trouble; he is attention itself.
The wife remains in her place; a little circle gathers round her and apparently conceals the rest of the
company from her; yet she sees everything that goes on, no one goes without a word with her; she has
omitted nothing which might interest anybody, she has said nothing unpleasant to any one, and without
any fuss the least is no more overlooked than the greatest. Dinner is announced, they take their places;
the man knowing the assembled guests will place them according to his knowledge; the wife, without
previous acquaintance, never makes a mistake; their looks and bearing have already shown her what is
wanted and every one will find himself where he wishes to be. I do not assert that the servants forget noone. The master of the house may have omitted no one, but the mistress perceives what you like and
sees that you get it; while she is talking to her neighbour she has one eye on the other end of the table;
she sees who is not eating because he is not hungry and who is afraid to help himself because he is
clumsy and timid. When the guests leave the table every one thinks she has had no thought but for him,
everybody thinks she has had no time to eat anything, but she has really eaten more than anybody.
  When the guests are gone, husband and wife tails over the events of the evening. He relates what
was said to him, what was said and done by those with whom he conversed. If the lady is not always
quite exact in this respect, yet on the other hand she perceived what was whispered at the other end of
the room; she knows what so-and-so thought, and what was the meaning of this speech or that gesture;
there is scarcely a change of expression for which she has not an explanation in readiness, and she is
almost always right.
  The same turn of mind which makes a woman of the world such an excellent hostess, enables a flirt
to excel in the art of amusing a number of suitors. Coquetry, cleverly carried out, demands an even
finer discernment than courtesy; provided a polite lady is civil to everybody, she has done fairly well in
any case; but the flirt would soon lose her hold by such clumsy uniformity; if she tries to be pleasant to
all  her  lovers  alike,  she  will  disgust  them  all.  In  ordinary  social  intercourse  the  manners  adopted
towards everybody are good enough for all; no question is asked as to private likes or dislikes provided
all are alike well received. But in love, a favour shared with others is an insult. A man of feeling would
rather be singled out for ill-treatment than be caressed with the crowd, and the worst that can befall him
is to be treated like every one else. So a woman who wants to keep several lovers at her feet must
persuade every one of them that she prefers him, and she must contrive to do this in the sight of all the
rest, each of whom is equally convinced that he is her favourite.
  If you want to see a man in a quandary, place him between two women with each of whom he has a
secret understanding, and see what a fool he looks. But put a woman in similar circumstances between
two men, and the results will be even more remarkable; you will be astonished at the skill with which
she cheats them both, and makes them laugh at each other. Now if that woman were to show the same
confidence in both, if she were to be equally familiar with both, how could they be deceived for a
moment? If she treated them alike, would she not show that they both had the same claims upon her?
Oh, she is far too clever for that; so far from treating them just alike, she makes a marked difference
between them, and she does it so skilfully that the man she flatters thinks it is affection, and the man
she ill uses think it is spite. So that each of them believes she is thinking of him, when she is thinking of
no one but herself.
  A general desire to please suggests similar measures; people would be disgusted with a woman's
whims if they were not skilfully managed, and when they are artistically distributed her servants are
more than ever enslaved.
  "Usa ogn'arte la donna, onde sia colto Nella sua rete alcun novello amante; Ne con tutti, ne sempre
un stesso volto Serba; ma cangia a tempo atto e sembiante." Tasso, Jerus. Del., c. iv., v. 87.
  What is the secret of this art? Is it not the result of a delicate and continuous observation which
shows her what is taking place in a man's heart, so that she is able to encourage or to check every
hidden impulse? Can this art be acquired? No; it is born with women; it is common to them all, and
men never show it to the same degree. It is one of the distinctive characters of the sex. Self-possession,
penetration, delicate observation, this is a woman's science; the skill to make use of it is her chief
accomplishment.
  This is what is, and we have seen why it is so. It is said that women are false. They become false.
They are really endowed with skill not duplicity; in the genuine inclinations of their sex they are not
false even when they tell a lie. Why do you consult their words when it is not their mouths that speak?
Consult their eyes, their colour, their breathing, their timid manner, their slight resistance, that is the
language nature gave them for your answer. The lips always say "No," and rightly so; but the tone is
not always the same, and that cannot lie. Has not a woman the same needs as a man, but without the
same right to make them known? Her fate would be too cruel if she had no language in which toexpress her legitimate desires except the words which she dare not utter. Must her modesty condemn
her to misery? Does she not require a means of indicating her inclinations without open expression?
What skill is needed to hide from her lover what she would fain reveal! Is it not of vital importance that
she should learn to touch his heart without showing that she cares for him? It is a pretty story that tale
of Galatea with her apple and her clumsy flight. What more is needed? Will she tell the shepherd who
pursues her among the willows that she only flees that he may follow? If she did, it would be a lie; for
she would no longer attract him. The more modest a woman is, the more art she needs, even with her
husband. Yes, I maintain that coquetry, kept within bounds, becomes modest and true, and out of it
springs a law of right conduct.
  One of my opponents has very truly asserted that virtue is one; you cannot disintegrate it and
choose this and reject the other. If you love virtue, you love it in its entirety, and you close your heart
when you can, and you always close your lips to the feelings which you ought not to allow. Moral truth
is not only what is, but what is good; what is bad ought not to be, and ought not to be confessed,
especially when that confession produces results which might have been avoided. If I were tempted to
steal, and in confessing it I tempted another to become my accomplice, the very confession of my
temptation would amount to a yielding to that temptation. Why do you say that modesty makes women
false? Are those who lose their modesty more sincere than the rest? Not so, they are a thousandfold
more deceitful. This degree of depravity is due to many vices, none of which is rejected, vices which
owe their power to intrigue and falsehood. [Footnote: I know that women who have openly decided on
a certain course of conduct profess that their lack of concealment is a virtue in itself, and swear that,
with one exception, they are possessed of all the virtues; but I am sure they never persuaded any but
fools to believe them. When the natural curb is removed from their sex, what is there left to restrain
them? What honour will they prize when they have rejected the honour of their sex? Having once given
the rein to passion they have no longer any reason for self-control. "Nec femina, amissa pudicitia, alia
abnuerit." No author ever understood more thoroughly the heart of both sexes than Tacitus when he
wrote those words.]
  On the other hand, those who are not utterly shameless, who take no pride in their faults, who are
able to conceal their desires even from those who inspire them, those who confess their passion most
reluctantly, these are the truest and most sincere, these are they on whose fidelity you may generally
rely.
  The only example I know which might be quoted as a recognised exception to these remarks is
Mlle. de L'Enclos; and she was considered a prodigy. In her scorn for the virtues of women, she
practised, so they say, the virtues of a man. She is praised for her frankness and uprightness; she was a
trustworthy acquaintance and a faithful friend. To complete the picture of her glory it is said that she
became a man. That may be, but in spite of her high reputation I should no more desire that man as my
friend than as my mistress.
  This is not so irrelevant as it seems. I am aware of the tendencies of our modern philosophy which
make a jest of female modesty and its so-called insincerity; I also perceive that the most certain result
of this philosophy will be to deprive the women of this century of such shreds of honour as they still
possess.
  On these grounds I think we may decide in general terms what sort of education is suited to the
female mind, and the objects to which we should turn its attention in early youth.
  As I have already said, the duties of their sex are more easily recognised than performed. They must
learn in the first place to love those duties by considering the advantages to be derived from them--that
is the only way to make duty easy. Every age and condition has its own duties. We are quick to see our
duty if we love it. Honour your position as a woman, and in whatever station of life to which it shall
please heaven to call you, you will be well off. The essential thing is to be what nature has made you;
women are only too ready to be what men would have them.
  The search for abstract and speculative truths, for principles and axioms in science, for all that tends
to wide generalisation, is beyond a woman's grasp; their studies should be thoroughly practical. It istheir business to apply the principles discovered by men, it is their place to make the observations
which lead men to discover those principles. A woman's thoughts, beyond the range of her immediate
duties, should be directed to the study of men, or the acquirement of that agreeable learning whose sole
end is the formation of taste; for the works of genius are beyond her reach, and she has neither the
accuracy nor the attention for success in the exact sciences; as for the physical sciences, to decide the
relations between living creatures and the laws of nature is the task of that sex which is more active and
enterprising,  which  sees  more  things,  that  sex  which  is  possessed  of  greater  strength  and  is  more
accustomed  to  the  exercise  of  that  strength.  Woman,  weak  as  she  is  and  limited  in  her  range  of
observation, perceives and judges the forces at her disposal to supplement her weakness, and those
forces are the passions of man. Her own mechanism is more powerful than ours; she has many levers
which may set the human heart in motion. She must find a way to make us desire what she cannot
achieve unaided and what she considers necessary or pleasing; therefore she must have a thorough
knowledge of man's mind; not an abstract knowledge of the mind of man in general, but the mind of
those men who are about her, the mind of those men who have authority over her, either by law or
custom. She must learn to divine their feelings from speech and action, look and gesture. By her own
speech and action, look and gesture, she must be able to inspire them with the feelings she desires,
without seeming to have any such purpose. The men will have a better philosophy of the human heart,
but  she  will  read  more  accurately  in  the  heart  of  men.  Woman  should  discover,  so  to  speak,  an
experimental morality, man should reduce it to a system. Woman has more wit, man more genius;
woman observes, man reasons; together they provide the clearest light and the profoundest knowledge
which is possible to the unaided human mind; in a word, the surest knowledge of self and of others of
which the human race is capable. In this way art may constantly tend to the perfection of the instrument
which nature has given us.
  The world is woman's book; if she reads it ill, it is either her own fault or she is blinded by passion.
Yet the genuine mother of a family is no woman of the world, she is almost as much of a recluse as the
nun in her convent. Those who have marriageable daughters should do what is or ought to be done for
those who are entering the cloisters: they should show them the pleasures they forsake before they are
allowed to renounce them, lest the deceitful picture of unknown pleasures should creep in to disturb the
happiness of their retreat. In France it is the girls who live in convents and the wives who flaunt in
society. Among the ancients it was quite otherwise; girls enjoyed, as I have said already, many games
and public festivals; the married women lived in retirement. This was a more reasonable custom and
more conducive to morality. A girl may be allowed a certain amount of coquetry, and she may be
mainly occupied at amusement. A wife has other responsibilities at home, and she is no longer on the
look-out for a husband; but women would not appreciate the change, and unluckily it is they who set
the fashion. Mothers, let your daughters be your companions. Give them good sense and an honest
heart, and then conceal from them nothing that a pure eye may behold. Balls, assemblies, sports, the
theatre itself; everything which viewed amiss delights imprudent youth may be safely displayed to a
healthy mind. The more they know of these noisy pleasures, the sooner they will cease to desire them.
I can fancy the outcry with which this will be received. What girl will resist such an example? Their
heads are turned by the first glimpse of the world; not one of them is ready to give it up. That may be;
but before you showed them this deceitful prospect, did you prepare them to behold it without emotion?
Did you tell them plainly what it was they would see? Did you show it in its true light? Did you arm
them  against  the  illusions  of  vanity?  Did  you  inspire  their  young  hearts  with  a  taste  for  the  true
pleasures which are not to be met with in this tumult? What precautions, what steps, did you take to
preserve  them  from  the  false  taste  which  leads  them  astray?  Not  only  have  you  done  nothing  to
preserve their minds from the tyranny of prejudice, you have fostered that prejudice; you have taught
them to desire every foolish amusement they can get. Your own example is their teacher. Young people
on their entrance into society have no guide but their mother, who is often just as silly as they are
themselves, and quite unable to show them things except as she sees them herself. Her example is
stronger than reason; it justifies them in their own eyes, and the mother's authority is an unanswerableexcuse for the daughter. If I ask a mother to bring her daughter into society, I assume that she will show
it in its true light.
  The evil begins still earlier; the convents are regular schools of coquetry; not that honest coquetry
which I have described, but a coquetry the source of every kind of misconduct, a coquetry which turns
out girls who are the most ridiculous little madams. When they leave the convent to take their place in
smart society, young women find themselves quite at home. They have been educated for such a life; is
it strange that they like it? I am afraid what I am going to say may be based on prejudice rather than
observation, but so far as I can see, one finds more family affection, more good wives and loving
mothers  in  Protestant  than  in  Catholic  countries;  if  that  is  so,  we  cannot  fail  to  suspect  that  the
difference is partly due to the convent schools.
  The charms of a peaceful family life must be known to be enjoyed; their delights should be tasted in
childhood. It is only in our father's home that we learn to love our own, and a woman whose mother did
not educate her herself will not be willing to educate her own children. Unfortunately, there is no such
thing as home education in our large towns. Society is so general and so mixed there is no place left for
retirement, and even in the home we live in public. We live in company till we have no family, and we
scarcely know our own relations, we see them as strangers; and the simplicity of home life disappears
together with the sweet familiarity which was its charm. In this wise do we draw with our mother's milk
a taste for the pleasures of the age and the maxims by which it is controlled.
  Girls are compelled to assume an air of propriety so that men may be deceived into marrying them
by their appearance. But watch these young people for a moment; under a pretence of coyness they
barely conceal the passion which devours them, and already you may read in their eager eyes their
desire to imitate their mothers. It is not a husband they want, but the licence of a married woman. What
need of a husband when there are so many other resources; but a husband there must be to act as a
screen. [Footnote: The way of a man in his youth was one of the four things that the sage could not
understand; the fifth was the shamelessness of an adulteress. "Quae comedit, et tergens os suum dicit;
non sum operata malum." Prov. xxx. 20.] There is modesty on the brow, but vice in the heart; this sham
modesty is one of its outward signs; they affect it that they may be rid of it once for all. Women of Paris
and London, forgive me! There may be miracles everywhere, but I am not aware of them; and if there is
even one among you who is really pure in heart, I know nothing of our institutions.
  All these different methods of education lead alike to a taste for the pleasures of the great world,
and to the passions which this taste so soon kindles. In our great towns depravity begins at birth; in the
smaller towns it begins with reason. Young women brought up in the country are soon taught to despise
the happy simplicity of their lives, and hasten to Paris to share the corruption of ours. Vices, cloaked
under  the  fair  name  of  accomplishments,  are  the  sole  object  of  their  journey;  ashamed  to  find
themselves so much behind the noble licence of the Parisian ladies, they hasten to become worthy of
the name of Parisian. Which is responsible for the evil--the place where it begins, or the place where it
is accomplished?
I would not have a sensible mother bring her girl to Paris to show her these sights so harmful to
others; but I assert that if she did so, either the girl has been badly brought up, or such sights have little
danger for her. With good taste, good sense, and a love of what is right, these things are less attractive
than  to  those  who  abandon  themselves  to  their  charm.  In  Paris  you  may  see  giddy  young  things
hastening to adopt the tone and fashions of the town for some six months, so that they may spend the
rest of their life in disgrace; but who gives any heed to those who, disgusted with the rout, return to
their distant home and are contented with their lot when they have compared it with that which others
desire. How many young wives have I seen whose good-natured husbands have taken them to Paris
where they might live if they pleased; but they have shrunk from it and returned home more willingly
than they went, saying tenderly, "Ah, let us go back to our cottage, life is happier there than in these
palaces." We do not know how many there are who have not bowed the knee to Baal, who scorn his
senseless worship. Fools make a stir; good women pass unnoticed.
  If so many women preserve a judgment which is proof against temptation, in spite of universalprejudice, in spite of the bad education of girls, what would their judgment have been, had it been
strengthened by suitable instruction, or rather left unaffected by evil teaching, for to preserve or restore
the natural feelings is our main business? You can do this without preaching endless sermons to your
daughters, without crediting them with your harsh morality. The only effect of such teaching is to
inspire a dislike for the teacher and the lessons. In talking to a young girl you need not make her afraid
of her duties, nor need you increase the burden laid upon her by nature. When you explain her duties
speak plainly and pleasantly; do not let her suppose that the performance of these duties is a dismal
thing--away with every affectation of disgust or pride. Every thought which we desire to arouse should
find  its  expression  in  our  pupils,  their  catechism  of  conduct  should  be  as  brief  and  plain  as  their
catechism of religion, but it need not be so serious. Show them that these same duties are the source of
their pleasures and the basis of their rights. Is it so hard to win love by love, happiness by an amiable
disposition, obedience by worth, and honour by self-respect? How fair are these woman's rights, how
worthy of reverence, how dear to the heart of man when a woman is able to show their worth! These
rights are no privilege of years; a woman's empire begins with her virtues; her charms are only in the
bud, yet she reigns already by the gentleness of her character and the dignity of her modesty. Is there
any man so hard-hearted and uncivilised that he does not abate his pride and take heed to his manners
with  a  sweet  and  virtuous  girl  of  sixteen,  who  listens  but  says  little;  her  bearing  is  modest,  her
conversation honest, her beauty does not lead her to forget her sex and her youth, her very timidity
arouses interest, while she wins for herself the respect which she shows to others?
  These external signs are not devoid of meaning; they do not rest entirely upon the charms of sense;
they arise from that conviction that we all feel that women are the natural judges of a man's worth. Who
would be scorned by women? not even he who has ceased to desire their love. And do you suppose that
I, who tell them such harsh truths, am indifferent to their verdict? Reader, I care more for their approval
than for yours; you are often more effeminate than they. While I scorn their morals, I will revere their
justice; I care not though they hate me, if I can compel their esteem.
  What great things might be accomplished by their influence if only we could bring it to bear! Alas
for the age whose women lose their ascendancy, and fail to make men respect their judgment! This is
the last stage of degradation. Every virtuous nation has shown respect to women. Consider Sparta,
Germany, and Rome; Rome the throne of glory and virtue, if ever they were enthroned on earth. The
Roman women awarded honour to the deeds of great generals, they mourned in public for the fathers of
the country, their awards and their tears were alike held sacred as the most solemn utterance of the
Republic. Every great revolution began with the women. Through a woman Rome gained her liberty,
through a woman the plebeians won the consulate, through a woman the tyranny of the decemvirs was
overthrown; it was the women who saved Rome when besieged by Coriolanus. What would you have
said at the sight of this procession, you Frenchmen who pride yourselves on your gallantry, would you
not have followed it with shouts of laughter? You and I see things with such different eyes, and perhaps
we are both right. Such a procession formed of the fairest beauties of France would be an indecent
spectacle; but let it consist of Roman ladies, you will all gaze with the eyes of the Volscians and feel
with the heart of Coriolanus.
I will go further and maintain that virtue is no less favourable to love than to other rights of nature,
and that it adds as much to the power of the beloved as to that of the wife or mother. There is no real
love without enthusiasm, and no enthusiasm without an object of perfection real or supposed, but
always present in the imagination. What is there to kindle the hearts of lovers for whom this perfection
is nothing, for whom the loved one is merely the means to sensual pleasure? Nay, not thus is the heart
kindled, not thus does it abandon itself to those sublime transports which form the rapture of lovers and
the charm of love. Love is an illusion, I grant you, but its reality consists in the feelings it awakes, in
the love of true beauty which it inspires. That beauty is not to be found in the object of our affections, it
is the creation of our illusions. What matter! do we not still sacrifice all those baser feelings to the
imaginary model? and we still feed our hearts on the virtues we attribute to the beloved, we still
withdraw ourselves from the baseness of human nature. What lover is there who would not give his lifefor his mistress? What gross and sensual passion is there in a man who is willing to die? We scoff at the
knights of old; they knew the meaning of love; we know nothing but debauchery. When the teachings
of romance began to seem ridiculous, it was not so much the work of reason as of immorality.
  Natural relations remain the same throughout the centuries, their good or evil effects are unchanged;
prejudices, masquerading as reason, can but change their outward seeming; self-mastery, even at the
behest of fantastic opinions, will not cease to be great and good. And the true motives of honour will
not fail to appeal to the heart of every woman who is able to seek happiness in life in her woman's
duties.  To  a  high-souled  woman  chastity  above  all  must  be  a  delightful  virtue.  She  sees  all  the
kingdoms of the world before her and she triumphs over herself and them; she sits enthroned in her
own soul and all men do her homage; a few passing struggles are crowned with perpetual glory; she
secures the affection, or it may be the envy, she secures in any case the esteem of both sexes and the
universal respect of her own. The loss is fleeting, the gain is permanent. What a joy for a noble heart--
the pride of virtue combined with beauty. Let her be a heroine of romance; she will taste delights more
exquisite than those of Lais and Cleopatra; and when her beauty is fled, her glory and her joys remain;
she alone can enjoy the past.
  The harder and more important the duties, the stronger and clearer must be the reasons on which
they are based. There is a sort of pious talk about the most serious subjects which is dinned in vain into
the ears of young people. This talk, quite unsuited to their ideas and the small importance they attach to
it in secret, inclines them to yield readily to their inclinations, for lack of any reasons for resistance
drawn from the facts themselves. No doubt a girl brought up to goodness and piety has strong weapons
against temptation; but one whose heart, or rather her ears, are merely filled with the jargon of piety,
will certainly fall a prey to the first skilful seducer who attacks her. A young and beautiful girl will
never despise her body, she will never really deplore sins which her beauty leads men to commit, she
will never lament earnestly in the sight of God that she is an object of desire, she will never be
convinced that the tenderest feeling is an invention of the Evil One. Give her other and more pertinent
reasons for her own sake, for these will have no effect. It will be worse to instil, as is often done, ideas
which contradict each other, and after having humbled and degraded her person and her charms as the
stain of sin, to bid her reverence that same vile body as the temple of Jesus Christ. Ideas too sublime
and too humble are equally ineffective and they cannot both be true. A reason adapted to her age and
sex is what is needed. Considerations of duty are of no effect unless they are combined with some
motive for the performance of our duty.
  "Quae quia non liceat non facit, illa facit." OVID, Amor. I. iii. eleg. iv.
  One would not suspect Ovid of such a harsh judgment.
  If you would inspire young people with a love of good conduct avoid saying, "Be good;" make it
their interest to be good; make them feel the value of goodness and they will love it. It is not enough to
show this effect in the distant future, show it now, in the relations of the present, in the character of
their lovers. Describe a good man, a man of worth, teach them to recognise him when they see him, to
love him for their own sake; convince them that such a man alone can make them happy as friend, wife,
or mistress. Let reason lead the way to virtue; make them feel that the empire of their sex and all the
advantages derived from it depend not merely on the right conduct, the morality, of women, but also on
that of men; that they have little hold over the vile and base, and that the lover is incapable of serving
his mistress unless he can do homage to virtue. You may then be sure that when you describe the
manners of our age you will inspire them with a genuine disgust; when you show them men of fashion
they will despise them; you will give them a distaste for their maxims, an aversion to their sentiments,
and a scorn for their empty gallantry; you will arouse a nobler ambition, to reign over great and strong
souls, the ambition of the Spartan women to rule over men. A bold, shameless, intriguing woman, who
can only attract her lovers by coquetry and retain them by her favours, wins a servile obedience in
common things; in weighty and important matters she has no influence over them. But the woman who
is both virtuous, wise, and charming, she who, in a word, combines love and esteem, can send them at
her bidding to the end of the world, to war, to glory, and to death at her behest. This is a fine kingdomand worth the winning.
  This is the spirit in which Sophy has been educated, she has been trained carefully rather than
strictly, and her taste has been followed rather than thwarted. Let us say just a word about her person,
according to the description I have given to Emile and the picture he himself has formed of the wife in
whom he hopes to find happiness.
I cannot repeat too often that I am not dealing with prodigies. Emile is no prodigy, neither is Sophy.
He is a man and she is a woman; this is all they have to boast of. In the present confusion between the
sexes  it  is  almost  a  miracle  to  belong  to  one's  own  sex.  Sophy  is  well  born  and  she  has  a  good
disposition; she is very warm-hearted, and this warmth of heart sometimes makes her imagination run
away with her. Her mind is keen rather than accurate, her temper is pleasant but variable, her person
pleasing though nothing out of the common, her countenance bespeaks a soul and it speaks true; you
may meet her with indifference, but you will not leave her without emotion. Others possess good
qualities which she lacks; others possess her good qualities in a higher degree, but in no one are these
qualities better blended to form a happy disposition. She knows how to make the best of her very faults,
and if she were more perfect she would be less pleasing.
  Sophy  is  not  beautiful;  but  in  her  presence  men  forget  the  fairer  women,  and  the  latter  are
dissatisfied with themselves. At first sight she is hardly pretty; but the more we see her the prettier she
is; she wins where so many lose, and what she wins she keeps. Her eyes might be finer, her mouth
more beautiful, her stature more imposing; but no one could have a more graceful figure, a finer
complexion, a whiter hand, a daintier foot, a sweeter look, and a more expressive countenance. She
does not dazzle; she arouses interest; she delights us, we know not why.
  Sophy is fond of dress, and she knows how to dress; her mother has no other maid; she has taste
enough to dress herself well; but she hates rich clothes; her own are always simple but elegant. She
does not like showy but becoming things. She does not know what colours are fashionable, but she
makes no mistake about those that suit her. No girl seems more simply dressed, but no one could take
more pains over her toilet; no article is selected at random, and yet there is no trace of artificiality. Her
dress is very modest in appearance and very coquettish in reality; she does not display her charms, she
conceals them, but in such a way as to enhance them. When you see her you say, "That is a good
modest girl," but while you are with her, you cannot take your eyes or your thoughts off her and one
might say that this very simple adornment is only put on to be removed bit by bit by the imagination.
  Sophy has natural gifts; she is aware of them, and they have not been neglected; but never having
had a chance of much training she is content to use her pretty voice to sing tastefully and truly; her little
feet step lightly, easily, and gracefully, she can always make an easy graceful courtesy. She has had no
singing master but her father, no dancing mistress but her mother; a neighbouring organist has given
her a few lessons in playing accompaniments on the spinet, and she has improved herself by practice.
At first she only wished to show off her hand on the dark keys; then she discovered that the thin clear
tone of the spinet made her voice sound sweeter; little by little she recognised the charms of harmony;
as she grew older she at last began to enjoy the charms of expression, to love music for its own sake.
But she has taste rather than talent; she cannot read a simple air from notes.
  Needlework is what Sophy likes best; and the feminine arts have been taught her most carefully,
even those you would not expect, such as cutting out and dressmaking. There is nothing she cannot do
with her needle, and nothing that she does not take a delight in doing; but lace-making is her favourite
occupation, because there is nothing which requires such a pleasing attitude, nothing which calls for
such grace and dexterity of finger. She has also studied all the details of housekeeping; she understands
cooking and cleaning; she knows the prices of food, and also how to choose it; she can keep accounts
accurately, she is her mother's housekeeper. Some day she will be the mother of a family; by managing
her father's house she is preparing to manage her own; she can take the place of any of the servants and
she is always ready to do so. You cannot give orders unless you can do the work yourself; that is why
her mother sets her to do it. Sophy does not think of that; her first duty is to be a good daughter, and
that is all she thinks about for the present. Her one idea is to help her mother and relieve her of some ofher anxieties. However, she does not like them all equally well. For instance, she likes dainty food, but
she does not like cooking; the details of cookery offend her, and things are never clean enough for her.
She is extremely sensitive in this respect and carries her sensitiveness to a fault; she would let the
whole dinner boil over into the fire rather than soil her cuffs. She has always disliked inspecting the
kitchen-garden for the same reason. The soil is dirty, and as soon as she sees the manure heap she
fancies there is a disagreeable smell.
  This defect is the result of her mother's teaching. According to her, cleanliness is one of the most
necessary of a woman's duties, a special duty, of the highest importance and a duty imposed by nature.
Nothing could be more revolting than a dirty woman, and a husband who tires of her is not to blame.
She insisted so strongly on this duty when Sophy was little, she required such absolute cleanliness in
her person, clothing, room, work, and toilet, that use has become habit, till it absorbs one half of her
time and controls the other; so that she thinks less of how to do a thing than of how to do it without
getting dirty.
  Yet this has not degenerated into mere affectation and softness; there is none of the over refinement
of luxury. Nothing but clean water enters her room; she knows no perfumes but the scent of flowers,
and her husband will never find anything sweeter than her breath. In conclusion, the attention she pays
to the outside does not blind her to the fact that time and strength are meant for greater tasks; either she
does not know or she despises that exaggerated cleanliness of body which degrades the soul. Sophy is
more than clean, she is pure.
I said that Sophy was fond of good things. She was so by nature; but she became temperate by habit
and now she is temperate by virtue. Little girls are not to be controlled, as little boys are, to some
extent, through their greediness. This tendency may have ill effects on women and it is too dangerous
to be left unchecked. When Sophy was little, she did not always return empty handed if she was sent to
her mother's cupboard, and she was not quite to be trusted with sweets and sugar-almonds. Her mother
caught her, took them from her, punished her, and made her go without her dinner. At last she managed
to persuade her that sweets were bad for the teeth, and that over-eating spoiled the figure. Thus Sophy
overcame her faults; and when she grew older other tastes distracted her from this low kind of self-
indulgence. With awakening feeling greediness ceases to be the ruling passion, both with men and
women. Sophy has preserved her feminine tastes; she likes milk and sweets; she likes pastry and made-
dishes, but not much meat. She has never tasted wine or spirits; moreover, she eats sparingly; women,
who do not work so hard as men, have less waste to repair. In all things she likes what is good, and
knows how to appreciate it; but she can also put up with what is not so good, or can go without it.
  Sophy's mind is pleasing but not brilliant, and thorough but not deep; it is the sort of mind which
calls for no remark, as she never seems cleverer or stupider than oneself. When people talk to her they
always find what she says attractive, though it may not be highly ornamental according to modern ideas
of an educated woman; her mind has been formed not only by reading, but by conversation with her
father and mother, by her own reflections, and by her own observations in the little world in which she
has lived. Sophy is naturally merry; as a child she was even giddy; but her mother cured her of her silly
ways, little by little, lest too sudden a change should make her self-conscious. Thus she became modest
and retiring while still a child, and now that she is a child no longer, she finds it easier to continue this
conduct  than  it  would  have  been  to  acquire  it  without  knowing  why.  It  is  amusing  to  see  her
occasionally return to her old ways and indulge in childish mirth and then suddenly check herself, with
silent lips, downcast eyes, and rosy blushes; neither child nor woman, she may well partake of both.
  Sophy is too sensitive to be always good humoured, but too gentle to let this be really disagreeable
to other people; it is only herself who suffers. If you say anything that hurts her she does not sulk, but
her heart swells; she tries to run away and cry. In the midst of her tears, at a word from her father or
mother she returns at once laughing and playing, secretly wiping her eyes and trying to stifle her sobs.
  Yet she has her whims; if her temper is too much indulged it degenerates into rebellion, and then
she forgets herself. But give her time to come round and her way of making you forget her wrong-
doing is almost a virtue. If you punish her she is gentle and submissive, and you see that she is moreashamed of the fault than the punishment. If you say nothing, she never fails to make amends, and she
does it so frankly and so readily that you cannot be angry with her. She would kiss the ground before
the lowest servant and would make no fuss about it; and as soon as she is forgiven, you can see by her
delight and her caresses that a load is taken off her heart. In a word, she endures patiently the wrong-
doing of others, and she is eager to atone for her own. This amiability is natural to her sex when
unspoiled. Woman is made to submit to man and to endure even injustice at his hands. You will never
bring young lads to this; their feelings rise in revolt against injustice; nature has not fitted them to put
up with it.
  "Gravem Pelidae stomachum cedere nescii." HORACE, lib. i. ode vi.
  Sophy's religion is reasonable and simple, with few doctrines and fewer observances; or rather as
she knows no course of conduct but the right her whole life is devoted to the service of God and to
doing good. In all her parents' teaching of religion she has been trained to a reverent submission; they
have often said, "My little girl, this is too hard for you; your husband will teach you when you are
grown up." Instead of long sermons about piety, they have been content to preach by their example, and
this example is engraved on her heart.
  Sophy loves virtue; this love has come to be her ruling passion; she loves virtue because there is
nothing fairer in itself, she loves it because it is a woman's glory and because a virtuous woman is little
lower than the angels; she loves virtue as the only road to real happiness, because she sees nothing but
poverty, neglect, unhappiness, shame, and disgrace in the life of a bad woman; she loves virtue because
it is dear to her revered father and to her tender and worthy mother; they are not content to be happy in
their own virtue, they desire hers; and she finds her chief happiness in the hope of making them happy.
All these feelings inspire an enthusiasm which stirs her heart and keeps all its budding passions in
subjection to this noble enthusiasm. Sophy will be chaste and good till her dying day; she has vowed it
in her secret heart, and not before she knew how hard it would be to keep her vow; she made this vow
at a time when she would have revoked it had she been the slave of her senses.
  Sophy is not so fortunate as to be a charming French woman, cold-hearted and vain, who would
rather attract attention than give pleasure, who seeks amusement rather than delight. She suffers from a
consuming desire for love; it even disturbs and troubles her heart in the midst of festivities; she has lost
her former liveliness, and her taste for merry games; far from being afraid of the tedium of solitude she
desires it. Her thoughts go out to him who will make solitude sweet to her. She finds strangers tedious,
she wants a lover, not a circle of admirers. She would rather give pleasure to one good man than be a
general favourite, or win that applause of society which lasts but a day and to-morrow is turned to
scorn.
  A woman's judgment develops sooner than a man's; being on the defensive from her childhood up,
and intrusted with a treasure so hard to keep, she is earlier acquainted with good and evil. Sophy is
precocious by temperament in everything, and her judgment is more formed than that of most girls of
her age. There is nothing strange in that, maturity is not always reached at the same age.
  Sophy has been taught the duties and rights of her own sex and of ours. She knows men's faults and
women's vices; she also knows their corresponding good qualities and virtues, and has them by heart.
No one can have a higher ideal of a virtuous woman, but she would rather think of a virtuous man, a
man of true worth; she knows that she is made for such a man, that she is worthy of him, that she can
make him as happy as he will make her; she is sure she will know him when she sees him; the difficulty
is to find him.
  Women are by nature judges of a man's worth, as he is of theirs; this right is reciprocal, and it is
recognised as such both by men and women. Sophy recognises this right and exercises it, but with the
modesty becoming her youth, her inexperience, and her position; she confines her judgment to what she
knows, and she only forms an opinion when it may help to illustrate some useful precept. She is
extremely careful what she says about those who are absent, particularly if they are women. She thinks
that talking about each other makes women spiteful and satirical; so long as they only talk about men
they are merely just. So Sophy stops there. As to women she never says anything at all about them,except to tell the good she knows; she thinks this is only fair to her sex; and if she knows no good of
any woman, she says nothing, and that is enough.
  Sophy has little knowledge of society, but she is observant and obliging, and all that she does is full
of grace. A happy disposition does more for her than much art. She has a certain courtesy of her own,
which is not dependent on fashion, and does not change with its changes; it is not a matter of custom,
but  it  arises  from  a  feminine  desire  to  please.  She  is  unacquainted  with  the  language  of  empty
compliment, nor does she invent more elaborate compliments of her own; she does not say that she is
greatly obliged, that you do her too much honour, that you should not take so much trouble, etc. Still
less does she try to make phrases of her own. She responds to an attention or a customary piece of
politeness by a courtesy or a mere "Thank you;" but this phrase in her mouth is quite enough. If you do
her a real service, she lets her heart speak, and its words are no empty compliment. She has never
allowed French manners to make her a slave to appearances; when she goes from one room to another
she does not take the arm of an old gentleman, whom she would much rather help. When a scented fop
offers her this empty attention, she leaves him on the staircase and rushes into the room saying that she
is not lame. Indeed, she will never wear high heels though she is not tall; her feet are small enough to
dispense with them.
  Not only does she adopt a silent and respectful attitude towards women, but also towards married
men, or those who are much older than herself; she will never take her place above them, unless
compelled to do so; and she will return to her own lower place as soon as she can; for she knows that
the rights of age take precedence of those of sex, as age is presumably wiser than youth, and wisdom
should be held in the greatest honour.
  With young folks of her own age it is another matter; she requires a different manner to gain their
respect, and she knows how to adopt it without dropping the modest ways which become her. If they
themselves are shy and modest, she will gladly preserve the friendly familiarity of youth; their innocent
conversation will be merry but suitable; if they become serious they must say something useful; if they
become silly, she soon puts a stop to it, for she has an utter contempt for the jargon of gallantry, which
she considers an insult to her sex. She feels sure that the man she seeks does not speak that jargon, and
she will never permit in another what would be displeasing to her in him whose character is engraved
on her heart. Her high opinion of the rights of women, her pride in the purity of her feelings, that active
virtue which is the basis of her self-respect, make her indignant at the sentimental speeches intended for
her amusement. She does not receive them with open anger, but with a disconcerting irony or an
unexpected iciness. If a fair Apollo displays his charms, and makes use of his wit in the praise of her
wit, her beauty, and her grace; at the risk of offending him she is quite capable of saying politely, "Sir, I
am afraid I know that better than you; if we have nothing more interesting to talk about, I think we may
put  an  end  to  this  conversation."  To  say  this  with  a  deep  courtesy,  and  then  to  withdraw  to  a
considerable distance, is the work of a moment. Ask your lady-killers if it is easy to continue to babble
to such, an unsympathetic ear.
  It is not that she is not fond of praise if it is really sincere, and if she thinks you believe what you
say. You must show that you appreciate her merit if you would have her believe you. Her proud spirit
may take pleasure in homage which is based upon esteem, but empty compliments are always rejected;
Sophy was not meant to practise the small arts of the dancing-girl.
  With a judgment so mature, and a mind like that of a woman of twenty, Sophy, at fifteen, is no
longer treated as a child by her parents. No sooner do they perceive the first signs of youthful disquiet
than they hasten to anticipate its development, their conversations with her are wise and tender. These
wise and tender conversations are in keeping with her age and disposition. If her disposition is what I
fancy why should not her father speak to her somewhat after this fashion?
  "You are a big girl now, Sophy, you will soon be a woman. We want you to be happy, for our own
sakes as well as yours, for our happiness depends on yours. A good girl finds her own happiness in the
happiness of a good man, so we must consider your marriage; we must think of it in good time, for
marriage makes or mars our whole life, and we cannot have too much time to consider it.  "There is nothing so hard to choose as a good husband, unless it is a good wife. You will be that
rare creature, Sophy, you will be the crown of our life and the blessing of our declining years; but
however worthy you are, there are worthier people upon earth. There is no one who would not do
himself honour by marriage with you; there are many who would do you even greater honour than
themselves.  Among  these  we  must  try  to  find  one  who  suits  you,  we  must  get  to  know  him  and
introduce you to him.
  "The greatest possible happiness in marriage depends on so many points of agreement that it is folly
to expect to secure them all. We must first consider the more important matters; if others are to be
found along with them, so much the better; if not we must do without them. Perfect happiness is not to
be found in this world, but we can, at least, avoid the worst form of unhappiness, that for which
ourselves are to blame.
  "There is a natural suitability, there is a suitability of established usage, and a suitability which is
merely conventional. Parents should decide as to the two latters, and the children themselves should
decide as to the former. Marriages arranged by parents only depend on a suitability of custom and
convention; it is not two people who are united, but two positions and two properties; but these things
may change, the people remain, they are always there; and in spite of fortune it is the personal relation
that makes a happy or an unhappy marriage.
  "Your mother had rank, I had wealth; this was all that our parents considered in arranging our
marriage. I lost my money, she lost her position; forgotten by her family, what good did it do her to be
a lady born? In the midst of our misfortunes, the union of our hearts has outweighed them all; the
similarity of our tastes led us to choose this retreat; we live happily in our poverty, we are all in all to
each other. Sophy is a treasure we hold in common, and we thank Heaven which has bestowed this
treasure and deprived us of all others. You see, my child, whither we have been led by Providence; the
conventional motives which brought about our marriage no longer exist, our happiness consists in that
natural suitability which was held of no account.
  "Husband and wife should choose each other. A mutual liking should be the first bond between
them. They should follow the guidance of their own eyes and hearts; when they are married their first
duty will be to love one another, and as love and hatred do not depend on ourselves, this duty brings
another with it, and they must begin to love each other before marriage. That is the law of nature, and
no power can abrogate it; those who have fettered it by so many legal restrictions have given heed
rather to the outward show of order than to the happiness of marriage or the morals of the citizen. You
see, my dear Sophy, we do not preach a harsh morality. It tends to make you your own mistress and to
make us leave the choice of your husband to yourself.
  "When we have told you our reasons for giving you full liberty, it is only fair to speak of your
reasons for making a wise use of that liberty. My child, you are good and sensible, upright and pious,
you have the accomplishments of a good woman and you are not altogether without charms; but you
are poor; you have the gifts most worthy of esteem, but not those which are most esteemed. Do not
seek what is beyond your reach, and let your ambition be controlled, not by your ideas or ours, but by
the opinion of others. If it were merely a question of equal merits, I know not what limits to impose on
your hopes; but do not let your ambitions outrun your fortune, and remember it is very small. Although
a man worthy of you would not consider this inequality an obstacle, you must do what he would not do;
Sophy must follow her mother's example and only enter a family which counts it an honour to receive
her. You never saw our wealth, you were born in our poverty; you make it sweet for us, and you share
it without hardship. Believe me, Sophy, do not seek those good things we indeed thank heaven for
having taken from us; we did not know what happiness was till we lost our money.
  "You are so amiable that you will win affection, and you are not go poor as to be a burden. You will
be sought in marriage, it may be by those who are unworthy of you. If they showed themselves in their
true colours, you would rate them at their real value; all their outward show would not long deceive
you;  but  though  your  judgment  is  good  and  you  know  what  merit  is  when  you  see  it,  you  are
inexperienced and you do not know how people can conceal their real selves. A skilful knave mightstudy your tastes in order to seduce you, and make a pretence of those virtues which he does not
possess. You would be ruined, Sophy, before you knew what you were doing, and you would only
perceive your error when you had cause to lament it. The most dangerous snare, the only snare which
reason cannot avoid, is that of the senses; if ever you have the misfortune to fall into its toils, you will
perceive nothing but fancies and illusions; your eyes will be fascinated, your judgment troubled, your
will corrupted, your very error will be dear to you, and even if you were able to perceive it you would
not be willing to escape from it. My child, I trust you to Sophy's own reason; I do not trust you to the
fancies of your own heart. Judge for yourself so long as your heart is untouched, but when you love
betake yourself to your mother's care.
  "I propose a treaty between us which shows our esteem for you, and restores the order of nature
between us. Parents choose a husband for their daughter and she is only consulted as a matter of form;
that is the custom. We shall do just the opposite; you will choose, and we shall be consulted. Use your
right, Sophy, use it freely and wisely. The husband suitable for you should be chosen by you not us.
But it is for us to judge whether he is really suitable, or whether, without knowing it, you are only
following your own wishes. Birth, wealth, position, conventional opinions will count for nothing with
us. Choose a good man whose person and character suit you; whatever he may be in other respects, we
will accept him as our son-in-law. He will be rich enough if he has bodily strength, a good character,
and family affection. His position will be good enough if it is ennobled by virtue. If everybody blames
us, we do not care. We do not seek the approbation of men, but your happiness."
I cannot tell my readers what effect such words would have upon girls brought up in their fashion.
As for Sophy, she will have no words to reply; shame and emotion will not permit her to express
herself easily; but I am sure that what was said will remain engraved upon her heart as long as she lives,
and that if any human resolution may be trusted, we may rely on her determination to deserve her
parent's esteem.
  At worst let us suppose her endowed with an ardent disposition which will make her impatient of
long delays; I maintain that her judgment, her knowledge, her taste, her refinement, and, above all, the
sentiments in which she has been brought up from childhood, will outweigh the impetuosity of the
senses, and enable her to offer a prolonged resistance, if not to overcome them altogether. She would
rather die a virgin martyr than distress her parents by marrying a worthless man and exposing herself to
the unhappiness of an ill-assorted marriage. Ardent as an Italian and sentimental as an Englishwoman,
she has a curb upon heart and sense in the pride of a Spaniard, who even when she seeks a lover does
not easily discover one worthy of her.
  Not every one can realise the motive power to be found in a love of what is right, nor the inner
strength which results from a genuine love of virtue. There are men who think that all greatness is a
figment of the brain, men who with their vile and degraded reason will never recognise the power over
human passions which is wielded by the very madness of virtue. You can only teach such men by
examples; if they persist in denying their existence, so much the worse for them. If I told them that
Sophy is no imaginary person, that her name alone is my invention, that her education, her conduct, her
character, her very features, really existed, and that her loss is still mourned by a very worthy family,
they would, no doubt, refuse to believe me; but indeed why should I not venture to relate word for word
the story of a girl so like Sophy that this story might be hers without surprising any one. Believe it or
no, it is all the same to me; call my history fiction if you will; in any case I have explained my method
and furthered my purpose.
  This young girl with the temperament which I have attributed to Sophy was so like her in other
respects that she was worthy of the name, and so we will continue to use it. After the conversation
related  above,  her  father  and  mother  thought  that  suitable  husbands  would  not  be  likely  to  offer
themselves in the hamlet where they lived; so they decided to send her to spend the winter in town,
under the care of an aunt who was privately acquainted with the object of the journey; for Sophy's heart
throbbed with noble pride at the thought of her self-control; and however much she might want to
marry, she would rather have died a maid than have brought herself to go in search of a husband.  In response to her parents' wishes her aunt introduced her to her friends, took her into company,
both private and public, showed her society, or rather showed her in society, for Sophy paid little heed
to its bustle. Yet it was plain that she did not shrink from young men of pleasing appearance and
modest  seemly  behaviour.  Her  very  shyness  had  a  charm  of  its  own,  which  was  very  much  like
coquetry; but after talking to them once or twice she repulsed them. She soon exchanged that air of
authority  which  seems  to  accept  men's  homage  for  a  humbler  bearing  and  a  still  more  chilling
politeness. Always watchful over her conduct, she gave them no chance of doing her the least service;
it was perfectly plain that she was determined not to accept any one of them.
  Never did sensitive heart take pleasure in noisy amusements, the empty and barren delights of those
who have no feelings, those who think that a merry life is a happy life. Sophy did not find what she
sought, and she felt sure she never would, so she got tired of the town. She loved her parents dearly and
nothing made up for their absence, nothing could make her forget them; she went home long before the
time fixed for the end of her visit.
  Scarcely  had  she  resumed  her  home  duties  when  they  perceived  that  her  temper  had  changed
though her conduct was unaltered, she was forgetful, impatient, sad, and dreamy; she wept in secret. At
first they thought she was in love and was ashamed to own it; they spoke to her, but she repudiated the
idea. She protested she had seen no one who could touch her heart, and Sophy always spoke the truth.
  Yet her languor steadily increased, and her health began to give way. Her mother was anxious about
her, and determined to know the reason for this change. She took her aside, and with the winning
speech and the irresistible caresses which only a mother can employ, she said, "My child, whom I have
borne beneath my heart, whom I bear ever in my affection, confide your secret to your mother's bosom.
What secrets are these which a mother may not know? Who pities your sufferings, who shares them,
who would gladly relieve them, if not your father and myself? Ah, my child! would you have me die of
grief for your sorrow without letting me share it?"
  Far from hiding her griefs from her mother, the young girl asked nothing better than to have her as
friend and comforter; but she could not speak for shame, her modesty could find no words to describe a
condition so unworthy of her, as the emotion which disturbed her senses in spite of all her efforts. At
length her very shame gave her mother a clue to her difficulty, and she drew from her the humiliating
confession. Far from distressing her with reproaches or unjust blame, she consoled her, pitied her, wept
over her; she was too wise to make a crime of an evil which virtue alone made so cruel. But why put up
with  such  an  evil  when  there  was  no  necessity  to  do  so,  when  the  remedy  was  so  easy  and  so
legitimate? Why did she not use the freedom they had granted her? Why did she not take a husband?
Why did she not make her choice? Did she not know that she was perfectly independent in this matter,
that whatever her choice, it would be approved, for it was sure to be good? They had sent her to town,
but she would not stay; many suitors had offered themselves, but she would have none of them. What
did she expect? What did she want? What an inexplicable contradiction?
  The reply was simple. If it were only a question of the partner of her youth, her choice would soon
be made; but a master for life is not so easily chosen; and since the two cannot be separated, people
must often wait and sacrifice their youth before they find the man with whom they could spend their
life. Such was Sophy's case; she wanted a lover, but this lover must be her husband; and to discover a
heart such as she required, a lover and husband were equally difficult to find. All these dashing young
men were only her equals in age, in everything else they were found lacking; their empty wit, their
vanity, their affectations of speech, their ill-regulated conduct, their frivolous imitations alike disgusted
her. She sought a man and she found monkeys; she sought a soul and there was none to be found.
  "How unhappy I am!" said she to her mother; "I am compelled to love and yet I am dissatisfied with
every one. My heart rejects every one who appeals to my senses. Every one of them stirs my passions
and all alike revolt them; a liking unaccompanied by respect cannot last. That is not the sort of man for
your Sophy; the delightful image of her ideal is too deeply graven in her heart. She can love no other;
she can make no one happy but him, and she cannot be happy without him. She would rather consume
herself in ceaseless conflicts, she would rather die free and wretched, than driven desperate by thecompany of a man she did not love, a man she would make as unhappy as herself; she would rather die
than live to suffer."
  Amazed at these strange ideas, her mother found them so peculiar that she could not fail to suspect
some mystery. Sophy was neither affected nor absurd. How could such exaggerated delicacy exist in
one who had been so carefully taught from her childhood to adapt herself to those with whom she must
live,  and  to  make  a  virtue  of  necessity?  This  ideal  of  the  delightful  man  with  which  she  was  so
enchanted, who appeared so often in her conversation, made her mother suspect that there was some
foundation for her caprices which was still unknown to her, and that Sophy had not told her all. The
unhappy girl, overwhelmed with her secret grief, was only too eager to confide it to another. Her
mother  urged  her  to  speak;  she  hesitated,  she  yielded,  and  leaving  the  room  without  a  word,  she
presently returned with a book in her hand. "Have pity on your unhappy daughter, there is no remedy
for her grief, her tears cannot be dried. You would know the cause: well, here it is," said she, flinging
the book on the table. Her mother took the book and opened it; it was The Adventures of Telemachus.
At first she could make nothing of this riddle; by dint of questions and vague replies, she discovered to
her great surprise that her daughter was the rival of Eucharis.
  Sophy was in love with Telemachus, and loved him with a passion which nothing could cure. When
her father and mother became aware of her infatuation, they laughed at it and tried to cure her by
reasoning with her. They were mistaken, reason was not altogether on their side; Sophy had her own
reason and knew how to use it. Many a time did she reduce them to silence by turning their own
arguments against them, by showing them that it was all their own fault for not having trained her to
suit the men of that century; that she would be compelled to adopt her husband's way of thinking or he
must adopt hers, that they had made the former course impossible by the way she had been brought up,
and that the latter was just what she wanted. "Give me," said she, "a man who holds the same opinions
as I do, or one who will be willing to learn them from me, and I will marry him; but until then, why do
you scold me? Pity me; I am miserable, but not mad. Is the heart controlled by the will? Did my father
not ask that very question? Is it my fault if I love what has no existence? I am no visionary; I desire no
prince, I seek no Telemachus, I know he is only an imaginary person; I seek some one like him. And
why should there be no such person, since there is such a person as I, I who feel that my heart is like
his? No, let us not wrong humanity so greatly, let us not think that an amiable and virtuous man is a
figment of the imagination. He exists, he lives, perhaps he is seeking me; he is seeking a soul which is
capable of love for him. But who is he, where is he? I know not; he is not among those I have seen; and
no doubt I shall never see him. Oh! mother, why did you make virtue too attractive? If I can love
nothing less, you are more to blame than I."
  Must I continue this sad story to its close? Must I describe the long struggles which preceded it?
Must I show an impatient mother exchanging her former caresses for severity? Must I paint an angry
father forgetting his former promises, and treating the most virtuous of daughters as a mad woman?
Must  I  portray  the  unhappy  girl,  more  than  ever  devoted  to  her  imaginary  hero,  because  of  the
persecution  brought  upon  her  by  that  devotion,  drawing  nearer  step  by  step  to  her  death,  and
descending into the grave when they were about to force her to the altar? No; I will not dwell upon
these gloomy scenes; I have no need to go so far to show, by what I consider a sufficiently striking
example, that in spite of the prejudices arising from the manners of our age, the enthusiasm for the
good and the beautiful is no more foreign to women than to men, and that there is nothing which, under
nature's guidance, cannot be obtained from them as well as from us.
  You stop me here to inquire whether it is nature which teaches us to take such pains to repress our
immoderate desires. No, I reply, but neither is it nature who gives us these immoderate desires. Now,
all that is not from nature is contrary to nature, as I have proved again and again.
  Let us give Emile his Sophy; let us restore this sweet girl to life and provide her with a less vivid
imagination and a happier fate. I desired to paint an ordinary woman, but by endowing her with a great
soul, I have disturbed her reason. I have gone astray. Let us retrace our steps. Sophy has only a good
disposition and an ordinary heart; her education is responsible for everything in which she excels otherwomen.
  In this book I intended to describe all that might be done and to leave every one free to choose what
he could out of all the good things I described. I meant to train a helpmeet for Emile, from the very
first, and to educate them for each other and with each other. But on consideration I thought all these
premature arrangements undesirable, for it was absurd to plan the marriage of two children before I
could tell whether this union was in accordance with nature and whether they were really suited to each
other. We must not confuse what is suitable in a state of savagery with what is suitable in civilised life.
In the former, any woman will suit any man, for both are still in their primitive and undifferentiated
condition; in the latter, all their characteristics have been developed by social institutions, and each
mind, having taken its own settled form, not from education alone, but by the co-operation, more or
less well-regulated, of natural disposition and education, we can only make a match by introducing
them to each other to see if they suit each other in every respect, or at least we can let them make that
choice which gives the most promise of mutual suitability.
  The difficulty is this: while social life develops character it differentiates classes, and these two
classifications do not correspond, so that the greater the social distinctions, the greater the difficulty of
finding the corresponding character. Hence we have ill-assorted marriages and all their accompanying
evils; and we find that it follows logically that the further we get from equality, the greater the change
in our natural feelings; the wider the distance between great and small, the looser the marriage tie; the
deeper the gulf between rich and poor the fewer husbands and fathers. Neither master nor slave belongs
to a family, but only to a class.
  If  you  would  guard  against  these  abuses,  and  secure  happy  marriages,  you  must  stifle  your
prejudices, forget human institutions, and consult nature. Do not join together those who are only alike
in one given condition, those who will not suit one another if that condition is changed; but those who
are adapted to one another in every situation, in every country, and in every rank in which they may be
placed. I do not say that conventional considerations are of no importance in marriage, but I do say that
the influence of natural relations is so much more important, that our fate in life is decided by them
alone, and that there is such an agreement of taste, temper, feeling, and disposition as should induce a
wise father, though he were a prince, to marry his son, without a moment's hesitation, to the woman so
adapted to him, were she born in a bad home, were she even the hangman's daughter. I maintain indeed
that every possible misfortune may overtake husband and wife if they are thus united, yet they will
enjoy more real happiness while they mingle their tears, than if they possessed all the riches of the
world, poisoned by divided hearts.
  Instead of providing a wife for Emile in childhood, I have waited till I knew what would suit him. It
is not for me to decide, but for nature; my task is to discover the choice she has made. My business,
mine I repeat, not his father's; for when he entrusted his son to my care, he gave up his place to me. He
gave me his rights; it is I who am really Emile's father; it is I who have made a man of him. I would
have refused to educate him if I were not free to marry him according to his own choice, which is mine.
Nothing but the pleasure of bestowing happiness on a man can repay me for the cost of making him
capable of happiness.
  Do not suppose, however, that I have delayed to find a wife for Emile till I sent him in search of
her. This search is only a pretext for acquainting him with women, so that he may perceive the value of
a suitable wife. Sophy was discovered long since; Emile may even have seen her already, but he will
not recognise her till the time is come.
  Although equality of rank is not essential in marriage, yet this equality along with other kinds of
suitability increases their value; it is not to be weighed against any one of them, but, other things being
equal, it turns the scale.
  A man, unless he is a king, cannot seek a wife in any and every class; if he himself is free from
prejudices, he will find them in others; and this girl or that might perhaps suit him and yet she would be
beyond his reach. A wise father will therefore restrict his inquiries within the bounds of prudence. He
should not wish to marry his pupil into a family above his own, for that is not within his power. If hecould do so he ought not desire it; for what difference does rank make to a young man, at least to my
pupil? Yet, if he rises he is exposed to all sorts of real evils which he will feel all his life long. I even
say that he should not try to adjust the balance between different gifts, such as rank and money; for
each of these adds less to the value of the other than the amount deducted from its own value in the
process of adjustment; moreover, we can never agree as to a common denominator; and finally the
preference, which each feels for his own surroundings, paves the way for discord between the two
families and often to difficulties between husband and wife.
  It makes a considerable difference as to the suitability of a marriage whether a man marries above
or beneath him. The former case is quite contrary to reason, the latter is more in conformity with
reason. As the family is only connected with society through its head, it is the rank of that head which
decides that of the family as a whole. When he marries into a lower rank, a man does not lower himself,
he raises his wife; if, on the other hand, he marries above his position, he lowers his wife and does not
raise himself. Thus there is in the first case good unmixed with evil, in the other evil unmixed with
good. Moreover, the law of nature bids the woman obey the man. If he takes a wife from a lower class,
natural and civil law are in accordance and all goes well. When he marries a woman of higher rank it is
just the opposite case; the man must choose between diminished rights or imperfect gratitude; he must
be ungrateful or despised. Then the wife, laying claim to authority, makes herself a tyrant over her
lawful head; and the master, who has become a slave, is the most ridiculous and miserable of creatures.
Such are the unhappy favourites whom the sovereigns of Asia honour and torment with their alliance;
people tell us that if they desire to sleep with their wife they must enter by the foot of the bed.
I  expect  that  many  of  my  readers  will  remember  that  I  think  women  have  a  natural  gift  for
managing men, and will accuse me of contradicting myself; yet they are mistaken. There is a vast
difference between claiming the right to command, and managing him who commands. Woman's reign
is a reign of gentleness, tact, and kindness; her commands are caresses, her threats are tears. She should
reign in the home as a minister reigns in the state, by contriving to be ordered to do what she wants. In
this sense, I grant you, that the best managed homes are those where the wife has most power. But
when she despises the voice of her head, when she desires to usurp his rights and take the command
upon herself, this inversion of the proper order of things leads only to misery, scandal, and dishonour.
  There remains the choice between our equals and our inferiors; and I think we ought also to make
certain restrictions with regard to the latter; for it is hard to find in the lowest stratum of society a
woman who is able to make a good man happy; not that the lower classes are more vicious than the
higher, but because they have so little idea of what is good and beautiful, and because the injustice of
other classes makes its very vices seem right in the eyes of this class.
  By nature man thinks but seldom. He learns to think as he acquires the other arts, but with even
greater difficulty. In both sexes alike I am only aware of two really distinct classes, those who think and
those who do not; and this difference is almost entirely one of education. A man who thinks should not
ally himself with a woman who does not think, for he loses the chief delight of social life if he has a
wife who cannot share his thoughts. People who spend their whole life in working for a living have no
ideas beyond their work and their own interests, and their mind seems to reside in their arms. This
ignorance is not necessarily unfavourable either to their honesty or their morals; it is often favourable;
we often content ourselves with thinking about our duties, and in the end we substitute words for
things. Conscience is the most enlightened philosopher; to be an honest man we need not read Cicero's
De Officiis, and the most virtuous woman in the world is probably she who knows least about virtue.
But it is none the less true that a cultivated mind alone makes intercourse pleasant, and it is a sad thing
for a father of a family, who delights in his home, to be forced to shut himself up in himself and to be
unable to make himself understood.
  Moreover, if a woman is quite unaccustomed to think, how can she bring up her children? How will
she know what is good for them? How can she incline them to virtues of which she is ignorant, to merit
of which she has no conception? She can only flatter or threaten, she can only make them insolent or
timid;  she  will  make  them  performing  monkeys  or  noisy  little  rascals;  she  will  never  make  themintelligent or pleasing children.
  Therefore it is not fitting that a man of education should choose a wife who has none, or take her
from a class where she cannot be expected to have any education. But I would a thousand times rather
have a homely girl, simply brought up, than a learned lady and a wit who would make a literary circle
of my house and install herself as its president. A female wit is a scourge to her husband, her children,
her friends, her servants, to everybody. From the lofty height of her genius she scorns every womanly
duty, and she is always trying to make a man of herself after the fashion of Mlle. de L'Enclos. Outside
her home she always makes herself ridiculous and she is very rightly a butt for criticism, as we always
are when we try to escape from our own position into one for which we are unfitted. These highly
talented women only get a hold over fools. We can always tell what artist or friend holds the pen or
pencil when they are at work; we know what discreet man of letters dictates their oracles in private.
This trickery is unworthy of a decent woman. If she really had talents, her pretentiousness would
degrade them. Her honour is to be unknown; her glory is the respect of her husband; her joys the
happiness of her family. I appeal to my readers to give me an honest answer; when you enter a woman's
room what makes you think more highly of her, what makes you address her with more respect--to see
her busy with feminine occupations, with her household duties, with her children's clothes about her, or
to find her writing verses at her toilet table surrounded with pamphlets of every kind and with notes on
tinted paper? If there were none but wise men upon earth such a woman would die an old maid.
  "Quaeris cur nolim te ducere, galla? diserta es." Martial xi. 20.
  Looks must next be considered; they are the first thing that strikes us and they ought to be the last,
still they should not count for nothing. I think that great beauty is rather to be shunned than sought after
in marriage. Possession soon exhausts our appreciation of beauty; in six weeks' time we think no more
about it, but its dangers endure as long as life itself. Unless a beautiful woman is an angel, her husband
is the most miserable of men; and even if she were an angel he would still be the centre of a hostile
crowd and she could not prevent it. If extreme ugliness were not repulsive I should prefer it to extreme
beauty; for before very long the husband would cease to notice either, but beauty would still have its
disadvantages  and  ugliness  its  advantages.  But  ugliness  which  is  actually  repulsive  is  the  worst
misfortune; repulsion increases rather than diminishes, and it turns to hatred. Such a union is a hell
upon earth; better death than such a marriage.
  Desire mediocrity in all things, even in beauty. A pleasant attractive countenance, which inspires
kindly feelings rather than love, is what we should prefer; the husband runs no risk, and the advantages
are common to husband and wife; charm is less perishable than beauty; it is a living thing, which
constantly renews itself, and after thirty years of married life, the charms of a good woman delight her
husband even as they did on the wedding-day.
  Such are the considerations which decided my choice of Sophy. Brought up, like Emile, by Nature,
she is better suited to him than any other; she will be his true mate. She is his equal in birth and
character, his inferior in fortune. She makes no great impression at first sight, but day by day reveals
fresh  charms.  Her  chief  influence  only  takes  effect  gradually,  it  is  only  discovered  in  friendly
intercourse;  and  her  husband  will  feel  it  more  than  any  one.  Her  education  is  neither  showy  nor
neglected; she has taste without deep study, talent without art, judgment without learning. Her mind
knows little, but it is trained to learn; it is well-tilled soil ready for the sower. She has read no book but
Bareme and Telemachus which happened to fall into her hands; but no girl who can feel so passionately
towards Telemachus can have a heart without feeling or a mind without discernment. What charming
ignorance! Happy is he who is destined to be her tutor. She will not be her husband's teacher but his
scholar; far from seeking to control his tastes, she will share them. She will suit him far better than a
blue-stocking  and  he  will  have  the  pleasure  of  teaching  her  everything.  It  is  time  they  made
acquaintance; let us try to plan a meeting.
  When we left Paris we were sorrowful and wrapped in thought. This Babel is not our home. Emile
casts a scornful glance towards the great city, saying angrily, "What a time we have wasted; the bride of
my heart is not there. My friend, you knew it, but you think nothing of my time, and you pay no heed tomy sufferings." With steady look and firm voice I reply, "Emile, do you mean what you say?" At once
he flings his arms round my neck and clasps me to his breast without speaking. That is his answer when
he knows he is in the wrong.
  And now we are wandering through the country like true knights-errant; yet we are not seeking
adventures when we leave Paris; we are escaping from them; now fast now slow, we wander through
the country like knights-errants. By following my usual practice the taste for it has become established;
and I do not suppose any of my readers are such slaves of custom as to picture us dozing in a post-
chaise  with  closed  windows,  travelling,  yet  seeing  nothing,  observing  nothing,  making  the  time
between our start and our arrival a mere blank, and losing in the speed of our journey, the time we
meant to save.
  Men say life is short, and I see them doing their best to shorten it. As they do not know how to
spend their time they lament the swiftness of its flight, and I perceive that for them it goes only too
slowly. Intent merely on the object of their pursuit, they behold unwillingly the space between them
and it; one desires to-morrow, another looks a month ahead, another ten years beyond that. No one
wants to live to-day, no one contents himself with the present hour, all complain that it passes slowly.
When they complain that time flies, they lie; they would gladly purchase the power to hasten it; they
would gladly spend their fortune to get rid of their whole life; and there is probably not a single one
who would not have reduced his life to a few hours if he had been free to get rid of those hours he
found tedious, and those which separated him from the desired moment. A man spends his whole life
rushing from Paris to Versailles, from Versailles to Paris, from town to country, from country to town,
from one district of the town to another; but he would not know what to do with his time if he had not
discovered this way of wasting it, by leaving his business on purpose to find something to do in coming
back to it; he thinks he is saving the time he spends, which would otherwise be unoccupied; or maybe
he rushes for the sake of rushing, and travels post in order to return in the same fashion. When will
mankind cease to slander nature? Why do you complain that life is short when it is never short enough
for you? If there were but one of you, able to moderate his desires, so that he did not desire the flight of
time, he would never find life too short; for him life and the joy of life would be one and the same;
should he die young, he would still die full of days.
  If this were the only advantage of my way of travelling it would be enough. I have brought Emile
up neither to desire nor to wait, but to enjoy; and when his desires are bent upon the future, their ardour
is not so great as to make time seem tedious. He will not only enjoy the delights of longing, but the
delights of approaching the object of his desires; and his passions are under such restraint that he lives
to a great extent in the present.
  So we do not travel like couriers but like explorers. We do not merely consider the beginning and
the end, but the space between. The journey itself is a delight. We do not travel sitting, dismally
imprisoned, so to speak, in a tightly closed cage. We do not travel with the ease and comfort of ladies.
We do not deprive ourselves of the fresh air, nor the sight of the things about us, nor the opportunity of
examining them at our pleasure. Emile will never enter a post-chaise, nor will he ride post unless in a
great hurry. But what cause has Emile for haste? None but the joy of life. Shall I add to this the desire
to do good when he can? No, for that is itself one of the joys of life.
I can only think of one way of travelling pleasanter than travelling on horseback, and that is to
travel on foot. You start at your own time, you stop when you will, you do as much or as little as you
choose. You see the country, you turn off to the right or left; you examine anything which interests you,
you stop to admire every view. Do I see a stream, I wander by its banks; a leafy wood, I seek its shade;
a cave, I enter it; a quarry, I study its geology. If I like a place, I stop there. As soon as I am weary of it,
I go on. I am independent of horses and postillions; I need not stick to regular routes or good roads; I go
anywhere  where  a  man  can  go;  I  see  all  that  a  man  can  see;  and  as  I  am  quite  independent  of
everybody, I enjoy all the freedom man can enjoy. If I am stopped by bad weather and I find myself
getting bored, then I take horses. If I am tired--but Emile is hardly ever tired; he is strong; why should
he get tired? There is no hurry? If he stops, why should he be bored? He always finds some amusement.He works at a trade; he uses his arms to rest his feet.
  To travel on foot is to travel in the fashion of Thales, Plato, and Pythagoras. I find it hard to
understand how a philosopher can bring himself to travel in any other way; how he can tear himself
from the study of the wealth which lies before his eyes and beneath his feet. Is there any one with an
interest in agriculture, who does not want to know the special products of the district through which he
is passing, and their method of cultivation? Is there any one with a taste for natural history, who can
pass a piece of ground without examining it, a rock without breaking off a piece of it, hills without
looking for plants, and stones without seeking for fossils?
  Your town-bred scientists study natural history in cabinets; they have small specimens; they know
their names but nothing of their nature. Emile's museum is richer than that of kings; it is the whole
world. Everything is in its right place; the Naturalist who is its curator has taken care to arrange it in the
fairest order; Dauberton could do no better.
  What varied pleasures we enjoy in this delightful way of travelling, not to speak of increasing
health and a cheerful spirit. I notice that those who ride in nice, well-padded carriages are always
wrapped in thought, gloomy, fault-finding, or sick; while those who go on foot are always merry, light-
hearted, and delighted with everything. How cheerful we are when we get near our lodging for the
night! How savoury is the coarse food! How we linger at table enjoying our rest! How soundly we
sleep on a hard bed! If you only want to get to a place you may ride in a post-chaise; if you want to
travel you must go on foot.
  If Sophy is not forgotten before we have gone fifty leagues in the way I propose, either I am a
bungler or Emile lacks curiosity; for with an elementary knowledge of so many things, it is hardly to be
supposed that he will not be tempted to extend his knowledge. It is knowledge that makes us curious;
and Emile knows just enough to want to know more.
  One thing leads on to another, and we make our way forward. If I chose a distant object for the end
of our first journey, it is not difficult to find an excuse for it; when we leave Paris we must seek a wife
at a distance.
  A few days later we had wandered further than usual among hills and valleys where no road was to
be seen and we lost our way completely. No matter, all roads are alike if they bring you to your
journey's end, but if you are hungry they must lead somewhere. Luckily we came across a peasant who
took up to his cottage; we enjoyed his poor dinner with a hearty appetite. When he saw how hungry and
tired we were he said, "If the Lord had led you to the other side of the hill you would have had a better
welcome, you would have found a good resting place, such good, kindly people! They could not wish
to do more for you than I, but they are richer, though folks say they used to be much better off. Still
they are not reduced to poverty, and the whole country-side is the better for what they have."
  When Emile heard of these good people his heart warmed to them. "My friend," said he, looking at
me, "let us visit this house, whose owners are a blessing to the district; I shall be very glad to see them;
perhaps they will be pleased to see us too; I am sure we shall be welcome; we shall just suit each
other."
  Our host told us how to find our way to the house and we set off, but lost our way in the woods. We
were caught in a heavy rainstorm, which delayed us further. At last we found the right path and in the
evening we reached the house, which had been described to us. It was the only house among the
cottages of the little hamlet, and though plain it had an air of dignity. We went up to the door and asked
for hospitality. We were taken to the owner of the house, who questioned us courteously; without
telling him the object of our journey, we told him why we had left our path. His former wealth enabled
him to judge a man's position by his manners; those who have lived in society are rarely mistaken; with
this passport we were admitted.
  The room we were shown into was very small, but clean and comfortable; a fire was lighted, and
we found linen, clothes, and everything we needed. "Why," said Emile, in astonishment, "one would
think they were expecting us. The peasant was quite right; how kind and attentive, how considerate,
and for strangers too! I shall think I am living in the times of Homer." "I am glad you feel this," said I,"but you need not be surprised; where strangers are scarce, they are welcome; nothing makes people
more hospitable than the fact that calls upon their hospitality are rare; when guests are frequent there is
an  end  to  hospitality.  In  Homer's  time,  people  rarely  travelled,  and  travellers  were  everywhere
welcome. Very likely we are the only people who have passed this way this year." "Never mind," said
he, "to know how to do without guests and yet to give them a kind welcome, is its own praise."
  Having  dried  ourselves  and  changed  our  clothes,  we  rejoined  the  master  of  the  house,  who
introduced us to his wife; she received us not merely with courtesy but with kindness. Her glance rested
on Emile. A mother, in her position, rarely receives a young man into her house without some anxiety
or some curiosity at least.
  Supper was hurried forward on our account. When we went into the dining-room there were five
places laid; we took our seats and the fifth chair remained empty. Presently a young girl entered, made
a deep courtesy, and modestly took her place without a word. Emile was busy with his supper or
considering how to reply to what was said to him; he bowed to her and continued talking and eating.
The main object of his journey was as far from his thoughts as he believed himself to be from the end
of his journey. The conversation turned upon our losing our way. "Sir," said the master of the house to
Emile, "you seem to be a pleasant well-behaved young gentleman, and that reminds me that your tutor
and you arrived wet and weary like Telemachus and Mentor in the island of Calypso." "Indeed," said
Emile, "we have found the hospitality of Calypso." His Mentor added, "And the charms of Eucharis."
But Emile knew the Odyssey and he had not read Telemachus, so he knew nothing of Eucharis. As for
the young girl, I saw she blushed up to her eyebrows, fixed her eyes on her plate, and hardly dared to
breathe. Her mother, noticing her confusion, made a sign to her father to turn the conversation. When
he talked of his lonely life, he unconsciously began to relate the circumstances which brought him into
it; his misfortunes, his wife's fidelity, the consolations they found in their marriage, their quiet, peaceful
life in their retirement, and all this without a word of the young girl; it is a pleasing and a touching
story, which cannot fail to interest. Emile, interested and sympathetic, leaves off eating and listens.
When finally this best of men discourses with delight of the affection of the best of women, the young
traveller, carried away by his feelings, stretches one hand to the husband, and taking the wife's hand
with the other, he kisses it rapturously and bathes it with his tears. Everybody is charmed with the
simple enthusiasm of the young man; but the daughter, more deeply touched than the rest by this
evidence of his kindly heart, is reminded of Telemachus weeping for the woes of Philoctetus. She looks
at him shyly, the better to study his countenance; there is nothing in it to give the lie to her comparison.
  His easy bearing shows freedom without pride; his manners are lively but not boisterous; sympathy
makes his glance softer and his expression more pleasing; the young girl, seeing him weep, is ready to
mingle her tears with his. With so good an excuse for tears, she is restrained by a secret shame; she
blames herself already for the tears which tremble on her eyelids, as though it were wrong to weep for
one's family.
  Her mother, who has been watching her ever since she sat down to supper, sees her distress, and to
relieve it she sends her on some errand. The daughter returns directly, but so little recovered that her
distress is apparent to all. Her mother says gently, "Sophy, control yourself; will you never cease to
weep for the misfortunes of your parents? Why should you, who are their chief comfort, be more
sensitive than they are themselves?"
  At the name of Sophy you would have seen Emile give a start. His attention is arrested by this dear
name, and he awakes all at once and looks eagerly at one who dares to bear it. Sophy! Are you the
Sophy whom my heart is seeking? Is it you that I love? He looks at her; he watches her with a sort of
fear and self-distrust. The face is not quite what he pictured; he cannot tell whether he likes it more or
less. He studies every feature, he watches every movement, every gesture; he has a hundred fleeting
interpretations for them all; he would give half his life if she would but speak. He looks at me anxiously
and uneasily; his eyes are full of questions and reproaches. His every glance seems to say, "Guide me
while there is yet time; if my heart yields itself and is deceived, I shall never get over it."
  There is no one in the world less able to conceal his feelings than Emile. How should he concealthem, in the midst of the greatest disturbance he has ever experienced, and under the eyes of four
spectators who are all watching him, while she who seems to heed him least is really most occupied
with him. His uneasiness does not escape the keen eyes of Sophy; his own eyes tell her that she is its
cause; she sees that this uneasiness is not yet love; what matter? He is thinking of her, and that is
enough; she will be very unlucky if he thinks of her with impunity.
  Mothers, like daughters, have eyes; and they have experience too. Sophy's mother smiles at the
success of our schemes. She reads the hearts of the young people; she sees that the time has come to
secure the heart of this new Telemachus; she makes her daughter speak. Her daughter, with her native
sweetness, replies in a timid tone which makes all the more impression. At the first sound of her voice,
Emile surrenders; it is Sophy herself; there can be no doubt about it. If it were not so, it would be too
late to deny it.
  The charms of this maiden enchantress rush like torrents through his heart, and he begins to drain
the draughts of poison with which he is intoxicated. He says nothing; questions pass unheeded; he sees
only Sophy, he hears only Sophy; if she says a word, he opens his mouth; if her eyes are cast down, so
are his; if he sees her sigh, he sighs too; it is Sophy's heart which seems to speak in his. What a change
have these few moments wrought in her heart! It is no longer her turn to tremble, it is Emile's. Farewell
liberty, simplicity, frankness. Confused, embarrassed, fearful, he dare not look about him for fear he
should see that we are watching him. Ashamed that we should read his secret, he would fain become
invisible to every one, that he might feed in secret on the sight of Sophy. Sophy, on the other hand,
regains her confidence at the sight of Emile's fear; she sees her triumph and rejoices in it.
  "No'l mostra gia, ben che in suo cor ne rida." Tasso, Jerus. Del., c. iv. v. 33.
  Her expression remains unchanged; but in spite of her modest look and downcast eyes, her tender
heart is throbbing with joy, and it tells her that she has found Telemachus.
  If I relate the plain and simple tale of their innocent affections you will accuse me of frivolity, but
you will be mistaken. Sufficient attention is not given to the effect which the first connection between
man and woman is bound to produce on the future life of both. People do not see that a first impression
so vivid as that of love, or the liking which takes the place of love, produces lasting effects whose
influence continues till death. Works on education are crammed with wordy and unnecessary accounts
of the imaginary duties of children; but there is not a word about the most important and most difficult
part of their education, the crisis which forms the bridge between the child and the man. If any part of
this work is really useful, it will be because I have dwelt at great length on this matter, so essential in
itself and so neglected by other authors, and because I have not allowed myself to be discouraged either
by false delicacy or by the difficulties of expression. The story of human nature is a fair romance. Am I
to blame if it is not found elsewhere? I am trying to write the history of mankind. If my book is a
romance, the fault lies with those who deprave mankind.
  This is supported by another reason; we are not dealing with a youth given over from childhood to
fear, greed, envy, pride, and all those passions which are the common tools of the schoolmaster; we
have to do with a youth who is not only in love for the first time, but with one who is also experiencing
his first passion of any kind; very likely it will be the only strong passion he will ever know, and upon
it depends the final formation of his character. His mode of thought, his feelings, his tastes, determined
by a lasting passion, are about to become so fixed that they will be incapable of further change.
  You will easily understand that Emile and I do not spend the whole of the night which follows after
such an evening in sleep. Why! Do you mean to tell me that a wise man should be so much affected by
a mere coincidence of name! Is there only one Sophy in the world? Are they all alike in heart and in
name? Is every Sophy he meets his Sophy? Is he mad to fall in love with a person of whom he knows
so little, with whom he has scarcely exchanged a couple of words? Wait, young man; examine, observe.
You do not even know who our hosts may be, and to hear you talk one would think the house was your
own.
  This is no time for teaching, and what I say will receive scant attention. It only serves to stimulate
Emile to further interest in Sophy, through his desire to find reasons for his fancy. The unexpectedcoincidence in the name, the meeting which, so far as he knows, was quite accidental, my very caution
itself, only serve as fuel to the fire. He is so convinced already of Sophy's excellence, that he feels sure
he can make me fond of her.
  Next morning I have no doubt Emile will make himself as smart as his old travelling suit permits. I
am not mistaken; but I am amused to see how eager he is to wear the clean linen put out for us. I know
his thoughts, and I am delighted to see that he is trying to establish a means of intercourse, through the
return and exchange of the linen; so that he may have a right to return it and so pay another visit to the
house.
I expected to find Sophy rather more carefully dressed too; but I was mistaken. Such common
coquetry is all very well for those who merely desire to please. The coquetry of true love is a more
delicate matter; it has quite another end in view. Sophy is dressed, if possible, more simply than last
night,  though  as  usual  her  frock  is  exquisitely  clean.  The  only  sign  of  coquetry  is  her  self-
consciousness. She knows that an elaborate toilet is a sign of love, but she does not know that a careless
toilet is another of its signs; it shows a desire to be like not merely for one's clothes but for oneself.
What does a lover care for her clothes if he knows she is thinking of him? Sophy is already sure of her
power over Emile, and she is not content to delight his eyes if his heart is not hers also; he must not
only perceive her charms, he must divine them; has he not seen enough to guess the rest?
  We may take it for granted that while Emile and I were talking last night, Sophy and her mother
were  not  silent;  a  confession  was  made  and  instructions  given.  The  morning's  meeting  is  not
unprepared. Twelve hours ago our young people had never met; they have never said a word to each
other; but it is clear that there is already an understanding between them. Their greeting is formal,
confused, timid; they say nothing, their downcast eyes seem to avoid each other, but that is in itself a
sign  that  they  understand,  they  avoid  each  other  with  one  consent;  they  already  feel  the  need  of
concealment, though not a word has been uttered. When we depart we ask leave to come again to return
the borrowed clothes in person, Emile's words are addressed to the father and mother, but his eyes seek
Sophy's, and his looks are more eloquent than his words. Sophy says nothing by word or gesture; she
seems deaf and blind, but she blushes, and that blush is an answer even plainer than that of her parents.
  We receive permission to come again, though we are not invited to stay. This is only fitting; you
offer shelter to benighted travellers, but a lover does not sleep in the house of his mistress.
  We  have  hardly  left  the  beloved  abode  before  Emile  is  thinking  of  taking  rooms  in  the
neighbourhood; the nearest cottage seems too far; he would like to sleep in the next ditch. "You young
fool!" I said in a tone of pity, "are you already blinded by passion? Have you no regard for manners or
for reason? Wretched youth, you call yourself a lover and you would bring disgrace upon her you love!
What would people say of her if they knew that a young man who has been staying at her house was
sleeping close by? You say you love her! Would you ruin her reputation? Is that the price you offer for
her parents' hospitality? Would you bring disgrace on her who will one day make you the happiest of
men?"  "Why  should  we  trouble  ourselves  about  the  empty  words  and  unjust  suspicions  of  other
people?" said he eagerly. "Have you not taught me yourself to make light of them? Who knows better
than I how greatly I honour Sophy, what respect I desire to show her? My attachment will not cause her
shame, it will be her glory, it shall be worthy of her. If my heart and my actions continually give her the
homage she deserves, what harm can I do her?" "Dear Emile," I said, as I clasped him to my heart, "you
are thinking of yourself alone; learn to think for her too. Do not compare the honour of one sex with
that of the other, they rest on different foundations. These foundations are equally firm and right,
because they are both laid by nature, and that same virtue which makes you scorn what men say about
yourself, binds you to respect what they say of her you love. Your honour is in your own keeping, her
honour depends on others. To neglect it is to wound your own honour, and you fail in what is due to
yourself if you do not give her the respect she deserves."
  Then while I explain the reasons for this difference, I make him realise how wrong it would be to
pay no attention to it. Who can say if he will really be Sophy's husband? He does not know how she
feels towards him; her own heart or her parents' will may already have formed other engagements; heknows nothing of her, perhaps there are none of those grounds of suitability which make a happy
marriage. Is he not aware that the least breath of scandal with regard to a young girl is an indelible
stain, which not even marriage with him who has caused the scandal can efface? What man of feeling
would ruin the woman he loves? What man of honour would desire that a miserable woman should for
ever lament the misfortune of having found favour in his eyes?
  Always prone to extremes, the youth takes alarm at the consequences which I have compelled him
to consider, and now he thinks that he cannot be too far from Sophy's home; he hastens his steps to get
further from it; he glances round to make sure that no one is listening; he would sacrifice his own
happiness a thousand times to the honour of her whom he loves; he would rather never see her again
than cause her the least unpleasantness. This is the first result of the pains I have taken ever since he
was a child to make him capable of affection.
  We must therefore seek a lodging at a distance, but not too far. We look about us, we make
inquiries; we find that there is a town at least two leagues away. We try and find lodgings in this town,
rather than in the nearer villages, where our presence might give rise to suspicion. It is there that the
new lover takes up his abode, full of love, hope, joy, above all full of right feeling. In this way, I guide
his rising passion towards all that is honourable and good, so that his inclinations unconsciously follow
the same bent.
  My course is drawing to a close; the end is in view. All the chief difficulties are vanquished, the
chief obstacles overcome; the hardest thing left to do is to refrain from spoiling my work by undue
haste to complete it. Amid the uncertainty of human life, let us shun that false prudence which seeks to
sacrifice the present to the future; what is, is too often sacrificed to what will never be. Let us make
man  happy  at  every  age  lest  in  spite  of  our  care  he  should  die  without  knowing  the  meaning  of
happiness. Now if there is a time to enjoy life, it is undoubtedly the close of adolescence, when the
powers of mind and body have reached their greatest strength, and when man in the midst of his course
is furthest from those two extremes which tell him "Life is short." If the imprudence of youth deceives
itself it is not in its desire for enjoyment, but because it seeks enjoyment where it is not to be found, and
lays up misery for the future, while unable to enjoy the present.
  Consider my Emile over twenty years of age, well formed, well developed in mind and body,
strong, healthy, active, skilful, robust, full of sense, reason, kindness, humanity, possessed of good
morals and good taste, loving what is beautiful, doing what is good, free from the sway of fierce
passions, released from the tyranny of popular prejudices, but subject to the law of wisdom, and easily
guided by the voice of a friend; gifted with so many useful and pleasant accomplishments, caring little
for wealth, able to earn a living with his own hands, and not afraid of want, whatever may come.
Behold him in the intoxication of a growing passion; his heart opens to the first beams of love; its
pleasant fancies reveal to him a whole world of new delights and enjoyments; he loves a sweet woman,
whose character is even more delightful than her person; he hopes, he expects the reward which he
deserves.
  Their  first  attachment  took  its  rise  in  mutual  affection,  in  community  of  honourable  feelings;
therefore this affection is lasting. It abandons itself, with confidence, with reason, to the most delightful
madness, without fear, regret, remorse, or any other disturbing thought, but that which is inseparable
from all happiness. What lacks there yet? Behold, inquire, imagine what still is lacking, that can be
combined  with  present  joys.  Every  happiness  which  can  exist  in  combination  is  already  present;
nothing could be added without taking away from what there is; he is as happy as man can be. Shall I
choose this time to cut short so sweet a period? Shall I disturb such pure enjoyment? The happiness he
enjoys is my life's reward. What could I give that could outweigh what I should take away? Even if I
set the crown to his happiness I should destroy its greatest charm. That supreme joy is a hundredfold
greater in anticipation than in possession; its savour is greater while we wait for it than when it is ours.
O worthy Emile! love and be loved! prolong your enjoyment before it is yours; rejoice in your love and
in your innocence, find your paradise upon earth, while you await your heaven. I shall not cut short this
happy period of life. I will draw out its enchantments, I will prolong them as far as possible. Alas! itmust come to an end and that soon; but it shall at least linger in your memory, and you will never
repent of its joys.
  Emile has not forgotten that we have something to return. As soon as the things are ready, we take
horse and set off at a great pace, for on this occasion he is anxious to get there. When the heart opens
the door to passion, it becomes conscious of the slow flight of time. If my time has not been wasted he
will not spend his life like this.
  Unluckily the road is intricate and the country difficult. We lose our way; he is the first to notice it,
and without losing his temper, and without grumbling, he devotes his whole attention to discovering the
path; he wanders for a long time before he knows where he is and always with the same self-control.
You think nothing of that; but I think it a matter of great importance, for I know how eager he is; I see
the results of the care I have taken from his infancy to harden him to endure the blows of necessity.
  We  are  there  at  last!  Our  reception  is  much  simpler  and  more  friendly  than  on  the  previous
occasion; we are already old acquaintances. Emile and Sophy bow shyly and say nothing; what can
they say in our presence? What they wish to say requires no spectators. We walk in the garden; a well-
kept kitchen-garden takes the place of flower-beds, the park is an orchard full of fine tall fruit trees of
every kind, divided by pretty streams and borders full of flowers. "What a lovely place!" exclaims
Emile, still thinking of his Homer, and still full of enthusiasm, "I could fancy myself in the garden of
Alcinous." The daughter wishes she knew who Alcinous was; her mother asks. "Alcinous," I tell them,
"was a king of Coreyra. Homer describes his garden and the critics think it too simple and unadorned.
[Footnote: "'When you leave the palace you enter a vast garden, four acres in extent, walled in on every
side, planted with tall trees in blossom, and yielding pears, pomegranates, and other goodly fruits, fig-
trees with their luscious burden and green olives. All the year round these fair trees are heavy with fruit;
summer and winter the soft breath of the west wind sways the trees and ripens the fruit. Pears and
apples wither on the branches, the fig on the fig-tree, and the clusters of grapes on the vine. The
inexhaustible stock bears fresh grapes, some are baked, some are spread out on the threshing floor to
dry, others are made into wine, while flowers, sour grapes, and those which are beginning to wither are
left upon the tree. At either end is a square garden filled with flowers which bloom throughout the year,
these gardens are adorned by two fountains, one of these streams waters the garden, the other passes
through the palace and is then taken to a lofty tower in the town to provide drinking water for its
citizens.' Such is the description of the royal garden of Alcinous in the 7th book of the Odyssey, a
garden in which, to the lasting disgrace of that old dreamer Homer and the princes of his day, there
were neither trellises, statues, cascades, nor bowling-greens."] This Alcinous had a charming daughter
who dreamed the night before her father received a stranger at his board that she would soon have a
husband." Sophy, taken unawares, blushed, hung her head, and bit her lips; no one could be more
confused. Her father, who was enjoying her confusion, added that the young princess bent herself to
wash the linen in the river. "Do you think," said he, "she would have scorned to touch the dirty clothes,
saying,  that  they  smelt  of  grease?"  Sophy,  touched  to  the  quick,  forgot  her  natural  timidity  and
defended herself eagerly. Her papa knew very well all the smaller things would have had no other
laundress if she had been allowed to wash them, and she would gladly have done more had she been set
to do it. [Footnote: I own I feel grateful to Sophy's mother for not letting her spoil such pretty hands
with  soap,  hands  which  Emile  will  kiss  so  often.]  Meanwhile  she  watched  me  secretly  with  such
anxiety that I could not suppress a smile, while I read the terrors of her simple heart which urged her to
speak. Her father was cruel enough to continue this foolish sport, by asking her, in jest, why she spoke
on her own behalf and what had she in common with the daughter of Alcinous. Trembling and ashamed
she dared hardly breathe or look at us. Charming girl! This is no time for feigning, you have shown
your true feelings in spite of yourself.
  To all appearance this little scene is soon forgotten; luckily for Sophy, Emile, at least, is unaware of
it. We continue our walk, the young people at first keeping close beside us; but they find it hard to
adapt themselves to our slower pace, and presently they are a little in front of us, they are walking side
by side, they begin to talk, and before long they are a good way ahead. Sophy seems to be listeningquietly, Emile is talking and gesticulating vigorously; they seem to find their conversation interesting.
When we turn homewards a full hour later, we call them to us and they return slowly enough now, and
we can see they are making good use of their time. Their conversation ceases suddenly before they
come within earshot, and they hurry up to us. Emile meets us with a frank affectionate expression; his
eyes are sparkling with joy; yet he looks anxiously at Sophy's mother to see how she takes it. Sophy is
not nearly so much at her ease; as she approaches us she seems covered with confusion at finding
herself tete-a-tete with a young man, though she has met so many other young men frankly enough, and
without being found fault with for it. She runs up to her mother, somewhat out of breath, and makes
some trivial remark, as if to pretend she had been with her for some time.
  From the happy expression of these dear children we see that this conversation has taken a load off
their hearts. They are no less reticent in their intercourse, but their reticence is less embarrassing, it is
only due to Emile's reverence and Sophy's modesty, to the goodness of both. Emile ventures to say a
few words to her, she ventures to reply, but she always looks at her mother before she dares to answer.
The most remarkable change is in her attitude towards me. She shows me the greatest respect, she
watches me with interest, she takes pains to please me; I see that I am honoured with her esteem, and
that she is not indifferent to mine. I understand that Emile has been talking to her about me; you might
say they have been scheming to win me over to their side; yet it is not so, and Sophy herself is not so
easily won. Perhaps Emile will have more need of my influence with her than of hers with me. What a
charming pair! When I consider that the tender love of my young friend has brought my name so
prominently into his first conversation with his lady-love, I enjoy the reward of all my trouble; his
affection is a sufficient recompense.
  Our visit is repeated. There are frequent conversations between the young people. Emile is madly in
love and thinks that his happiness is within his grasp. Yet he does not succeed in winning any formal
avowal from Sophy; she listens to what he says and answers nothing. Emile knows how modest she is,
and is not surprised at her reticence; he feels sure that she likes him; he knows that parents decide
whom their daughters shall marry; he supposes that Sophy is awaiting her parents' commands; he asks
her permission to speak to them, and she makes no objection. He talks to me and I speak on his behalf
and  in  his  presence.  He  is  immensely  surprised  to  hear  that  Sophy  is  her  own  mistress,  that  his
happiness depends on her alone. He begins to be puzzled by her conduct. He is less self-confident, he
takes alarm, he sees that he has not made so much progress as he expected, and then it is that his love
appeals to her in the tenderest and most moving language.
  Emile is not the sort of man to guess what is the matter; if no one told him he would never discover
it as long as he lived, and Sophy is too proud to tell him. What she considers obstacles, others would
call advantages. She has not forgotten her parents' teaching. She is poor; Emile is rich; so much she
knows. He must win her esteem; his deserts must be great indeed to remove this inequality. But how
should he perceive these obstacles? Is Emile aware that he is rich? Has he ever condescended to
inquire? Thank heaven, he has no need of riches, he can do good without their aid. The good he does
comes from his heart, not his purse. He gives the wretched his time, his care, his affection, himself; and
when he reckons up what he has done, he hardly dares to mention the money spent on the poor.
  As he does not know what to make of his disgrace, he thinks it is his own fault; for who would
venture  to  accuse  the  adored  one  of  caprice.  The  shame  of  humiliation  adds  to  the  pangs  of
disappointed love. He no longer approaches Sophy with that pleasant confidence of his own worth; he
is shy and timid in her presence. He no longer hopes to win her affections, but to gain her pity.
Sometimes he loses patience and is almost angry with her. Sophy seems to guess his angry feelings and
she looks at him. Her glance is enough to disarm and terrify him; he is more submissive than he used to
be.
  Disturbed by this stubborn resistance, this invincible silence, he pours out his heart to his friend. He
shares with him the pangs of a heart devoured by sorrow; he implores his help and counsel. "How
mysterious it is, how hard to understand! She takes an interest in me, that I am sure; far from avoiding
me she is pleased to see me; when I come she shows signs of pleasure, when I go she shows regret; shereceives my attentions kindly, my services seem to give her pleasure, she condescends to give me her
advice and even her commands. Yet she rejects my requests and my prayers. When I venture to speak
of marriage, she bids me be silent; if I say a word, she leaves me at once. Why on earth should she wish
me to be hers but refuse to be mine? She respects and loves you, and she will not dare to refuse to listen
to you. Speak to her, make her answer. Come to your friend's help, and put the coping stone to all you
have done for him; do not let him fall a victim to your care! If you fail to secure his happiness, your
own teaching will have been the cause of his misery."
I speak to Sophy, and have no difficulty in getting her to confide her secret to me, a secret which
was known to me already. It is not so easy to get permission to tell Emile; but at last she gives me leave
and  I  tell  him  what  is  the  matter.  He  cannot  get  over  his  surprise  at  this  explanation.  He  cannot
understand this delicacy; he cannot see how a few pounds more or less can affect his character or his
deserts. When I get him to see their effect on people's prejudices he begins to laugh; he is so wild with
delight that he wants to be off at once to tear up his title deeds and renounce his money, so as to have
the honour of being as poor as Sophy, and to return worthy to be her husband.
  "Why," said I, trying to check him, and laughing in my turn at his impetuosity, "will this young
head never grow any older? Having dabbled all your life in philosophy, will you never learn to reason?
Do not you see that your wild scheme would only make things worse, and Sophy more obstinate? It is a
small  superiority  to  be  rather  richer  than  she,  but  to  give  up  all  for  her  would  be  a  very  great
superiority; if her pride cannot bear to be under the small obligation, how will she make up her mind to
the greater? If she cannot bear to think that her husband might taunt her with the fact that he has
enriched her, would she permit him to blame her for having brought him to poverty? Wretched boy,
beware lest she suspects you of such a plan! On the contrary, be careful and economical for her sake,
lest she should accuse you of trying to gain her by cunning, by sacrificing of your own free will what
you are really wasting through carelessness.
  "Do you really think that she is afraid of wealth, and that she is opposed to great possessions in
themselves? No, dear Emile; there are more serious and substantial grounds for her opinion, in the
effect produced by wealth on its possessor. She knows that those who are possessed of fortune's gifts
are apt to place them first. The rich always put wealth before merit. When services are reckoned against
silver, the latter always outweighs the former, and those who have spent their life in their master's
service are considered his debtors for the very bread they eat. What must you do, Emile, to calm her
fears? Let her get to know you better; that is not done in a day. Show her the treasures of your heart, to
counterbalance  the  wealth  which  is  unfortunately  yours.  Time  and  constancy  will  overcome  her
resistance; let your great and noble feelings make her forget your wealth. Love her, serve her, serve her
worthy parents. Convince her that these attentions are not the result of a foolish fleeting passion, but of
settled principles engraved upon your heart. Show them the honour deserved by worth when exposed to
the buffets of Fortune; that is the only way to reconcile it with that worth which basks in her smiles."
  The transports of joy experienced by the young man at these words may easily be imagined; they
restore confidence and hope, his good heart rejoices to do something to please Sophy, which he would
have done if there had been no such person, or if he had not been in love with her. However little his
character has been understood, anybody can see how he would behave under such circumstances.
  Here am I, the confidant of these two young people and the mediator of their affection. What a fine
task for a tutor! So fine that never in all my life have I stood so high in my own eyes, nor felt so pleased
with myself. Moreover, this duty is not without its charms. I am not unwelcome in the home; it is my
business to see that the lovers behave themselves; Emile, ever afraid of offending me, was never so
docile. The little lady herself overwhelms me with a kindness which does not deceive me, and of which
I only take my proper share. This is her way of making up for her severity towards Emile. For his sake
she bestows on me a hundred tender caresses, though she would die rather than bestow them on him;
and he, knowing that I would never stand in his way, is delighted that I should get on so well with her.
If she refuses his arm when we are out walking, he consoles himself with the thought that she has taken
mine. He makes way for me without a murmur, be clasps my hand, and voice and look alike whisper,"My friend, plead for me!" and his eyes follow us with interest; he tries to read our feelings in our
faces,  and  to  interpret  our  conversation  by  our  gestures;  he  knows  that  everything  we  are  saying
concerns him. Dear Sophy, how frank and easy you are when you can talk to Mentor without being
overheard by Telemachus. How freely and delightfully you permit him to read what is passing in your
tender little heart! How delighted you are to show him how you esteem his pupil! How cunningly and
appealingly you allow him to divine still tenderer sentiments. With what a pretence of anger you
dismiss Emile when his impatience leads him to interrupt you? With what pretty vexation you reproach
his indiscretion when he comes and prevents you saying something to his credit, or listening to what I
say about him, or finding in my words some new excuse to love him!
  Having got so far as to be tolerated as an acknowledged lover, Emile takes full advantage of his
position; he speaks, he urges, he implores, he demands. Hard words or ill treatment make no difference,
provided he gets a hearing. At length Sophy is persuaded, though with some difficulty, to assume the
authority of a betrothed, to decide what he shall do, to command instead of to ask, to accept instead of
to thank, to control the frequency and the hours of his visits, to forbid him to come till such a day or to
stay beyond such an hour. This is not done in play, but in earnest, and if it was hard to induce her to
accept these rights, she uses them so sternly that Emile is often ready to regret that he gave them to her.
But whatever her commands, they are obeyed without question, and often when at her bidding he is
about to leave her, he glances at me his eyes full of delight, as if to say, "You see she has taken
possession of me." Yet unknown to him, Sophy, with all her pride, is observing him closely, and she is
smiling to herself at the pride of her slave.
  Oh that I had the brush of an Alban or a Raphael to paint their bliss, or the pen of the divine Milton
to describe the pleasures of love and innocence! Not so; let such hollow arts shrink back before the
sacred truth of nature. In tenderness and pureness of heart let your imagination freely trace the raptures
of these young lovers, who under the eyes of parents and tutor, abandon themselves to their blissful
illusions; in the intoxication of passion they are advancing step by step to its consummation; with
flowers and garlands they are weaving the bonds which are to bind them till death do part. I am carried
away by this succession of pictures, I am so happy that I cannot group them in any sort of order or
scheme; any one with a heart in his breast can paint the charming picture for himself and realise the
different experiences of father, mother, daughter, tutor, and pupil, and the part played by each and all in
the union of the most delightful couple whom love and virtue have ever led to happiness.
  Now that he is really eager to please, Emile begins to feel the value of the accomplishments he has
acquired. Sophy is fond of singing, he sings with her; he does more, he teaches her music. She is lively
and  light  of  foot,  she  loves  skipping;  he  dances  with  her,  he  perfects  and  develops  her  untrained
movements  into  the  steps  of  the  dance.  These  lessons,  enlivened  by  the  gayest  mirth,  are  quite
delightful, they melt the timid respect of love; a lover may enjoy teaching his betrothed--he has a right
to be her teacher.
  There is an old spinet quite out of order. Emile mends and tunes it; he is a maker and mender of
musical instruments as well as a carpenter; it has always been his rule to learn to do everything he can
for himself. The house is picturesquely situated and he makes several sketches of it, in some of which
Sophy does her share, and she hangs them in her father's study. The frames are not gilded, nor do they
require gilding. When she sees Emile drawing, she draws too, and improves her own drawing; she
cultivates all her talents, and her grace gives a charm to all she does. Her father and mother recall the
days of their wealth, when they find themselves surrounded by the works of art which alone gave value
to wealth; the whole house is adorned by love; love alone has enthroned among them, without cost or
effort, the very same pleasures which were gathered together in former days by dint of toil and money.
  As the idolater gives what he loves best to the shrine of the object of his worship, so the lover is not
content to see perfection in his mistress, he must be ever trying to add to her adornment. She does not
need it for his pleasure, it is he who needs the pleasure of giving, it is a fresh homage to be rendered to
her, a fresh pleasure in the joy of beholding her. Everything of beauty seems to find its place only as an
accessory to the supreme beauty. It is both touching and amusing to see Emile eager to teach Sophyeverything he knows, without asking whether she wants to learn it or whether it is suitable for her. He
talks about all sorts of things and explains them to her with boyish eagerness; he thinks he has only to
speak  and  she  will  understand;  he  looks  forward  to  arguing,  and  discussing  philosophy  with  her;
everything he cannot display before her is so much useless learning; he is quite ashamed of knowing
more than she.
  So he gives her lessons in philosophy, physics, mathematics, history, and everything else. Sophy is
delighted to share his enthusiasm and to try and profit by it. How pleased Emile is when he can get
leave to give these lessons on his knees before her! He thinks the heavens are open. Yet this position,
more trying to pupil than to teacher, is hardly favourable to study. It is not easy to know where to look,
to avoid meeting the eyes which follow our own, and if they meet so much the worse for the lesson.
  Women are no strangers to the art of thinking, but they should only skim the surface of logic and
metaphysics. Sophy understands readily, but she soon forgets. She makes most progress in the moral
sciences and aesthetics; as to physical science she retains some vague idea of the general laws and order
of this world. Sometimes in the course of their walks, the spectacle of the wonders of nature bids them
not fear to raise their pure and innocent hearts to nature's God; they are not afraid of His presence, and
they pour out their hearts before him.
  What! Two young lovers spending their time together talking of religion! Have they nothing better
to do than to say their catechism! What profit is there in the attempt to degrade what is noble? Yes, no
doubt they are saying their catechism in their delightful land of romance; they are perfect in each
other's eyes; they love one another, they talk eagerly of all that makes virtue worth having. Their
sacrifices to virtue make her all the dearer to them. Their struggles after self-control draw from them
tears purer than the dew of heaven, and these sweet tears are the joy of life; no human heart has ever
experienced a sweeter intoxication. Their very renunciation adds to their happiness, and their sacrifices
increase their self-respect. Sensual men, bodies without souls, some day they will know your pleasures,
and all their life long they will recall with regret the happy days when they refused the cup of pleasure.
  In spite of this good understanding, differences and even quarrels occur from time to time; the lady
has her whims, the lover has a hot temper; but these passing showers are soon over and only serve to
strengthen their union. Emile learns by experience not to attach too much importance to them, he
always gains more by the reconciliation than he lost by the quarrel. The results of the first difference
made him expect a like result from all; he was mistaken, but even if he does not make any appreciable
step forward, he has always the satisfaction of finding Sophy's genuine concern for his affection more
firmly established. "What advantage is this to him?" you would ask. I will gladly tell you; all the more
gladly because it will give me an opportunity to establish clearly a very important principle, and to
combat a very deadly one.
  Emile is in love, but he is not presuming; and you will easily understand that the dignified Sophy is
not the sort of girl to allow any kind of familiarity. Yet virtue has its bounds like everything else, and
she is rather to be blamed for her severity than for indulgence; even her father himself is sometimes
afraid lest her lofty pride should degenerate into a haughty spirit. When most alone, Emile dare not ask
for the slightest favour, he must not even seem to desire it; and if she is gracious enough to take his arm
when they are out walking, a favour which she will never permit him to claim as a right, it is only
occasionally that he dare venture with a sigh to press her hand to his heart. However, after a long period
of self-restraint, he ventured secretly to kiss the hem of her dress, and several times he was lucky
enough to find her willing at least to pretend she was not aware of it. One day he attempts to take the
same privilege rather more openly, and Sophy takes it into her head to be greatly offended. He persists,
she gets angry and speaks sharply to him; Emile will not put up with this without reply; the rest of the
day is given over to sulks, and they part in a very ill temper.
  Sophy is ill at ease; her mother is her confidant in all things, how can she keep this from her? It is
their first misunderstanding, and the misunderstanding of an hour is such a serious business. She is
sorry for what she has done, she has her mother's permission and her father's commands to make
reparation.  The next day Emile returns somewhat earlier than usual and in a state of some anxiety. Sophy is in
her  mother's  dressing-room  and  her  father  is  also  present.  Emile  enters  respectfully  but  gloomily.
Scarcely have her parents greeted him than Sophy turns round and holding out her hand asks him in an
affectionate tone how he is. That pretty hand is clearly held out to be kissed; he takes it but does not
kiss it. Sophy, rather ashamed of herself, withdraws her hand as best she may. Emile, who is not used to
a woman's whims, and does not know how far caprice may be carried, does not forget so easily or make
friends again all at once. Sophy's father, seeing her confusion, completes her discomfiture by his jokes.
The poor girl, confused and ashamed, does not know what to do with herself and would gladly have a
good cry. The more she tries to control herself the worse she feels; at last a tear escapes in spite of all
she can do to prevent it. Emile, seeing this tear, rushes towards her, falls on his knees, takes her hand
and kisses it again and again with the greatest devotion. "My word, you are too kind to her," says her
father, laughing; "if I were you, I should deal more severely with these follies, I should punish the
mouth that wronged me." Emboldened by these words, Emile turns a suppliant eye towards her mother,
and thinking she is not unwilling, he tremblingly approaches Sophy's face; she turns away her head, and
to save her mouth she exposes a blushing cheek. The daring young man is not content with this; there is
no great resistance. What a kiss, if it were not taken under her mother's eyes. Have a care, Sophy, in
your severity; he will be ready enough to try to kiss your dress if only you will sometimes say "No."
  After this exemplary punishment, Sophy's father goes about his business, and her mother makes
some excuse for sending her out of the room; then she speaks to Emile very seriously. "Sir," she says,
"I think a young man so well born and well bred as yourself, a man of feeling and character, would
never reward with dishonour the confidence reposed in him by the friendship of this family. I am
neither  prudish  nor  over  strict;  I  know  how  to  make  excuses  for  youthful  folly,  and  what  I  have
permitted in my own presence is sufficient proof of this. Consult your friend as to your own duty, he
will  tell  you  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  the  playful  kisses  sanctioned  by  the
presence of father and mother, and the same freedom taken in their absence and in betrayal of their
confidence, a freedom which makes a snare of the very favours which in the parents' presence were
wholly innocent. He will tell you, sir, that my daughter is only to blame for not having perceived from
the first what she ought never to have permitted; he will tell you that every favour, taken as such, is a
favour, and that it is unworthy of a man of honour to take advantage of a young girl's innocence, to
usurp in private the same freedom which she may permit in the presence of others. For good manners
teach us what is permitted in public; but we do not know what a man will permit to himself in private,
if he makes himself the sole judge of his conduct."
  After this well-deserved rebuke, addressed rather to me than to my pupil, the good mother leaves
us, and I am amazed by her rare prudence, in thinking it a little thing that Emile should kiss her
daughter's lips in her presence, while fearing lest he should venture to kiss her dress when they are
alone. When I consider the folly of worldly maxims, whereby real purity is continually sacrificed to a
show of propriety, I understand why speech becomes more refined while the heart becomes more
corrupt, and why etiquette is stricter while those who conform to it are most immoral.
  While I am trying to convince Emile's heart with regard to these duties which I ought to have
instilled into him sooner, a new idea occurs to me, an idea which perhaps does Sophy all the more
credit,  though  I  shall  take  care  not  to  tell  her  lover;  this  so-called  pride,  for  which  she  has  been
censured,  is  clearly  only  a  very  wise  precaution  to  protect  her  from  herself.  Being  aware  that,
unfortunately, her own temperament is inflammable, she dreads the least spark, and keeps out of reach
so far as she can. Her sternness is due not to pride but to humility. She assumes a control over Emile
because  she  doubts  her  control  of  herself;  she  turns  the  one  against  the  other.  If  she  had  more
confidence in herself she would be much less haughty. With this exception is there anywhere on earth a
gentler, sweeter girl? Is there any who endures an affront with greater patience, any who is more afraid
of annoying others? Is there any with less pretension, except in the matter of virtue? Moreover, she is
not proud of her virtue, she is only proud in order to preserve her virtue, and if she can follow the
guidance of her heart without danger, she caresses her lover himself. But her wise mother does notconfide all this even to her father; men should not hear everything.
  Far from seeming proud of her conquest, Sophy has grown more friendly and less exacting towards
everybody, except perhaps the one person who has wrought this change. Her noble heart no longer
swells with the feeling of independence. She triumphs modestly over a victory gained at the price of her
freedom. Her bearing is more restrained, her speech more timid, since she has begun to blush at the
word "lover"; but contentment may be seen beneath her outward confusion and this very shame is not
painful. This change is most noticeable in her behaviour towards the young men she meets. Now that
she has ceased to be afraid of them, much of her extreme reserve has disappeared. Now that her choice
is made, she does not hesitate to be gracious to those to whom she is quite indifferent; taking no more
interest in them, she is less difficult to please, and she always finds them pleasant enough for people
who are of no importance to her.
  If true love were capable of coquetry, I should fancy I saw traces of it in the way Sophy behaves
towards other young men in her lover's presence. One would say that not content with the ardent
passion she inspires by a mixture of shyness and caresses, she is not sorry to rouse this passion by a
little  anxiety;  one  would  say  that  when  she  is  purposely  amusing  her  young  guests  she  means  to
torment Emile by the charms of a freedom she will not allow herself with him; but Sophy is too
considerate, too kindly, too wise to really torment him. Love and honour take the place of prudence and
control the use of this dangerous weapon. She can alarm and reassure him just as he needs it; and if she
sometimes makes him uneasy she never really gives him pain. The anxiety she causes to her beloved
may be forgiven because of her fear that he is not sufficiently her own.
  But what effect will this little performance have upon Emile? Will he be jealous or not? That is
what we must discover; for such digressions form part of the purpose of my book, and they do not lead
me far from my main subject.
I have already shown how this passion of jealousy in matters of convention finds its way into the
heart of man. In love it is another matter; then jealousy is so near akin to nature, that it is hard to
believe that it is not her work; and the example of the very beasts, many of whom are madly jealous,
seems to prove this point beyond reply. Is it man's influence that has taught cooks to tear each other to
pieces or bulls to fight to the death?
  No one can deny that the aversion to everything which may disturb or interfere with our pleasures is
a natural impulse. Up to a certain point the desire for the exclusive possession of that which ministers to
our pleasure is in the same case. But when this desire has become a passion, when it is transformed into
madness, or into a bitter and suspicious fancy known as jealousy, that is quite another matter; such a
passion may be natural or it may not; we must distinguish between these different cases.
I have already analysed the example of the animal world in my Discourse on Inequality, and on
further consideration I think I may refer my readers to that analysis as sufficiently thorough. I will only
add this further point to those already made in that work, that the jealousy which springs from nature
depends greatly on sexual power, and that when sexual power is or appears to be boundless, that
jealousy is at its height; for then the male, measuring his rights by his needs, can never see another male
except as an unwelcome rival. In such species the females always submit to the first comer, they only
belong to the male by right of conquest, and they are the cause of unending strife.
  Among the monogamous species, where intercourse seems to give rise to some sort of moral bond,
a kind of marriage, the female who belongs by choice to the male on whom she has bestowed herself
usually denies herself to all others; and the male, having this preference of affection as a pledge of her
fidelity, is less uneasy at the sight of other males and lives more peaceably with them. Among these
species the male shares the care of the little ones; and by one of those touching laws of nature it seems
as if the female rewards the father for his love for his children.
  Now consider the human species in its primitive simplicity; it is easy to see, from the limited
powers of the male, and the moderation of his desires, that nature meant him to be content with one
female; this is confirmed by the numerical equality of the two sexes, at any rate in our part of the world;
an equality which does not exist in anything like the same degree among those species in which severalfemales are collected around one male. Though a man does not brood like a pigeon, and though he has
no milk to suckle the young, and must in this respect be classed with the quadrupeds, his children are
feeble and helpless for so long a time, that mother and children could ill dispense with the father's
affection, and the care which results from it.
  All these observations combine to prove that the jealous fury of the males of certain animals proves
nothing with regard to man; and the exceptional case of those southern regions were polygamy is the
established custom, only confirms the rule, since it is the plurality of wives that gives rise to the
tyrannical precautions of the husband, and the consciousness of his own weakness makes the man
resort to constraint to evade the laws of nature.
  Among ourselves where these same laws are less frequently evaded in this respect, but are more
frequently  evaded  in  another  and  even  more  detestable  manner,  jealousy  finds  its  motives  in  the
passions of society rather than in those of primitive instinct. In most irregular connections the hatred of
the lover for his rivals far exceeds his love for his mistress; if he fears a rival in her affections it is the
effect of that self-love whose origin I have already traced out, and he is moved by vanity rather than
affection. Moreover, our clumsy systems of education have made women so deceitful, [Footnote: The
kind of deceit referred to here is just the opposite of that deceit becoming in a woman, and taught her
by nature; the latter consists in concealing her real feelings, the former in feigning what she does not
feel. Every society lady spends her life in boasting of her supposed sensibility, when in reality she cares
for no one but herself.] and have so over-stimulated their appetites, that you cannot rely even on the
most clearly proved affection; they can no longer display a preference which secures you against the
fear of a rival.
  True love is another matter. I have shown, in the work already referred to, that this sentiment is not
so natural as men think, and that there is a great difference between the gentle habit which binds a man
with cords of love to his helpmeet, and the unbridled passion which is intoxicated by the fancied
charms of an object which he no longer sees in its true light. This passion which is full of exclusions
and preferences, only differs from vanity in this respect, that vanity demands all and gives nothing, so
that it is always harmful, while love, bestowing as much as it demands, is in itself a sentiment full of
equity. Moreover, the more exacting it is, the more credulous; that very illusion which gave rise to it,
makes it easy to persuade. If love is suspicious, esteem is trustful; and love will never exist in an honest
heart without esteem, for every one loves in another the qualities which he himself holds in honour.
  When once this is clearly understood, we can predict with confidence the kind of jealousy which
Emile will be capable of experiencing; as there is only the smallest germ of this passion in the human
heart, the form it takes must depend solely upon education: Emile, full of love and jealousy, will not be
angry, sullen, suspicious, but delicate, sensitive, and timid; he will be more alarmed than vexed; he will
think more of securing his lady-love than of threatening his rival; he will treat him as an obstacle to be
removed if possible from his path, rather than as a rival to be hated; if he hates him, it is not because he
presumes to compete with him for Sophy's affection, but because Emile feels that there is a real danger
of losing that affection; he will not be so unjust and foolish as to take offence at the rivalry itself; he
understands that the law of preference rests upon merit only, and that honour depends upon success; he
will  redouble  his  efforts  to  make  himself  acceptable,  and  he  will  probably  succeed.  His  generous
Sophy, though she has given alarm to his love, is well able to allay that fear, to atone for it; and the
rivals who were only suffered to put him to the proof are speedily dismissed.
  But whither am I going? O Emile! what art thou now? Is this my pupil? How art thou fallen! Where
is that young man so sternly fashioned, who braved all weathers, who devoted his body to the hardest
tasks and his soul to the laws of wisdom; untouched by prejudice or passion, a lover of truth, swayed by
reason only, unheeding all that was not hers? Living in softness and idleness he now lets himself be
ruled by women; their amusements are the business of his life, their wishes are his laws; a young girl is
the arbiter of his fate, he cringes and grovels before her; the earnest Emile is the plaything of a child.
  So shift the scenes of life; each age is swayed by its own motives, but the man is the same. At ten
his mind was set upon cakes, at twenty it is set upon his mistress; at thirty it will be set upon pleasure;at forty on ambition, at fifty on avarice; when will he seek after wisdom only? Happy is he who is
compelled to follow her against his will! What matter who is the guide, if the end is attained. Heroes
and sages have themselves paid tribute to this human weakness; and those who handled the distaff with
clumsy fingers were none the less great men.
  If you would prolong the influence of a good education through life itself, the good habits acquired
in childhood must be carried forward into adolescence, and when your pupil is what he ought to be you
must manage to keep him what he ought to be. This is the coping-stone of your work. This is why it is
of the first importance that the tutor should remain with young men; otherwise there is little doubt they
will learn to make love without him. The great mistake of tutors and still more of fathers is to think that
one way of living makes another impossible, and that as soon as the child is grown up, you must
abandon everything you used to do when he was little. If that were so, why should we take such pains
in childhood, since the good or bad use we make of it will vanish with childhood itself; if another way
of life were necessarily accompanied by other ways of thinking?
  The stream of memory is only interrupted by great illnesses, and the stream of conduct, by great
passions. Our tastes and inclinations may change, but this change, though it may be sudden enough, is
rendered less abrupt by our habits. The skilful artist, in a good colour scheme, contrives so to mingle
and blend his tints that the transitions are imperceptible; and certain colour washes are spread over the
whole picture so that there may be no sudden breaks. So should it be with our likings. Unbalanced
characters are always changing their affections, their tastes, their sentiments; the only constant factor is
the habit of change; but the man of settled character always returns to his former habits and preserves to
old age the tastes and the pleasures of his childhood.
  If you contrive that young people passing from one stage of life to another do not despise what has
gone before, that when they form new habits, they do not forsake the old, and that they always love to
do what is right, in things new and old; then only are the fruits of your toil secure, and you are sure of
your scholars as long as they live; for the revolution most to be dreaded is that of the age over which
you are now watching. As men always look back to this period with regret so the tastes carried forward
into it from childhood are not easily destroyed; but if once interrupted they are never resumed.
  Most of the habits you think you have instilled into children and young people are not really habits
at all; they have only been acquired under compulsion, and being followed reluctantly they will be cast
off at the first opportunity. However long you remain in prison you never get a taste for prison life; so
aversion is increased rather than diminished by habit. Not so with Emile; as a child he only did what he
could do willingly and with pleasure, and as a man he will do the same, and the force of habit will only
lend its help to the joys of freedom. An active life, bodily labour, exercise, movement, have become so
essential to him that he could not relinquish them without suffering. Reduce him all at once to a soft
and sedentary life and you condemn him to chains and imprisonment, you keep him in a condition of
thraldom and constraint; he would suffer, no doubt, both in health and temper. He can scarcely breathe
in a stuffy room, he requires open air, movement, fatigue. Even at Sophy's feet he cannot help casting a
glance at the country and longing to explore it in her company. Yet he remains if he must; but he is
anxious and ill at ease; he seems to be struggling with himself; he remains because he is a captive.
"Yes," you will say, "these are necessities to which you have subjected him, a yoke which you have
laid upon him." You speak truly, I have subjected him to the yoke of manhood.
  Emile loves Sophy; but what were the charms by which he was first attracted? Sensibility, virtue,
and love for things pure and honest. When he loves this love in Sophy, will he cease to feel it himself?
And what price did she put upon herself? She required all her lover's natural feelings--esteem of what is
really good, frugality, simplicity, generous unselfishness, a scorn of pomp and riches. These virtues
were Emile's before love claimed them of him. Is he really changed? He has all the more reason to be
himself; that is the only difference. The careful reader will not suppose that all the circumstances in
which he is placed are the work of chance. There were many charming girls in the town; is it chance
that his choice is discovered in a distant retreat? Is their meeting the work of chance? Is it chance that
makes them so suited to each other? Is it chance that they cannot live in the same place, that he iscompelled to find a lodging so far from her? Is it chance that he can see her so seldom and must
purchase the pleasure of seeing her at the price of such fatigue? You say he is becoming effeminate.
Not so, he is growing stronger; he must be fairly robust to stand the fatigue he endures on Sophy's
account.
  He lives more than two leagues away. That distance serves to temper the shafts of love. If they lived
next door to each other, or if he could drive to see her in a comfortable carriage, he would love at his
ease in the Paris fashion. Would Leander have braved death for the sake of Hero if the sea had not lain
between them? Need I say more; if my reader is able to take my meaning, he will be able to follow out
my principles in detail.
  The first time we went to see Sophy, we went on horseback, so as to get there more quickly. We
continue this convenient plan until our fifth visit. We were expected; and more than half a league from
the house we see people on the road. Emile watches them, his pulse quickens as he gets nearer, he
recognises Sophy and dismounts quickly; he hastens to join the charming family. Emile is fond of good
horses; his horse is fresh, he feels he is free, and gallops off across the fields; I follow and with some
difficulty I succeed in catching him and bringing him back. Unluckily Sophy is afraid of horses, and I
dare not approach her. Emile has not seen what happened, but Sophy whispers to him that he is giving
his friend a great deal of trouble. He hurries up quite ashamed of himself, takes the horses, and follows
after the party. It is only fair that each should take his turn and he rides on to get rid of our mounts. He
has to leave Sophy behind him, and he no longer thinks riding a convenient mode of travelling. He
returns out of breath and meets us half-way.
  The next time, Emile will not hear of horses. "Why," say I, "we need only take a servant to look
after them." "Shall we put our worthy friends to such expense?" he replies. "You see they would insist
on feeding man and horse." "That is true," I reply; "theirs is the generous hospitality of the poor. The
rich man in his niggardly pride only welcomes his friends, but the poor find room for their friends'
horses." "Let us go on foot," says he; "won't you venture on the walk, when you are always so ready to
share the toilsome pleasures of your child?" "I will gladly go with you," I reply at once, "and it seems to
me that love does not desire so much show."
  As we draw near, we meet the mother and daughter even further from home than on the last
occasion. We have come at a great pace. Emile is very warm; his beloved condescends to pass her
handkerchief over his cheeks. It would take a good many horses to make us ride there after this.
  But it is rather hard never to be able to spend an evening together. Midsummer is long past and the
days are growing shorter. Whatever we say, we are not allowed to return home in the dark, and unless
we make a very early start, we have to go back almost as soon as we get there. The mother is sorry for
us and uneasy on our account, and it occurs to her that, though it would not be proper for us to stay in
the house, beds might be found for us in the village, if we liked to stay there occasionally. Emile claps
his hands at this idea and trembles with joy; Sophy, unwittingly, kisses her mother rather oftener than
usual on the day this idea occurs to her.
  Little by little the charm of friendship and the familiarity of innocence take root and grow among
us.  I  generally  accompany  my  young  friend  on  the  days  appointed  by  Sophy  or  her  mother,  but
sometimes I let him go alone. The heart thrives in the sunshine of confidence, and a man must not be
treated as a child; and what have I accomplished so far, if my pupil is unworthy of my esteem? Now
and then I go without him; he is sorry, but he does not complain; what use would it be? And then he
knows I shall not interfere with his interests. However, whether we go together or separately you will
understand that we are not stopped by the weather; we are only too proud to arrive in a condition which
calls for pity. Unluckily Sophy deprives us of this honour and forbids us to come in bad weather. This
is the only occasion on which she rebels against the rules which I laid down for her in private.
  One day Emile had gone alone and I did not expect him back till the following day, but he returned
the same evening. "My dear Emile," said I, "have you come back to your old friend already?" But
instead of responding to my caresses he replied with some show of temper, "You need not suppose I
came back so soon of my own accord; she insisted on it; it is for her sake not yours that I am here."Touched by his frankness I renewed my caresses, saying, "Truthful heart and faithful friend, do not
conceal from me anything I ought to know. If you came back for her sake, you told me so for my own;
your return is her doing, your frankness is mine. Continue to preserve the noble candour of great souls;
strangers may think what they will, but it is a crime to let our friends think us better than we are."
I take care not to let him underrate the cost of his confession by assuming that there is more love
than generosity in it, and by telling him that he would rather deprive himself of the honour of this
return, than give it to Sophy. But this is how he revealed to me, all unconsciously, what were his real
feelings; if he had returned slowly and comfortably, dreaming of his sweetheart, I should know he was
merely her lover; when he hurried back, even if he was a little out of temper, he was the friend of his
Mentor.
  You see that the young man is very far from spending his days with Sophy, and seeing as much of
her as he wants. One or two visits a week are all that is permitted, and these visits are often only for the
afternoon and are rarely extended to the next day. He spends much more of his time in longing to see
her, or in rejoicing that he has seen her, than he actually spends in her presence. Even when he goes to
see her, more time is spent in going and returning than by her side. His pleasures, genuine, pure,
delicious, but more imaginary than real, serve to kindle his love but not to make him effeminate.
  On the days when he does not see Sophy he is not sitting idle at home. He is Emile himself and
quite unchanged. He usually scours the country round in pursuit of its natural history; he observes and
studies the soil, its products, and their mode of cultivation; he compares the methods he sees with those
with which he is already familiar; he tries to find the reasons for any differences; if he thinks other
methods better than those of the locality, he introduces them to the farmers' notice; if he suggests a
better kind of plough, he has one made from his own drawings; if he finds a lime pit he teaches them
how to use the lime on the land, a process new to them; he often lends a hand himself; they are
surprised to find him handling all manner of tools more easily than they can themselves; his furrows are
deeper and straighter than theirs, he is a more skilful sower, and his beds for early produce are more
cleverly planned. They do not scoff at him as a fine talker, they see he knows what he is talking about.
In a word, his zeal and attention are bestowed on everything that is really useful to everybody; nor does
he stop there. He visits the peasants in their homes; inquires into their circumstances, their families, the
number of their children, the extent of their holdings, the nature of their produce, their markets, their
rights, their burdens, their debts, etc. He gives away very little money, for he knows it is usually ill
spent; but he himself directs the use of his money, and makes it helpful to them without distributing it
among them. He supplies them with labourers, and often pays them for work done by themselves, on
tasks for their own benefit. For one he has the falling thatch repaired or renewed; for another he clears a
piece of land which had gone out of cultivation for lack of means; to another he gives a cow, a horse, or
stock of any kind to replace a loss; two neighbours are ready to go to law, he wins them over, and
makes  them  friends  again;  a  peasant  falls  ill,  he  has  him  cared  for,  he  looks  after  him  himself;
[Footnote: To look after a sick peasant is not merely to give him a pill, or medicine, or to send a
surgeon to him. That is not what these poor folk require in sickness; what they want is more and better
food. When you have fever, you will do well to fast, but when your peasants have it, give them meat
and wine; illness, in their case, is nearly always due to poverty and exhaustion; your cellar will supply
the best draught, your butchers will be the best apothecary.] another is harassed by a rich and powerful
neighbor, he protects him and speaks on his behalf; young people are fond of one another, he helps
forward their marriage; a good woman has lost her beloved child, he goes to see her, he speaks words
of comfort and sits a while with her; he does not despise the poor, he is in no hurry to avoid the
unfortunate; he often takes his dinner with some peasant he is helping, and he will even accept a meal
from those who have no need of his help; though he is the benefactor of some and the friend of all, he is
none the less their equal. In conclusion, he always does as much good by his personal efforts as by his
money.
  Sometimes his steps are turned in the direction of the happy abode; he may hope to see Sophy
without her knowing, to see her out walking without being seen. But Emile is always quite open ineverything he does; he neither can nor would deceive. His delicacy is of that pleasing type in which
pride rests on the foundation of a good conscience. He keeps strictly within bounds, and never comes
near enough to gain from chance what he only desires to win from Sophy herself. On the other hand, he
delights to roam about the neighbourhood, looking for the trace of Sophy's steps, feeling what pains she
has taken and what a distance she has walked to please him.
  The day before his visit, he will go to some neighbouring farm and order a little feast for the
morrow. We shall take our walk in that direction without any special object, we shall turn in apparently
by chance; fruit, cakes, and cream are waiting for us. Sophy likes sweets, so is not insensible to these
attentions, and she is quite ready to do honour to what we have provided; for I always have my share of
the credit even if I have had no part in the trouble; it is a girl's way of returning thanks more easily. Her
father and I have cakes and wine; Emile keeps the ladies company and is always on the look-out to
secure a dish of cream in which Sophy has dipped her spoon.
  The cakes lead me to talk of the races Emile used to run. Every one wants to hear about them; I
explain amid much laughter; they ask him if he can run as well as ever. "Better," says he; "I should be
sorry to forget how to run." One member of the company is dying to see him run, but she dare not say
so; some one else undertakes to suggest it; he agrees and we send for two or three young men of the
neighbourhood; a prize is offered, and in imitation of our earlier games a cake is placed on the goal.
Every one is ready, Sophy's father gives the signal by clapping his hands. The nimble Emile flies like
lightning and reaches the goal almost before the others have started. He receives his prize at Sophy's
hands, and no less generous than Aeneas, he gives gifts to all the vanquished.
  In the midst of his triumph, Sophy dares to challenge the victor, and to assert that she can run as fast
as he. He does not refuse to enter the lists with her, and while she is getting ready to start, while she is
tucking up her skirt at each side, more eager to show Emile a pretty ankle than to vanquish him in the
race, while she is seeing if her petticoats are short enough, he whispers a word to her mother who
smiles and nods approval. Then he takes his place by his competitor; no sooner is the signal given than
she is off like a bird.
  Women were not meant to run; they flee that they may be overtaken. Running is not the only thing
they do ill, but it is the only thing they do awkwardly; their elbows glued to their sides and pointed
backwards look ridiculous, and the high heels on which they are perched make them look like so many
grasshoppers trying to run instead of to jump.
  Emile, supposing that Sophy runs no better than other women, does not deign to stir from his place
and watches her start with a smile of mockery. But Sophy is light of foot and she wears low heels; she
needs no pretence to make her foot look smaller; she runs so quickly that he has only just time to
overtake this new Atalanta when he sees her so far ahead. Then he starts like an eagle dashing upon its
prey; he pursues her, clutches her, grasps her at last quite out of breath, and gently placing his left arm
about her, he lifts her like a feather, and pressing his sweet burden to his heart, he finishes the race,
makes her touch the goal first, and then exclaiming, "Sophy wins!" he sinks on one knee before her and
owns himself beaten.
  Along with such occupations there is also the trade we learnt. One day a week at least, and every
day when the weather is too bad for country pursuits, Emile and I go to work under a master-joiner. We
do not work for show, like people above our trade; we work in earnest like regular workmen. Once
when Sophy's father came to see us, he found us at work, and did not fail to report his wonder to his
wife and daughter. "Go and see that young man in the workshop," said he, "and you will soon see if he
despises the condition of the poor." You may fancy how pleased Sophy was at this! They talk it over,
and they decide to surprise him at his work. They question me, apparently without any special object,
and having made sure of the time, mother and daughter take a little carriage and come to town on that
very day.
  On her arrival, Sophy sees, at the other end of the shop, a young man in his shirt sleeves, with his
hair all untidy, so hard at work that he does not see her; she makes a sign to her mother. Emile, a chisel
in one hand and a hammer in the other, is just finishing a mortise; then he saws a piece of wood andplaces it in the vice in order to polish it. The sight of this does not set Sophy laughing; it affects her
greatly; it wins her respect. Woman, honour your master; he it is who works for you, he it is who gives
you bread to eat; this is he!
  While they are busy watching him, I perceive them and pull Emile by the sleeve; he turns round,
drops his tools, and hastens to them with an exclamation of delight. After he has given way to his first
raptures, he makes them take a seat and he goes back to his work. But Sophy cannot keep quiet; she
gets up hastily, runs about the workshop, looks at the tools, feels the polish of the boards, picks up
shavings, looks at our hands, and says she likes this trade, it is so clean. The merry girl tries to copy
Emile. With her delicate white hand she passes a plane over a bit of wood; the plane slips and makes no
impression. It seems to me that Love himself is hovering over us and beating his wings; I think I can
hear his joyous cries, "Hercules is avenged."
  Yet Sophy's mother questions the master. "Sir, how much do you pay these two men a day?" "I give
them each tenpence a day and their food; but if that young fellow wanted he could earn much more, for
he is the best workman in the country." "Tenpence a day and their food," said she looking at us
tenderly. "That is so, madam," replied the master. At these words she hurries up to Emile, kisses him,
and clasps him to her breast with tears; unable to say more she repeats again and again, "My son, my
son!"
  When they had spent some time chatting with us, but without interrupting our work, "We must be
going now," said the mother to her daughter, "it is getting late and we must not keep your father
waiting." Then approaching Emile she tapped him playfully on the cheek, saying, "Well, my good
workman, won't you come with us?" He replied sadly, "I am at work, ask the master." The master is
asked if he can spare us. He replies that he cannot. "I have work on hand," said he, "which is wanted
the day after to-morrow, so there is not much time. Counting on these gentlemen I refused other
workmen who came; if they fail me I don't know how to replace them and I shall not be able to send the
work home at the time promised." The mother said nothing, she was waiting to hear what Emile would
say. Emile hung his head in silence. "Sir," she said, somewhat surprised at this, "have you nothing to
say to that?" Emile looked tenderly at her daughter and merely said, "You see I am bound to stay."
Then the ladies left us. Emile went with them to the door, gazed after them as long as they were in
sight, and returned to his work without a word.
  On the way home, the mother, somewhat vexed at his conduct, spoke to her daughter of the strange
way in which he had behaved. "Why," said she, "was it so difficult to arrange matters with the master
without being obliged to stay. The young man is generous enough and ready to spend money when
there is no need for it, could not he spend a little on such a fitting occasion?" "Oh, mamma," replied
Sophy, "I trust Emile will never rely so much on money as to use it to break an engagement, to fail to
keep his own word, and to make another break his! I know he could easily give the master a trifle to
make up for the slight inconvenience caused by his absence; but his soul would become the slave of
riches, he would become accustomed to place wealth before duty, and he would think that any duty
might be neglected provided he was ready to pay. That is not Emile's way of thinking, and I hope he
will never change on my account. Do you think it cost him nothing to stay? You are quite wrong,
mamma; it was for my sake that he stayed; I saw it in his eyes."
  It is not that Sophy is indifferent to genuine proofs of love; on the contrary she is imperious and
exacting; she would rather not be loved at all than be loved half-heartedly. Hers is the noble pride of
worth, conscious of its own value, self-respecting and claiming a like honour from others. She would
scorn a heart that did not recognise the full worth of her own; that did not love her for her virtues as
much and more than for her charms; a heart which did not put duty first, and prefer it to everything. She
did not desire a lover who knew no will but hers. She wished to reign over a man whom she had not
spoilt. Thus Circe, having changed into swine the comrades of Ulysses, bestowed herself on him over
whom she had no power.
  Except for this sacred and inviolable right, Sophy is very jealous of her own rights; she observes
how  carefully  Emile  respects  them,  how  zealously  he  does  her  will;  how  cleverly  he  guesses  herwishes, how exactly he arrives at the appointed time; she will have him neither late nor early; he must
arrive to the moment. To come early is to think more of himself than of her; to come late is to neglect
her. To neglect Sophy, that could not happen twice. An unfounded suspicion on her part nearly ruined
everything, but Sophy is really just and knows how to atone for her faults.
  They were expecting us one evening; Emile had received his orders. They came to meet us, but we
were not there. What has become of us? What accident have we met with? No message from us! The
evening is spent in expectation of our arrival. Sophy thinks we are dead; she is miserable and in an
agony  of  distress;  she  cries  all  the  night  through.  In  the  course  of  the  evening  a  messenger  was
despatched to inquire after us and bring back news in the morning. The messenger returns together with
another messenger sent by us, who makes our excuses verbally and says we are quite well. Then the
scene is changed; Sophy dries her tears, or if she still weeps it is for anger. It is small consolation to her
proud spirit to know that we are alive; Emile lives and he has kept her waiting.
  When we arrive she tries to escape to her own room; her parents desire her to remain, so she is
obliged to do so; but deciding at once what course she will take she assumes a calm and contented
expression which would deceive most people. Her father comes forward to receive us saying, "You
have made your friends very uneasy; there are people here who will not forgive you very readily."
"Who are they, papa," said Sophy with the most gracious smile she could assume. "What business is
that of yours," said her father, "if it is not you?" Sophy bent over her work without reply. Her mother
received us coldly and formally. Emile was so confused he dared not speak to Sophy. She spoke first,
inquired how he was, asked him to take a chair, and pretended so cleverly that the poor young fellow,
who  as  yet  knew  nothing  of  the  language  of  angry  passions,  was  quite  deceived  by  her  apparent
indifference, and ready to take offence on his own account.
  To undeceive him I was going to take Sophy's hand and raise it to my lips as I sometimes did; she
drew it back so hastily, with the word, "Sir," uttered in such a strange manner that Emile's eyes were
opened at once by this involuntary movement.
  Sophy herself, seeing that she had betrayed herself, exercised less control over herself. Her apparent
indifference  was  succeeded  by  scornful  irony.  She  replied  to  everything  he  said  in  monosyllables
uttered slowly and hesitatingly as if she were afraid her anger should show itself too plainly. Emile half
dead with terror stared at her full of sorrow, and tried to get her to look at him so that his eyes might
read  in  hers  her  real  feelings.  Sophy,  still  more  angry  at  his  boldness,  gave  him  one  look  which
removed all wish for another. Luckily for himself, Emile, trembling and dumbfounded, dared neither
look at her nor speak to her again; for had he not been guilty, had he been able to endure her wrath, she
would never have forgiven him.
  Seeing that it was my turn now, and that the time was ripe for explanation, I returned to Sophy. I
took her hand and this time she did not snatch it away; she was ready to faint. I said gently, "Dear
Sophy,  we  are  the  victims  of  misfortune;  but  you  are  just  and  reasonable;  you  will  not  judge  us
unheard; listen to what we have to say." She said nothing and I proceeded--
  "We set out yesterday at four o'clock; we were told to be here at seven, and we always allow
ourselves rather more time than we need, so as to rest a little before we get here. We were more than
half way here when we heard lamentable groans, which came from a little valley in the hillside, some
distance off. We hurried towards the place and found an unlucky peasant who had taken rather more
wine than was good for him; on his way home he had fallen heavily from his horse and broken his leg.
We shouted and called for help; there was no answer; we tried to lift the injured man on his horse, but
without success; the least movement caused intense agony. We decided to tie up the horse in a quiet
part of the wood; then we made a chair of our crossed arms and carried the man as gently as possible,
following his directions till we got him home. The way was long, and we were constantly obliged to
stop and rest. At last we got there, but thoroughly exhausted. We were surprised and sorry to find that it
was a house we knew already and that the wretched creature we had carried with such difficulty was
the very man who received us so kindly when first we came. We had all been so upset that until that
moment we had not recognised each other.  "There were only two little children. His wife was about to present him with another, and she was
so overwhelmed at the sight of him brought home in such a condition, that she was taken ill and a few
hours later gave birth to another little one. What was to be done under such circumstances in a lonely
cottage far from any help? Emile decided to fetch the horse we had left in the wood, to ride as fast as he
could into the town and fetch a surgeon. He let the surgeon have the horse, and not succeeding in
finding a nurse all at once, he returned on foot with a servant, after having sent a messenger to you;
meanwhile I hardly knew what to do between a man with a broken leg and a woman in travail, but I got
ready as well as I could such things in the house as I thought would be needed for the relief of both.
  "I will pass over the rest of the details; they are not to the point. It was two o'clock in the morning
before we got a moment's rest. At last we returned before daybreak to our lodging close at hand, where
we waited till you were up to let you know what had happened to us."
  That was all I said. But before any one could speak Emile, approaching Sophy, raised his voice and
said with greater firmness than I expected, "Sophy, my fate is in your hands, as you very well know.
You may condemn me to die of grief; but do not hope to make me forget the rights of humanity; they
are even more sacred in my eyes than your own rights; I will never renounce them for you."
  For all answer, Sophy rose, put her arm round his neck, and kissed him on the cheek; then offering
him her hand with inimitable grace she said to him, "Emile, take this hand; it is yours. When you will,
you shall be my husband and my master; I will try to be worthy of that honour."
  Scarcely had she kissed him, when her delighted father clapped his hands calling, "Encore, encore,"
and Sophy without further ado, kissed him twice on the other cheek; but afraid of what she had done
she took refuge at once in her mother's arms and hid her blushing face on the maternal bosom.
I will not describe our happiness; everybody will feel with us. After dinner Sophy asked if it were
too far to go and see the poor invalids. It was her wish and it was a work of mercy. When we got there
we found them both in bed--Emile had sent for a second bedstead; there were people there to look after
them--Emile had seen to it. But in spite of this everything was so untidy that they suffered almost as
much from discomfort as from their condition. Sophy asked for one of the good wife's aprons and set to
work to make her more comfortable in her bed; then she did as much for the man; her soft and gentle
hand seemed to find out what was hurting them and how to settle them into less painful positions. Her
very presence seemed to make them more comfortable; she seemed to guess what was the matter. This
fastidious girl was not disgusted by the dirt or smells, and she managed to get rid of both without
disturbing the sick people. She who had always appeared so modest and sometimes so disdainful, she
who would not for all the world have touched a man's bed with her little finger, lifted the sick man and
changed his linen without any fuss, and placed him to rest in a more comfortable position. The zeal of
charity is of more value than modesty. What she did was done so skilfully and with such a light touch
that he felt better almost without knowing she had touched him. Husband and wife mingled their
blessings upon the kindly girl who tended, pitied, and consoled them. She was an angel from heaven
come to visit them; she was an angel in face and manner, in gentleness and goodness. Emile was
greatly touched by all this and he watched her without speaking. O man, love thy helpmeet. God gave
her to relieve thy sufferings, to comfort thee in thy troubles. This is she!
  The new-born baby was baptised. The two lovers were its god-parents, and as they held it at the
font they were longing, at the bottom of their hearts, for the time when they should have a child of their
own to be baptised. They longed for their wedding day; they thought it was close at hand; all Sophy's
scruples had vanished, but mine remained. They had not got so far as they expected; every one must
have his turn.
  One morning when they had not seen each other for two whole days, I entered Emile's room with a
letter in my hands, and looking fixedly at him I said to him, "What would you do if some one told you
Sophy were dead?" He uttered a loud cry, got up and struck his hands together, and without saying a
single  word,  he  looked  at  me  with  eyes  of  desperation.  "Answer  me,"  I  continued  with  the  same
calmness. Vexed at my composure, he then approached me with eyes blazing with anger; and checking
himself in an almost threatening attitude, "What would I do? I know not; but this I do know, I wouldnever set eyes again upon the person who brought me such news." "Comfort yourself," said I, smiling,
"she lives, she is well, and they are expecting us this evening. But let us go for a short walk and we can
talk things over."
  The passion which engrosses him will no longer permit him to devote himself as in former days to
discussions of pure reason; this very passion must be called to our aid if his attention is to be given to
my teaching. That is why I made use of this terrible preface; I am quite sure he will listen to me now.
  "We must be happy, dear Emile; it is the end of every feeling creature; it is the first desire taught us
by nature, and the only one which never leaves us. But where is happiness? Who knows? Every one
seeks it, and no one finds it. We spend our lives in the search and we die before the end is attained. My
young friend, when I took you, a new-born infant, in my arms, and called God himself to witness to the
vow I dared to make that I would devote my life to the happiness of your life, did I know myself what I
was undertaking? No; I only knew that in making you happy, I was sure of my own happiness. By
making this useful inquiry on your account, I made it for us both.
  "So long as we do not know what to do, wisdom consists in doing nothing. Of all rules there is none
so greatly needed by man, and none which he is less able to obey. In seeking happiness when we know
not where it is, we are perhaps getting further and further from it, we are running as many risks as there
are roads to choose from. But it is not every one that can keep still. Our passion for our own well-being
makes us so uneasy, that we would rather deceive ourselves in the search for happiness than sit still and
do nothing; and when once we have left the place where we might have known happiness, we can never
return.
  "In ignorance like this I tried to avoid a similar fault. When I took charge of you I decided to take
no useless steps and to prevent you from doing so too. I kept to the path of nature, until she should
show me the path of happiness. And lo! their paths were the same, and without knowing it this was the
path I trod.
  "Be at once my witness and my judge; I will never refuse to accept your decision. Your early years
have not been sacrificed to those that were to follow, you have enjoyed all the good gifts which nature
bestowed upon you. Of the ills to which you were by nature subject, and from which I could shelter
you, you have only experienced such as would harden you to bear others. You have never suffered any
evil, except to escape a greater. You have known neither hatred nor servitude. Free and happy, you
have remained just and kindly; for suffering and vice are inseparable, and no man ever became bad
until he was unhappy. May the memory of your childhood remain with you to old age! I am not afraid
that your kind heart will ever recall the hand that trained it without a blessing upon it.
  "When you reached the age of reason, I secured you from the influence of human prejudice; when
your heart awoke I preserved you from the sway of passion. Had I been able to prolong this inner
tranquillity till your life's end, my work would have been secure, and you would have been as happy as
man can be; but, my dear Emile, in vain did I dip you in the waters of Styx, I could not make you
everywhere invulnerable; a fresh enemy has appeared, whom you have not yet learnt to conquer, and
from whom I cannot save you. That enemy is yourself. Nature and fortune had left you free. You could
face poverty, you could bear bodily pain; the sufferings of the heart were unknown to you; you were
then dependent on nothing but your position as a human being; now you depend on all the ties you have
formed for yourself; you have learnt to desire, and you are now the slave of your desires. Without any
change in yourself, without any insult, any injury to yourself, what sorrows may attack your soul, what
pains may you suffer without sickness, how many deaths may you die and yet live! A lie, an error, a
suspicion, may plunge you in despair.
  "At the theatre you used to see heroes, abandoned to depths of woe, making the stage re-echo with
their wild cries, lamenting like women, weeping like children, and thus securing the applause of the
audience. Do you remember how shocked you were by those lamentations, cries, and groans, in men
from whom one would only expect deeds of constancy and heroism. 'Why,' said you, 'are those the
patterns we are to follow, the models set for our imitation! Are they afraid man will not be small
enough, unhappy enough, weak enough, if his weakness is not enshrined under a false show of virtue.'My young friend, henceforward you must be more merciful to the stage; you have become one of those
heroes.
  "You know how to suffer and to die; you know how to bear the heavy yoke of necessity in ills of
the body, but you have not yet learnt to give a law to the desires of your heart; and the difficulties of
life arise rather from our affections than from our needs. Our desires are vast, our strength is little better
than nothing. In his wishes man is dependent on many things; in himself he is dependent on nothing,
not even on his own life; the more his connections are multiplied, the greater his sufferings. Everything
upon earth has an end; sooner or later all that we love escapes from our fingers, and we behave as if it
would last for ever. What was your terror at the mere suspicion of Sophy's death? Do you suppose she
will live for ever? Do not young people of her age die? She must die, my son, and perhaps before you.
Who knows if she is alive at this moment? Nature meant you to die but once; you have prepared a
second death for yourself.
  "A slave to your unbridled passions, how greatly are you to be pitied! Ever privations, losses,
alarms; you will not even enjoy what is left. You will possess nothing because of the fear of losing it;
you will never be able to satisfy your passions, because you desired to follow them continually. You
will ever be seeking that which will fly before you; you will be miserable and you will become wicked.
How can you be otherwise, having no care but your unbridled passions! If you cannot put up with
involuntary privations how will you voluntarily deprive yourself? How can you sacrifice desire to duty,
and resist your heart in order to listen to your reason? You would never see that man again who dared
to bring you word of the death of your mistress; how would you behold him who would deprive you of
her living self, him who would dare to tell you, 'She is dead to you, virtue puts a gulf between you'? If
you must live with her whatever happens, whether Sophy is married or single, whether you are free or
not, whether she loves or hates you, whether she is given or refused to you, no matter, it is your will
and you must have her at any price. Tell me then what crime will stop a man who has no law but his
heart's desires, who knows not how to resist his own passions.
  "My son, there is no happiness without courage, nor virtue without a struggle. The word virtue is
derived from a word signifying strength, and strength is the foundation of all virtue. Virtue is the
heritage of a creature weak by nature but strong by will; that is the whole merit of the righteous man;
and though we call God good we do not call Him virtuous, because He does good without effort. I
waited to explain the meaning of this word, so often profaned, until you were ready to understand me.
As long as virtue is quite easy to practise, there is little need to know it. This need arises with the
awakening of the passions; your time has come.
  "When I brought you up in all the simplicity of nature, instead of preaching disagreeable duties, I
secured for you immunity from the vices which make such duties disagreeable; I made lying not so
much hateful as unnecessary in your sight; I taught you not so much to give others their due, as to care
little about your own rights; I made you kindly rather than virtuous. But the kindly man is only kind so
long as he finds it pleasant; kindness falls to pieces at the shook of human passions; the kindly man is
only kind to himself.
  "What is meant by a virtuous man? He who can conquer his affections; for then he follows his
reason, his conscience; he does his duty; he is his own master and nothing can turn him from the right
way. So far you have had only the semblance of liberty, the precarious liberty of the slave who has not
received his orders. Now is the time for real freedom; learn to be your own master; control your heart,
my Emile, and you will be virtuous.
  "There is another apprenticeship before you, an apprenticeship more difficult than the former; for
nature delivers us from the evils she lays upon us, or else she teaches us to submit to them; but she has
no message for us with regard to our self-imposed evils; she leaves us to ourselves; she leaves us,
victims of our own passions, to succumb to our vain sorrows, to pride ourselves on the tears of which
we should be ashamed.
  "This is your first passion. Perhaps it is the only passion worthy of you. If you can control it like a
man, it will be the last; you will be master of all the rest, and you will obey nothing but the passion forvirtue.
  "There is nothing criminal in this passion; I know it; it is as pure as the hearts which experience it.
It was born of honour and nursed by innocence. Happy lovers! for you the charms of virtue do but add
to those of love; and the blessed union to which you are looking forward is less the reward of your
goodness than of your affection. But tell me, O truthful man, though this passion is pure, is it any the
less your master? Are you the less its slave? And if to-morrow it should cease to be innocent, would
you strangle it on the spot? Now is the time to try your strength; there is no time for that in hours of
danger. These perilous efforts should be made when danger is still afar. We do not practise the use of
our weapons when we are face to face with the enemy, we do that before the war; we come to the
battle-field ready prepared.
  "It is a mistake to classify the passions as lawful and unlawful, so as to yield to the one and refuse
the other. All alike are good if we are their masters; all alike are bad if we abandon ourselves to them.
Nature forbids us to extend our relations beyond the limits of our strength; reason forbids us to want
what we cannot get, conscience forbids us, not to be tempted, but to yield to temptation. To feel or not
to feel a passion is beyond our control, but we can control ourselves. Every sentiment under our own
control is lawful; those which control us are criminal. A man is not guilty if he loves his neighbour's
wife, provided he keeps this unhappy passion under the control of the law of duty; he is guilty if he
loves his own wife so greatly as to sacrifice everything to that love.
  "Do not expect me to supply you with lengthy precepts of morality, I have only one rule to give you
which sums up all the rest. Be a man; restrain your heart within the limits of your manhood. Study and
know these limits; however narrow they may be, we are not unhappy within them; it is only when we
wish to go beyond them that we are unhappy, only when, in our mad passions, we try to attain the
impossible; we are unhappy when we forget our manhood to make an imaginary world for ourselves,
from which we are always slipping back into our own. The only good things, whose loss really affects
us, are those which we claim as our rights. If it is clear that we cannot obtain what we want, our mind
turns away from it; wishes without hope cease to torture us. A beggar is not tormented by a desire to be
a king; a king only wishes to be a god when he thinks himself more than man.
  "The illusions of pride are the source of our greatest ills; but the contemplation of human suffering
keeps the wise humble. He keeps to his proper place and makes no attempt to depart from it; he does
not waste his strength in getting what he cannot keep; and his whole strength being devoted to the right
employment of what he has, he is in reality richer and more powerful in proportion as he desires less
than we. A man, subject to death and change, shall I forge for myself lasting chains upon this earth,
where everything changes and disappears, whence I myself shall shortly vanish! Oh, Emile! my son! if
I were to lose you, what would be left of myself? And yet I must learn to lose you, for who knows
when you may be taken from me?
  "Would you live in wisdom and happiness, fix your heart on the beauty that is eternal; let your
desires be limited by your position, let your duties take precedence of your wishes; extend the law of
necessity into the region of morals; learn to lose what may be taken from you; learn to forsake all things
at the command of virtue, to set yourself above the chances of life, to detach your heart before it is torn
in pieces, to be brave in adversity so that you may never be wretched, to be steadfast in duty that you
may never be guilty of a crime. Then you will be happy in spite of fortune, and good in spite of your
passions. You will find a pleasure that cannot be destroyed, even in the possession of the most fragile
things; you will possess them, they will not possess you, and you will realise that the man who loses
everything, only enjoys what he knows how to resign. It is true you will not enjoy the illusions of
imaginary pleasures, neither will you feel the sufferings which are their result. You will profit greatly
by this exchange, for the sufferings are real and frequent, the pleasures are rare and empty. Victor over
so many deceitful ideas, you will also vanquish the idea that attaches such an excessive value to life.
You will spend your life in peace, and you will leave it without terror; you will detach yourself from
life as from other things. Let others, horror-struck, believe that when this life is ended they cease to be;
conscious of the nothingness of life, you will think that you are but entering upon the true life. To thewicked, death is the close of life; to the just it is its dawn."
  Emile heard me with attention not unmixed with anxiety. After such a startling preface he feared
some gloomy conclusion. He foresaw that when I showed him how necessary it is to practise the
strength of the soul, I desired to subject him to this stern discipline; he was like a wounded man who
shrinks from the surgeon, and fancies he already feels the painful but healing touch which will cure the
deadly wound.
  Uncertain, anxious, eager to know what I am driving at, he does not answer, he questions me but
timidly. "What must I do?" says he almost trembling, not daring to raise his eyes. "What must you do?"
I reply firmly. "You must leave Sophy." "What are you saying?" he exclaimed angrily. "Leave Sophy,
leave Sophy, deceive her, become a traitor, a villain, a perjurer!" "Why!" I continue, interrupting him;
"does Emile suppose I shall teach him to deserve such titles?" "No," he continued with the same vigour.
"Neither  you  nor  any  one  else;  I  am  capable  of  preserving  your  work;  I  shall  not  deserve  such
reproaches."
I was prepared for this first outburst; I let it pass unheeded. If I had not the moderation I preach it
would not be much use preaching it! Emile knows me too well to believe me capable of demanding any
wrong action from him, and he knows that it would be wrong to leave Sophy, in the sense he attaches to
the phrase. So he waits for an explanation. Then I resume my speech.
  "My dear Emile, do you think any man whatsoever can be happier than you have been for the last
three  months?  If  you  think  so,  undeceive  yourself.  Before  tasting  the  pleasures  of  life  you  have
plumbed the depths of its happiness. There is nothing more than you have already experienced. The
joys of sense are soon over; habit invariably destroys them. You have tasted greater joys through hope
than  you  will  ever  enjoy  in  reality.  The  imagination  which  adorns  what  we  long  for,  deserts  its
possession. With the exception of the one self-existing Being, there is nothing beautiful except that
which is not. If that state could have lasted for ever, you would have found perfect happiness. But all
that is related to man shares his decline; all is finite, all is fleeting in human life, and even if the
conditions which make us happy could be prolonged for ever, habit would deprive us of all taste for
that  happiness.  If  external  circumstances  remain  unchanged,  the  heart  changes;  either  happiness
forsakes us, or we forsake her.
  "During your infatuation time has passed unheeded. Summer is over, winter is at hand. Even if our
expeditions were possible, at such a time of year they would not be permitted. Whether we wish it or
no, we shall have to change our way of life; it cannot continue. I read in your eager eyes that this does
not disturb you greatly; Sophy's confession and your own wishes suggest a simple plan for avoiding the
snow and escaping the journey. The plan has its advantages, no doubt; but when spring returns, the
snow will melt and the marriage will remain; you must reckon for all seasons.
  "You wish to marry Sophy and you have only known her five months! You wish to marry her, not
because she is a fit wife for you, but because she pleases you; as if love were never mistaken as to
fitness, as if those, who begin with love, never ended with hatred! I know she is virtuous; but is that
enough? Is fitness merely a matter of honour? It is not her virtue I misdoubt, it is her disposition. Does
a woman show her real character in a day? Do you know how often you must have seen her and under
what varying conditions to really know her temper? Is four months of liking a sufficient pledge for the
rest of your life? A couple of months hence you may have forgotten her; as soon as you are gone
another may efface your image in her heart; on your return you may find her as indifferent as you have
hitherto found her affectionate. Sentiments are not a matter of principle; she may be perfectly virtuous
and yet cease to love you. I am inclined to think she will be faithful and true; but who will answer for
her, and who will answer for you if you are not put to the proof? Will you postpone this trial till it is too
late, will you wait to know your true selves till parting is no longer possible?
  "Sophy is not eighteen, and you are barely twenty-two; this is the age for love, but not for marriage.
What a father and mother for a family! If you want to know how to bring up children, you should at
least wait till you yourselves are children no longer. Do you not know that too early motherhood has
weakened the constitution, destroyed the health, and shortened the life of many young women? Do younot know that many children have always been weak and sickly because their mother was little more
than a child herself? When mother and child are both growing, the strength required for their growth is
divided, and neither gets all that nature intended; are not both sure to suffer? Either I know very little of
Emile, or he would rather wait and have a healthy wife and children, than satisfy his impatience at the
price of their life and health.
  "Let us speak of yourself. You hope to be a husband and a father; have you seriously considered
your duties? When you become the head of a family you will become a citizen of your country. And
what is a citizen of the state? What do you know about it? You have studied your duties as a man, but
what do you know of the duties of a citizen? Do you know the meaning of such terms as government,
laws, country? Do you know the price you must pay for life, and for what you must be prepared to die?
You think you know everything, when you really know nothing at all. Before you take your place in the
civil order, learn to perceive and know what is your proper place.
  "Emile, you must leave Sophy; I do not bid you forsake her; if you were capable of such conduct,
she would be only too happy not to have married you; you must leave her in order to return worthy of
her. Do not be vain enough to think yourself already worthy. How much remains to be done! Come and
fulfil this splendid task; come and learn to submit to absence; come and earn the prize of fidelity, so
that when you return you may indeed deserve some honour, and may ask her hand not as a favour but
as a reward."
    Unaccustomed to struggle with himself, untrained to desire one thing and to will another, the young
man will not give way; he resists, he argues. Why should he refuse the happiness which awaits him?
Would he not despise the hand which is offered him if he hesitated to accept it? Why need he leave her
to learn what he ought to know? And if it were necessary to leave her why not leave her as his wife
with a certain pledge of his return? Let him be her husband, and he is ready to follow me; let them be
married and he will leave her without fear. "Marry her in order to leave her, dear Emile! what a
contradiction! A lover who can leave his mistress shows himself capable of great things; a husband
should never leave his wife unless through necessity. To cure your scruples, I see the delay must be
involuntary on your part; you must be able to tell Sophy you leave her against your will. Very well, be
content, and since you will not follow the commands of reason, you must submit to another master.
You have not forgotten your promise. Emile, you must leave Sophy; I will have it."
  For a moment or two he was downcast, silent, and thoughtful, then looking me full in the face he
said, "When do we start?" "In a week's time," I replied; "Sophy must be prepared for our going. Women
are weaker than we are, and we must show consideration for them; and this parting is not a duty for her
as it is for you, so she may be allowed to bear it less bravely."
  The temptation to continue the daily history of their love up to the time of their separation is very
great; but I have already presumed too much upon the good nature of my readers; let us abridge the
story so as to bring it to an end. Will Emile face the situation as bravely at his mistress' feet as he has
done in conversation with his friend? I think he will; his confidence is rooted in the sincerity of his
love. He would be more at a loss with her, if it cost him less to leave her; he would leave her feeling
himself to blame, and that is a difficult part for a man of honour to play; but the greater the sacrifice,
the more credit he demands for it in the sight of her who makes it so difficult. He has no fear that she
will misunderstand his motives. Every look seems to say, "Oh, Sophy, read my heart and be faithful to
me; your lover is not without virtue."
  Sophy tries to bear the unforeseen blow with her usual pride and dignity. She tries to seem as if she
did not care, but as the honours of war are not hers, but Emile's, her strength is less equal to the task.
She weeps, she sighs against her will, and the fear of being forgotten embitters the pain of parting. She
does not weep in her lover's sight, she does not let him see her terror; she would die rather than utter a
sigh in his presence. I am the recipient of her lamentations, I behold her tears, it is I who am supposed
to be her confidant. Women are very clever and know how to conceal their cleverness; the more she
frets in private, the more pains she takes to please me; she feels that her fate is in my hands.
I console and comfort her; I make myself answerable for her lover, or rather for her husband; let herbe as true to him as he to her and I promise they shall be married in two years' time. She respects me
enough to believe that I do not want to deceive her. I am guarantor to each for the other. Their hearts,
their virtue, my honesty, the confidence of their parents, all combine to reassure them. But what can
reason avail against weakness? They part as if they were never to meet again.
  Then it is that Sophy recalls the regrets of Eucharis, and fancies herself in her place. Do not let us
revive that fantastic affection during his absence "Sophy," say I one day, "exchange books with Emile;
let him have your Telemachus that he may learn to be like him, and let him give you his Spectator
which you enjoy reading. Study the duties of good wives in it, and remember that in two years' time
you  will  undertake  those  duties."  The  exchange  gave  pleasure  to  both  and  inspired  them  with
confidence. At last the sad day arrived and they must part.
  Sophy's worthy father, with whom I had arranged the whole business, took affectionate leave of me,
and taking me aside, he spoke seriously and somewhat emphatically, saying, "I have done everything to
please you; I knew I had to do with a man of honour; I have only one word to say. Remembering your
pupil has signed his contract of marriage on my daughter's lips."
  What a difference in the behaviour of the two lovers! Emile, impetuous, eager, excited, almost
beside himself, cries aloud and sheds torrents of tears upon the hands of father, mother, and daughter;
with sobs he embraces every one in the house and repeats the same thing over and over again in a way
that would be ludicrous at any other time. Sophy, pale, sorrowful, doleful, and heavy-eyed, remains
quiet without a word or a tear, she sees no one, not even Emile. In vain he takes her hand, and clasps
her in his arms; she remains motionless, unheeding his tears, his caresses, and everything he does; so
far as she is concerned, he is gone already. A sight more moving than the prolonged lamentations and
noisy regrets of her lover! He sees, he feels, he is heartbroken. I drag him reluctantly away; if I left him
another minute, he would never go. I am delighted that he should carry this touching picture with him.
If he should ever be tempted to forget what is due to Sophy, his heart must have strayed very far indeed
if I cannot bring it back to her by recalling her as he saw her last.
  OF TRAVEL
  Is it good for young people to travel? The question is often asked and as often hotly disputed. If it
were stated otherwise--Are men the better for having travelled?--perhaps there would be less difference
of opinion.
  The misuse of books is the death of sound learning. People think they know what they have read,
and take no pains to learn. Too much reading only produces a pretentious ignoramus. There was never
so much reading in any age as the present, and never was there less learning; in no country of Europe
are so many histories and books of travel printed as in France, and nowhere is there less knowledge of
the mind and manners of other nations. So many books lead us to neglect the book of the world; if we
read it at all, we keep each to our own page. If the phrase, "Can one become a Persian," were unknown
to me, I should suspect on hearing it that it came from the country where national prejudice is most
prevalent and from the sex which does most to increase it.
  A Parisian thinks he has a knowledge of men and he knows only Frenchmen; his town is always full
of foreigners, but he considers every foreigner as a strange phenomenon which has no equal in the
universe. You must have a close acquaintance with the middle classes of that great city, you must have
lived among them, before you can believe that people could be at once so witty and so stupid. The
strangest thing about it is that probably every one of them has read a dozen times a description of the
country whose inhabitants inspire him with such wonder.
  To discover the truth amidst our own prejudices and those of the authors is too hard a task. I have
been reading books of travels all my life, but I never found two that gave me the same idea of the same
nation. On comparing my own scanty observations with what I have read, I have decided to abandon
the travellers and I regret the time wasted in trying to learn from their books; for I am quite convinced
that for that sort of study, seeing not reading is required. That would be true enough if every traveller
were honest, if he only said what he saw and believed, and if truth were not tinged with false colours
from his own eyes. What must it be when we have to disentangle the truth from the web of lies and ill-faith?
  Let us leave the boasted resources of books to those who are content to use them. Like the art of
Raymond Lully they are able to set people chattering about things they do not know. They are able to
set fifteen-year-old Platos discussing philosophy in the clubs, and teaching people the customs of Egypt
and the Indies on the word of Paul Lucas or Tavernier.
I maintain that it is beyond dispute that any one who has only seen one nation does not know men;
he only knows those men among whom he has lived. Hence there is another way of stating the question
about travel: "Is it enough for a well-educated man to know his fellow-countrymen, or ought he to
know mankind in general?" Then there is no place for argument or uncertainty. See how greatly the
solution of a difficult problem may depend on the way in which it is stated.
  But is it necessary to travel the whole globe to study mankind? Need we go to Japan to study
Europeans? Need we know every individual before we know the species? No, there are men so much
alike that it is not worth while to study them individually. When you have seen a dozen Frenchmen you
have seen them all. Though one cannot say as much of the English and other nations, it is, however,
certain that every nation has its own specific character, which is derived by induction from the study,
not of one, but many of its members. He who has compared a dozen nations knows men, just he who
has compared a dozen Frenchmen knows the French.
  To acquire knowledge it is not enough to travel hastily through a country. Observation demands
eyes, and the power of directing them towards the object we desire to know. There are plenty of people
who learn no more from their travels than from their books, because they do not know how to think;
because in reading their mind is at least under the guidance of the author, and in their travels they do
not know how to see for themselves. Others learn nothing, because they have no desire to learn. Their
object is so entirely different, that this never occurs to them; it is very unlikely that you will see clearly
what you take no trouble to look for. The French travel more than any other nation, but they are so
taken up with their own customs, that everything else is confused together. There are Frenchmen in
every corner of the globe. In no country of the world do you find more people who have travelled than
in France. And yet of all the nations of Europe, that which has seen most, knows least. The English are
also  travellers,  but  they  travel  in  another  fashion;  these  two  nations  must  always  be  at  opposite
extremes. The English nobility travels, the French stays at home; the French people travel, the English
stay at home. This difference does credit, I think, to the English. The French almost always travel for
their own ends; the English do not seek their fortune in other lands, unless in the way of commerce and
with their hands full; when they travel it is to spend their money, not to live by their wits; they are too
proud to cringe before strangers. This is why they learn more abroad than the French who have other
fish to fry. Yet the English have their national prejudices; but these prejudices are not so much the
result of ignorance as of feeling. The Englishman's prejudices are the result of pride, the Frenchman's
are due to vanity.
  Just as the least cultivated nations are usually the best, so those travel best who travel least; they
have made less progress than we in our frivolous pursuits, they are less concerned with the objects of
our empty curiosity, so that they give their attention to what is really useful. I hardly know any but the
Spaniards who travel in this fashion. While the Frenchman is running after all the artists of the country,
while the Englishman is getting a copy of some antique, while the German is taking his album to every
man of science, the Spaniard is silently studying the government, the manners of the country, its police,
and he is the only one of the four who from all that he has seen will carry home any observation useful
to his own country.
  The ancients travelled little, read little, and wrote few books; yet we see in those books that remain
to us, that they observed each other more thoroughly than we observe our contemporaries. Without
going back to the days of Homer, the only poet who transports us to the country he describes, we
cannot deny to Herodotus the glory of having painted manners in his history, though he does it rather
by narrative than by comment; still he does it better than all our historians whose books are overladen
with portraits and characters. Tacitus has described the Germans of his time better than any author hasdescribed the Germans of to-day. There can be no doubt that those who have devoted themselves to
ancient history know more about the Greeks, Carthaginians, Romans, Gauls, and Persians than any
nation of to-day knows about its neighbours.
  It must also be admitted that the original characteristics of different nations are changing day by
day, and are therefore more difficult to grasp. As races blend and nations intermingle, those national
differences which formerly struck the observer at first sight gradually disappear. Before our time every
nation remained more or less cut off from the rest; the means of communication were fewer; there was
less travelling, less of mutual or conflicting interests, less political and civil intercourse between nation
and nation; those intricate schemes of royalty, miscalled diplomacy, were less frequent; there were no
permanent ambassadors resident at foreign courts; long voyages were rare, there was little foreign
trade, and what little there was, was either the work of princes, who employed foreigners, or of people
of no account who had no influence on others and did nothing to bring the nations together. The
relations between Europe and Asia in the present century are a hundredfold more numerous than those
between Gaul and Spain in the past; Europe alone was less accessible than the whole world is now.
  Moreover, the peoples of antiquity usually considered themselves as the original inhabitants of their
country; they had dwelt there so long that all record was lost of the far-off times when their ancestors
settled there; they had been there so long that the place had made a lasting impression on them; but in
modern Europe the invasions of the barbarians, following upon the Roman conquests, have caused an
extraordinary confusion. The Frenchmen of to-day are no longer the big fair men of old; the Greeks are
no longer beautiful enough to serve as a sculptor's model; the very face of the Romans has changed as
well as their character; the Persians, originally from Tartary, are daily losing their native ugliness
through  the  intermixture  of  Circassian  blood.  Europeans  are  no  longer  Gauls,  Germans,  Iberians,
Allobroges; they are all Scythians, more or less degenerate in countenance, and still more so in conduct.
  This is why the ancient distinctions of race, the effect of soil and climate, made a greater difference
between  nation  and  nation  in  respect  of  temperament,  looks,  manners,  and  character  than  can  be
distinguished in our own time, when the fickleness of Europe leaves no time for natural causes to work,
when the forests are cut down and the marshes drained, when the earth is more generally, though less
thoroughly, tilled, so that the same differences between country and country can no longer be detected
even in purely physical features.
  If they considered these facts perhaps people would not be in such a hurry to ridicule Herodotus,
Ctesias, Pliny for having described the inhabitants of different countries each with its own peculiarities
and with striking differences which we no longer see. To recognise such types of face we should need
to see the men themselves; no change must have passed over them, if they are to remain the same. If we
could behold all the people who have ever lived, who can doubt that we should find greater variations
between one century and another, than are now found between nation and nation.
  At the same time, while observation becomes more difficult, it is more carelessly and badly done;
this is another reason for the small success of our researches into the natural history of the human race.
The information acquired by travel depends upon the object of the journey. If this object is a system of
philosophy, the traveller only sees what he desires to see; if it is self-interest, it engrosses the whole
attention of those concerned. Commerce and the arts which blend and mingle the nations at the same
time prevent them from studying each other. If they know how to make a profit out of their neighbours,
what more do they need to know?
  It is a good thing to know all the places where we might live, so as to choose those where we can
live most comfortably. If every one lived by his own efforts, all he would need to know would be how
much land would keep him in food. The savage, who has need of no one, and envies no one, neither
knows nor seeks to know any other country but his own. If he requires more land for his subsistence he
shuns inhabited places; he makes war upon the wild beasts and feeds on them. But for us, to whom
civilised life has become a necessity, for us who must needs devour our fellow-creatures, self-interest
prompts each one of us to frequent those districts where there are most people to be devoured. This is
why we all flock to Rome, Paris, and London. Human flesh and blood are always cheapest in thecapital cities. Thus we only know the great nations, which are just like one another.
  They say that men of learning travel to obtain information; not so, they travel like other people from
interested motives. Philosophers like Plato and Pythagoras are no longer to be found, or if they are, it
must be in far-off lands. Our men of learning only travel at the king's command; they are sent out, their
expenses are paid, they receive a salary for seeing such and such things, and the object of that journey
is certainly not the study of any question of morals. Their whole time is required for the object of their
journey, and they are too honest not to earn their pay. If in any country whatsoever there are people
travelling at their own expense, you may be sure it is not to study men but to teach them. It is not
knowledge they desire but ostentation. How should their travels teach them to shake off the yoke of
prejudice? It is prejudice that sends them on their travels.
  To travel to see foreign lands or to see foreign nations are two very different things. The former is
the usual aim of the curious, the latter is merely subordinate to it. If you wish to travel as a philosopher
you should reverse this order. The child observes things till he is old enough to study men. Man should
begin by studying his fellows; he can study things later if time permits.
  It is therefore illogical to conclude that travel is useless because we travel ill. But granting the
usefulness of travel, does it follow that it is good for all of us? Far from it; there are very few people
who are really fit to travel; it is only good for those who are strong enough in themselves to listen to the
voice of error without being deceived, strong enough to see the example of vice without being led away
by it. Travelling accelerates the progress of nature, and completes the man for good or evil. When a
man returns from travelling about the world, he is what he will be all his life; there are more who return
bad than good, because there are more who start with an inclination towards evil. In the course of their
travels, young people, ill-educated and ill-behaved, pick up all the vices of the nations among whom
they have sojourned, and none of the virtues with which those vices are associated; but those who,
happily for themselves, are well-born, those whose good disposition has been well cultivated, those
who travel with a real desire to learn, all such return better and wiser than they went. Emile will travel
in this fashion; in this fashion there travelled another young man, worthy of a nobler age; one whose
worth was the admiration of Europe, one who died for his country in the flower of his manhood; he
deserved to live, and his tomb, ennobled by his virtues only, received no honour till a stranger's hand
adorned it with flowers.
  Everything that is done in reason should have its rules. Travel, undertaken as a part of education,
should therefore have its rules. To travel for travelling's sake is to wander, to be a vagabond; to travel to
learn is still too vague; learning without some definite aim is worthless. I would give a young man a
personal  interest  in  learning,  and  that  interest,  well-chosen,  will  also  decide  the  nature  of  the
instruction. This is merely the continuation of the method I have hitherto practised.
  Now  after  he  has  considered  himself  in  his  physical  relations  to  other  creatures,  in  his  moral
relations with other men, there remains to be considered his civil relations with his fellow-citizens. To
do this he must first study the nature of government in general, then the different forms of government,
and lastly the particular government under which he was born, to know if it suits him to live under it;
for by a right which nothing can abrogate, every man, when he comes of age, becomes his own master,
free to renounce the contract by which he forms part of the community, by leaving the country in which
that  contract  holds  good.  It  is  only  by  sojourning  in  that  country,  after  he  has  come  to  years  of
discretion, that he is supposed to have tacitly confirmed the pledge given by his ancestors. He acquires
the right to renounce his country, just as he has the right to renounce all claim to his father's lands; yet
his place of birth was a gift of nature, and in renouncing it, he renounces what is his own. Strictly
speaking, every man remains in the land of his birth at his own risk unless he voluntarily submits to its
laws in order to acquire a right to their protection.
  For example, I should say to Emile, "Hitherto you have lived under my guidance, you were unable
to rule yourself. But now you are approaching the age when the law, giving you the control over your
property, makes you master of your person. You are about to find yourself alone in society, dependent
on everything, even on your patrimony. You mean to marry; that is a praiseworthy intention, it is one ofthe duties of man; but before you marry you must know what sort of man you want to be, how you wish
to spend your life, what steps you mean to take to secure a living for your family and for yourself; for
although we should not make this our main business, it must be definitely considered. Do you wish to
be dependent on men whom you despise? Do you wish to establish your fortune and determine your
position by means of civil relations which will make you always dependent on the choice of others,
which will compel you, if you would escape from knaves, to become a knave yourself?"
  In the next place I would show him every possible way of using his money in trade, in the civil
service, in finance, and I shall show him that in every one of these there are risks to be taken, every one
of them places him in a precarious and dependent position, and compels him to adapt his morals, his
sentiments, his conduct to the example and the prejudices of others.
  "There is yet another way of spending your time and money; you may join the army; that is to say,
you may hire yourself out at very high wages to go and kill men who never did you any harm. This
trade is held in great honour among men, and they cannot think too highly of those who are fit for
nothing better. Moreover, this profession, far from making you independent of other resources, makes
them all the more necessary; for it is a point of honour in this profession to ruin those who have
adopted it. It is true they are not all ruined; it is even becoming fashionable to grow rich in this as in
other professions; but if I told you how people manage to do it, I doubt whether you would desire to
follow their example.
  "Moreover, you must know that, even in this trade, it is no longer a question of courage or valour,
unless with regard to the ladies; on the contrary, the more cringing, mean, and degraded you are, the
more honour you obtain; if you have decided to take your profession seriously, you will be despised,
you will be hated, you will very possibly be driven out of the service, or at least you will fall a victim to
favouritism  and  be  supplanted  by  your  comrades,  because  you  have  been  doing  your  duty  in  the
trenches, while they have been attending to their toilet."
  We can hardly suppose that any of these occupations will be much to Emile's taste. "Why," he will
exclaim, "have I forgotten the amusements of my childhood? Have I lost the use of my arms? Is my
strength failing me? Do I not know how to work? What do I care about all your fine professions and all
the silly prejudices of others? I know no other pride than to be kindly and just; no other happiness than
to live in independence with her I love, gaining health and a good appetite by the day's work. All these
difficulties you speak of do not concern me. The only property I desire is a little farm in some quiet
corner. I will devote all my efforts after wealth to making it pay, and I will live without a care. Give me
Sophy and my land, and I shall be rich."
  "Yes, my dear friend, that is all a wise man requires, a wife and land of his own; but these treasures
are scarcer than you think. The rarest you have found already; let us discuss the other.
  "A field of your own, dear Emile! Where will you find it, in what remote corner of the earth can
you say, 'Here am I master of myself and of this estate which belongs to me?' We know where a man
may  grow  rich;  who  knows  where  he  can  do  without  riches?  Who  knows  where  to  live  free  and
independent, without ill-treating others and without fear of being ill-treated himself! Do you think it is
so easy to find a place where you can always live like an honest man? If there is any safe and lawful
way of living without intrigues, without lawsuits, without dependence on others, it is, I admit, to live by
the labour of our hands, by the cultivation of our own land; but where is the state in which a man can
say, 'The earth which I dig is my own?' Before choosing this happy spot, be sure that you will find the
peace you desire; beware lest an unjust government, a persecuting religion, and evil habits should
disturb you in your home. Secure yourself against the excessive taxes which devour the fruits of your
labours, and the endless lawsuits which consume your capital. Take care that you can live rightly
without  having  to  pay  court  to  intendents,  to  their  deputies,  to  judges,  to  priests,  to  powerful
neighbours, and to knaves of every kind, who are always ready to annoy you if you neglect them.
Above all, secure yourself from annoyance on the part of the rich and great; remember that their estates
may anywhere adjoin your Naboth's vineyard. If unluckily for you some great man buys or builds a
house near your cottage, make sure that he will not find a way, under some pretence or other, toencroach on your lands to round off his estate, or that you do not find him at once absorbing all your
resources to make a wide highroad. If you keep sufficient credit to ward off all these disagreeables, you
might as well keep your money, for it will cost you no more to keep it. Riches and credit lean upon
each other, the one can hardly stand without the other.
  "I have more experience than you, dear Emile; I see more clearly the difficulties in the way of your
scheme. Yet it is a fine scheme and honourable; it would make you happy indeed. Let us try to carry it
out. I have a suggestion to make; let us devote the two years from now till the time of your return to
choosing a place in Europe where you could live happily with your family, secure from all the dangers
I have just described. If we succeed, you will have discovered that true happiness, so often sought for in
vain; and you will not have to regret the time spent in its search. If we fail, you will be cured of a
mistaken idea; you will console yourself for an inevitable ill, and you will bow to the law of necessity."
I do not know whether all my readers will see whither this suggested inquiry will lead us; but this I
do know, if Emile returns from his travels, begun and continued with this end in view, without a full
knowledge of questions of government, public morality, and political philosophy of every kind, we are
greatly lacking, he in intelligence and I in judgment.
  The science of politics is and probably always will be unknown. Grotius, our leader in this branch
of learning, is only a child, and what is worse an untruthful child. When I hear Grotius praised to the
skies and Hobbes overwhelmed with abuse, I perceive how little sensible men have read or understood
these authors. As a matter of fact, their principles are exactly alike, they only differ in their mode of
expression. Their methods are also different: Hobbes relies on sophism; Grotius relies on the poets;
they are agreed in everything else. In modern times the only man who could have created this vast and
useless  science  was  the  illustrious  Montesquieu.  But  he  was  not  concerned  with  the  principles  of
political law; he was content to deal with the positive laws of settled governments; and nothing could
be more different than these two branches of study.
  Yet he who would judge wisely in matters of actual government is forced to combine the two; he
must know what ought to be in order to judge what is. The chief difficulty in the way of throwing light
upon this important matter is to induce an individual to discuss and to answer these two questions.
"How does it concern me; and what can I do?" Emile is in a position to answer both.
  The next difficulty is due to the prejudices of childhood, the principles in which we were brought
up; it is due above all to the partiality of authors, who are always talking about truth, though they care
very little about it; it is only their own interests that they care for, and of these they say nothing. Now
the nation has neither professorships, nor pensions, nor membership of the academies to bestow. How
then shall its rights be established by men of that type? The education I have given him has removed
this difficulty also from Emile's path. He scarcely knows what is meant by government; his business is
to find the best; he does not want to write books; if ever he did so, it would not be to pay court to those
in authority, but to establish the rights of humanity.
  There is a third difficulty, more specious than real; a difficulty which I neither desire to solve nor
even to state; enough that I am not afraid of it; sure I am that in inquiries of this kind, great talents are
less necessary than a genuine love of justice and a sincere reverence for truth. If matters of government
can ever be fairly discussed, now or never is our chance.
  Before beginning our observations we must lay down rules of procedure; we must find a scale with
which  to  compare  our  measurements.  Our  principles  of  political  law  are  our  scale.  Our  actual
measurements are the civil law of each country.
  Our elementary notions are plain and simple, being taken directly from the nature of things. They
will take the form of problems discussed between us, and they will not be formulated into principles,
until we have found a satisfactory solution of our problems.
  For example, we shall begin with the state of nature, we shall see whether men are born slaves or
free, in a community or independent; is their association the result of free will or of force? Can the
force which compels them to united action ever form a permanent law, by which this original force
becomes  binding,  even  when  another  has  been  imposed  upon  it,  so  that  since  the  power  of  KingNimrod, who is said to have been the first conqueror, every other power which has overthrown the
original power is unjust and usurping, so that there are no lawful kings but the descendants of Nimrod
or their representatives; or if this original power has ceased, has the power which succeeded it any right
over us, and does it destroy the binding force of the former power, so that we are not bound to obey
except under compulsion, and we are free to rebel as soon as we are capable of resistance? Such a right
is not very different from might; it is little more than a play upon words.
  We shall inquire whether man might not say that all sickness comes from God, and that it is
therefore a crime to send for the doctor.
  Again, we shall inquire whether we are bound by our conscience to give our purse to a highwayman
when we might conceal it from him, for the pistol in his hand is also a power.
  Does this word power in this context mean something different from a power which is lawful and
therefore subject to the laws to which it owes its being?
  Suppose we reject this theory that might is right and admit the right of nature, or the authority of the
father,  as  the  foundation  of  society;  we  shall  inquire  into  the  extent  of  this  authority;  what  is  its
foundation in nature? Has it any other grounds but that of its usefulness to the child, his weakness, and
the natural love which his father feels towards him? When the child is no longer feeble, when he is
grown-up in mind as well as in body, does not he become the sole judge of what is necessary for his
preservation? Is he not therefore his own master, independent of all men, even of his father himself?
For is it not still more certain that the son loves himself, than that the father loves the son?
  The father being dead, should the children obey the eldest brother, or some other person who has
not the natural affection of a father? Should there always be, from family to family, one single head to
whom all the family owe obedience? If so, how has power ever come to be divided, and how is it that
there is more than one head to govern the human race throughout the world?
  Suppose the nations to have been formed each by its own choice; we shall then distinguish between
right and fact; being thus subjected to their brothers, uncles, or other relations, not because they were
obliged, but because they choose, we shall inquire whether this kind of society is not a sort of free and
voluntary association?
  Taking next the law of slavery, we shall inquire whether a man can make over to another his right
to himself, without restriction, without reserve, without any kind of conditions; that is to say, can he
renounce his person, his life, his reason, his very self, can he renounce all morality in his actions; in a
word, can he cease to exist before his death, in spite of nature who places him directly in charge of his
own preservation, in spite of reason and conscience which tell him what to do and what to leave
undone?
  If there is any reservation or restriction in the deed of slavery, we shall discuss whether this deed
does not then become a true contract, in which both the contracting powers, having in this respect no
common  master,  [Footnote:  If  they  had  such  a  common  master,  he  would  be  no  other  than  the
sovereign, and then the right of slavery resting on the right of sovereignty would not be its origin.]
remain their own judge as to the conditions of the contract, and therefore free to this extent, and able to
break the contract as soon as it becomes hurtful.
  If then a slave cannot convey himself altogether to his master, how can a nation convey itself
altogether to its head? If a slave is to judge whether his master is fulfilling his contract, is not the nation
to judge whether its head is fulfilling his contract?
  Thus we are compelled to retrace our steps, and when we consider the meaning of this collective
nation we shall inquire whether some contract, a tacit contract at the least, is not required to make a
nation, a contract anterior to that which we are assuming.
  Since the nation was a nation before it chose a king, what made it a nation, except the social
contract? Therefore the social contract is the foundation of all civil society, and it is in the nature of this
contract that we must seek the nature of the society formed by it.
  We  will  inquire  into  the  meaning  of  this  contract;  may  it  not  be  fairly  well  expressed  in  this
formula? As an individual every one of us contributes his goods, his person, his life, to the commonstock, under the supreme direction of the general will; while as a body we receive each member as an
indivisible part of the whole.
  Assuming  this,  in  order  to  define  the  terms  we  require,  we  shall  observe  that,  instead  of  the
individual person of each contracting party, this deed of association produces a moral and collective
body, consisting of as many members as there are votes in the Assembly. This public personality is
usually called the body politic, which is called by its members the State when it is passive, and the
Sovereign when it is active, and a Power when compared with its equals. With regard to the members
themselves, collectively they are known as the nation, and individually as citizens as members of the
city or partakers in the sovereign power, and subjects as obedient to the same authority.
  We shall note that this contract of association includes a mutual pledge on the part of the public and
the individual; and that each individual, entering, so to speak, into a contract with himself, finds himself
in a twofold capacity, i.e., as a member of the sovereign with regard to others, as member of the state
with regard to the sovereign.
  We shall also note that while no one is bound by any engagement to which he was not himself a
party, the general deliberation which may be binding on all the subjects with regard to the sovereign,
because of the two different relations under which each of them is envisaged, cannot be binding on the
state with regard to itself. Hence we see that there is not, and cannot be, any other fundamental law,
properly so called, except the social contract only. This does not mean that the body politic cannot, in
certain respects, pledge itself to others; for in regard to the foreigner, it then becomes a simple creature,
an individual.
  Thus the two contracting parties, i.e., each individual and the public, have no common superior to
decide their differences; so we will inquire if each of them remains free to break the contract at will,
that is to repudiate it on his side as soon as he considers it hurtful.
  To clear up this difficulty, we shall observe that, according to the social pact, the sovereign power is
only able to act through the common, general will; so its decrees can only have a general or common
aim; hence it follows that a private individual cannot be directly injured by the sovereign, unless all are
injured, which is impossible, for that would be to want to harm oneself. Thus the social contract has no
need of any warrant but the general power, for it can only be broken by individuals, and they are not
therefore freed from their engagement, but punished for having broken it.
  To decide all such questions rightly, we must always bear in mind that the nature of the social pact
is private and peculiar to itself, in that the nation only contracts with itself, i.e., the people as a whole as
sovereign, with the individuals as subjects; this condition is essential to the construction and working of
the political machine, it alone makes pledges lawful, reasonable, and secure, without which it would be
absurd, tyrannical, and liable to the grossest abuse.
  Individuals having only submitted themselves to the sovereign, and the sovereign power being only
the general will, we shall see that every man in obeying the sovereign only obeys himself, and how
much freer are we under the social part than in the state of nature.
  Having compared natural and civil liberty with regard to persons, we will compare them as to
property, the rights of ownership and the rights of sovereignty, the private and the common domain. If
the sovereign power rests upon the right of ownership, there is no right more worthy of respect; it is
inviolable and sacred for the sovereign power, so long as it remains a private individual right; as soon
as it is viewed as common to all the citizens, it is subject to the common will, and this will may destroy
it. Thus the sovereign has no right to touch the property of one or many; but he may lawfully take
possession of the property of all, as was done in Sparta in the time of Lycurgus; while the abolition of
debts by Solon was an unlawful deed.
  Since nothing is binding on the subjects except the general will, let us inquire how this will is made
manifest, by what signs we may recognise it with certainty, what is a law, and what are the true
characters of the law? This is quite a fresh subject; we have still to define the term law.
  As soon as the nation considers one or more of its members, the nation is divided. A relation is
established between the whole and its part which makes of them two separate entities, of which the partis one, and the whole, minus that part, is the other. But the whole minus the part is not the whole; as
long as this relation exists, there is no longer a whole, but two unequal parts.
  On the other hand, if the whole nation makes a law for the whole nation, it is only considering
itself; and if a relation is set up, it is between the whole community regarded from one point of view,
and the whole community regarded from another point of view, without any division of that whole.
Then the object of the statute is general, and the will which makes that statute is general too. Let us see
if there is any other kind of decree which may bear the name of law.
  If the sovereign can only speak through laws, and if the law can never have any but a general
purpose, concerning all the members of the state, it follows that the sovereign never has the power to
make any law with regard to particular cases; and yet it is necessary for the preservation of the state that
particular oases should also be dealt with; let us see how this can be done.
  The decrees of the sovereign can only be decrees of the general will, that is laws; there must also be
determining decrees, decrees of power or government, for the execution of those laws; and these, on the
other hand, can only have particular aims. Thus the decrees by which the sovereign decides that a chief
shall be elected is a law; the decree by which that chief is elected, in pursuance of the law, is only a
decree of government.
  This is a third relation in which the assembled people may be considered, i.e., as magistrates or
executors of the law which it has passed in its capacity as sovereign. [Footnote: These problems and
theorems are mostly taken from the Treatise on the Social Contract, itself a summary of a larger work,
undertaken without due consideration of my own powers, and long since abandoned.]
  We will now inquire whether it is possible for the nation to deprive itself of its right of sovereignty,
to bestow it on one or more persons; for the decree of election not being a law, and the people in this
decree not being themselves sovereign, we do not see how they can transfer a right which they do not
possess.
  The essence of sovereignty consisting in the general will, it is equally hard to see how we can be
certain that an individual will shall always be in agreement with the general will. We should rather
assume that it will often be opposed to it; for individual interest always tends to privileges, while the
common interest always tends to equality, and if such an agreement were possible, no sovereign right
could exist, unless the agreement were either necessary or indestructible.
  We will inquire if, without violating the social pact, the heads of the nation, under whatever name
they are chosen, can ever be more than the officers of the people, entrusted by them with the duty of
carrying the law into execution. Are not these chiefs themselves accountable for their administration,
and are not they themselves subject to the laws which it is their business to see carried out?
  If the nation cannot alienate its supreme right, can it entrust it to others for a time? Cannot it give
itself a master, cannot it find representatives? This is an important question and deserves discussion.
  If the nation can have neither sovereign nor representatives we will inquire how it can pass its own
laws; must there be many laws; must they be often altered; is it easy for a great nation to be its own
lawgiver?
  Was not the Roman people a great nation?
  Is it a good thing that there should be great nations?
  It follows from considerations already established that there is an intermediate body in the state
between subjects and sovereign; and this intermediate body, consisting of one or more members, is
entrusted with the public administration, the carrying out of the laws, and the maintenance of civil and
political liberty.
  The members of this body are called magistrates or kings, that is to say, rulers. This body, as a
whole, considered in relation to its members, is called the prince, and considered in its actions it is
called the government.
  If we consider the action of the whole body upon itself, that is to say, the relation of the whole to
the whole, of the sovereign to the state, we can compare this relation to that of the extremes in a
proportion of which the government is the middle term. The magistrate receives from the sovereign thecommands which he gives to the nation, and when it is reckoned up his product or his power is in the
same degree as the product or power of the citizens who are subjects on one side of the proportion and
sovereigns  on  the  other.  None  of  the  three  terms  can  be  varied  without  at  once  destroying  this
proportion. If the sovereign tries to govern, and if the prince wants to make the laws, or if the subject
refuses to obey them, disorder takes the place of order, and the state falls to pieces under despotism or
anarchy.
  Let  us  suppose  that  this  state  consists  of  ten  thousand  citizens.  The  sovereign  can  only  be
considered collectively and as a body, but each individual, as a subject, has his private and independent
existence. Thus the sovereign is as ten thousand to one; that is to say, every member of the state has, as
his own share, only one ten-thousandth part of the sovereign power, although he is subject to the whole.
Let the nation be composed of one hundred thousand men, the position of the subjects is unchanged,
and each continues to bear the whole weight of the laws, while his vote, reduced to the one hundred-
thousandth part, has ten times less influence in the making of the laws. Thus the subject being always
one, the sovereign is relatively greater as the number of the citizens is increased. Hence it follows that
the larger the state the less liberty.
  Now  the  greater  the  disproportion  between  private  wishes  and  the  general  will,  i.e.,  between
manners and laws, the greater must be the power of repression. On the other side, the greatness of the
state gives the depositaries of public authority greater temptations and additional means of abusing that
authority, so that the more power is required by the government to control the people, the more power
should there be in the sovereign to control the government.
  From  this  twofold  relation  it  follows  that  the  continued  proportion  between  the  sovereign,  the
prince, and the people is not an arbitrary idea, but a consequence of the nature of the state. Moreover, it
follows that one of the extremes, i.e., the nation, being constant, every time the double ratio increases or
decreases, the simple ratio increases or diminishes in its turn; which cannot be unless the middle term is
as often changed. From this we may conclude that there is no single absolute form of government, but
there must be as many different forms of government as there are states of different size.
  If the greater the numbers of the nation the less the ratio between its manners and its laws, by a
fairly clear analogy, we may also say, the more numerous the magistrates, the weaker the government.
  To make this principle clearer we will distinguish three essentially different wills in the person of
each magistrate; first, his own will as an individual, which looks to his own advantage only; secondly,
the common will of the magistrates, which is concerned only with the advantage of the prince, a will
which may be called corporate, and one which is general in relation to the government and particular in
relation to the state of which the government forms part; thirdly, the will of the people, or the sovereign
will,  which  is  general,  as  much  in  relation  to  the  state  viewed  as  the  whole  as  in  relation  to  the
government viewed as a part of the whole. In a perfect legislature the private individual will should be
almost  nothing;  the  corporate  will  belonging  to  the  government  should  be  quite  subordinate,  and
therefore the general and sovereign will is the master of all the others. On the other hand, in the natural
order, these different wills become more and more active in proportion as they become centralised; the
general will is always weak, the corporate will takes the second place, the individual will is preferred to
all; so that every one is himself first, then a magistrate, and then a citizen; a series just the opposite of
that required by the social order.
  Having laid down this principle, let us assume that the government is in the hands of one man. In
this case the individual and the corporate will are absolutely one, and therefore this will has reached the
greatest possible degree of intensity. Now the use of power depends on the degree of this intensity, and
as the absolute power of the government is always that of the people, and therefore invariable, it
follows that the rule of one man is the most active form of government.
  If, on the other hand, we unite the government with the supreme power, and make the prince the
sovereign and the citizens so many magistrates, then the corporate will is completely lost in the general
will, and will have no more activity than the general will, and it will leave the individual will in full
vigour. Thus the government, though its absolute force is constant, will have the minimum of activity.  These rules are incontestable in themselves, and other considerations only serve to confirm them.
For example, we see the magistrates as a body far more active than the citizens as a body, so that the
individual will always counts for more. For each magistrate usually has charge of some particular duty
of government; while each citizen, in himself, has no particular duty of sovereignty. Moreover, the
greater the state the greater its real power, although its power does not increase because of the increase
in territory; but the state remaining unchanged, the magistrates are multiplied in vain, the government
acquires no further real strength, because it is the depositary of that of the state, which I have assumed
to be constant. Thus, this plurality of magistrates decreases the activity of the government without
increasing its power.
  Having  found  that  the  power  of  the  government  is  relaxed  in  proportion  as  the  number  of
magistrates is multiplied, and that the more numerous the people, the more the controlling power must
be increased, we shall infer that the ratio between the magistrates and the government should be inverse
to  that  between  subjects  and  sovereign,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  greater  the  state,  the  smaller  the
government,  and  that  in  like  manner  the  number  of  chiefs  should  be  diminished  because  of  the
increased numbers of the people.
  In order to make this diversity of forms clearer, and to assign them their different names, we shall
observe in the first place that the sovereign may entrust the care of the government to the whole nation
or to the greater part of the nation, so that there are more citizen magistrates than private citizens. This
form of government is called Democracy.
  Or the sovereign may restrict the government in the hands of a lesser number, so that there are more
plain citizens than magistrates; and this form of government is called Aristocracy.
  Finally, the sovereign may concentrate the whole government in the hands of one man. This is the
third and commonest form of government, and is called Monarchy or royal government.
  We shall observe that all these forms, or the first and second at least, may be less or more, and that
within tolerably wide limits. For the democracy may include the whole nation, or may be confined to
one half of it. The aristocracy, in its turn, may shrink from the half of the nation to the smallest number.
Even royalty may be shared, either between father and son, between two brothers, or in some other
fashion. There were always two kings in Sparta, and in the Roman empire there were as many as eight
emperors at once, and yet it cannot be said that the empire was divided. There is a point where each
form of government blends with the next; and under the three specific forms there may be really as
many forms of government as there are citizens in the state.
  Nor is this all. In certain respects each of these governments is capable of subdivision into different
parts, each administered in one of these three ways. From these forms in combination there may arise a
multitude of mixed forms, since each may be multiplied by all the simple forms.
  In all ages there have been great disputes as to which is the best form of government, and people
have failed to consider that each is the best in some cases and the worst in others. For ourselves, if the
number  of  magistrates  [Footnote:  You  will  remember  that  I  mean,  in  this  context,  the  supreme
magistrates or heads of the nation, the others being only their deputies in this or that respect.] in the
various states is to be in inverse ratio to the number of the citizens, we infer that generally a democratic
government is adapted to small states, an aristocratic government to those of moderate size, and a
monarchy to large states.
  These inquiries furnish us with a clue by which we may discover what are the duties and rights of
citizens, and whether they can be separated one from the other; what is our country, in what does it
really consist, and how can each of us ascertain whether he has a country or no?
  Having thus considered every kind of civil society in itself, we shall compare them, so as to note
their relations one with another; great and small, strong and weak, attacking one another, insulting one
another, destroying one another; and in this perpetual action and reaction causing more misery and loss
of life than if men had preserved their original freedom. We shall inquire whether too much or too little
has not been accomplished in the matter of social institutions; whether individuals who are subject to
law and to men, while societies preserve the independence of nature, are not exposed to the ills of bothconditions without the advantages of either, and whether it would not be better to have no civil society
in the world rather than to have many such societies. Is it not that mixed condition which partakes of
both and secures neither?
  "Per quem neutrum licet, nec tanquam in bello paratum esse, nec tanquam in pace securum."--
Seneca De Trang: Animi, cap. I.
  Is it not this partial and imperfect association which gives rise to tyranny and war? And are not
tyranny and war the worst scourges of humanity?
  Finally we will inquire how men seek to get rid of these difficulties by means of leagues and
confederations, which leave each state its own master in internal affairs, while they arm it against any
unjust aggression. We will inquire how a good federal association may be established, what can make it
lasting,  and  how  far  the  rights  of  the  federation  may  be  stretched  without  destroying  the  right  of
sovereignty.
  The Abbe de Saint-Pierre suggested an association of all the states of Europe to maintain perpetual
peace among themselves. Is this association practicable, and supposing that it were established, would
it be likely to last? These inquiries lead us straight to all the questions of international law which may
clear up the remaining difficulties of political law. Finally we shall lay down the real principles of the
laws of war, and we shall see why Grotius and others have only stated false principles.
I should not be surprised if my pupil, who is a sensible young man, should interrupt me saying,
"One would think we were building our edifice of wood and not of men; we are putting everything so
exactly in its place!" That is true; but remember that the law does not bow to the passions of men, and
that we have first to establish the true principles of political law. Now that our foundations are laid,
come and see what men have built upon them; and you will see some strange sights!
  Then I set him to read Telemachus, and we pursue our journey; we are seeking that happy Salentum
and the good Idomeneus made wise by misfortunes. By the way we find many like Protesilas and no
Philocles, neither can Adrastes, King of the Daunians, be found. But let our readers picture our travels
for themselves, or take the same journeys with Telemachus in their hand; and let us not suggest to them
painful applications which the author himself avoids or makes in spite of himself.
  Moreover, Emile is not a king, nor am I a god, so that we are not distressed that we cannot imitate
Telemachus and Mentor in the good they did; none know better than we how to keep to our own place,
none have less desire to leave it. We know that the same task is allotted to all; that whoever loves what
is right with all his heart, and does the right so far as it is in his power, has fulfilled that task. We know
that Telemachus and Mentor are creatures of the imagination. Emile does not travel in idleness and he
does more good than if he were a prince. If we were kings we should be no greater benefactors. If we
were kings and benefactors we should cause any number of real evils for every apparent good we
supposed we were doing. If we were kings and sages, the first good deed we should desire to perform,
for ourselves and for others, would be to abdicate our kingship and return to our present position.
I have said why travel does so little for every one. What makes it still more barren for the young is
the way in which they are sent on their travels. Tutors, more concerned to amuse than to instruct, take
them from town to town, from palace to palace, where if they are men of learning and letters, they
make them spend their time in libraries, or visiting antiquaries, or rummaging among old buildings
transcribing ancient inscriptions. In every country they are busy over some other century, as if they
were living in another country; so that after they have travelled all over Europe at great expense, a prey
to frivolity or tedium, they return, having seen nothing to interest them, and having learnt nothing that
could be of any possible use to them.
  All capitals are just alike, they are a mixture of all nations and all ways of living; they are not the
place in which to study the nations. Paris and London seem to me the same town. Their inhabitants
have a few prejudices of their own, but each has as many as the other, and all their rules of conduct are
the same. We know the kind of people who will throng the court. We know the way of living which the
crowds of people and the unequal distribution of wealth will produce. As soon as any one tells me of a
town with two hundred thousand people, I know its life already. What I do not know about it is notworth going there to learn.
  To study the genius and character of a nation you should go to the more remote provinces, where
there is less stir, less commerce, where strangers seldom travel, where the inhabitants stay in one place,
where there are fewer changes of wealth and position. Take a look at the capital on your way, but go
and study the country far away from that capital. The French are not in Paris, but in Touraine; the
English are more English in Mercia than in London, and the Spaniards more Spanish in Galicia than in
Madrid. In these remoter provinces a nation assumes its true character and shows what it really is; there
the good or ill effects of the government are best perceived, just as you can measure the arc more
exactly at a greater radius.
  The necessary relations between character and government have been so clearly pointed out in the
book of L'Esprit des Lois, that one cannot do better than have recourse to that work for the study of
those relations. But speaking generally, there are two plain and simple standards by which to decide
whether governments are good or bad. One is the population. Every country in which the population is
decreasing is on its way to ruin; and the countries in which the population increases most rapidly, even
were they the poorest countries in the world, are certainly the best governed. [Footnote: I only know
one exception to this rule--it is China.] But this population must be the natural result of the government
and the national character, for if it is caused by colonisation or any other temporary and accidental
cause, then the remedy itself is evidence of the disease. When Augustus passed laws against celibacy,
those laws showed that the Roman empire was already beginning to decline. Citizens must be induced
to marry by the goodness of the government, not compelled to marry by law; you must not examine the
effects of force, for the law which strives against the constitution has little or no effect; you should
study what is done by the influence of public morals and by the natural inclination of the government,
for these alone produce a lasting effect. It was the policy of the worthy Abbe de Saint-Pierre always to
look for a little remedy for every individual ill, instead of tracing them to their common source and
seeing if they could not all be cured together. You do not need to treat separately every sore on a rich
man's body; you should purify the blood which produces them. They say that in England there are
prizes for agriculture; that is enough for me; that is proof enough that agriculture will not flourish there
much longer.
  The second sign of the goodness or badness of the government and the laws is also to be found in
the population, but it is to be found not in its numbers but in its distribution. Two states equal in size
and population may be very unequal in strength; and the more powerful is always that in which the
people are more evenly distributed over its territory; the country which has fewer large towns, and
makes less show on this account, will always defeat the other. It is the great towns which exhaust the
state and are the cause of its weakness; the wealth which they produce is a sham wealth, there is much
money and few goods. They say the town of Paris is worth a whole province to the King of France; for
my own part I believe it costs him more than several provinces. I believe that Paris is fed by the
provinces in more senses than one, and that the greater part of their revenues is poured into that town
and stays there, without ever returning to the people or to the king. It is inconceivable that in this age of
calculators there is no one to see that France would be much more powerful if Paris were destroyed.
Not  only  is  this  ill-distributed  population  not  advantageous  to  the  state,  it  is  more  ruinous  than
depopulation itself, because depopulation only gives as produce nought, and the ill-regulated addition
of still more people gives a negative result. When I hear an Englishman and a Frenchman so proud of
the size of their capitals, and disputing whether London or Paris has more inhabitants, it seems to me
that they are quarrelling as to which nation can claim the honour of being the worst governed.
  Study the nation outside its towns; thus only will you really get to know it. It is nothing to see the
apparent form of a government, overladen with the machinery of administration and the jargon of the
administrators, if you have not also studied its nature as seen in the effects it has upon the people, and
in every degree of administration. The difference of form is really shared by every degree of the
administration, and it is only by including every degree that you really know the difference. In one
country you begin to feel the spirit of the minister in the manoeuvres of his underlings; in another youmust see the election of members of parliament to see if the nation is really free; in each and every
country, he who has only seen the towns cannot possibly know what the government is like, as its spirit
is never the same in town and country. Now it is the agricultural districts which form the country, and
the country people who make the nation.
  This study of different nations in their remoter provinces, and in the simplicity of their native
genius, gives a general result which is very satisfactory, to my thinking, and very consoling to the
human heart; it is this: All the nations, if you observe them in this fashion, seem much better worth
observing; the nearer they are to nature, the more does kindness hold sway in their character; it is only
when they are cooped up in towns, it is only when they are changed by cultivation, that they become
depraved, that certain faults which were rather coarse than injurious are exchanged for pleasant but
pernicious vices.
  From this observation we see another advantage in the mode of travel I suggest; for young men,
sojourning less in the big towns which are horribly corrupt, are less likely to catch the infection of vice;
among simpler people and less numerous company, they will preserve a surer judgment, a healthier
taste,  and  better  morals.  Besides  this  contagion  of  vice  is  hardly  to  be  feared  for  Emile;  he  has
everything to protect him from it. Among all the precautions I have taken, I reckon much on the love he
bears in his heart.
  We do not know the power of true love over youthful desires, because we are ourselves as ignorant
of it as they are, and those who have control over the young turn them from true love. Yet a young man
must either love or fall into bad ways. It is easy to be deceived by appearances. You will quote any
number of young men who are said to live very chastely without love; but show me one grown man, a
real man, who can truly say that his youth was thus spent? In all our virtues, all our duties, people are
content with appearances; for my own part I want the reality, and I am much mistaken if there is any
other way of securing it beyond the means I have suggested.
  The idea of letting Emile fall in love before taking him on his travels is not my own. It was
suggested to me by the following incident.
I was in Venice calling on the tutor of a young Englishman. It was winter and we were sitting round
the fire. The tutor's letters were brought from the post office. He glanced at them, and then read them
aloud to his pupil. They were in English; I understood not a word, but while he was reading I saw the
young man tear some fine point lace ruffles which he was wearing, and throw them in the fire one after
another, as quietly as he could, so that no one should see it. Surprised at this whim, I looked at his face
and thought I perceived some emotion; but the external signs of passion, though much alike in all men,
have national differences which may easily lead one astray. Nations have a different language of facial
expression as well as of speech. I waited till the letters were finished and then showing the tutor the
bare wrists of his pupil, which he did his best to hide, I said, "May I ask the meaning of this?"
  The  tutor  seeing  what  had  happened  began  to  laugh;  he  embraced  his  pupil  with  an  air  of
satisfaction and, with his consent, he gave me the desired explanation.
  "The ruffles," said he, "which Mr. John has just torn to pieces, were a present from a lady in this
town, who made them for him not long ago. Now you must know that Mr. John is engaged to a young
lady in his own country, with whom he is greatly in love, and she well deserves it. This letter is from
the lady's mother, and I will translate the passage which caused the destruction you beheld.
  "'Lucy is always at work upon Mr. John's ruffles. Yesterday Miss Betty Roldham came to spend the
afternoon and insisted on doing some of her work. I knew that Lucy was up very early this morning and
I wanted to see what she was doing; I found her busy unpicking what Miss Betty had done. She would
not have a single stitch in her present done by any hand but her own.'"
  Mr. John went to fetch another pair of ruffles, and I said to his tutor: "Your pupil has a very good
disposition; but tell me is not the letter from Miss Lucy's mother a put up job? Is it not an expedient of
your designing against the lady of the ruffles?" "No," said he, "it is quite genuine; I am not so artful as
that; I have made use of simplicity and zeal, and God has blessed my efforts."
  This incident with regard to the young man stuck in my mind; it was sure to set a dreamer like methinking.
  But it is time we finished. Let us take Mr. John back to Miss Lucy, or rather Emile to Sophy. He
brings her a heart as tender as ever, and a more enlightened mind, and he returns to his native land all
the bettor for having made acquaintance with foreign governments through their vices and foreign
nations through their virtues. I have even taken care that he should associate himself with some man of
worth in every nation, by means of a treaty of hospitality after the fashion of the ancients, and I shall
not be sorry if this acquaintance is kept up by means of letters. Not only may this be useful, not only is
it always pleasant to have a correspondent in foreign lands, it is also an excellent antidote against the
sway of patriotic prejudices, to which we are liable all through our life, and to which sooner or later we
are more or less enslaved. Nothing is better calculated to lessen the hold of such prejudices than a
friendly  interchange  of  opinions  with  sensible  people  whom  we  respect;  they  are  free  from  our
prejudices and we find ourselves face to face with theirs, and so we can set the one set of prejudices
against the other and be safe from both. It is not the same thing to have to do with strangers in our own
country and in theirs. In the former case there is always a certain amount of politeness which either
makes them conceal their real opinions, or makes them think more favourably of our country while
they are with us; when they get home again this disappears, and they merely do us justice. I should be
very glad if the foreigner I consult has seen my country, but I shall not ask what he thinks of it till he is
at home again.
  When we have spent nearly two years travelling in a few of the great countries and many of the
smaller countries of Europe, when we have learnt two or three of the chief languages, when we have
seen  what  is  really  interesting  in  natural  history,  government,  arts,  or  men,  Emile,  devoured  by
impatience, reminds me that our time is almost up. Then I say, "Well, my friend, you remember the
main object of our journey; you have seen and observed; what is the final result of your observations?
What decision have you come to?" Either my method is wrong, or he will answer me somewhat after
this fashion--
  "What decision have I come to? I have decided to be what you made me; of my own free will I will
add no fetters to those imposed upon me by nature and the laws. The more I study the works of men in
their institutions, the more clearly I see that, in their efforts after independence, they become slaves,
and that their very freedom is wasted in vain attempts to assure its continuance. That they may not be
carried away by the flood of things, they form all sorts of attachments; then as soon as they wish to
move forward they are surprised to find that everything drags them back. It seems to me that to set
oneself free we need do nothing, we need only continue to desire freedom. My master, you have made
me  free  by  teaching  me  to  yield  to  necessity.  Let  her  come  when  she  will,  I  follow  her  without
compulsion; I lay hold of nothing to keep me back. In our travels I have sought for some corner of the
earth  where  I  might  be  absolutely  my  own;  but  where  can  one  dwell  among  men  without  being
dependent on their passions? On further consideration I have discovered that my desire contradicted
itself; for were I to hold to nothing else, I should at least hold to the spot on which I had settled; my life
would be attached to that spot, as the dryads were attached to their trees. I have discovered that the
words liberty and empire are incompatible; I can only be master of a cottage by ceasing to be master of
myself.
  "'Hoc erat in votis, modus agri non ita magnus.' Horace, lib. ii., sat. vi.
  "I remember that my property was the origin of our inquiries. You argued very forcibly that I could
not keep both my wealth and my liberty; but when you wished me to be free and at the same time
without  needs,  you  desired  two  incompatible  things,  for  I  could  only  be  independent  of  men  by
returning to dependence on nature. What then shall I do with the fortune bequeathed to me by my
parents? To begin with, I will not be dependent on it; I will cut myself loose from all the ties which
bind me to it; if it is left in my hands, I shall keep it; if I am deprived of it, I shall not be dragged away
with it. I shall not trouble myself to keep it, but I shall keep steadfastly to my own place. Rich or poor, I
shall be free. I shall be free not merely in this country or in that; I shall be free in any part of the world.
All the chains of prejudice are broken; as far as I am concerned I know only the bonds of necessity. Ihave been trained to endure them from my childhood, and I shall endure them until death, for I am a
man; and why should I not wear those chains as a free man, for I should have to wear them even if I
were a slave, together with the additional fetters of slavery?
  "What matters my place in the world? What matters it where I am? Wherever there are men, I am
among my brethren; wherever there are none, I am in my own home. So long as I may be independent
and rich, and have wherewithal to live, and I shall live. If my wealth makes a slave of me, I shall find it
easy to renounce it. I have hands to work, and I shall get a living. If my hands fail me, I shall live if
others will support me; if they forsake me I shall die; I shall die even if I am not forsaken, for death is
not the penalty of poverty, it is a law of nature. Whensoever death comes I defy it; it shall never find
me making preparations for life; it shall never prevent me having lived.
  "My father, this is my decision. But for my passions, I should be in my manhood independent as
God himself, for I only desire what is and I should never fight against fate. At least, there is only one
chain, a chain which I shall ever wear, a chain of which I may be justly proud. Come then, give me my
Sophy, and I am free."
  "Dear Emile, I am glad indeed to hear you speak like a man, and to behold the feelings of your
heart. At your age this exaggerated unselfishness is not unpleasing. It will decrease when you have
children of your own, and then you will be just what a good father and a wise man ought to be. I knew
what the result would be before our travels; I knew that when you saw our institutions you would be far
from reposing a confidence in them which they do not deserve. In vain do we seek freedom under the
power of the laws. The laws! Where is there any law? Where is there any respect for law? Under the
name of law you have everywhere seen the rule of self-interest and human passion. But the eternal laws
of nature and of order exist. For the wise man they take the place of positive law; they are written in the
depths of his heart by conscience and reason; let him obey these laws and be free; for there is no slave
but the evil-doer, for he always does evil against his will. Liberty is not to be found in any form of
government, she is in the heart of the free man, he bears her with him everywhere. The vile man bears
his slavery in himself; the one would be a slave in Geneva, the other free in Paris.
  "If I spoke to you of the duties of a citizen, you would perhaps ask me, 'Which is my country?' And
you would think you had put me to confusion. Yet you would be mistaken, dear Emile, for he who has
no country has, at least, the land in which he lives. There is always a government and certain so-called
laws under which he has lived in peace. What matter though the social contract has not been observed,
if he has been protected by private interest against the general will, if he has been secured by public
violence against private aggressions, if the evil he has beheld has taught him to love the good, and if
our institutions themselves have made him perceive and hate their own iniquities? Oh, Emile, where is
the man who owes nothing to the land in which he lives? Whatever that land may be, he owes to it the
most precious thing possessed by man, the morality of his actions and the love of virtue. Born in the
depths of a forest he would have lived in greater happiness and freedom; but being able to follow his
inclinations without a struggle there would have been no merit in his goodness, he would not have been
virtuous, as he may be now, in spite of his passions. The mere sight of order teaches him to know and
love it. The public good, which to others is a mere pretext, is a real motive for him. He learns to fight
against himself and to prevail, to sacrifice his own interest to the common weal. It is not true that he
gains nothing from the laws; they give him courage to be just, even in the midst of the wicked. It is not
true that they have failed to make him free; they have taught him to rule himself.
  "Do not say therefore, 'What matter where I am?' It does matter that you should be where you can
best  do  your  duty;  and  one  of  these  duties  is  to  love  your  native  land.  Your  fellow-countrymen
protected you in childhood; you should love them in your manhood. You should live among them, or at
least you should live where you can serve them to the best of your power, and where they know where
to find you if ever they are in need of you. There are circumstances in which a man may be of more use
to his fellow-countrymen outside his country than within it. Then he should listen only to his own zeal
and should bear his exile without a murmur; that exile is one of his duties. But you, dear Emile, you
have not undertaken the painful task of telling men the truth, you must live in the midst of your fellow-creatures, cultivating their friendship in pleasant intercourse; you must be their benefactor, their pattern;
your example will do more than all our books, and the good they see you do will touch them more
deeply than all our empty words.
  "Yet I do not exhort you to live in a town; on the contrary, one of the examples which the good
should give to others is that of a patriarchal, rural life, the earliest life of man, the most peaceful, the
most natural, and the most attractive to the uncorrupted heart. Happy is the land, my young friend,
where one need not seek peace in the wilderness! But where is that country? A man of good will finds
it hard to satisfy his inclinations in the midst of towns, where he can find few but frauds and rogues to
work for. The welcome given by the towns to those idlers who flock to them to seek their fortunes only
completes the ruin of the country, when the country ought really to be repopulated at the cost of the
towns. All the men who withdraw from high society are useful just because of their withdrawal, since
its vices are the result of its numbers. They are also useful when they can bring with them into the
desert places life, culture, and the love of their first condition. I like to think what benefits Emile and
Sophy, in their simple home, may spread about them, what a stimulus they may give to the country,
how they may revive the zeal of the unlucky villagers.
  "In fancy I see the population increasing, the land coming under cultivation, the earth clothed with
fresh beauty. Many workers and plenteous crops transform the labours of the fields into holidays; I see
the young couple in the midst of the rustic sports which they have revived, and I hear the shouts of joy
and the blessings of those about them. Men say the golden age is a fable; it always will be for those
whose feelings and taste are depraved. People do not really regret the golden age, for they do nothing to
restore it. What is needed for its restoration? One thing only, and that is an impossibility; we must love
the golden age.
  "Already it seems to be reviving around Sophy's home; together you will only complete what her
worthy parents have begun. But, dear Emile, you must not let so pleasant a life give you a distaste for
sterner duties, if every they are laid upon you; remember that the Romans sometimes left the plough to
become consul. If the prince or the state calls you to the service of your country, leave all to fulfil the
honourable duties of a citizen in the post assigned to you. If you find that duty onerous, there is a sure
and honourable means of escaping from it; do your duty so honestly that it will not long be left in your
hands. Moreover, you need not fear the difficulties of such a test; while there are men of our own time,
they will not summon you to serve the state."
  Why may I not paint the return of Emile to Sophy and the end of their love, or rather the beginning
of their wedded love! A love founded on esteem which will last with life itself, on virtues which will
not fade with fading beauty, on fitness of character which gives a charm to intercourse, and prolongs to
old age the delights of early love. But all such details would be pleasing but not useful, and so far I
have not permitted myself to give attractive details unless I thought they would be useful. Shall I
abandon this rule when my task is nearly ended? No, I feel that my pen is weary. Too feeble for such
prolonged labours, I should abandon this if it were not so nearly completed; if it is not to be left
imperfect it is time it were finished.
  At last I see the happy day approaching, the happiest day of Emile's life and my own; I see the
crown of my labours, I begin to appreciate their results. The noble pair are united till death do part;
heart and lips confirm no empty vows; they are man and wife. When they return from the church, they
follow where they are led; they know not where they are, whither they are going, or what is happening
around them. They heed nothing, they answer at random; their eyes are troubled and they see nothing.
Oh, rapture! Oh, human weakness! Man is overwhelmed by the feeling of happiness, he is not strong
enough to bear it.
  There are few people who know how to talk to the newly-married couple. The gloomy propriety of
some and the light conversation of others seem to me equally out of place. I would rather their young
hearts were left to themselves, to abandon themselves to an agitation which is not without its charm,
rather than that they should be so cruelly distressed by a false modesty, or annoyed by coarse witticisms
which, even if they appealed to them at other times, are surely out of place on such a day.I behold our young people, wrapped in a pleasant languor, giving no heed to what is said. Shall I,
who desire that they should enjoy all the days of their life, shall I let them lose this precious day? No, I
desire that they shall taste its pleasures and enjoy them. I rescue them from the foolish crowd, and walk
with them in some quiet place; I recall them to themselves by speaking of them I wish to speak, not
merely to their ears, but to their hearts, and I know that there is only one subject of which they can
think to-day.
  "My children," say I, taking a hand of each, "it is three years since I beheld the birth of the pure and
vigorous passion which is your happiness to-day. It has gone on growing; your eyes tell me that it has
reached its highest point; it must inevitably decline." My readers can fancy the raptures, the anger, the
vows of Emile, and the scornful air with which Sophy withdraws her hand from mine; how their eyes
protest that they will adore each other till their latest breath. I let them have their way; then I continue:
  "I have often thought that if the happiness of love could continue in marriage, we should find a
Paradise upon earth. So far this has never been. But if it were not quite impossible, you two are quite
worthy to set an example you have not received, an example which few married couples could follow.
My children, shall I tell you what I think is the way, and the only way, to do it?"
  They look at one another and smile at my simplicity. Emile thanks me curtly for my prescription,
saying that he thinks Sophy has a better, at any rate it is good enough for him. Sophy agrees with him
and seems just as certain. Yet in spite of her mockery, I think I see a trace of curiosity. I study Emile;
his eager eyes are fixed upon his wife's beauty; he has no curiosity for anything else; and he pays little
heed to what I say. It is my turn to smile, and I say to myself, "I will soon get your attention."
  The almost imperceptible difference between these two hidden impulses is characteristic of a real
difference between the two sexes; it is that men are generally less constant than women, and are sooner
weary of success in love. A woman foresees man's future inconstancy, and is anxious; it is this which
makes her more jealous. [Footnote: In France it is the wives who first emancipate themselves; and
necessarily so, for having very little heart, and only desiring attention, when a husband ceases to pay
them attention they care very little for himself. In other countries it is not so; it is the husband who first
emancipates himself; and necessarily so, for women, faithful, but foolish, importune men with their
desires and only disgust them. There may be plenty of exceptions to these general truths; but I still
think they are truths.] When his passion begins to cool she is compelled to pay him the attentions he
used to bestow on her for her pleasure; she weeps, it is her turn to humiliate herself, and she is rarely
successful. Affection and kind deeds rarely win hearts, and they hardly ever win them back. I return to
my prescription against the cooling of love in marriage.
  "It is plain and simple," I continue. "It consists in remaining lovers when you are husband and
wife."
  "Indeed," said Emile, laughing at my secret, "we shall not find that hard."
  "Perhaps you will find it harder than you think. Pray give me time to explain.
  "Cords too tightly stretched are soon broken. This is what happens when the marriage bond is
subjected to too great a strain. The fidelity imposed by it upon husband and wife is the most sacred of
all rights; but it gives to each too great a power over the other. Constraint and love do not agree
together, and pleasure is not to be had for the asking. Do not blush, Sophy, and do not try to run away.
God forbid that I should offend your modesty! But your fate for life is at stake. For so great a cause,
permit a conversation between your husband and your father which you would not permit elsewhere.
  "It is not so much possession as mastery of which people tire, and affection is often more prolonged
with regard to a mistress than a wife. How can people make a duty of the tenderest caresses, and a right
of the sweetest pledges of love? It is mutual desire which gives the right, and nature knows no other.
The law may restrict this right, it cannot extend it. The pleasure is so sweet in itself! Should it owe to
sad constraint the power which it cannot gain from its own charms? No, my children, in marriage the
hearts are bound, but the bodies are not enslaved. You owe one another fidelity, but not complaisance.
Neither of you may give yourself to another, but neither of you belongs to the other except at your own
will.  "If it is true, dear Emile, that you would always be your wife's lover, that she should always be your
mistress and her own, be a happy but respectful lover; obtain all from love and nothing from duty, and
let the slightest favours never be of right but of grace. I know that modesty shuns formal confessions
and requires to be overcome; but with delicacy and true love, will the lover ever be mistaken as to the
real will? Will not he know when heart and eyes grant what the lips refuse? Let both for ever be master
of their person and their caresses, let them have the right to bestow them only at their own will.
Remember that even in marriage this pleasure is only lawful when the desire is mutual. Do not be
afraid, my children, that this law will keep you apart; on the contrary, it will make both more eager to
please, and will prevent satiety. True to one another, nature and love will draw you to each other."
  Emile is angry and cries out against these and similar suggestions. Sophy is ashamed, she hides her
face behind her fan and says nothing. Perhaps while she is saying nothing, she is the most annoyed. Yet
I insist, without mercy; I make Emile blush for his lack of delicacy; I undertake to be surety for Sophy
that she will undertake her share of the treaty. I incite her to speak, you may guess she will not dare to
say I am mistaken. Emile anxiously consults the eyes of his young wife; he beholds them, through all
her confusion, filled with a, voluptuous anxiety which reassures him against the dangers of trusting her.
He flings himself at her feet, kisses with rapture the hand extended to him, and swears that beyond the
fidelity he has already promised, he will renounce all other rights over her. "My dear wife," said he, "be
the arbiter of my pleasures as you are already the arbiter of my life and fate. Should your cruelty cost
me life itself I would yield to you my most cherished rights. I will owe nothing to your complaisance,
but all to your heart."
  Dear Emile, be comforted; Sophy herself is too generous to let you fall a victim to your generosity.
  In the evening, when I am about to leave them, I say in the most solemn tone, "Remember both of
you, that you are free, that there is no question of marital rights; believe me, no false deference. Emile
will you come home with me? Sophy permits it." Emile is ready to strike me in his anger. "And you,
Sophy, what do you say? Shall I take him away?" The little liar, blushing, answers, "Yes." A tender and
delightful falsehood, better than truth itself!
  The next day. ... Men no longer delight in the picture of bliss; their taste is as much depraved by the
corruption of vice as their hearts. They can no longer feel what is touching or perceive what is truly
delightful. You who, as a picture of voluptuous joys, see only the happy lovers immersed in pleasure,
your picture is very imperfect; you have only its grosser part, the sweetest charms of pleasure are not
there. Which of you has seen a young couple, happily married, on the morrow of their marriage? their
chaste yet languid looks betray the intoxication of the bliss they have enjoyed, the blessed security of
innocence, and the delightful certainty that they will spend the rest of their life together. The heart of
man can behold no more rapturous sight; this is the real picture of happiness; you have beheld it a
hundred times without heeding it; your hearts are so hard that you cannot love it. Sophy, peaceful and
happy, spends the day in the arms of her tender mother; a pleasant resting place, after a night spent in
the arms of her husband.
  The day after I am aware of a slight change. Emile tries to look somewhat vexed; but through this
pretence I notice such a tender eagerness, and indeed so much submission, that I do not think there is
much amiss. As for Sophy she is merrier than she was yesterday; her eyes are sparkling and she looks
very well pleased with herself; she is charming to Emile; she ventures to tease him a little and vexes
him still more.
  These changes are almost imperceptible, but they do not escape me; I am anxious and I question
Emile in private, and I learn that, to his great regret, and in spite of all entreaties, he was not permitted
last night to share Sophy's bed. That haughty lady had made haste to assert her right. An explanation
takes place. Emile complains bitterly, Sophy laughs; but at last, seeing that Emile is really getting
angry, she looks at him with eyes full of tenderness and love, and pressing my hand, she only says these
two words, but in a tone that goes to his heart, "Ungrateful man!" Emile is too stupid to understand. But
I understand, and I send Emile away and speak to Sophy privately in her turn.
  "I see," said I, "the reason for this whim. No one could be more delicate, and no one could use thatdelicacy so ill. Dear Sophy, do not be anxious, I have given you a man; do not be afraid to treat him as
such. You have had the first fruits of his youth; he has not squandered his manhood and it will endure
for you. My dear child, I must explain to you why I said what I did in our conversation of the day
before yesterday. Perhaps you only understood it as a way of restraining your pleasures to secure their
continuance. Oh, Sophy, there was another object, more worthy of my care. When Emile became your
husband, he became your head, it is yours to obey; this is the will of nature. When the wife is like
Sophy, it is, however, good for the man to be led by her; that is another of nature's laws, and it is to
give you as much authority over his heart, as his sex gives him over your person, that I have made you
the arbiter of his pleasures. It will be hard for you, but you will control him if you can control yourself,
and what has already happened shows me that this difficult art is not beyond your courage. You will
long rule him by love if you make your favours scarce and precious, if you know how to use them
aright. If you want to have your husband always in your power, keep him at a distance. But let your
sternness be the result of modesty not caprice; let him find you modest not capricious; beware lest in
controlling his love you make him doubt your own. Be all the dearer for your favours and all the more
respected when you refuse them; let him honour his wife's chastity, without having to complain of her
coldness.
  "Thus, my child, he will give you his confidence, he will listen to your opinion, will consult you in
his business, and will decide nothing without you. Thus you may recall him to wisdom, if he strays, and
bring him back by a gentle persuasion, you may make yourself lovable in order to be useful, you may
employ coquetry on behalf of virtue, and love on behalf of reason.
  "Do not think that with all this, your art will always serve your purpose. In spite of every precaution
pleasures are destroyed by possession, and love above all others. But when love has lasted long enough,
a gentle habit takes its place and the charm of confidence succeeds the raptures of passion. Children
form a bond between their parents, a bond no less tender and a bond which is sometimes stronger than
love itself. When you cease to be Emile's mistress you will be his friend and wife; you will be the
mother of his children. Then instead of your first reticence let there be the fullest intimacy between
you; no more separate beds, no more refusals, no more caprices. Become so truly his better half that he
can no longer do without you, and if he must leave you, let him feel that he is far from himself. You
have made the charms of home life so powerful in your father's home, let them prevail in your own.
Every man who is happy at home loves his wife. Remember that if your husband is happy in his home,
you will be a happy wife.
  "For the present, do not be too hard on your lover; he deserves more consideration; he will be
offended by your fears; do not care for his health at the cost of his happiness, and enjoy your own
happiness. You must neither wait for disgust nor repulse desire; you must not refuse for the sake of
refusing, but only to add to the value of your favours."
  Then, taking her back to Emile, I say to her young husband, "One must bear the yoke voluntarily
imposed upon oneself. Let your deserts be such that the yoke may be lightened. Above all, sacrifice to
the graces, and do not think that sulkiness will make you more amiable." Peace is soon made, and
everybody can guess its terms. The treaty is signed with a kiss, after which I say to my pupil, "Dear
Emile, all his life through a man needs a guide and counsellor. So far I have done my best to fulfil that
duty;  my  lengthy  task  is  now  ended,  and  another  will  undertake  this  duty.  To-day  I  abdicate  the
authority which you gave me; henceforward Sophy is your guardian."
  Little by little the first raptures subside and they can peacefully enjoy the delights of their new
condition. Happy lovers, worthy husband and wife! To do honour to their virtues, to paint their felicity,
would require the history of their lives. How often does my heart throb with rapture when I behold in
them the crown of my life's work! How often do I take their hands in mine blessing God with all my
heart! How often do I kiss their clasped hands! How often do their tears of joy fall upon mine! They are
touched by my joy and they share my raptures. Their worthy parents see their own youth renewed in
that of their children; they begin to live, as it were, afresh in them; or rather they perceive, for the first
time, the true value of life; they curse their former wealth, which prevented them from enjoying sodelightful a lot when they were young. If there is such a thing as happiness upon earth, you must seek it
in our abode.
  One morning a few months later Emile enters my room and embraces me, saying, "My master,
congratulate your son; he hopes soon to have the honour of being a father. What a responsibility will be
ours, how much we shall need you! Yet God forbid that I should let you educate the son as you
educated the father. God forbid that so sweet and holy a task should be fulfilled by any but myself,
even though I should make as good a choice for my child as was made for me! But continue to be the
teacher of the young teachers. Advise and control us; we shall be easily led; as long as I live I shall
need you. I need you more than ever now that I am taking up the duties of manhood. You have done
your own duty; teach me to follow your example, while you enjoy your well-earned leisure."
  THE END





  A DISCOURSE ON POLITICAL ECONOMY
  Jean Jacques Rousseau
  1755
  THE word Economy, or OEconomy, is derived from oikos, a house, and nomos, law, and meant
originally only the wise and legitimate government of the house for the common good of the whole
family. The meaning of the term was then extended to the government of that great family, the State.
To distinguish these two senses of the word, the latter is called general or political economy, and the
former domestic or particular economy. The first only is discussed in the present discourse.
  Even if there were as close an analogy as many authors maintain between the State and the family,
it would not follow that the rules of conduct proper for one of these societies would be also proper for
the other. They differ too much in extent to be regulated in the same manner; and there will always be a
great difference between domestic government, in which a father can see everything for himself, and
civil government, where the chief sees hardly anything save through the eyes of others. To put both on
an equality in this respect, the talents, strength, and all the faculties of the father would have to increase
in proportion to the size of his family, and the soul of a powerful monarch would have to be, to that of
an ordinary man, as the extent of his empire is to that of a private person's estate.
  But how could the government of the State be like that of the family, when the basis on which they
rest is so different? The father being physically stronger than his children, his paternal authority, as
long as they need his protection, may be reasonably said to be established by nature. But in the great
family, all the members of which are naturally equal, the political authority, being purely arbitrary as
far as its institution is concerned, can be founded only on conventions, and the Magistrate can have no
authority over the rest, except by virtue of the laws. The duties of a father are dictated to him by natural
feelings, and in a manner that seldom allows him to neglect them. For rulers there is no such principle,
and they are really obliged to the people only by what they themselves have promised to do, and the
people have therefore a right to require of them. Another more important difference is that since the
children have nothing but what they receive from their father, it is plain that all the rights of property
belong to him, or emanate from him; but quite the opposite is the case in the great family, where the
general administration is established only to secure individual property, which is antecedent to it. The
principal object of the work of the whole house is to preserve and increase the patrimony of the father,
in order that he may be able some day to distribute it among his children without impoverishing them;
whereas the wealth of the exchequer is only a means, often ill understood, of keeping the individuals in
peace and plenty. In a word, the little family is destined to be extinguished, and to resolve itself some
day into several families of a similar nature; but the great family, being constituted to endure for ever in
the same condition, need not, like the small one, increase for the purpose of multiplying, but need onlymaintain itself; and it can easily be proved that any increase does it more harm than good.
  In the family, it is clear, for several reasons which lie in its very nature, that the father ought to
command. In the first place, the authority ought not to be equally divided between father and mother;
the government must be single, and in every division of opinion there must be one preponderant voice
to decide. Secondly, however lightly we may regard the disadvantages peculiar to women, yet, as they
necessarily  occasion  intervals  of  inaction,  this  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  excluding  them  from  this
supreme authority: for when the balance is perfectly even, a straw is enough to turn the scale. Besides,
the husband ought to be able to superintend his wife's conduct, because it is of importance for him to be
assured that the children, whom he is obliged to acknowledge and maintain, belong to no one but
himself. Thirdly, children should be obedient to their father, at first of necessity, and afterwards from
gratitude: after having had their wants satisfied by him during one half of their lives, they ought to
consecrate the other half to providing for his. Fourthly, servants owe him their services in exchange for
the provision he makes for them, though they may break off the bargain as soon as it ceases to suit
them. I say nothing here of slavery, because it is contrary to nature, and cannot be authorised by any
right or law.
  There is nothing of all this in political society, in which the chief is so far from having any natural
interest in the happiness of the individuals, that it is not uncommon for him to seek his own in their
misery. If the magistracy is hereditary, a community of men is often governed by a child. If it be
elective, innumerable inconveniences arise from such election; while in both cases all the advantages of
paternity are lost. If you have but a single ruler, you lie at the discretion of a master who has no reason
to love you: and if you have several, you must bear at once their tyranny and their divisions. In a word,
abuses are inevitable and their consequences fatal in every society where the public interest and the
laws have no natural force, and are perpetually attacked by personal interest and the passions of the
ruler and the members.
  Although the functions of the father of a family and those of the chief magistrate ought to make for
the same object, they must do so in such different ways, and their duty and rights are so essentially
distinct, that we cannot confound them without forming very false ideas about the fundamental laws of
society, and falling into errors which are fatal to mankind. In fact, if the voice of nature is the best
counsellor to which a father can listen in the discharge of his duty, for the Magistrate it is a false guide,
which continually prevents him from performing his, and leads him on sooner or later to the ruin of
himself  and  of  the  State,  if  he  is  not  restrained  by  the  most  sublime  virtue.  The  only  precaution
necessary for the father of a family is to guard himself against depravity, and prevent his natural
inclinations from being corrupted; whereas it is these themselves which corrupt the Magistrate. In order
to act aright, the first has only to consult his heart; the other becomes a traitor the moment he listens to
his. Even his own reason should be suspect to him, nor should he follow any rule other than the public
reason, which is the law. Thus nature has made a multitude of good fathers of families; but it is
doubtful whether, from the very beginning of the world, human wisdom has made ten men capable of
governing their peers.
  From all that has just been said, it follows that public economy, which is my subject, has been
rightly distinguished from private economy, and that, the State having nothing in common with the
family except the obligations which their heads lie under of making both of them happy, the same rules
of conduct cannot apply to both. I have considered these few lines enough to overthrow the detestable
system which Sir Robert Filmer has endeavoured to establish in his Patriarcha; a work to which two
celebrated writers have done too much honour in writing books to refute it.E1 Moreover, this error is of
very long standing; for Aristotle himself thought proper to combat it with arguments which may be
found in the first book of his Politics.
I must here ask my readers to distinguish also between public economy, which is my subject and
which I call government, and the supreme authority, which I call Sovereignty; a distinction which
consists in the fact that the latter has the right of legislation, and in certain cases binds the body of the
nation itself, while the former has only the right of execution, and is binding only on individuals.I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  making  use  of  a  very  common,  and  in  some  respects  inaccurate,
comparison, which will serve to illustrate my meaning.
  The body politic, taken individually, may be considered as an organised, living body, resembling
that of man. The sovereign power represents the head; the laws and customs are the brain, the source of
the nerves and seat of the understanding, will and senses, of which the Judges and Magistrates are the
organs: commerce, industry, and agriculture are the mouth and stomach which prepare the common
subsistence; the public income is the blood, which a prudent economy, in performing the functions of
the heart, causes to distribute through the whole body nutriment and life: the citizens are the body and
the members, which make the machine live, move and work; and no part of this machine can be
damaged without the painful impression being at once conveyed to the brain, if the animal is in a state
of health.
  The life of both bodies is the self common to the whole, the reciprocal sensibility and internal
correspondence of all the parts. Where this communication ceases, where the formal unity disappears,
and the contiguous parts belong to one another only by juxtaposition, the man is dead, or the State is
dissolved.
  The body politic, therefore, is also a moral being possessed of a will; and this general will, which
tends always to the preservation and welfare of the whole and of every part, and is the source of the
laws, constitutes for all the members of the State, in their relations to one another and to it, the rule of
what is just or unjust: a truth which shows, by the way, how idly some writers have treated as theft the
subtlety prescribed to children at Sparta for obtaining their frugal repasts, as if everything ordained by
the law were not lawful.
  It is important to observe that this rule of justice, though certain with regard to all citizens, may be
defective with regard to foreigners. The reason is clear. The will of the State, though general in relation
to its own members, is no longer so in relation to other States and their members, but becomes, for
them, a particular and individual will, which has its rule of justice in the law of nature. This, however,
enters equally into the principle here laid down; for in such a case, the great city of the world becomes
the body politic, whose general will is always the law of nature, and of which the different States and
peoples  are  individual  members.  From  these  distinctions,  applied  to  each  political  society  and  its
members,  are  derived  the  most  certain  and  universal  rules,  by  which  we  can  judge  whether  a
government is good or bad, and in general of the morality of all human actions.
  Every political society is composed of other smaller societies of different kinds, each of which has
its interests and its rules of conduct: but those societies which everybody perceives, because they have
an external and authorised form, are not the only ones that actually exist in the State: all individuals
who are united by a common interest compose as many others, either transitory or permanent, whose
influence is none the less real because it is less apparent, and the proper observation of whose various
relations is the true knowledge of public morals and manners. The influence of all these tacit or formal
associations causes, by the influence of their will, as many different modifications of the public will.
The will of these particular societies has always two relations; for the members of the association, it is a
general will; for the great society, it is a particular will; and it is often right with regard to the first
object, and wrong as to the second. An individual may be a devout priest, a brave soldier, or a zealous
senator, and yet a bad citizen. A particular resolution may be advantageous to the smaller community,
but pernicious to the greater. It is true that particular societies being always subordinate to the general
society in preference to others, the duty of a citizen takes precedence of that of a senator, and a man's
duty of that of a citizen: but unhappily personal interest is always found in inverse ratio to duty, and
increases in proportion as the association grows narrower, and the engagement less sacred; which
irrefragably proves that the most general will is always the most just also, and that the voice of the
people is in fact the voice of God.
  It does not follow that the public decisions are always equitable; they may possibly, for reasons
which I have given, not be so when they have to do with foreigners. Thus it is not impossible that a
Republic, though in itself well governed, should enter upon an unjust war. Nor is it less possible for theCouncil of a Democracy to pass unjust decrees, and condemn the innocent; but this never happens
unless the people is seduced by private interests, which the credit or eloquence of some clever persons
substitutes for those of the State: in which case the general will will be one thing, and the result of the
public deliberation another. This is not contradicted by the case of the Athenian Democracy; for Athens
was in fact not a Democracy, but a very tyrannical Aristocracy, governed by philosophers and orators.
Carefully determine what happens in every public deliberation, and it will be seen that the general will
is always for the common good; but very often there is a secret division, a tacit confederacy, which, for
particular ends, causes the natural disposition of the assembly to be set at nought. In such a case the
body of society is really divided into other bodies, the members of which acquire a general will, which
is good and just with respect to these new bodies, but unjust and bad with regard to the whole, from
which each is thus dismembered.
  We see then how easy it is, by the help of these principles, to explain those apparent contradictions,
which are noticed in the conduct of many persons who are scrupulously honest in some respects, and
cheats and scoundrels in others, who trample under foot the most sacred duties, and yet are faithful to
the death to engagements that are often illegitimate. Thus the most depraved of men always pay some
sort of homage to public faith; and even robbers, who are the enemies of virtue in the great society, pay
some respect to the shadow of it in their secret caves.
  In establishing the general will as the first principle of public economy, and the fundamental rule of
government, I have not thought it necessary to inquire seriously whether the Magistrates belong to the
people, or the people to the Magistrates; or whether in public affairs the good of the State should be
taken into account, or only that of its rulers. That question indeed has long been decided one way in
theory, and another in practice; and in general it would be ridiculous to expect that those who are in fact
masters will prefer any other interest to their own. It would not be improper, therefore, further to
distinguish public economy as popular or tyrannical. The former is that of every State, in which there
reigns between the people and the rulers unity of interest and will: the latter will necessarily exist
wherever the government and the people have different interests, and, consequently, opposing wills.
The rules of the latter are written at length in the archives of history, and in the satires of Machiavelli.
The rules of the former are found only in the writings of those philosophers who venture to proclaim
the rights of humanity.
  I.  The  first  and  most  important  rule  of  legitimate  or  popular  government,  that  is  to  say,  of
government whose object is the good of the people, is therefore, as I have observed, to follow in
everything  the  general  will.  But  to  follow  this  will  it  is  necessary  to  know  it,  and  above  all  to
distinguish it from the particular will, beginning with one's self: this distinction is always very difficult
to make, and only the most sublime virtue can afford sufficient illumination for it. As, in order to will,
it is necessary to be free, a difficulty no less great than the former arises — that of preserving at once
the public liberty and the authority of government. Look into the motives which have induced men,
once united by their common needs in a general society, to unite themselves still more intimately by
means of civil societies: you will find no other motive than that of assuring the property, life and liberty
of each member by the protection of all. But can men be forced to defend the liberty of any one among
them, without trespassing on that of others? And how can they provide for the public needs, without
alienating  the  individual  property  of  those  who  are  forced  to  contribute  to  them?  With  whatever
sophistry all this may be covered over, it is certain that if any constraint can be laid on my will, I am no
longer free, and that I am no longer master of my own property, if any one else can lay a hand on it.
This difficulty, which would have seemed insurmountable, has been removed, like the first, by the most
sublime of all human institutions, or rather by a divine inspiration, which teaches mankind to imitate
here below the unchangeable decrees of the Deity. By what inconceivable art has a means been found
of making men free by making them subject; of using in the service of the State the properties, the
persons and even the lives of all its members, without constraining and without consulting them; of
confining their will by their own admission; of overcoming their refusal by that consent, and forcing
them to punish themselves, when they act against their own will? How can it be that all should obey,yet nobody take upon him to command, and that all should serve, and yet have no masters, but be the
more free, as, in apparent subjection, each loses no part of his liberty but what might be hurtful to that
of another? These wonders are the work of law. It is to law alone that men owe justice and liberty. It is
this salutary organ of the will of all which establishes, in civil right, the natural equality between men.
It is this celestial voice which dictates to each citizen the precepts of public reason, and teaches him to
act according to the rules of his own judgment, and not to behave inconsistently with himself. It is with
this voice alone that political rulers should speak when they command; for no sooner does one man,
setting aside the law, claim to subject another to his private will, than he departs from the state of civil
society, and confronts him face to face in the pure state of nature, in which obedience is prescribed
solely by necessity.
  The most pressing interest of the ruler, and even his most indispensable duty, therefore, is to watch
over the observation of the laws of which he is the minister, and on which his whole authority is
founded. At the same time, if he exacts the observance of them from others, he is the more strongly
bound to observe them himself, since he enjoys all their favour. For his example is of such force, that
even if the people were willing to permit him to release himself from the yoke of the law, he ought to
be cautious in availing himself of so dangerous a prerogative, which others might soon claim to usurp
in their turn, and often use to his prejudice. At bottom, as all social engagements are mutual in nature, it
is impossible for any one to set himself above the law, without renouncing its advantages; for nobody is
bound by any obligation to one who claims that he is under no obligations to others. For this reason no
exemption  from  the  law  will  ever  be  granted,  on  any  ground  whatsoever,  in  a  well-regulated
government.  Those  citizens  who  have  deserved  well  of  their  country  ought  to  be  rewarded  with
honours, but never with privileges: for the Republic is at the eve of its fall, when any one can think it
fine not to obey the laws. If the nobility or the soldiery should ever adopt such a maxim, all would be
lost beyond redemption.
  The  power  of  the  laws  depends  still  more  on  their  own  wisdom  than  on  the  severity  of  their
administrators, and the public will derives its greatest weight from the reason which has dictated it.
Hence Plato looked upon it as a very necessary precaution to place at the head of all edicts a preamble,
setting forth their justice and utility. In fact, the first of all laws is to respect the laws: the severity of
penalties is only a vain resource, invented by little minds in order to substitute terror for that respect
which they have no means of obtaining. It has constantly been observed that in those countries where
legal punishments are most severe, they are also most frequent; so that the cruelty of such punishments
is a proof only of the multitude of criminals, and, punishing everything with equal severity, induces
those who are guilty to commit crimes, in order to escape being punished for their faults.
  But though the government be not master of the law, it is much to be its guarantor, and to possess a
thousand means of inspiring the love of it. In this alone the talent of reigning consists. With force in
one's hands, there is no art required to make the whole world tremble, nor indeed much to gain men's
hearts; for experience has long since taught the people to give its rulers great credit for all the evil they
abstain from doing it, and to adore them if they do not absolutely hate it. A fool, if he be obeyed, may
punish crimes as well as another: but the true statesman is he who knows how to prevent them: it is
over the wills, even more than the actions, of his subjects that his honourable rule is extended. If he
could  secure  that  every  one  should  act  aright,  he  would  no  longer  have  anything  to  do;  and  the
masterpiece of his labours would be to be able to remain unemployed. It is certain, at least, that the
greatest talent a ruler can possess is to disguise his power, in order to render it less odious, and to
conduct the State so peaceably as to make it seem to have no need of conductors.
I conclude, therefore, that, as the first duty of the legislator is to make the laws conformable to the
general will, the first rule of public economy is that the administration of justice should be conformable
to the laws. It will even be enough to prevent the State from being ill governed, that the Legislator shall
have provided, as he should, for every need of place, climate, soil, custom, neighbourhood, and all the
rest of the relations peculiar to the people he had to institute. Not but what there still remains an infinity
of details of administration and economy, which are left to the wisdom of the government: but there aretwo infallible rules for its good conduct on these occasions; one is, that the spirit of the law ought to
decide in every particular case that could not be foreseen; the other is that the general will, the source
and supplement of all laws, should be consulted wherever they fail. But how, I shall be asked, can the
general  will  be  known  in  cases  in  which  it  has  not  expressed  itself?  Must  the  whole  nation  be
assembled together at every unforeseen event? Certainly not. It ought the less to be assembled, because
it is by no means certain that its decision would be the expression of the general will; besides, the
method would be impractible in a great people, and is hardly ever necessary where the government is
well-intentioned: for the rulers well know that the general will is always on the side which is most
favourable to the public interest, that is to say, most equitable; so that it is needful only to act justly, to
be certain of following the general will. When this is flouted too openly, it makes itself felt, in spite of
the formidable restraint of the public authority. I shall cite the nearest possible examples that may be
followed in such cases.
  In China, it is the constant maxim of the Prince to decide against his officers, in every dispute that
arises between them and the people. If bread be too dear in any province, the Intendant of that province
is thrown into prison. If there be an insurrection in another, the Governor is dismissed, and every
Mandarin answers with his head for all the mischief that happens in his department. Not that these
affairs  do  not  subsequently  undergo  a  regular  examination;  but  long  experience  has  caused  the
judgment to be thus anticipated. There is seldom any injustice to be repaired; in the meantime, the
Emperor, being satisfied that public outcry does not arise without cause, always discovers, through the
seditious clamours which he punishes, just grievances to redress.
  It is a great thing to preserve the rule of peace and order through all the parts of the Republic; it is a
great thing that the State should be tranquil, and the law respected: but if nothing more is done, there
will be in all this more appearance than reality; for that government which confines itself to mere
obedience will find difficulty in getting itself obeyed. If it is good to know how to deal with men as
they are, it is much better to make them what there is need that they should be. The most absolute
authority is that which penetrates into a man's inmost being, and concerns itself no less with his will
than with his actions. It is certain that all peoples become in the long run what the government makes
them; warriors, citizens, men, when it so pleases: or merely populace and rabble, when it chooses to
make them so. Hence every prince who despises his subjects, dishonours himself, in confessing that he
does not know how to make them worthy of respect. Make men, therefore, if you would command
men: if you would have them obedient to the laws, make them love the laws, and then they will need
only to know what is their duty to do it. This was the great art of ancient governments, in those distant
times when philosophers gave laws to men, and made use of their authority only to render them wise
and happy. Thence arose the numerous sumptuary laws, the many regulations of morals, and all the
public rules of conduct which were admitted or rejected with the greatest care. Even tyrants did not
forget this important part of administration, but took as great pains to corrupt the morals of their slaves,
as  Magistrates  took  to  correct  those  of  their  fellow-citizens.  But  our  modern  governments,  which
imagine they have done everything when they have raised money, conceive that it is unnecessary and
even impossible to go a step further.
  II. The second essential rule of public economy is no less important than the first. If you would
have the general will accomplished, bring all the particular wills into conformity with it; in other words,
as virtue is nothing more than this conformity of the particular wills with the general will, establish the
reign of virtue.
  If our politicians were less blinded by their ambition, they would see how impossible it is for any
establishment whatever to act in the spirit of its institution, unless it is guided in accordance with the
law of duty; they would feel that the greatest support of public authority lies in the hearts of the
citizens, and that nothing can take the place of morality in the maintenance of government. It is not
only upright men who know how to administer the laws; but at bottom only good men know how to
obey them. The man who once gets the better of remorse, will not shrink before punishments which are
less severe, and less lasting, and from which there is at least the hope of escaping: whatever precautionsare taken, those who only require impunity in order to do wrong will not fail to find means of eluding
the law, and avoiding its penalties. In this case, as all particular interests unite against the general
interest, which is no longer that of any individual, public vices have a greater effect in enervating the
laws than the laws in the repression of such vices: so that the corruption of the people and of their rulers
will at length extend to the government, however wise it may be. The worst of all abuses is to pay an
apparent obedience to the laws, only in order actually to break them with security. For in this case the
best laws soon become the most pernicious; and it would be a hundred times better that they should not
exist. In such a situation, it is vain to add edicts to edicts and regulations to regulations. Everything
serves only to introduce new abuses, without correcting the old. The more laws are multiplied, the more
they are despised, and all the new officials appointed to supervise them are only so many more people
to break them, and either to share the plunder with their predecessors, or to plunder apart on their own.
The reward of virtue soon becomes that of robbery; the vilest of men rise to the greatest credit; the
greater they are the more despicable they become; their infamy appears even in their dignities, and their
very honours dishonour them. If they buy the influence of the leaders or the protection of women, it is
only that they may sell justice, duty, and the State in their turn: in the meantime, the people, feeling that
its vices are not the first cause of its misfortunes, murmurs and complains that all its misfortunes come
solely from those whom it pays to protect it from such things.
  It is under these circumstances that the voice of duty no longer speaks in men's hearts, and their
rulers are obliged to substitute the cry of terror, or the lure of an apparent interest, of which they
subsequently trick their creatures. In this situation they are compelled to have recourse to all the petty
and despicable shifts which they call rules of State and mysteries of the cabinet. All the vigour that is
left in the government is used by its members in ruining and supplanting one another, while the public
business is neglected, or is transacted only as personal interest requires and directs. In short, the whole
art of those great politicians lies in so mesmerising those they stand in need of, that each may think he
is labouring for his own interest in working for theirs: I say theirs on the false supposition that it is the
real interest of rulers to annihilate a people in order to make it subject, and to ruin their own property in
order to secure their possession of it.
  But when the citizens love their duty, and the guardians of the public authority sincerely apply
themselves to the fostering of that love by their own example and assiduity, every difficulty vanishes;
and government becomes so easy that it needs none of that art of darkness, whose blackness is its only
mystery. Those enterprising spirits, so dangerous and so much admired, all those great ministers, whose
glory is inseparable from the miseries of the people, are no longer regretted: public morality supplies
what is wanting in the genius of the rulers; and the more virtue reigns, the less need there is for talent.
Even ambition is better served by duty than by usurpation: when the people is convinced that its rulers
are labouring only for its happiness, its deference saves them the trouble of labouring to strengthen their
power: and history shows us, in a thousand cases, that the authority of one who is beloved over those
whom he loves is a hundred times more absolute than all the tyranny of usurpers. This does not mean
that the government ought to be afraid to make use of its power, but that it ought to make use of it only
in a lawful manner. We find in history a thousand examples of pusillanimous or ambitious rulers, who
were ruined by their slackness or their pride; not one who suffered for having been strictly just. But we
ought  not  to  confound  negligence  with  moderation,  or  clemency  with  weakness.  To  be  just,  it  is
necessary to be severe; to permit vice, when one has the right and the power to suppress it, is to be
oneself vicious.
  It is not enough to say to the citizens, be good; they must be taught to be so; and even example,
which is in this respect the first lesson, is not the sole means to be employed; patriotism is the most
efficacious: for, as I have said already, every man is virtuous when his particular will is in all things
conformable to the general will, and we voluntarily will what is willed by those whom we love. It
appears that the feeling of humanity evaporates and grows feeble in embracing all mankind, and that we
cannot be affected by the calamities of Tartary or Japan, in the same manner as we are by those of
European nations. It is necessary in some degree to confine and limit our interest and compassion inorder to make it active. Now, as this sentiment can be useful only to those with whom we have to live,
it is proper that our humanity should confine itself to our fellow-citizens, and should receive a new
force because we are in the habit of seeing them, and by reason of the common interest which unites
them. It is certain that the greatest miracles of virtue have been produced by patriotism: this fine and
lively feeling, which gives to the force of self-love all the beauty of virtue, lends it an energy which,
without  disfiguring  it,  makes  it  the  most  heroic  of  all  passions.  This  it  is  that  produces  so  many
immortal actions, the glory of which dazzles our feeble eyes; and so many great men, whose old-world
virtues pass for fables now that patriotism is made mock of. This is not surprising; the transports of
susceptible hearts appear altogether fanciful to any one who has never felt them; and the love of one's
country, which is a hundred times more lively and delightful than the love of a mistress, cannot be
conceived except by experiencing it. But it is easy to perceive in every heart that is warmed by it, in all
the actions it inspires, a glowing and sublime ardour which does not attend the purest virtue, when
separated from it. Contrast Socrates even with Cato; the one was the greater philosopher, the other
more of the citizen. Athens was already ruined in the time of Socrates, and he had no other country than
the world at large. Cato had the cause of his country always at heart; he lived for it alone, and could not
bear to outlive it. The virtue of Socrates was that of the wisest of men; but, compared with Caesar and
Pompey,  Cato  seems  a  God  among  mortals.  Socrates  instructed  a  few  individuals,  opposed  the
Sophists,  and  died  for  truth:  but  Cato  defended  his  country,  its  liberty  and  its  laws,  against  the
conquerors of the world, and at length departed from the earth, when he had no longer a country to
serve. A worthy pupil of Socrates would be the most virtuous of his contemporaries; but a worthy
follower of Cato would be one of the greatest. The virtue of the former would be his happiness; the
latter would seek his happiness in that of all. We should be taught by the one, and led by the other; and
this alone is enough to determine which to prefer: for no people has ever been made into a nation of
philosophers, but it is not impossible to make a people happy.
  Do we wish men to be virtuous? Then let us begin by making them love their country: but how can
they love it, if their country be nothing more to them than to strangers, and afford them nothing but
what it can refuse nobody? It would be still worse, if they did not enjoy even the privilege of social
security, and if their lives, liberties and property lay at the mercy of persons in power, without their
being permitted, or it being possible for them, to get relief from the laws. For in that case, being
subjected to the duties of the state of civil society, without enjoying even the common privileges of the
state of nature, and without being able to use their strength in their own defence, they would be in the
worst condition in which freemen could possibly find themselves, and the word country would mean
for them something merely odious and ridiculous. It must not be imagined that a man can break or lose
an arm, without the pain being conveyed to his head: nor is it any more credible that the general will
should consent that any one member of the State, whoever he might be, should wound or destroy
another, than it is that the fingers of a man in his senses should wilfully scratch his eyes out. The
security of individuals is so intimately connected with the public confederation that, apart from the
regard that must be paid to human weakness, that convention would in point of right be dissolved, if in
the  State  a  single  citizen  who  might  have  been  relieved  were  allowed  to  perish,  or  if  one  were
wrongfully confined in prison, or if in one case an obviously unjust sentence were given. For the
fundamental conventions being broken, it is impossible to conceive of any right or interest that could
retain the people in the social union; unless they were restrained by force, which alone causes the
dissolution of the state of civil society.
  In fact, does not the undertaking entered into by the whole body of the nation bind it to provide for
the security of the least of its members with as much care as for that of all the rest? Is the welfare of a
single citizen any less the common cause than that of the whole State? It may be said that it is good that
one should perish for all. I am ready to admire such a saying when it comes from the lips of a virtuous
and worthy patriot, voluntarily and dutifully sacrificing himself for the good of his country: but if we
are to understand by it, that it is lawful for the government to sacrifice an innocent man for the good of
the multitude, I look upon it as one of the most execrable rules tyranny ever invented, the greatestfalsehood  that  can  be  advanced,  the  most  dangerous  admission  that  can  be  made,  and  a  direct
contradiction of the fundamental laws of society. So little is it the case that any one person ought to
perish for all, that all have pledged their lives and properties for the defence of each, in order that the
weakness of individuals may always be protected by the strength of the public, and each member by the
whole State. Suppose we take from the whole people one individual after another, and then press the
advocates of this rule to explain more exactly what they mean by the body of the State, and we shall see
that it will at length be reduced to a small number of persons, who are not the people, but the officers of
the people, and who, having bound themselves by personal oath to perish for the welfare of the people,
would thence infer that the people is to perish for their own.
  Need we look for examples of the protection which the State owes to its members, and the respect it
owes to their persons? It is only among the most illustrious and courageous nations that they are to be
found; it is only among free peoples that the dignity of man is realised. It is well known into what
perplexity the whole republic of Sparta was thrown, when the question of punishing a guilty citizen
arose.
  In Macedon, the life of a man was a matter of such importance, that Alexander the Great, at the
height of his glory, would not have dared to put a Macedonian criminal to death in cold blood, till the
accused had appeared to make his defence before his fellow-citizens, and had been condemned by
them. But the Romans distinguished themselves above all other peoples by the regard which their
government paid to the individual, and by its scrupulous attention to the preservation of the inviolable
rights of all the members of the State. Nothing was so sacred among them as the life of a citizen; and no
less than an assembly of the whole people was needed to condemn one. Not even the Senate, nor the
Consuls, in all their majesty, possessed the right; but the crime and punishment of a citizen were
regarded as a public calamity among the most powerful people in the world. So hard indeed did it seem
to shed blood for any crime whatsoever, that by the Lex Porcia, the penalty of death was commuted
into  that  of  banishment  for  all  those  who  were  willing  to  survive  the  loss  of  so  great  a  country.
Everything both at Rome, and in the Roman armies, breathed that love of fellow-citizens one for
another, and that respect for the Roman name, which raised the courage and inspired the virtue of every
one who had the honour to bear it. The cap of a citizen delivered from slavery, the civic crown of him
who had saved the life of another, were looked upon with the greatest pleasure amid the pomp of their
triumphs; and it is remarkable that among the crowns which were bestowed in honour of splendid
actions in war, the civic crown and that of the triumphant general alone were of laurel, all the others
being merely of gold. It was thus that Rome was virtuous and became the mistress of the world.
Ambitious rulers! A herdsman governs his dogs and cattle, and yet is only the meanest of mankind. If it
be a fine thing to command, it is when those who obey us are capable of doing us honour. Show
respect, therefore, to your fellow-citizens, and you will render yourselves worthy of respect; show
respect to liberty, and your power will increase daily. Never exceed your rights, and they will soon
become unlimited.
  Let our country then show itself the common mother of her citizens; let the advantages they enjoy
in  their  country  endear  it  to  them;  let  the  government  leave  them  enough  share  in  the  public
administration to make them feel that they are at home; and let the laws be in their eyes only the
guarantees of the common liberty. These rights, great as they are, belong to all men: but without
seeming to attack them directly, the ill-will of rulers may in fact easily reduce their effect to nothing.
The law, which they thus abuse, serves the powerful at once as a weapon of offence, and as a shield
against the weak; and the pretext of the public good is always the most dangerous scourge of the
people. What is most necessary, and perhaps most difficult, in government, is rigid integrity in doing
strict justice to all, and above all in protecting the poor against the tyranny of the rich. The greatest evil
has already come about, when there are poor men to be defended, and rich men to be restrained. It is on
the middle classes alone that the whole force of the law is exerted; they are equally powerless against
the treasures of the rich and the penury of the poor. The first mocks them, the second escapes them. The
one breaks the meshes, the other passes through them.  It is therefore one of the most important functions of government to prevent extreme inequality of
fortunes;  not  by  taking  away  wealth  from  its  possessors,  but  by  depriving  all  men  of  means  to
accumulate it; not by building hospitals for the poor, but by securing the citizens from becoming poor.
The unequal distribution of inhabitants over the territory, when men are crowded together in one place,
while other places are depopulated; the encouragement of the arts that minister to luxury and of purely
industrial arts at the expense of useful and laborious crafts; the sacrifice of agriculture to commerce; the
necessitation of the tax-farmer by the mal-administration of the funds of the State; and in short, venality
pushed to such an extreme that even public esteem is reckoned at a cash value, and virtue rated at a
market price: these are the most obvious causes of opulence and of poverty, of public interest, of
mutual hatred among citizens, of indifference to the common cause, of the corruption of the people, and
of the weakening of all the springs of government. Such are the evils, which are with difficulty cured
when they make themselves felt, but which a wise administration ought to prevent, if it is to maintain,
along with good morals, respect for the laws, patriotism, and the influence of the general will.
  But all these precautions will be inadequate, unless rulers go still more to the root of the matter. I
conclude this part of public economy where I ought to have begun it. There can be no patriotism
without liberty, no liberty without virtue, no virtue without citizens; create citizens, and you have
everything you need; without them, you will have nothing but debased slaves, from the rulers of the
State downwards. To form citizens is not the work of a day; and in order to have men it is necessary to
educate them when they are children. It will be said, perhaps, that whoever has men to govern, ought
not to seek, beyond their nature, a perfection of which they are incapable; that he ought not to desire to
destroy their passions; and that the execution of such an attempt is no more desirable than it is possible.
I will agree, further, that a man without passions would certainly be a bad citizen; but it must be agreed
also that, if men are not taught not to love some things, it is impossible to teach them to love one object
more than another — to prefer that which is truly beautiful to that which is deformed. If, for example,
they were early accustomed to regard their individuality only in its relation to the body of the State, and
to be aware, so to speak, of their own existence merely as a part of that of the State, they might at
length come to identify themselves in some degree with this greater whole, to feel themselves members
of their country, and to love it with that exquisite feeling which no isolated person has save for himself;
to lift up their spirits perpetually to this great object, and thus to transform into a sublime virtue that
dangerous disposition which gives rise to all our vices. Not only does philosophy demonstrate the
possibility  of  giving  feeling  these  new  directions;  history  furnishes  us  with  a  thousand  striking
examples. If they are so rare among us moderns, it is because nobody troubles himself whether citizens
exist or not, and still less does anybody think of attending to the matter soon enough to make them. It is
too late to change our natural inclinations, when they have taken their course, and egoism is confirmed
by habit: it is too late to lead us out of ourselves when once the human Ego, concentrated in our hearts,
has acquired that contemptible activity which absorbs all virtue and constitutes the life and being of
little minds. How can patriotism germinate in the midst of so many other passions which smother it?
And what can remain, for fellow-citizens, of a heart already divided between avarice, a mistress, and
vanity?
  From the first moment of life, men ought to begin learning to deserve to live; and, as at the instant
of birth we partake of the rights of citizenship, that instant ought to be the beginning of the exercise of
our  duty.  If  there  are  laws  for  the  age  of  maturity,  there  ought  to  be  laws  for  infancy,  teaching
obedience to others: and as the reason of each man is not left to be the sole arbiter of his duties,
government ought the less indiscriminately to abandon to the intelligence and prejudices of fathers the
education of their children, as that education is of still greater importance to the State than to the
fathers: for, according to the course of nature, the death of the father often deprives him of the final
fruits of education; but his country sooner or later perceives its effects. Families dissolve, but the State
remains.
  Should the public authority, by taking the place of the father, and charging itself with that important
function, acquire his rights by discharging his duties, he would have the less cause to complain, as hewould only be changing his title, and would have in common, under the name of citizen, the same
authority over his children, as he was exercising separately under the name of father, and would not be
less obeyed when speaking in the name of the law, than when he spoke in that of nature. Public
education, therefore, under regulations prescribed by the government, and under magistrates established
by the Sovereign, is one of the fundamental rules of popular or legitimate government. If children are
brought up in common in the bosom of equality; if they are imbued with the laws of the State and the
precepts of the general will; if they are taught to respect these above all things; if they are surrounded
by examples and objects which constantly remind them of the tender mother who nourishes them, of
the love she bears them, of the inestimable benefits they receive from her, and of the return they owe
her, we cannot doubt that they will learn to cherish one another mutually as brothers, to will nothing
contrary to the will of society, to substitute the actions of men and citizens for the futile and vain
babbling of sophists, and to become in time defenders and fathers of the country of which they will
have been so long the children.
I shall say nothing of the Magistrates destined to preside over such an education, which is certainly
the most important business of the State. It is easy to see that if such marks of public confidence were
conferred on slight grounds, if this sublime function were not, for those who have worthily discharged
all other offices, the reward of labour, the pleasant and honourable repose of old age, and the crown of
all honours, the whole enterprise would be useless and the education void of success. For wherever the
lesson is not supported by authority, and the precept by example, all instruction is fruitless; and virtue
itself loses its credit in the mouth of one who does not practise it. But let illustrious warriors, bent under
the weight of their laurels, preach courage: let upright Magistrates, grown white in the purple and on
the bench teach justice. Such teachers as these would thus get themselves virtuous successors, and
transmit from age to age, to generations to come, the experience and talents of rulers, the courage and
virtue of citizens, and common emulation in all to live and die for their country.
I know of but three peoples which once practised public education, the Cretans, the Lacedemonians,
and the ancient Persians: among all these it was attended with the greatest success, and indeed it did
wonders among the two last. Since the world has been divided into nations too great to admit of being
well governed, this method has been no longer practicable, and the reader will readily perceive other
reasons why such a thing has never been attempted by any modern people. It is very remarkable that
the Romans were able to dispense with it; but Rome was for five hundred years one continued miracle
which the world cannot hope to see again. The virtue of the Romans, engendered by their horror of
tyranny and the crimes of tyrants, and by an innate patriotism, made all their houses so many schools of
citizenship; while the unlimited power of fathers over their children made the individual authority so
rigid that the father was more feared than the Magistrate, and was in his family tribunal both censor of
morals and avenger of the laws.
  Thus  a  careful  and  well-intentioned  government,  vigilant  incessantly  to  maintain  or  restore
patriotism and morality among the people, provides beforehand against the evils which sooner or later
result from the indifference of the citizens to the fate of the Republic, keeping within narrow bounds
that personal interest which so isolates the individual that the State is enfeebled by his power, and has
nothing to hope from his good-will. Wherever men love their country, respect the laws, and live simply,
little remains to be done in order to make them happy; and in public administration, where chance has
less influence than in the lot of individuals, wisdom is so nearly allied to happiness, that the two objects
are confounded.
  III. It is not enough to have citizens and to protect them, it is also necessary to consider their
subsistence. Provision for the public wants is an obvious inference from the general will, and the third
essential duty of government. This duty is not, we should feel, to fill the granaries of individuals and
thereby to grant them a dispensation from labour, but to keep plenty so within their reach that labour is
always necessary and never useless for its acquisition. It extends also to everything regarding the
management  of  the  exchequer,  and  the  expenses  of  public  administration.  Having  thus  treated  of
general economy with reference to the government of persons, we must now consider it with referenceto the administration of property.
  This part presents no fewer difficulties to solve, and contradictions to remove, than the preceding. It
is certain that the right of property is the most sacred of all the rights of citizenship, and even more
important in some respects than liberty itself; either because it more nearly affects the preservation of
life, or because, property being more easily usurped and more difficult to defend than life, the law
ought to pay a greater attention to what is most easily taken away; or finally, because property is the
true foundation of civil society, and the real guarantee of the undertakings of citizens: for if property
were not answerable for personal actions, nothing would be easier than to evade duties and laugh at the
laws. On the other hand, it is no less certain that the maintenance of the State and the government
involves costs and outgoings; and as every one who agrees to the end must acquiesce in the means, it
follows that the members of a society ought to contribute from their property to its support. Besides, it
is difficult to secure the property of individuals on one side, without attacking it on another; and it is
impossible that all the regulations which govern the order of succession, will, contracts, &c. should not
lay individuals under some constraint as to the disposition of their goods, and should not consequently
restrict the right of property.
  But besides what I have said above of the agreement between the authority of law and the liberty of
the citizen, there remains to be made, with respect to the disposition of goods, an important observation
which removes many difficulties. As Puffendorf has shown, the right of property, by its very nature,
does not extend beyond the life of the proprietor, and the moment a man is dead his goods cease to
belong to him. Thus, to prescribe the conditions according to which he can dispose of them, is in reality
less to alter his right as it appears, than to extend it in fact.
  In general, although the institution of the laws which regulate the power of individuals in the
disposition  of  their  own  goods  belongs  only  to  the  Sovereign,  the  spirit  of  these  laws,  which  the
government ought to follow in their application, is that, from father to son, and from relation to relation,
the goods of a family should go as little out of it and be as little alienated as possible. There is a
sensible reason for this in favour of children, to whom the right of property would be quite useless, if
the  father  left  them  nothing,  and  who  besides,  having  often  contributed  by  their  labour  to  the
acquisition of their father's wealth, are in their own right associates with him in his right of property.
But another reason, more distant, though not less important, is that nothing is more fatal to morality and
to the Republic than the continual shifting of rank and fortune among the citizens: such changes are
both the proof and the source of a thousand disorders, and overturn and confound everything; for those
who were brought up to one thing find themselves destined for another; and neither those who rise nor
those who fall are able to assume the rules of conduct, or to possess themselves of the qualifications
requisite for their new condition, still less to discharge the duties it entails. I proceed to the object of
public finance.
  If the people governed itself and there were no intermediary between the administration of the State
and the citizens, they would have no more to do than to assess themselves occasionally, in proportion to
the public needs and the abilities of individuals: and as they would all keep in sight the recovery and
employment of such assessments, no fraud or abuse could slip into the management of them; the State
would never be involved in debt, or the people over-burdened with taxes; or at least the knowledge of
how the money would be used would be a consolation for the severity of the tax. But things cannot be
carried on in this manner: on the contrary, however small any State may be, civil societies are always
too populous to be under the immediate government of all their members. It is necessary that the public
money should go through the hands of the rulers, all of whom have, besides the interests of the State,
their own individual interests, which are not the last to be listened to. The people, on its side, perceiving
rather the cupidity and ridiculous expenditure of its rulers than the public needs, murmurs at seeing
itself stripped of necessaries to furnish others with superfluities; and when once these complaints have
reached a certain degree of bitterness, the most upright administration will find it impossible to restore
confidence.  In  such  a  case,  voluntary  contributions  bring  in  nothing,  and  forced  contributions  are
illegitimate. This cruel alternative of letting the State perish, or of violating the sacred right of property,which is its support, constitutes the great difficulty of just and prudent economy.
  The first step which the founder of a republic ought to take after the establishment of laws, is to
settle a sufficient fund for the maintenance of the Magistrates and other Officials, and for other public
expenses. This fund, if it consist of money, is called ararium or fisc, and public demesne if it consist of
lands. This, for obvious reasons, is much to be preferred. Whoever has reflected on this matter must be
of the opinion of Bodin, who looks upon the public demesne as the most reputable and certain means of
providing for the needs of the State. It is remarkable also that Romulus, in his division of lands, made it
his first care to set apart a third for the use of the State. I confess it is not impossible for the produce of
the demesne, if it be badly managed, to be reduced to nothing; but it is not of the essence of public
demesnes to be badly administered.
  Before any use is made of this fund, it should be assigned or accepted by an assembly of the people,
or of the estates of the country, which should determine its future use. After this solemnity, which
makes such funds inalienable, their very nature is, in a manner, changed, and the revenues become so
sacred, that it is not only the most infamous theft, but actual treason, to misapply them or pervert them
from the purpose for which they were destined. It reflects great dishonour on Rome that the integrity of
Cato the censor was something so very remarkable, and that an Emperor, on rewarding the talents of a
singer with a few crowns, thought it necessary to observe that the money came from his own private
purse, and not from that of the State. But if we find few Galbas, where are we to look for a Cato? For
when vice is no longer dishonourable, what chiefs will be so scrupulous as to abstain from touching the
public revenues that are left to their discretion, and even not in time to impose on themselves, by
pretending to confound their own expensive and scandalous dissipations with the glory of the State, and
the means of extending their own authority with the means of augmenting its power? It is particularly in
this delicate part of the administration that virtue is the only effective instrument, and that the integrity
of the Magistrate is the only real check upon his avarice. Books and auditing of accounts, instead of
exposing frauds, only conceal them; for prudence is never so ready to conceive new precautions as
knavery is to elude them. Never mind, then, about account books and papers; place the management of
finance in honest hands: that is the only way to get it faithfully conducted.
  When public funds are once established, the rulers of the State become of right the administrators of
them: for this administration constitutes a part of government which is always essential, though not
always equally so. Its influence increases in proportion as that of other resources is diminished; and it
may justly be said that a government has reached the last stage of corruption, when it has ceased to
have sinews other than money. Now as every government constantly tends to become lax, this is
enough to show why no State can subsist unless its revenues constantly increase.
  The first sense of the necessity of this increase is also the first sign of the internal disorder of the
State;  and  the  prudent  administrator,  in  his  endeavours  to  find  means  to  provide  for  the  present
necessity, will neglect nothing to find out the distance cause of the new need; just as a mariner when he
finds the water gaining on his vessel, does not neglect, while he is working the pumps, to discover and
stop the leak.
  From this rule is deduced the most important rule in the administration of finance, which is, to take
more pains to guard against needs than to increase revenues. For, whatever diligence be employed, the
relief which only comes after, and more slowly than, the evil, always leaves some injury behind. While
a remedy is being found for one evil, another is beginning to make itself felt, and even the remedies
themselves produce new difficulties: so that at length the nation is involved in debt and the people
oppressed, while the government loses its influence and can do very little with a great deal of money. I
imagine  it  was  owing  to  the  recognition  of  this  rule  that  such  wonders  were  done  by  ancient
governments, which did more with their parsimony than ours do with all their treasures; and perhaps
from this comes the common use of the word economy, which means rather the prudent management of
what one has than ways of getting what one has not.
  But apart from the public demesne, which is of service to the State in proportion to the uprightness
of  those  who  govern,  any  one  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  whole  force  of  the  generaladministration, especially when it confines itself to legitimate methods, would be astonished at the
resources the rulers can make use of for guarding against public needs, without trespassing on the
goods of individuals. As they are masters of the whole commerce of the State, nothing is easier for
them than to direct it into such channels as to provide for every need, without appearing to interfere.
The distribution of provisions, money, and merchandise in just proportions, according to times and
places, is the true secret of finance and the source of wealth, provided those who administer it have
foresight enough to suffer a present apparent loss, in order really to obtain immense profits in the
future. When we see a government paying bounties, instead of receiving duties, on the exportation of
corn in time of plenty, and on its importation in time of scarcity, we must have such facts before our
eyes if we are to be persuaded of their reality. We should hold such facts to be idle tales, if they had
happened in ancient times. Let us suppose that, in order to prevent a scarcity in bad years, a proposal
were made to establish public granaries; would not the maintenance of so useful an institution serve in
most countries as an excuse for new taxes? At Geneva, such granaries, established and kept up by a
prudent administration, are a public resource in bad years, and the principal revenue of the State at all
times. Alit et ditat is the inscription which stands, rightly and properly, on the front of the building. To
set forth in this place the economic system of a good government, I have often turned my eyes to that of
this Republic, rejoicing to find in my own country an example of that wisdom and happiness which I
should be glad to see prevail in every other.
  If we ask how the needs of a State grow, we shall find they generally arise, like the wants of
individuals, less from any real necessity than from the increase of useless desires, and that expenses are
often augmented only to give a pretext for raising receipts: so that the State would sometimes gain by
not being rich, and apparent wealth is in reality more burdensome than poverty itself would be. Rulers
may indeed hope to keep the peoples in stricter dependence, by thus giving them with one hand what
they take from them with the other; and this was in fact the policy of Joseph towards the Egyptians: but
this political sophistry is the more fatal to the State, as the money never returns into the hands it went
out of. Such principles only enrich the idle at the expense of the industrious.
  A desire for conquest is one of the most evident and dangerous causes of this increase. This desire,
occasioned often by a different species of ambition from that which it seems to proclaim, is not always
what it appears to be, and has not so much, for its real motive, the apparent desire to aggrandise the
Nation as a secret desire to increase the authority of the rulers at home, by increasing the number of
troops, and by the diversion which the objects of war occasion in the minds of the citizens.
  It is at least certain, that no peoples are so oppressed and wretched as conquering nations, and that
their successes only increase their misery. Did not history inform us of the fact, reason would suffice to
tell us that, the greater a State grows, the heavier and more burdensome in proportion its expenses
become: for every province has to furnish its share to the general expense of government, and besides
has to be at the expense of its own administration, which is as great as if it were really independent.
Add to this that great fortunes are always acquired in one place and spent in another. Production
therefore soon ceases to balance consumption, and a whole country is impoverished merely to enrich a
single town.
  Another source of the increase of public wants, which depends on the foregoing, is this. There may
come a time when the citizens, no longer looking upon themselves as interested in the common cause,
will  cease  to  be  the  defenders  of  their  country,  and  the  Magistrates  will  prefer  the  command  of
mercenaries to that of free-men; if for no other reason than that, when the time comes, they may use
them to reduce free-men to submission. Such was the state of Rome towards the end of the Republic
and under the Emperors: for all the victories of the early Romans, like those of Alexander, had been
won by brave citizens, who were ready, at need, to give their blood in the service of their country, but
would never sell it. Only at the siege of Veii did the practice of paying the Roman infantry begin.
Marius, in the Jugurthine war, dishonoured the legions by introducing freedmen, vagabonds and other
mercenaries. Tyrants, the enemies of the very people it was their duty to make happy, maintained
regular troops, apparently to withstand the foreigner, but really to enslave their countrymen. To formsuch troops, it was necessary to take men from the land; the lack of their labour then diminished the
amount of provisions, and their maintenance introduced those taxes which increased prices. This first
disorder gave rise to murmurs among the people; in order to suppress them, the number of troops had to
be increased, and consequently the misery of the people also got worse; and the growing despair led to
still  further  increases  in  the  cause  in  order  to  guard  against  its  effects.  On  the  other  hand,  the
mercenaries, whose merit we may judge of by the price at which they sold themselves, proud of their
own meanness, and despising the laws that protected them, as well as their fellows whose bread they
ate, imagined themselves more honoured in being Caesar's satellites than in being defenders of Rome.
As they were given over to blind obedience, their swords were always at the throats of their fellow-
citizens, and they were prepared for general butchery at the first sign. It would not be difficult to show
that this was one of the principal causes of the ruin of the Roman Empire.
  The invention of artillery and fortifications has forced the princes of Europe, in modern times, to
return to the use of regular troops, in order to garrison their towns; but, however lawful their motives, it
is  to  be  feared  the  effect  may  be  no  less  fatal.  There  is  no  better  reason  now  than  formerly  for
depopulating the country to form armies and garrisons, nor should the people be oppressed to support
them; in a word, these dangerous establishments have increased of late years with such rapidity in this
part of the world, that they evidently threaten to depopulate Europe, and sooner or later to ruin its
inhabitants.
  Be this as it may, it ought to be seen that such institutions necessarily subvert the true economic
system, which draws the principal revenue of the State from the public demesne, and leave only the
troublesome resource of subsidies and imposts; with which it remains to deal.
  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  foundation  of  the  social  compact  is  property;  and  its  first
condition, that every one should be maintained in the peaceful possession of what belongs to him. It is
true that, by the same treaty, every one binds himself, at least tacitly, to be assessed toward the public
wants: but as this undertaking cannot prejudice the fundamental law, and presupposes that the need is
clearly recognised by all who contribute to it, it is plain that such assessment, in order to be lawful,
must be voluntary; it must depend, not indeed on a particular will, as if it were necessary to have the
consent of each individual, and that he should give no more than just what he pleased, but on a general
will, decided by vote of a majority, and on the basis of a proportional rating which leaves nothing
arbitrary in the imposition of the tax.
  That  taxes  cannot  be  legitimately  established  except  by  the  consent  of  the  people  or  its
representatives, is a truth generally admitted by all philosophers and jurists of any repute on questions
of public right, not even excepting Bodin. If any of them have laid down rules which seem to contradict
this, their particular motives for doing so may easily be seen; and they introduce so many conditions
and restrictions that the argument comes at bottom to the same thing: for whether the people has it in its
power to refuse, or the Sovereign ought not to exact, is a matter of indifference with regard to right; and
if the point in question concerns only power, it is useless to inquire whether it is legitimate or not.
Contributions levied on the people are two kinds; real, levied on commodities, and personal, paid by
the head. Both are called taxes or subsidies: when the people fixes the sum to be paid, it is called
subsidy; but when it grants the product of an imposition, it is called a tax. We are told in The Spirit of
the Laws that a capitation tax is most suited to slavery, and a real tax most in accordance with liberty.
This would be incontestable, if the circumstances of every person were equal; for otherwise nothing can
be more disproportionate than such a tax; and it is in the observations of exact proportions that the spirit
of liberty consists. But if a tax by heads were exactly proportioned to the circumstances of individuals,
as what is called the capitation tax in France might be, it would be the most equitable and consequently
the most proper for freemen.
  These proportions appear at first very easy to note, because, being relative to each man's position in
the world, their incidence is always public: but proper regard is seldom paid to all the elements that
should enter into such a calculation, even apart from deception arising from avarice, fraud and self-
interest. In the first place, we have to consider the relation of quantities, according to which, ceterisparibus, the person who has ten times the property of another man ought to pay ten times as much to
the State. Secondly, the relation of the use made, that is to say, the distinction between necessaries and
superfluities. He who possesses only the common necessaries of life should pay nothing at all, while
the tax on him who is in possession of superfluities may justly be extended to everything he has over
and above mere necessaries. To this he will possibly object that, when his rank is taken into account,
what may be superfluous to a man of inferior station is necessary for him. But this is false: for a
grandee has two legs just like a cow-herd, and, like him again, but one belly. Besides, these pretended
necessaries are really so little necessary to his rank, that if he should renounce them on any worthy
occasion, he would only be the more honoured. The populace would be ready to adore a Minister who
went to Council on foot, because he had sold off his carriages to supply a pressing need of the State.
Lastly, to no man does the law prescribe magnificence; and propriety is no argument against right.
  A third relation, which is never taken into account, though it ought to be the chief consideration, is
the advantage that every person derives from the social confederacy; for this provides a powerful
protection for the immense possessions of the rich, and hardly leaves the poor man in quiet possession
of the cottage he builds with his own hands. Are not all the advantages of society for the rich and
powerful? Are not all lucrative posts in their hands? Are not all privileges and exemptions reserved for
them alone? Is not the public authority always on their side? If man of eminence robs his creditors, or is
guilty of other knaveries, is he not always assured of impunity? Are not the assaults, acts of violence,
assassinations, and even murders committed by the great, matters that are hushed up in a few months,
and of which nothing more is thought? But if a great man himself is robbed or insulted, the whole
police force is immediately in motion, and woe even to innocent persons who chance to be suspected. If
he has to pass through any dangerous road, the country is up in arms to escort him. If the axle-tree of
his chaise breaks, everybody flies to his assistance. If there is a noise at his door, he speaks but a word,
and all is silent. If he is incommoded by the crowd, he waves his hand and every one makes way. If his
coach is met on the road by a wagon, his servants are ready to beat the driver's brains out, and fifty
honest pedestrians going quietly about their business had better be knocked on the head than an idle
jackanapes be delayed in his coach. Yet all this respect costs him not a farthing: it is the rich man's
right, and not what he buys with his wealth. How different is the case of the poor man! the more
humanity owes him, the more society denies him. Every door is shut against him, even when he has a
right to its being opened: and if ever he obtains justice, it is with much greater difficulty than others
obtain favours. If the militia is to be raised or the highway to be mended, he is always given the
preference;  he  always  bears  the  burden  which  his  richer  neighbour  has  influence  enough  to  get
exempted  from.  On  the  least  accident  that  happens  to  him,  everybody  avoids  him:  if  his  cart  be
overturned in the road, so far is he from receiving any assistance, that he is lucky if he does not get
horse-whipped by the impudent lackeys of some young Duke; in a word, all gratuitous assistance is
denied to the poor when they need it, just because they cannot pay for it. I look upon any poor man as
totally  undone,  if  he  has  the  misfortune  to  have  an  honest  heart,  a  fine  daughter,  and  a  powerful
neighbour.
  Another no less important fact is that the losses of the poor are much harder to repair than those of
the rich, and that the difficulty of acquisition is always greater in proportion as there is more need for it.
"Nothing comes out of nothing," is as true of life as in physics: money is the seed of money, and the
first guinea is sometimes more difficult to acquire than the second million. Add to this that what the
poor pay is lost to them for ever, and remains in, or returns to, the hands of the rich: and as, to those
who share in the government or to their dependents, the whole produce of the taxes must sooner or later
pass, although they pay their share, these persons have always a sensible interest in increasing them.
  The terms of the social compact between these two estates of men may be summed up in a few
words. "You have need of me, because I am rich and you are poor. We will therefore come to an
agreement. I will permit you to have the honour of serving me, on condition that you bestow on me the
little you have left, in return for the pains I shall take to command you."
  Putting all these considerations carefully together, we shall find that, in order to levy taxes in a trulyequitable and proportionate manner, the imposition ought not to be in simple ratio to the property of the
contributors, but in compound ratio to the difference of their conditions and the superfluity of their
possessions. This very important and difficult operation is daily made by numbers of honest clerks,
who know their arithmetic; but a Plato or a Montesquieu would not venture to undertake it without the
greatest diffidence, or without praying to Heaven for understanding and integrity.
  Another disadvantage of personal taxes is that they may be too much felt or raised with too great
severity. This, however, does not prevent them from being frequently evaded; for it is much easier for
persons to escape a tax than for their possessions.
  Of all impositions, that on land, or real taxation, has always been regarded as most advantageous in
countries where more attention is paid to what the tax will produce, and to the certainty of recovering
the product, than to securing the least discomfort for the people. It has been even maintained that it is
necessary to burden the peasant in order to rouse him from indolence, and that he would never work if
he had no taxes to pay. But in all countries experience confutes this ridiculous notion. In England and
Holland the farmer pays very little, and in China nothing: yet these are the countries in which the land
is best cultivated. On the other hand, in those countries where the husbandman is taxed in proportion to
the produce of his lands, he leaves them uncultivated, or reaps just as much from them as suffices for
bare subsistence. For to him who loses the fruit of his labour, it is some gain to do nothing. To lay a tax
on industry is a very singular expedient for banishing idleness.
  Taxes on land or corn, especially when they are excessive, lead to two results so fatal in their effect
that they cannot but depopulate and ruin, in the long run, all countries in which they are established.
  The first of these arises from the defective circulation of specie; for industry and commerce draw all
the  money  from  the  country  into  the  capitals:  and  as  the  tax  destroys  the  proportion  there  might
otherwise be between the needs of the husbandman and the price of his corn, money is always leaving
and never returning. Thus the richer the city the poorer the country. The product of the taxes passes
from  the  hands  of  the  Prince  or  his  financial  officers  into  those  of  artists  and  traders;  and  the
husbandman, who receives only the smallest part of it, is at length exhausted by paying always the
same, and receiving constantly less. How could a human body subsist if it had veins and no arteries, or
if its arteries conveyed the blood only within four inches of the heart? Chardin tells us that in Persia the
royal dues on commodities are paid in kind: this custom, which, Herodotus informs us, prevailed long
ago in the same country down to the time of Darius, might prevent the evil of which I have been
speaking. But unless intendants, directors, commissioners, and warehousemen in Persia are a different
kind of people from what they are elsewhere, I can hardly believe that the smallest part of this produce
ever  reaches  the  king,  or  that  the  corn  is  not  spoilt  in  every  granary,  and  the  greater  part  of  the
warehouses not consumed by fire.
  The second evil effect arises from an apparent advantage, which aggravates the evil before it can be
perceived. That is that corn is a commodity whose price is not enhanced by taxes in the country
producing it, and which, in spite of its absolute necessity, may be diminished in quantity without the
price  being  increased.  Hence,  many  people  die  of  hunger,  although  corn  remains  cheap,  and  the
husbandman bears the whole charge of a tax, for which he cannot indemnify himself by the price of his
corn. It must be observed that we ought not to reason about a land-tax in the same manner as about
duties laid on various kinds of merchandise; for the effect of such duties is to raise the price, and they
are paid by the buyers rather than the sellers. For these duties, however heavy, are still voluntary, and
are paid by the merchant only in proportion to the quantity he buys; and as he buys only in proportion
to his sale, he himself gives the law its particular application; but the farmer who is obliged to pay his
rent at stated times, whether he sells or not, cannot wait till he can get his own price for his commodity:
even if he is not forced to sell for mere subsistence, he must sell to pay the taxes; so that it is frequently
the heaviness of the tax that keeps the price of corn low.
  It is further to be noticed that the resources of commerce and industry are so far from rendering the
tax more supportable through abundance of money, that they only render it more burdensome. I shall
not insist on what is very evident; i.e., that, although a greater or less quantity of money in a State maygive it the greater or less credit in the eye of the foreigner, it makes not the least difference to the real
fortune of the citizens, and does not make their condition any more or less comfortable. But I must
make  these  two  important  remarks:  first,  unless  a  State  possesses  superfluous  commodities,  and
abundance of money results from foreign trade, only trading cities are sensible of the abundance; while
the peasant only becomes relatively poorer. Secondly, as the price of everything is enhanced by the
increase of money, taxes also must be proportionately increased; so that the farmer will find himself
still more burdened without having more resources.
  It ought to be observed that the tax on land is a real duty on the produce. It is universally agreed,
however, that nothing is so dangerous as a tax on corn paid by the purchaser: but how comes it we do
not see that it is a hundred times worse when the duty is paid by the cultivator himself? Is not this an
attack  on  the  substance  of  the  State  at  its  very  source?  Is  it  not  the  directest  possible  method  of
depopulating a country, and therefore in the end ruining it? For the worst kind of scarcity a nation can
suffer from is lack of inhabitants.
  Only the real statesman can rise, in imposing taxes, above the mere financial object: he alone can
transform heavy burdens into useful regulations, and make the people even doubtful whether such
establishments were not calculated rather for the good of the nation in general, than merely for the
raising of money.
  Duties  on  the  importation  of  foreign  commodities,  of  which  the  natives  are  fond,  without  the
country standing in need of them; on the exportation of those of the growth of the country which are
not too plentiful, and which foreigners cannot do without: on the productions of frivolous and all too
lucrative arts; on the importation of all pure luxuries; and in general on all objects of luxury; will
answer the two-fold end in view. It is by such taxes, indeed, by which the poor are eased, and the
burdens thrown on the rich, that it is possible to prevent the continual increase of inequality of fortune;
the subjection of such a multitude of artisans and useless servants to the rich, the multiplication of idle
persons in our cities, and the depopulation of the country-side.
  It is important that the value of any commodity and the duties laid on it should be so proportioned
that the avarice of individuals may not be too strongly tempted to fraud by the greatness of the possible
profit. To make smuggling difficult, those commodities should be singled out which are hardest to
conceal. All duties should be rather paid by the consumer of the commodity taxed than by him who
sells it: as the quantity of duty he would be obliged to pay would lay him open to greater temptations,
and afford him more opportunities for fraud.
  This is the constant custom in China, a country where the taxes are greater and yet better paid than
in any other part of the world. There the merchant himself pays no duty; the buyer alone, without
murmuring or sedition, meets the whole charge; for as the necessaries of life, such as rice and corn, are
absolutely exempt from taxation, the common people is not oppressed, and the duty falls only on those
who are well-to-do. Precautions against smuggling ought not to be dictated so much by the fear of it
occurring, as by the attention which the government should pay to securing individuals from being
seduced by illegitimate profits, which first make them bad citizens, and afterwards soon turn them into
dishonest men.
  Heavy taxes should be laid on servants in livery, on equipages, rich furniture, fine clothes, on
spacious courts and gardens, on public entertainments of all kinds, on useless professions, such as
dancers, singers, players, and in a word, on all that multiplicity of objects of luxury, amusement and
idleness, which strike the eyes of all, and can the less be hidden, as their whole purpose is to be seen,
without which they would be useless. We need be under no apprehension of the produce of these taxes
being arbitrary, because they are laid on things not absolutely necessary. They must know but little of
mankind who imagine that, after they have been once seduced by luxury, they can ever renounce it:
they would a hundred times sooner renounce common necessaries, and had much rather die of hunger
than of shame. The increase in their expense is only an additional reason for supporting them, when the
vanity of appearing wealthy reaps its profit from the price of the thing and the charge of the tax. As
long as there are rich people in the world, they will be desirous of distinguishing themselves from thepoor, nor can the State devise a revenue less burdensome or more certain than what arises from this
distinction.
  For  the  same  reason,  industry  would  have  nothing  to  suffer  from  an  economic  system  which
increased the revenue, encouraged agriculture by relieving the husbandman, and insensibly tended to
bring all fortunes nearer to that middle condition which constitutes the genuine strength of the State.
These taxes might, I admit, bring certain fashionable articles of dress and amusement to an untimely
end; but it would be only to substitute others, by which the artificer would gain, and the exchequer
suffer no loss. In a word, suppose the spirit of government was constantly to tax only the superfluities
of the rich, one of two things must happen: either the rich would convert their superfluous expenses
into useful ones, which would redound to the profit of the State, and thus the imposition of taxes would
have the effect of the best sumptuary laws, the expenses of the State would necessarily diminish with
those of individuals, and the treasury would not receive so much less as it would gain by having less to
pay; or, if the rich did not become less extravagant, the exchequer would have such resources in the
product of taxes on their expenditure as would provide for the needs of the State. In the first case the
treasury would be the richer by what it would save, from having the less to do with its money; and in
the second, it would be enriched by the useless expenses of individuals.
  We  may  add  to  all  this  a  very  important  distinction  in  matters  of  political  right,  to  which
governments, constantly tenacious of doing everything for themselves, ought to pay great attention. It
has been observed that personal taxes and duties on the necessaries of life, as they directly trespass on
the right of property, and consequently on the true foundation of political society, are always liable to
have  dangerous  results,  if  they  are  not  established  with  the  express  consent  of  the  people  or  its
representatives. It is not the same with articles the use of which we can deny ourselves; for as the
individual is under no absolute necessity to pay, his contribution may count as voluntary. The particular
consent of each contributor then takes the place of the general consent of the whole people: for why
should a people oppose the imposition of a tax which falls only on those who desire to pay it? It
appears to me certain that everything, which is not proscribed by law, or contrary to morality, and yet
may be prohibited by the government, may also be permitted on payment of a certain duty. Thus, for
example, if the government may prohibit the use of coaches, it may certainly impose a tax on them; and
this is a prudent and useful method of censuring their use without absolutely forbidding it. In this case,
the tax may be regarded as a sort of fine, the product of which compensates for the abuse it punishes.
  It may perhaps be objected that those, whom Bodin calls impostors, i.e., those who impose or
contrive the taxes, being in the class of the rich, will be far from sparing themselves to relieve the poor.
But  this  is  quite  beside  the  point.  If,  in  every  nation,  those  to  whom  the  Sovereign  commits  the
government of the people, were, from their position, its enemies, it would not be worth while to inquire
what they ought to do to make the people happy.





  A DISCOURSE ON A SUBJECT PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY OF DIJON:
  WHAT IS THE ORIGIN OF INEQUALITY AMONG MEN,
  AND IS IT AUTHORISED BY NATURAL LAW?
  Jean Jacques Rousseau


  CONTENTS
  Dedication
  Preface
  Part I  Part II
  Appendix


  We should consider what is natural not in things
  depraved but in those which are rightly ordered
  according to nature. Aristotle, Politics, Bk. i, ch. 5
 
 
  DEDICATION TO THE REPUBLIC OF GENEVA
  MOST HONOURABLE, MAGNIFICENT AND SOVEREIGN LORDS, convinced that only a
virtuous citizen can confer on his country honours which it can accept, I have been for thirty years past
working to make myself worthy to offer you some public homage; and, this fortunate opportunity
supplementing in some degree the insufficiency of my efforts, I have thought myself entitled to follow
in embracing it the dictates of the zeal which inspires me, rather than the right which should have been
my authorisation. Having had the happiness to be born among you, how could I reflect on the equality
which  nature  has  ordained  between  men,  and  the  inequality  which  they  have  introduced,  without
reflecting on the profound wisdom by which both are in this State happily combined and made to
coincide, in the manner that is most in conformity with natural law, and most favourable to society, to
the maintenance of public order and to the happiness of individuals? In my researches after the best
rules common sense can lay down for the constitution of a government, I have been so struck at finding
them all in actuality in your own, that even had I not been born within your walls I should have thought
it indispensable for me to offer this picture of human society to that people, which of all others seems to
be possessed of its greatest advantages, and to have best guarded against its abuses.
  If I had had to make choice of the place of my birth, I should have preferred a society which had an
extent  proportionate  to  the  limits  of  the  human  faculties;  that  is,  to  the  possibility  of  being  well
governed: in which every person being equal to his occupation, no one should be obliged to commit to
others the functions with which he was entrusted: a State, in which all the individuals being well known
to one another, neither the secret machinations of vice, nor the modesty of virtue should be able to
escape the notice and judgment of the public; and in which the pleasant custom of seeing and knowing
one another should make the love of country rather a love of the citizens than of its soil.
I should have wished to be born in a country in which the interest of the Sovereign and that of the
people must be single and identical; to the end that all the movements of the machine might tend
always to the general happiness. And as this could not be the case, unless the Sovereign and the people
were one and the same person, it follows that I should have wished to be born under a democratic
government, wisely tempered.
I should have wished to live and die free: that is, so far subject to the laws that neither I, nor
anybody else, should be able to cast off their honourable yoke: the easy and salutary yoke which the
haughtiest necks bear with the greater docility, as they are made to bear no other.
I should have wished then that no one within the State should be able to say he was above the law;
and that no one without should be able to dictate so that the State should be obliged to recognise his
authority. For, be the constitution of a government what it may, if there be within its jurisdiction a
single man who is not subject to the law, all the rest are necessarily at his discretion. And if there be a
national  ruler  within,  and  a  foreign  ruler  without,  however  they  may  divide  their  authority,  it  is
impossible that both should be duly obeyed, or that the State should be well governed.
I should not have chosen to live in a republic of recent institution, however excellent its laws; for
fear the government, being perhaps otherwise framed than the circumstances of the moment might
require, might disagree with the new citizens, or they with it, and the State run the risk of overthrow
and destruction almost as soon as it came into being. For it is with liberty as it is with those solid and
succulent foods, or with those generous wines which are well adapted to nourish and fortify robustconstitutions that are used to them, but ruin and intoxicate weak and delicate constitutions to which
they are not suited. Peoples once accustomed to masters are not in a condition to do without them. If
they attempt to shake off the yoke, they still more estrange themselves from freedom, as, by mistaking
for it an unbridled license to which it is diametrically opposed, they nearly always manage, by their
revolutions, to hand themselves over to seducers, who only make their chains heavier than before. The
Roman people itself, a model for all free peoples, was wholly incapable of governing itself when it
escaped from the oppression of the Tarquins. Debased by slavery, and the ignominious tasks which had
been imposed upon it, it was at first no better than a stupid mob, which it was necessary to control and
govern with the greatest wisdom; in order that, being accustomed by degrees to breathe the health-
giving  air  of  liberty,  minds  which  had  been  enervated  or  rather  brutalised  under  tyranny,  might
gradually acquire that severity of morals and spirit of fortitude which made it at length the people of all
most worthy of respect. I should, then, have sought out for my country some peaceful and happy
Republic, of an antiquity that lost itself, as it were, in the night of time: which had experienced only
such shocks as served to manifest and strengthen the courage and patriotism of its subjects; and whose
citizens, long accustomed to a wise independence, were not only free, but worthy to be so.
I should have wished to choose myself a country, diverted, by a fortunate impotence, from the
brutal love of conquest, and secured, by a still more fortunate situation, from the fear of becoming itself
the conquest of other States: a free city situated between several nations, none of which should have
any interest in attacking it, while each had an interest in preventing it from being attacked by the others;
in short, a Republic which should have nothing to tempt the ambition of its neighbours, but might
reasonably depend on their assistance in case of need. It follows that a republican State so happily
situated could have nothing to fear but from itself; and that, if its members trained themselves to the use
of arms, it would be rather to keep alive that military ardour and courageous spirit which are so proper
among freemen, and tend to keep up their taste for liberty, than from the necessity of providing for their
defence.
I should have sought a country, in which the right of legislation was vested in all the citizens; for
who can judge better than they of the conditions under which they had best dwell together in the same
society? Not that I should have approved of Plebiscita, like those among the Romans; in which the
rulers in the State, and those most interested in its preservation, were excluded from the deliberations
on which in many cases its security depended; and in which, by the most absurd inconsistency, the
magistrates were deprived of rights which the meanest citizens enjoyed.
  On the contrary, I should have desired that, in order to prevent self-interested and ill-conceived
projects, and all such dangerous innovations as finally ruined the Athenians, each man should not be at
liberty to propose new laws at pleasure; but that this right should belong exclusively to the magistrates;
and that even they should use it with so much caution, the people, on its side, be so reserved in giving
its consent to such laws, and the promulgation of them be attended with so much solemnity, that before
the constitution could be upset by them, there might be time enough for all to be convinced, that it is
above all the great antiquity of the laws which makes them sacred and venerable, that men soon learn to
despise laws which they see daily altered, and that States, by accustoming themselves to neglect their
ancient  customs  under  the  pretext  of  improvement,  often  introduce  greater  evils  than  those  they
endeavour to remove.
I should have particularly avoided, as necessarily ill-governed, a Republic in which the people,
imagining themselves in a position to do without magistrates, or at least to leave them with only a
precarious authority, should imprudently have kept for themselves the administration of civil affairs
and  the  execution  of  their  own  laws.  Such  must  have  been  the  rude  constitution  of  primitive
governments,  directly  emerging  from  a  state  of  nature;  and  this  was  another  of  the  vices  that
contributed to the downfall of the Republic of Athens.
  But I should have chosen a community in which the individuals, content with sanctioning their
laws, and deciding the most important public affairs in general assembly and on the motion of the
rulers, had established honoured tribunals, carefully distinguished the several departments, and electedyear by year some of the most capable and upright of their fellow-citizens to administer justice and
govern the State; a community, in short, in which the virtue of the magistrates thus bearing witness to
the wisdom of the people, each class reciprocally did the other honour. If in such a case any fatal
misunderstandings arose to disturb the public peace, even these intervals of blindness and error would
bear the marks of moderation, mutual esteem, and a common respect for the laws; which are sure signs
and  pledges  of  a  reconciliation  as  lasting  as  sincere.  Such  are  the  advantages,  most  honourable,
magnificent and sovereign lords, which I should have sought in the country in which I should have
chosen to be born. And if providence had added to all these a delightful situation, a temperate climate, a
fertile soil, and the most beautiful countryside under Heaven, I should have desired only, to complete
my felicity, the peaceful enjoyment of all these blessings, in the bosom of this happy country; to live at
peace in the sweet society of my fellow-citizens, and practising towards them, from their own example,
the duties of friendship, humanity, and every other virtue, to leave behind me the honourable memory
of a good man, and an upright and virtuous patriot.
  But, if less fortunate or too late grown wise, I had seen myself reduced to end an infirm and
languishing life in other climates, vainly regretting that peaceful repose which I had forfeited in the
imprudence of youth, I should at least have entertained the same feelings in my heart, though denied
the opportunity of making use of them in my native country. Filled with a tender and disinterested love
for my distant fellow-citizens, I should have addressed them from my heart, much in the following
terms.
  "My dear fellow-citizens, or rather my brothers, since the ties of blood, as well as the laws, unite
almost all of us, it gives me pleasure that I cannot think of you, without thinking, at the same time, of
all the blessings you enjoy, and of which none of you, perhaps, more deeply feels the value than I who
have lost them. The more I reflect on your civil and political condition, the less can I conceive that the
nature of human affairs could admit of a better. In all other governments, when there is a question of
ensuring  the  greatest  good  of  the  State,  nothing  gets  beyond  projects  and  ideas,  or  at  best  bare
possibilities. But as for you, your happiness is complete, and you have nothing to do but enjoy it; you
require nothing more to be made perfectly happy, than to know how to be satisfied with being so. Your
sovereignty, acquired or recovered by the sword, and maintained for two centuries past by your valour
and wisdom, is at length fully and universally acknowledged. Your boundaries are fixed, your rights
confirmed and your repose secured by honourable treaties. Your constitution is excellent, being not
only dictated by the profoundest wisdom, but guaranteed by great and friendly powers. Your State
enjoys perfect tranquillity; you have neither wars nor conquerors to fear; you have no other master than
the wise laws you have yourselves made; and these are administered by upright magistrates of your
own choosing. You are neither so wealthy as to be enervated by effeminacy, and thence to lose, in the
pursuit of frivolous pleasures, the taste for real happiness and solid virtue; nor poor enough to require
more assistance from abroad than your own industry is sufficient to procure you. In the meantime the
precious privilege of liberty, which in great nations is maintained only by submission to the most
exorbitant impositions, costs you hardly anything for its preservation.
  May a Republic, so wisely and happily constituted, last for ever, for an example to other nations,
and  for  the  felicity  of  its  own  citizens!  This  is  the  only  prayer  you  have  left  to  make,  the  only
precaution that remains to be taken. It depends, for the future, on yourselves alone (not to make you
happy, for your ancestors have saved you that trouble), but to render that happiness lasting, by your
wisdom in its enjoyment. It is on your constant union, your obedience to the laws, and your respect for
their  ministers,  that  your  preservation  depends.  If  there  remains  among  you  the  smallest  trace  of
bitterness or distrust, hasten to destroy it, as an accursed leaven which sooner or later must bring
misfortune and ruin on the State. I conjure you all to look into your hearts, and to hearken to the secret
voice of conscience. Is there any among you who can find, throughout the universe, a more upright,
more enlightened and more honourable body than your magistracy? Do not all its members set you an
example of moderation, of simplicity of manners, of respect for the laws, and of the most sincere
harmony? Place, therefore, without reserve, in such wise superiors, that salutary confidence whichreason ever owes to virtue. Consider that they are your own choice, that they justify that choice, and
that the honours due to those whom you have dignified are necessarily yours by reflexion. Not one of
you is so ignorant as not to know that, when the laws lose their force and those who defend them their
authority, security and liberty are universally impossible. Why, therefore, should you hesitate to do that
cheerfully and with just confidence which you would all along have been bound to do by your true
interest, your duty and reason itself?
  Let not a culpable and pernicious indifference to the maintenance of the constitution ever induce
you to neglect, in case of need, the prudent advice of the most enlightened and zealous of your fellow-
citizens; but let equity, moderation and firmness of resolution continue to regulate all your proceedings,
and to exhibit you to the whole universe as the example of a valiant and modest people, jealous equally
of their honour and of their liberty. Beware particularly, as the last piece of advice I shall give you, of
sinister constructions and venomous rumours, the secret motives of which are often more dangerous
than the actions at which they are levelled. A whole house will be awake and take the first alarm given
by a good and trusty watch-dog, who barks only at the approach of thieves; but we hate the importunity
of those noisy curs, which are perpetually disturbing the public repose, and whose continual ill-timed
warnings prevent our attending to them, when they may perhaps be necessary."
  And you, most honourable and magnificent lords, the worthy and revered magistrates of a free
people, permit me to offer you in particular my duty and homage. If there is in the world a station
capable  of  conferring  honour  on  those  who  fill  it,  it  is  undoubtedly  that  which  virtue  and  talents
combine to bestow, that of which you have made yourselves worthy, and to which you have been
promoted by your fellow-citizens. Their worth adds a new lustre to your own; while, as you have been
chosen, by men capable of governing others, to govern themselves, I cannot but hold you as much
superior to all other magistrates, as a free people, and particularly that over which you have the honour
to preside, is by its wisdom and its reason superior to the populace of other States.
  Be it permitted me to cite an example of which there ought to have existed better records, and one
which will be ever near to my heart. I cannot recall to mind, without the sweetest emotions, the memory
of that virtuous citizen, to whom I owe my being, and by whom I was often instructed, in my infancy,
in the respect which is due to you. I see him still, living by the work of his hands, and feeding his soul
on the sublimest truths. I see the works of Tacitus, Plutarch, and Grotius lying before him in the midst
of the tools of his trade. At his side stands his dear son, receiving, alas with too little profit, the tender
instructions of the best of fathers. But, if the follies of youth made me for a while forget his wise
lessons, I have at length the happiness to be conscious that, whatever propensity one may have to vice,
it is not easy for an education, with which love has mingled, to be entirely thrown away.
  Such,  my  most  honourable  and  magnificent  lords,  are  the  citizens,  and  even  the  common
inhabitants of the State which you govern; such are those intelligent and sensible men, of whom, under
the name of workmen and the people, it is usual, in other nations, to have a low and false opinion. My
father, I own with pleasure, was in no way distinguished among his fellow-citizens. He was only such
as they all are; and yet, such as he was, there is no country, in which his acquaintance would not have
been coveted, and cultivated even with advantage by men of the highest character. It would not become
me, nor is it, thank Heaven, at all necessary for me to remind you of the regard which such men have a
right to expect of their magistrates, to whom they are equal both by education and by the rights of
nature and birth, and inferior only, by their own will, by that preference which they owe to your merit,
and, for giving you, can claim some sort of acknowledgment on your side. It is with a lively satisfaction
I understand that the greatest candour and condescension attend, in all your behaviour towards them, on
that gravity which becomes the ministers of the law; and that you so well repay them, by your esteem
and attention, the respect and obedience which they owe to you. This conduct is not only just but
prudent; as it happily tends to obliterate the memory of many unhappy events, which ought to be buried
in  eternal  oblivion.  It  is  also  so  much  the  more  judicious,  as  it  tends  to  make  this  generous  and
equitable people find a pleasure in their duty; to make them naturally love to do you honour, and to
cause those who are the most zealous in the maintenance of their own rights to be at the same time themost disposed to respect yours.
  It ought not to be thought surprising that the rulers of a civil society should have the welfare and
glory of their communities at heart: but it is uncommonly fortunate for the peace of men, when those
persons who look upon themselves as the magistrates, or rather the masters of a more holy and sublime
country, show some love for the earthly country which maintains them. I am happy in having it in my
power to make so singular an exception in our favour, and to be able to rank, among its best citizens,
those  zealous  depositaries  of  the  sacred  articles  of  faith  established  by  the  laws,  those  venerable
shepherds of souls whose powerful and captivating eloquence are so much the better calculated to bear
to men's hearts the maxims of the gospel, as they are themselves the first to put them into practice. All
the world knows of the great success with which the art of the pulpit is cultivated at Geneva; but men
are so used to hearing divines preach one thing and practise another, that few have a chance of knowing
how far the spirit of Christianity, holiness of manners, severity towards themselves and indulgence
towards their neighbours, prevail throughout the whole body of our ministers. It is, perhaps, given to
the city of Geneva alone, to produce the edifying example of so perfect a union between its clergy and
men of letters. It is in great measure on their wisdom, their known moderation, and their zeal for the
prosperity of the State that I build my hopes of its perpetual tranquillity. At the same time, I notice,
with a pleasure mingled with surprise and veneration, how much they detest the frightful maxims of
those accursed and barbarous men, of whom history furnishes us with more than one example; who, in
order to support the pretended rights of God, that is to say their own interests, have been so much the
less  greedy  of  human  blood,  as  they  were  more  hopeful  their  own  in  particular  would  be  always
respected.
I must not forget that precious half of the Republic, which makes the happiness of the other; and
whose sweetness and prudence preserve its tranquillity and virtue. Amiable and virtuous daughters of
Geneva, it will be always the lot of your sex to govern ours. Happy are we, so long as your chaste
influence, solely exercised within the limits of conjugal union, is exerted only for the glory of the State
and the happiness of the public. It was thus the female sex commanded at Sparta; and thus you deserve
to command at Geneva. What man can be such a barbarian as to resist the voice of honour and reason,
coming  from  the  lips  of  an  affectionate  wife?  Who  would  not  despise  the  vanities  of  luxury,  on
beholding the simple and modest attire which, from the lustre it derives from you, seems the most
favourable to beauty? It is your task to perpetuate, by your insinuating influence and your innocent and
amiable rule, a respect for the laws of the State, and harmony among the citizens. It is yours to reunite
divided families by happy marriages; and, above all things, to correct, by the persuasive sweetness of
your lessons and the modest graces of your conversation, those extravagancies which our young people
pick up in other countries, whence, instead of many useful things by which they might profit, they bring
home hardly anything, besides a puerile air and a ridiculous manner, acquired among loose women, but
an admiration for I know not what so-called grandeur, and paltry recompenses for being slaves, which
can never come near the real greatness of liberty. Continue, therefore, always to be what you are, the
chaste guardians of our morals, and the sweet security for our peace, exerting on every occasion the
privileges of the heart and of nature, in the interests of duty and virtue.
I flatter myself that I shall never be proved to have been mistaken, in building on such a foundation
my hopes of the general happiness of the citizens and the glory of the Republic. It must be confessed,
however, that with all these advantages, it will not shine with that lustre, by which the eyes of most
men are dazzled; a puerile and fatal taste for which is the most mortal enemy of happiness and liberty.
  Let our dissolute youth seek elsewhere light pleasures and long repentances. Let our pretenders to
taste admire elsewhere the grandeur of palaces, the beauty of equipages, sumptuous furniture, the pomp
of public entertainments, and all the refinements of luxury and effeminacy. Geneva boasts nothing but
men; such a sight has nevertheless a value of its own, and those who have a taste for it are well worth
the admirers of all the rest.
  Deign, most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, to receive, and with equal goodness, this
respectful testimony of the interest I take in your common prosperity. And, if I have been so unhappyas to be guilty of any indiscreet transport in this glowing effusion of my heart, I beseech you to pardon
me, and to attribute it to the tender affection of a true patriot, and to the ardent and legitimate zeal of a
man, who can imagine for himself no greater felicity than to see you happy.
  Most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, I am, with the most profound respect,
  Your most humble and obedient servant and fellow-citizen.
  J. J. ROUSSEAU
  Chambéry, June 12, 1754
 
 
  PREFACE
  OF all human sciences the most useful and most imperfect appears to me to be that of mankind: and
I will venture to say, the single inscription on the Temple of Delphi contained a precept more difficult
and more important than is to be found in all the huge volumes that moralists have ever written. I
consider the subject of the following discourse as one of the most interesting questions philosophy can
propose, and unhappily for us, one of the most thorny that philosophers can have to solve. For how
shall we know the source of inequality between men, if we do not begin by knowing mankind? And
how shall man hope to see himself as nature made him, across all the changes which the succession of
place  and  time  must  have  produced  in  his  original  constitution?  How  can  he  distinguish  what  is
fundamental in his nature from the changes and additions which his circumstances and the advances he
has made have introduced to modify his primitive condition? Like the statue of Glaucus, which was so
disfigured by time, seas and tempests, that it looked more like a wild beast than a god, the human soul,
altered in society by a thousand causes perpetually recurring, by the acquisition of a multitude of truths
and errors, by the changes happening to the constitution of the body, and by the continual jarring of the
passions, has, so to speak, changed in appearance, so as to be hardly recognisable. Instead of a being,
acting constantly from fixed and invariable principles, instead of that celestial and majestic simplicity,
impressed on it by its divine Author, we find in it only the frightful contrast of passion mistaking itself
for reason, and of understanding grown delirious.
  It is still more cruel that, as every advance made by the human species removes it still farther from
its primitive state, the more discoveries we make, the more we deprive ourselves of the means of
making the most important of all. Thus it is, in one sense, by our very study of man, that the knowledge
of him is put out of our power.
  It is easy to perceive that it is in these successive changes in the constitution of man that we must
look for the origin of those differences which now distinguish men, who, it is allowed, are as equal
among themselves as were the animals of every kind, before physical causes had introduced those
varieties which are now observable among some of them.
  It is, in fact, not to be conceived that these primary changes, however they may have arisen, could
have altered, all at once and in the same manner, every individual of the species. It is natural to think
that, while the condition of some of them grew better or worse, and they were acquiring various good
or bad qualities not inherent in their nature, there were others who continued a longer time in their
original condition. Such was doubtless the first source of the inequality of mankind, which it is much
easier to point out thus in general terms, than to assign with precision to its actual causes.
  Let not my readers therefore imagine that I flatter myself with having seen what it appears to me so
difficult to discover. I have here entered upon certain arguments, and risked some conjectures, less in
the hope of solving the difficulty, than with a view to throwing some light upon it, and reducing the
question to its proper form. Others may easily proceed farther on the same road, and yet no one find it
very easy to get to the end. For it is by no means a light undertaking to distinguish properly between
what is original and what is artificial in the actual nature of man, or to form a true idea of a state which
no  longer  exists,  perhaps  never  did  exist,  and  probably  never  will  exist;  and  of  which,  it  is,
nevertheless, necessary to have true ideas, in order to form a proper judgment of our present state. It
requires, indeed, more philosophy than can be imagined to enable any one to determine exactly whatprecautions he ought to take, in order to make solid observations on this subject; and it appears to me
that a good solution of the following problem would be not unworthy of the Aristotles and Plinys of the
present age. What experiments would have to be made, to discover the natural man? And how are those
experiments to be made in a state of society?
  So far am I from undertaking to solve this problem, that I think I have sufficiently considered the
subject, to venture to declare beforehand that our greatest philosophers would not be too good to direct
such experiments, and our most powerful sovereigns to make them. Such a combination we have very
little reason to expect, especially attended with the perseverance, or rather succession of intelligence
and goodwill necessary on both sides to success.
  These investigations, which are so difficult to make, and have been hitherto so little thought of, are,
nevertheless, the only means that remain of obviating a multitude of difficulties which deprive us of the
knowledge of the real foundations of human society. It is this ignorance of the nature of man, which
casts so much uncertainty and obscurity on the true definition of natural right: for, the idea of right,
says Burlamaqui, and more particularly that of natural right, are ideas manifestly relative to the nature
of man. It is then from this very nature itself, he goes on, from the constitution and state of man, that we
must deduce the first principles of this science.
  We cannot see without surprise and disgust how little agreement there is between the different
authors who have treated this great subject. Among the more important writers there are scarcely two of
the same mind about it. Not to speak of the ancient philosophers, who seem to have done their best
purposely to contradict one another on the most fundamental principles, the Roman jurists subjected
man and the other animals indiscriminately to the same natural law, because they considered, under that
name, rather the law which nature imposes on herself than that which she prescribes to others; or rather
because of the particular acceptation of the term law among those jurists; who seem on this occasion to
have  understood  nothing  more  by  it  than  the  general  relations  established  by  nature  between  all
animated beings, for their common preservation. The moderns, understanding, by the term law, merely
a rule prescribed to a moral being, that is to say intelligent, free and considered in his relations to other
beings, consequently confine the jurisdiction of natural law to man, as the only animal endowed with
reason. But, defining this law, each after his own fashion, they have established it on such metaphysical
principles, that there are very few persons among us capable of comprehending them, much less of
discovering  them  for  themselves.  So  that  the  definitions  of  these  learned  men,  all  differing  in
everything  else,  agree  only  in  this,  that  it  is  impossible  to  comprehend  the  law  of  nature,  and
consequently to obey it, without being a very subtle casuist and a profound metaphysician. All which is
as much as to say that mankind must have employed, in the establishment of society, a capacity which
is acquired only with great difficulty, and by very few persons, even in a state of society.
  Knowing so little of nature, and agreeing so ill about the meaning of the word law, it would be
difficult for us to fix on a good definition of natural law. Thus all the definitions we meet with in books,
setting aside their defect in point of uniformity, have yet another fault, in that they are derived from
many kinds of knowledge, which men do not possess naturally, and from advantages of which they can
have no idea until they have already departed from that state. Modern writers begin by inquiring what
rules it would be expedient for men to agree on for their common interest, and then give the name of
natural law to a collection of these rules, without any other proof than the good that would result from
their  being  universally  practised.  This  is  undoubtedly  a  simple  way  of  making  definitions,  and  of
explaining the nature of things by almost arbitrary conveniences.
  But as long as we are ignorant of the natural man, it is in vain for us to attempt to determine either
the law originally prescribed to him, or that which is best adapted to his constitution. All we can know
with any certainty respecting this law is that, if it is to be a law, not only the wills of those it obliges
must be sensible of their submission to it; but also, to be natural, it must come directly from the voice
of nature.
  Throwing aside, therefore, all those scientific books, which teach us only to see men such as they
have made themselves, and contemplating the first and most simple operations of the human soul, Ithink I can perceive in it two principles prior to reason, one of them deeply interesting us in our own
welfare and preservation, and the other exciting a natural repugnance at seeing any other sensible being,
and particularly any of our own species, suffer pain or death. It is from the agreement and combination
which the understanding is in a position to establish between these two principles, without its being
necessary to introduce that of sociability, that all the rules of natural right appear to me to be derived —
rules which our reason is afterwards obliged to establish on other foundations, when by its successive
developments it has been led to suppress nature itself.
  In proceeding thus, we shall not be obliged to make man a philosopher before he is a man. His
duties toward others are not dictated to him only by the later lessons of wisdom; and, so long as he does
not resist the internal impulse of compassion, he will never hurt any other man, nor even any sentient
being, except on those lawful occasions on which his own preservation is concerned and he is obliged
to give himself the preference. By this method also we put an end to the time-honoured disputes
concerning the participation of animals in natural law: for it is clear that, being destitute of intelligence
and liberty, they cannot recognise that law; as they partake, however, in some measure of our nature, in
consequence of the sensibility with which they are endowed, they ought to partake of natural right; so
that mankind is subjected to a kind of obligation even toward the brutes. It appears, in fact, that if I am
bound to do no injury to my fellow-creatures, this is less because they are rational than because they are
sentient beings: and this quality, being common both to men and beasts, ought to entitle the latter at
least to the privilege of not being wantonly ill-treated by the former.
  The very study of the original man, of his real wants, and the fundamental principles of his duty, is
besides the only proper method we can adopt to obviate all the difficulties which the origin of moral
inequality presents, on the true foundations of the body politic, on the reciprocal rights of its members,
and on many other similar topics equally important and obscure.
  If we look at human society with a calm and disinterested eye, it seems, at first, to show us only the
violence of the powerful and the oppression of the weak. The mind is shocked at the cruelty of the one,
or is induced to lament the blindness of the other; and as nothing is less permanent in life than those
external relations, which are more frequently produced by accident than wisdom, and which are called
weakness or power, riches or poverty, all human institutions seem at first glance to be founded merely
on banks of shifting sand. It is only by taking a closer look, and removing the dust and sand that
surround the edifice, that we perceive the immovable basis on which it is raised, and learn to respect its
foundations.  Now,  without  a  serious  study  of  man,  his  natural  faculties  and  their  successive
development, we shall never be able to make these necessary distinctions, or to separate, in the actual
constitution of things, that which is the effect of the divine will, from the innovations attempted by
human art. The political and moral investigations, therefore, to which the important question before us
leads,  are  in  every  respect  useful;  while  the  hypothetical  history  of  governments  affords  a  lesson
equally instructive to mankind.
  In considering what we should have become, had we been left to ourselves, we should learn to bless
Him,  whose  gracious  hand,  correcting  our  institutions,  and  giving  them  an  immovable  basis,  has
prevented those disorders which would otherwise have arisen from them, and caused our happiness to
come from those very sources which seemed likely to involve us in misery.
 
  A DISSERTATION
  ON THE ORIGIN AND FOUNDATION OF
  THE INEQUALITY OF MANKIND
  IT is of man that I have to speak; and the question I am investigating shows me that it is to men that
I must address myself: for questions of this sort are not asked by those who are afraid to honour truth. I
shall then confidently uphold the cause of humanity before the wise men who invite me to do so, and
shall not be dissatisfied if I acquit myself in a manner worthy of my subject and of my judges.
I conceive that there are two kinds of inequality among the human species; one, which I call natural
or physical, because it is established by nature, and consists in a difference of age, health, bodilystrength, and the qualities of the mind or of the soul: and another, which may be called moral or
political  inequality,  because  it  depends  on  a  kind  of  convention,  and  is  established,  or  at  least
authorised by the consent of men. This latter consists of the different privileges, which some men enjoy
to the prejudice of others; such as that of being more rich, more honoured, more powerful or even in a
position to exact obedience.
  It is useless to ask what is the source of natural inequality, because that question is answered by the
simple definition of the word. Again, it is still more useless to inquire whether there is any essential
connection between the two inequalities; for this would be only asking, in other words, whether those
who command are necessarily better than those who obey, and if strength of body or of mind, wisdom
or virtue are always found in particular individuals, in proportion to their power or wealth: a question
fit  perhaps  to  be  discussed  by  slaves  in  the  hearing  of  their  masters,  but  highly  unbecoming  to
reasonable and free men in search of the truth.
  The subject of the present discourse, therefore, is more precisely this. To mark, in the progress of
things, the moment at which right took the place of violence and nature became subject to law, and to
explain by what sequence of miracles the strong came to submit to serve the weak, and the people to
purchase imaginary repose at the expense of real felicity.
  The philosophers, who have inquired into the foundations of society, have all felt the necessity of
going back to a state of nature; but not one of them has got there. Some of them have not hesitated to
ascribe to man, in such a state, the idea of just and unjust, without troubling themselves to show that he
must be possessed of such an idea, or that it could be of any use to him. Others have spoken of the
natural  right  of  every  man  to  keep  what  belongs  to  him,  without  explaining  what  they  meant  by
belongs. Others again, beginning by giving the strong authority over the weak, proceeded directly to the
birth of government, without regard to the time that must have elapsed before the meaning of the words
authority and government could have existed among men. Every one of them, in short, constantly
dwelling on wants, avidity, oppression, desires and pride, has transferred to the state of nature ideas
which were acquired in society; so that, in speaking of the savage, they described the social man. It has
not even entered into the heads of most of our writers to doubt whether the state of nature ever existed;
but  it  is  clear  from  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  the  first  man,  having  received  his  understanding  and
commandments immediately from God, was not himself in such a state; and that, if we give such credit
to the writings of Moses as every Christian philosopher ought to give, we must deny that, even before
the deluge, men were ever in the pure state of nature; unless, indeed, they fell back into it from some
very extraordinary circumstance; a paradox which it would be very embarrassing to defend, and quite
impossible to prove.
  Let us begin then by laying facts aside, as they do not affect the question. The investigations we
may enter into, in treating this subject, must not be considered as historical truths, but only as mere
conditional  and  hypothetical  reasonings,  rather  calculated  to  explain  the  nature  of  things,  than  to
ascertain their actual origin; just like the hypotheses which our physicists daily form respecting the
formation of the world. Religion commands us to believe that, God Himself having taken men out of a
state of nature immediately after the creation, they are unequal only because it is His will they should
be so: but it does not forbid us to form conjectures based solely on the nature of man, and the beings
around him, concerning what might have become of the human race, if it had been left to itself. This
then is the question asked me, and that which I propose to discuss in the following discourse. As my
subject interests mankind in general, I shall endeavour to make use of a style adapted to all nations, or
rather, forgetting time and place, to attend only to men to whom I am speaking. I shall suppose myself
in the Lyceum of Athens, repeating the lessons of my masters, with Plato and Xenocrates for judges,
and the whole human race for audience.
  O man, of whatever country you are, and whatever your opinions may be, behold your history, such
as I have thought to read it, not in books written by your fellow-creatures, who are liars, but in nature,
which never lies. All that comes from her will be true; nor will you meet with anything false, unless I
have involuntarily put in something of my own. The times of which I am going to speak are veryremote: how much are you changed from what you once were! It is, so to speak, the life of your species
which I am going to write, after the qualities which you have received, which your education and habits
may have depraved, but cannot have entirely destroyed. There is, I feel, an age at which the individual
man would wish to stop: you are about to inquire about the age at which you would have liked your
whole species to stand still. Discontented with your present state, for reasons which threaten your
unfortunate descendants with still greater discontent, you will perhaps wish it were in your power to go
back; and this feeling should be a panegyric on your first ancestors, a criticism of your contemporaries,
and a terror to the unfortunates who will come after you.
  THE FIRST PART
  IMPORTANT as it may be, in order to judge rightly of the natural state of man, to consider him
from his origin, and to examine him, as it were, in the embryo of his species; I shall not follow his
organisation through its successive developments, nor shall I stay to inquire what his animal system
must have been at the beginning, in order to become at length what it actually is. I shall not ask whether
his long nails were at first, as Aristotle supposes, only crooked talons; whether his whole body, like that
of a bear, was not covered with hair; or whether the fact that he walked upon all fours, with his looks
directed toward the earth, confined to a horizon of a few paces, did not at once point out the nature and
limits of his ideas. On this subject I could form none but vague and almost imaginary conjectures.
Comparative anatomy has as yet made too little progress, and the observations of naturalists are too
uncertain to afford an adequate basis for any solid reasoning. So that, without having recourse to the
supernatural information given us on this head, or paying any regard to the changes which must have
taken place in the internal, as well as the external, conformation of man, as he applied his limbs to new
uses, and fed himself on new kinds of food, I shall suppose his conformation to have been at all times
what it appears to us at this day; that he always walked on two legs, made use of his hands as we do,
directed his looks over all nature, and measured with his eyes the vast expanse of Heaven.
  If we strip this being, thus constituted, of all the supernatural gifts he may have received, and all the
artificial faculties he can have acquired only by a long process; if we consider him, in a word, just as he
must have come from the hands of nature, we behold in him an animal weaker than some, and less agile
than others; but, taking him all round, the most advantageously organised of any. I see him satisfying
his hunger at the first oak, and slaking his thirst at the first brook; finding his bed at the foot of the tree
which afforded him a repast; and, with that, all his wants supplied.
  While the earth was left to its natural fertility and covered with immense forests, whose trees were
never mutilated by the axe, it would present on every side both sustenance and shelter for every species
of animal. Men, dispersed up and down among the rest, would observe and imitate their industry, and
thus attain even to the instinct of the beasts, with the advantage that, whereas every species of brutes
was confined to one particular instinct, man, who perhaps has not any one peculiar to himself, would
appropriate them all, and live upon most of those different foods which other animals shared among
themselves; and thus would find his subsistence much more easily than any of the rest.
  Accustomed from their infancy to the inclemencies of the weather and the rigour of the seasons,
inured to fatigue, and forced, naked and unarmed, to defend themselves and their prey from other
ferocious animals, or to escape them by flight, men would acquire a robust and almost unalterable
constitution. The children, bringing with them into the world the excellent constitution of their parents,
and fortifying it by the very exercises which first produced it, would thus acquire all the vigour of
which the human frame is capable. Nature in this case treats them exactly as Sparta treated the children
of her citizens: those who come well formed into the world she renders strong and robust, and all the
rest she destroys; differing in this respect from our modern communities, in which the State, by making
children a burden to their parents, kills them indiscriminately before they are born.
  The  body  of  a  savage  man  being  the  only  instrument  he  understands,  he  uses  it  for  various
purposes, of which ours, for want of practice, are incapable: for our industry deprives us of that force
and agility, which necessity obliges him to acquire. If he had had an axe, would he have been able with
his naked arm to break so large a branch from a tree? If he had had a sling, would he have been able tothrow a stone with so great velocity? If he had had a ladder, would he have been so nimble in climbing
a tree? If he had had a horse, would he have been himself so swift of foot? Give civilised man time to
gather all his machines about him, and he will no doubt easily beat the savage; but if you would see a
still more unequal contest, set them together naked and unarmed, and you will soon see the advantage
of having all our forces constantly at our disposal, of being always prepared for every event, and of
carrying one's self, as it were, perpetually whole and entire about one.
  Hobbes contends that man is naturally intrepid, and is intent only upon attacking and fighting.
Another illustrious philosopher holds the opposite, and Cumberland and Puffendorf also affirm that
nothing is more timid and fearful than man in the state of nature; that he is always in a tremble, and
ready to fly at the least noise or the slightest movement. This may be true of things he does not know;
and I do not doubt his being terrified by every novelty that presents itself, when he neither knows the
physical good or evil he may expect from it, nor can make a comparison between his own strength and
the dangers he is about to encounter. Such circumstances, however, rarely occur in a state of nature, in
which all things proceed in a uniform manner, and the face of the earth is not subject to those sudden
and continual changes which arise from the passions and caprices of bodies of men living together. But
savage  man,  living  dispersed  among  other  animals,  and  finding  himself  betimes  in  a  situation  to
measure his strength with theirs, soon comes to compare himself with them; and, perceiving that he
surpasses them more in adroitness than they surpass him in strength, learns to be no longer afraid of
them. Set a bear, or a wolf, against a robust, agile, and resolute savage, as they all are, armed with
stones and a good cudgel, and you will see that the danger will be at least on both sides, and that, after a
few trials of this kind, wild beasts, which are not fond of attacking each other, will not be at all ready to
attack man, whom they will have found to be as wild and ferocious as themselves. With regard to such
animals as have really more strength than man has adroitness, he is in the same situation as all weaker
animals, which notwithstanding are still able to subsist; except indeed that he has the advantage that,
being equally swift of foot, and finding an almost certain place of refuge in every tree, he is at liberty to
take or leave it at every encounter, and thus to fight or fly, as he chooses. Add to this that it does not
appear that any animal naturally makes war on man, except in case of self-defence or excessive hunger,
or betrays any of those violent antipathies, which seem to indicate that one species is intended by nature
for the food of another.
  This is doubtless why negroes and savages are so little afraid of the wild beasts they may meet in
the woods. The Caraibs of Venezuela among others live in this respect in absolute security and without
the  smallest  inconvenience.  Though  they  are  almost  naked,  Francis  Corréal  tells  us,  they  expose
themselves freely in the woods, armed only with bows and arrows; but no one has ever heard of one of
them being devoured by wild beasts.
  But man has other enemies more formidable, against which is is not provided with such means of
defence: these are the natural infirmities of infancy, old age, and illness of every kind, melancholy
proofs of our weakness, of which the two first are common to all animals, and the last belongs chiefly
to man in a state of society. With regard to infancy, it is observable that the mother, carrying her child
always with her, can nurse it with much greater ease than the females of many other animals, which are
forced to be perpetually going and coming, with great fatigue, one way to find subsistence, and another
to suckle or feed their young. It is true that if the woman happens to perish, the infant is in great danger
of perishing with her; but this risk is common to many other species of animals, whose young take a
long time before they are able to provide for themselves. And if our infancy is longer than theirs, our
lives are longer in proportion; so that all things are in this respect fairly equal; though there are other
rules to be considered regarding the duration of the first period of life, and the number of young, which
do not affect the present subject. In old age, when men are less active and perspire little, the need for
food diminishes with the ability to provide it. As the savage state also protects them from gout and
rheumatism, and old age is, of all ills, that which human aid can least alleviate, they cease to be,
without others perceiving that they are no more, and almost without perceiving it themselves.
  With respect to sickness, I shall not repeat the vain and false declamations which most healthypeople pronounce against medicine; but I shall ask if any solid observations have been made from
which it may be justly concluded that, in the countries where the art of medicine is most neglected, the
mean duration of man's life is less than in those where it is most cultivated. How indeed can this be the
case, if we bring on ourselves more diseases than medicine can furnish remedies? The great inequality
in manner of living, the extreme idleness of some, and the excessive labour of others, the easiness of
exciting and gratifying our sensual appetites, the too exquisite foods of the wealthy which overheat and
fill them with indigestion, and, on the other hand, the unwholesome food of the poor, often, bad as it is,
insufficient  for  their  needs,  which  induces  them,  when  opportunity  offers,  to  eat  voraciously  and
overcharge  their  stomachs;  all  these,  together  with  sitting  up  late,  and  excesses  of  every  kind,
immoderate  transports  of  every  passion,  fatigue,  mental  exhaustion,  the  innumerable  pains  and
anxieties inseparable from every condition of life, by which the mind of man is incessantly tormented;
these are too fatal proofs that the greater part of our ills are of our own making, and that we might have
avoided them nearly all by adhering to that simple, uniform and solitary manner of life which nature
prescribed. If she destined man to be healthy, I venture to declare that a state of reflection is a state
contrary  to  nature,  and  that  a  thinking  man  is  a  depraved  animal.  When  we  think  of  the  good
constitution of the savages, at least of those whom we have not ruined with our spirituous liquors, and
reflect that they are troubled with hardly any disorders, save wounds and old age, we are tempted to
believe that, in following the history of civil society, we shall be telling also that of human sickness.
Such, at least, was the opinion of Plato, who inferred from certain remedies prescribed, or approved, by
Podalirius and Machaon at the siege of Troy, that several sicknesses which these remedies gave rise to
in his time, were not then known to mankind: and Celsus tells us that diet, which is now so necessary,
was first invented by Hippocrates.
  Being subject therefore to so few causes of sickness, man, in the state of nature, can have no need
of remedies, and still less of physicians: nor is the human race in this respect worse off than other
animals, and it is easy to learn from hunters whether they meet with many infirm animals in the course
of the chase. It is certain they frequently meet with such as carry the marks of having been considerably
wounded, with many that have had bones or even limbs broken, yet have been healed without any other
surgical assistance than that of time, or any other regimen than that of their ordinary life. At the same
time their cures seem not to have been less perfect, for their not having been tortured by incisions,
poisoned with drugs, or wasted by fasting. In short, however useful medicine, properly administered,
may be among us, it is certain that, if the savage, when he is sick and left to himself, has nothing to
hope but from nature, he has, on the other hand, nothing to fear but from his disease; which renders his
situation often preferable to our own.
  We should beware, therefore, of confounding the savage man with the men we have daily before
our eyes. Nature treats all the animals left to her care with a predilection that seems to show how
jealous she is of that right. The horse, the cat, the bull, and even the ass are generally of greater stature,
and always more robust, and have more vigour, strength and courage, when they run wild in the forests
than when bred in the stall. By becoming domesticated, they lose half these advantages; and it seems as
if all our care to feed and treat them well serves only to deprave them. It is thus with man also: as he
becomes sociable and a slave, he grows weak, timid and servile; his effeminate way of life totally
enervates his strength and courage. To this it may be added that there is still a greater difference
between savage and civilised man, than between wild and tame beasts: for men and brutes having been
treated alike by nature, the several conveniences in which men indulge themselves still more than they
do their beasts, are so many additional causes of their deeper degeneracy.
  It is not therefore so great a misfortune to these primitive men, nor so great an obstacle to their
preservation, that they go naked, have no dwellings and lack all the superfluities which we think so
necessary.  If  their  skins  are  not  covered  with  hair,  they  have  no  need  of  such  covering  in  warm
climates;  and,  in  cold  countries,  they  soon  learn  to  appropriate  the  skins  of  the  beasts  they  have
overcome. If they have but two legs to run with, they have two arms to defend themselves with, and
provide for their wants. Their children are slowly and with difficulty taught to walk; but their mothersare able to carry them with ease; an advantage which other animals lack, as the mother, if pursued, is
forced either to abandon her young, or to regulate her pace by theirs. Unless, in short, we suppose a
singular and fortuitous concurrence of circumstances of which I shall speak later, and which would be
unlikely to exist, it is plain in every state of the case, that the man who first made himself clothes or a
dwelling was furnishing himself with things not at all necessary; for he had till then done without them,
and there is no reason why he should not have been able to put up in manhood with the same kind of
life as had been his in infancy.
  Solitary, indolent, and perpetually accompanied by danger, the savage cannot but be fond of sleep;
his sleep too must be light, like that of the animals, which think but little and may be said to slumber all
the time they do not think. Self-preservation being his chief and almost sole concern, he must exercise
most those faculties which are most concerned with attack or defence, either for overcoming his prey,
or for preventing him from becoming the prey of other animals. On the other hand, those organs which
are perfected only by softness and sensuality will remain in a gross and imperfect state, incompatible
with any sort of delicacy; so that, his senses being divided on this head, his touch and taste will be
extremely coarse, his sight, hearing and smell exceedingly fine and subtle. Such in general is the animal
condition,  and  such,  according  to  the  narratives  of  travellers,  is  that  of  most  savage  nations.  It  is
therefore no matter for surprise that the Hottentots of the Cape of Good Hope distinguish ships at sea,
with the naked eye, at as great a distance as the Dutch can do with their telescopes; or that the savages
of America should trace the Spaniards, by their smell, as well as the best dogs could have done; or that
these barbarous peoples feel no pain in going naked, or that they use large quantities of piemento with
their food, and drink the strongest European liquors like water.
  Hitherto  I  have  considered  merely  the  physical  man;  let  us  now  take  a  view  of  him  on  his
metaphysical and moral side.
I see nothing in any animal but an ingenious machine, to which nature hath given senses to wind
itself up, and to guard itself, to a certain degree, against anything that might tend to disorder or destroy
it. I perceive exactly the same things in the human machine, with this difference, that in the operations
of  the  brute,  nature  is  the  sole  agent,  whereas  man  has  some  share  in  his  own  operations,  in  his
character as a free agent. The one chooses and refuses by instinct, the other from an act of free-will:
hence the brute cannot deviate from the rule prescribed to it, even when it would be advantageous for it
to do so; and, on the contrary, man frequently deviates from such rules to his own prejudice. Thus a
pigeon would be starved to death by the side of a dish of the choicest meats, and a cat on a heap of fruit
or grain; though it is certain that either might find nourishment in the foods which it thus rejects with
disdain, did it think of trying them. Hence it is that dissolute men run into excesses which bring on
fevers and death; because the mind depraves the senses, and the will continues to speak when nature is
silent.
  Every animal has ideas, since it has senses; it even combines those ideas in a certain degree; and it
is  only  in  degree  that  man  differs,  in  this  respect,  from  the  brute.  Some  philosophers  have  even
maintained that there is a greater difference between one man and another than between some men and
some beasts. It is not, therefore, so much the understanding that constitutes the specific difference
between the man and the brute, as the human quality of free-agency. Nature lays her commands on
every animal, and the brute obeys her voice. Man receives the same impulsion, but at the same time
knows himself at liberty to acquiesce or resist: and it is particularly in his consciousness of this liberty
that the spirituality of his soul is displayed. For physics may explain, in some measure, the mechanism
of the senses and the formation of ideas; but in the power of willing or rather of choosing, and in the
feeling of this power, nothing is to be found but acts which are purely spiritual and wholly inexplicable
by the laws of mechanism.
  However, even if the difficulties attending all these questions should still leave room for difference
in this respect between men and brutes, there is another very specific quality which distinguishes them,
and which will admit of no dispute. This is the faculty of self-improvement, which, by the help of
circumstances, gradually develops all the rest of our faculties, and is inherent in the species as in theindividual: whereas a brute is, at the end of a few months, all he will ever be during his whole life, and
his species, at the end of a thousand years, exactly what it was the first year of that thousand. Why is
man alone liable to grow into a dotard? Is it not because he returns, in this, to his primitive state; and
that, while the brute, which has acquired nothing and has therefore nothing to lose, still retains the force
of instinct, man, who loses, by age or accident, all that his perfectibility had enabled him to gain, falls
by this means lower than the brutes themselves? It would be melancholy, were we forced to admit that
this distinctive and almost unlimited faculty is the source of all human misfortunes; that it is this which,
in time, draws man out of his original state, in which he would have spent his days insensibly in peace
and innocence; that it is this faculty, which, successively producing in different ages his discoveries and
his errors, his vices and his virtues, makes him at length a tyrant both over himself and over nature.1 It
would be shocking to be obliged to regard as a benefactor the man who first suggested to the Oroonoko
Indians the use of the boards they apply to the temples of their children, which secure to them some
part at least of their imbecility and original happiness.
  Savage man, left by nature solely to the direction of instinct, or rather indemnified for what he may
lack by faculties capable at first of supplying its place, and afterwards of raising him much above it,
must  accordingly  begin  with  purely  animal  functions:  thus  seeing  and  feeling  must  be  his  first
condition, which would be common to him and all other animals. To will, and not to will, to desire and
to fear, must be the first, and almost the only operations of his soul, till new circumstances occasion
new developments of his faculties.
  Whatever moralists may hold, the human understanding is greatly indebted to the passions, which,
it is universally allowed, are also much indebted to the understanding. It is by the activity of the
passions that our reason is improved; for we desire knowledge only because we wish to enjoy; and it is
impossible to conceive any reason why a person who has neither fears nor desires should give himself
the trouble of reasoning. The passions, again, originate in our wants, and their progress depends on that
of our knowledge; for we cannot desire or fear anything, except from the idea we have of it, or from the
simple impulse of nature. Now savage man, being destitute of every species of intelligence, can have
no passions save those of the latter kind: his desires never go beyond his physical wants. The only
goods he recognises in the universe are food, a female, and sleep: the only evils he fears are pain and
hunger. I say pain, and not death: for no animal can know what it is to die; the knowledge of death and
its terrors being one of the first acquisitions made by man in departing from an animal state.
  It would be easy, were it necessary, to support this opinion by facts, and to show that, in all the
nations of the world, the progress of the understanding has been exactly proportionate to the wants
which the peoples had received from nature, or been subjected to by circumstances, and in consequence
to the passions that induced them to provide for those necessities. I might instance the arts, rising up in
Egypt and expanding with the inundation of the Nile. I might follow their progress into Greece, where
they took root afresh, grew up and lowered to the skies, among the rocks and sands of Attica, without
being able to germinate on the fertile banks of the Eurotas: I might observe that in general, the people
of the North are more industrious than those of the South, because they cannot get on so well without
being so: as if nature wanted to equalise matters by giving their understandings the fertility she had
refused to their soil.
  But who does not see, without recurring to the uncertain testimony of history, that everything seems
to  remove  from  savage  man  both  the  temptation  and  the  means  of  changing  his  condition?  His
imagination paints no pictures; his heart makes no demands on him. His few wants are so readily
supplied, and he is so far from having the knowledge which is needful to make him want more, that he
can have neither foresight nor curiosity. The face of nature becomes indifferent to him as it grows
familiar. He sees in it always the same order, the same successions: he has not understanding enough to
wonder at the greatest miracles; nor is it in his mind that we can expect to find that philosophy man
needs, if he is to know how to notice for once what he sees every day. His soul, which nothing disturbs,
is wholly wrapped up in the feeling of its present existence, without any idea of the future, however
near at hand; while his projects, as limited as his views, hardly extend to the close of day. Such, even atpresent, is the extent of the native Caribbean's foresight: he will improvidently sell you his cotton-bed
in the morning, and come crying in the evening to buy it again, not having foreseen he would want it
again the next night.
  The more we reflect on this subject, the greater appears the distance between pure sensation and the
most simple knowledge: it is impossible indeed to conceive how a man, by his own powers alone,
without the aid of communication and the spur of necessity, could have bridged so great a gap. How
many ages may have elapsed before mankind were in a position to behold any other fire than that of the
heavens. What a multiplicity of chances must have happened to teach them the commonest uses of that
element! How often must they have let it out before they acquired the art of reproducing it? and how
often  may  not  such  a  secret  have  died  with  him  who  had  discovered  it?  What  shall  we  say  of
agriculture, an art which requires so much labour and foresight, which is so dependent on others that it
is plain it could only be practised in a society which had at least begun, and which does not serve so
much to draw the means of subsistence from the earth — for these it would produce of itself — but to
compel it to produce what is most to our taste? But let us suppose that men had so multiplied that the
natural produce of the earth was no longer sufficient for their support; a supposition, by the way, which
would prove such a life to be very advantageous for the human race; let us suppose that, without forges
or workshops, the instruments of husbandry had dropped from the sky into the hands of savages; that
they had overcome their natural aversion to continual labour; that they had learnt so much foresight for
their needs; that they had divined how to cultivate the earth, to sow grain and plant trees; that they had
discovered the arts of grinding corn, and of setting the grape to ferment — all being things that must
have been taught them by the gods, since it is not to be conceived how they could discover them for
themselves — yet after all this, what man among them would be so absurd as to take the trouble of
cultivating a field, which might be stripped of its crop by the first comer, man or beast, that might take
a liking to it; and how should each of them resolve to pass his life in wearisome labour, when, the more
necessary to him the reward of his labour might be, the surer he would be of not getting it? In a word,
how could such a situation induce men to cultivate the earth, till it was regularly parcelled out among
them; that is to say, till the state of nature had been abolished?
  Were we to suppose savage man as trained in the art of thinking as philosophers make him; were
we, like them, to suppose him a very philosopher capable of investigating the sublimest truths, and of
forming, by highly abstract chains of reasoning, maxims of reason and justice, deduced from the love
of order in general, or the known will of his Creator; in a word, were we to suppose him as intelligent
and  enlightened,  as  he  must  have  been,  and  is  in  fact  found  to  have  been,  dull  and  stupid,  what
advantage would accrue to the species, from all such metaphysics, which could not be communicated
by one to another, but must end with him who made them? What progress could be made by mankind,
while dispersed in the woods among other animals? and how far could men improve or mutually
enlighten one another, when, having no fixed habitation, and no need of one another's assistance, the
same  persons  hardly  met  twice  in  their  lives,  and  perhaps  then,  without  knowing  one  another  or
speaking together?
  Let it be considered how many ideas we owe to the use of speech; how far grammar exercises the
understanding and facilitates its operations. Let us reflect on the inconceivable pains and the infinite
space  of  time  that  the  first  invention  of  languages  must  have  cost.  To  these  reflections  add  what
preceded, and then judge how many thousand ages must have elapsed in the successive development in
the human mind of those operations of which it is capable.
I shall here take the liberty for a moment, of considering the difficulties of the origin of languages,
on which subject I might content myself with a simple repetition of the Abbé Condillac's investigations,
as they fully confirm my system, and perhaps even first suggested it. But it is plain, from the manner in
which this philosopher solves the difficulties he himself raises, concerning the origin of arbitrary signs,
that he assumes what I question, viz., that a kind of society must already have existed among the first
inventors of language. While I refer, therefore, to his observations on this head, I think it right to give
my own, in order to exhibit the same difficulties in a light adapted to my subject. The first whichpresents  itself  is  to  conceive  how  language  can  have  become  necessary;  for  as  there  was  no
communication  among  men  and  no  need  for  any,  we  can  neither  conceive  the  necessity  of  this
invention, nor the possibility of it, if it was not somehow indispensable. I might affirm, with many
others, that languages arose in the domestic intercourse between parents and their children. But this
expedient would not obviate the difficulty, and would besides involve the blunder made by those who,
in reasoning on the state of nature, always import into it ideas gathered in a state of society. Thus they
constantly consider families as living together under one roof, and the individuals of each as observing
among themselves a union as intimate and permanent as that which exists among us, where so many
common interests unite them: whereas, in this primitive state, men had neither houses, nor huts, nor any
kind of property whatever; every one lived where he could, seldom for more than a single night; the
sexes united without design, as accident, opportunity or inclination brought them together, nor had they
any great need of words to communicate their designs to each other; and they parted with the same
indifference. The mother gave suck to her children at first for her own sake; and afterwards, when habit
had made them dear, for theirs: but as soon as they were strong enough to go in search of their own
food, they forsook her of their own accord; and, as they had hardly any other method of not losing one
another  than  that  of  remaining  continually  within  sight,  they  soon  became  quite  incapable  of
recognising one another when they happened to meet again. It is farther to be observed that the child,
having all his wants to explain, and of course more to say to his mother than the mother could have to
say to him, must have borne the brunt of the task of invention, and the language he used would be of
his own device, so that the number of languages would be equal to that of the individuals speaking
them, and the variety would be increased by the vagabond and roving life they led, which would not
give time for any idiom to become constant. For to say that the mother dictated to her child the words
he was to use in asking her for one thing or another, is an explanation of how languages already formed
are taught, but by no means explains how languages were originally formed.
  We will suppose, however, that this first difficulty is obviated. Let us for a moment then take
ourselves as being on this side of the vast space which must lie between a pure state of nature and that
in which languages had become necessary, and, admitting their necessity, let us inquire how they could
first be established. Here we have a new and worse difficulty to grapple with; for if men need speech to
learn to think, they must have stood in much greater need of the art of thinking, to be able to invent that
of speaking. And though we might conceive how the articulate sounds of the voice came to be taken as
the conventional interpreters of our ideas, it would still remain for us to inquire what could have been
the interpreters of this convention for those ideas, which, answering to no sensible objects, could not be
indicated either by gesture or voice; so that we can hardly form any tolerable conjectures about the
origin of this art of communicating our thoughts and establishing a correspondence between minds: an
art  so  sublime,  that  far  distant  as  it  is  from  its  origin,  philosophers  still  behold  it  at  such  an
immeasurable distance from perfection, that there is none rash enough to affirm it will ever reach it,
even though the revolutions time necessarily produces were suspended in its favour, though prejudice
should be banished from our academies or condemned to silence, and those learned societies should
devote themselves uninterruptedly for whole ages to this thorny question.
  The first language of mankind, the most universal and vivid, in a word the only language man
needed, before he had occasion to exert his eloquence to persuade assembled multitudes, was the
simple cry of nature. But as this was excited only by a sort of instinct on urgent occasions, to implore
assistance in case of danger, or relief in case of suffering, it could be of little use in the ordinary course
of life, in which more moderate feelings prevail. When the ideas of men began to expand and multiply,
and closer communication took place among them, they strove to invent more numerous signs and a
more copious language. They multiplied the inflections of the voice, and added gestures, which are in
their own nature more expressive, and depend less for their meaning on a prior determination. Visible
and movable objects were therefore expressed by gestures, and audible ones by imitative sounds: but,
as hardly anything can be indicated by gestures, except objects actually present or easily described, and
visible actions; as they are not universally useful — for darkness or the interposition of a materialobject destroys their efficacy — and as besides they rather request than secure our attention; men at
length bethought themselves of substituting for them the articulate sounds of the voice, which, without
bearing  the  same  relation  to  any  particular  ideas,  are  better  calculated  to  express  them  all,  as
conventional signs. Such an institution could only be made by common consent, and must have been
effected in a manner not very easy for men whose gross organs had not been accustomed to any such
exercise. It is also in itself still more difficult to conceive, since such a common agreement must have
had motives, and speech seems to have been highly necessary to establish the use of it.
  It is reasonable to suppose that the words first made use of by mankind had a much more extensive
signification than those used in languages already formed, and that ignorant as they were of the division
of  discourse  into  its  constituent  parts,  they  at  first  gave  every  single  word  the  sense  of  a  whole
proposition. When they began to distinguish subject and attribute, and noun and verb, which was itself
no common effort of genius, substantives were first only so many proper names; the present infinitive
was the only tense of verbs; and the very idea of adjectives must have been developed with great
difficulty; for every adjective is an abstract idea, and abstractions are painful and unnatural operations.
  Every object at first received a particular name without regard to genus or species, which these
primitive originators were not in a position to distinguish; every individual presented itself to their
minds in isolation, as they are in the picture of nature. If one oak was called A, another was called B;
for the primitive idea of two things is that they are not the same, and it often takes a long time for what
they have in common to be seen: so that, the narrower the limits of their knowledge of things, the more
copious their dictionary must have been. The difficulty of using such a vocabulary could not be easily
removed; for, to arrange beings under common and generic denominations, it became necessary to
know their distinguishing properties: the need arose for observation and definition, that is to say, for
natural history and metaphysics of a far more developed kind than men can at that time have possessed.
  Add to this, that general ideas cannot be introduced into the mind without the assistance of words,
nor can the understanding seize them except by means of propositions. This is one of the reasons why
animals cannot form such ideas, or ever acquire that capacity for self-improvement which depends on
them. When a monkey goes from one nut to another, are we to conceive that he entertains any general
idea of that kind of fruit, and compares its archetype with the two individual nuts? Assuredly he does
not; but the sight of one of these nuts recalls to his memory the sensations which he received from the
other,  and  his  eyes,  being  modified  after  a  certain  manner,  give  information  to  the  palate  of  the
modification it is about to receive. Every general idea is purely intellectual; if the imagination meddles
with it ever so little, the idea immediately becomes particular. If you endeavour to trace in your mind
the image of a tree in general, you never attain to your end. In spite of all you can do, you will have to
see it as great or little, bare or leafy, light or dark, and were you capable of seeing nothing in it but what
is common to all trees, it would no longer be like a tree at all. Purely abstract beings are perceivable in
the same manner, or are only conceivable by the help of language. The definition of a triangle alone
gives you a true idea of it: the moment you imagine a triangle in your mind, it is some particular
triangle and not another, and you cannot avoid giving it sensible lines and a coloured area. We must
then make use of propositions and of language in order to form general ideas. For no sooner does the
imagination cease to operate than the understanding proceeds only by the help of words. If then the first
inventors  of  speech  could  give  names  only  to  ideas  they  already  had,  it  follows  that  the  first
substantives could be nothing more than proper names.
  But when our new grammarians, by means of which I have no conception, began to extend their
ideas and generalise their terms, the ignorance of the inventors must have confined this method within
very narrow limits; and, as they had at first gone too far in multiplying the names of individuals, from
ignorance  of  their  genus  and  species,  they  made  afterwards  too  few  of  these,  from  not  having
considered beings in all their specific differences. It would indeed have needed more knowledge and
experience than they could have, and more pains and inquiry than they would have bestowed, to carry
these distinctions to their proper length. If, even to-day, we are continually discovering new species,
which have hitherto escaped observation, let us reflect how many of them must have escaped men whojudged things merely from their first appearance! It is superfluous to add that the primitive classes and
the most general notions must necessarily have escaped their notice also. How, for instance, could they
have understood or thought of the words matter, spirit, substance, mode, figure, motion, when even our
philosophers, who have so long been making use of them, have themselves the greatest difficulty in
understanding them; and when, the ideas attached to them being purely metaphysical, there are no
models of them to be found in nature?
  But I stop at this point, and ask my judges to suspend their reading a while, to consider, after the
invention of physical substantives, which is the easiest part of language to invent, that there is still a
great way to go, before the thoughts of men will have found perfect expression and constant form, such
as would answer the purposes of public speaking, and produce their effect on society. I beg of them to
consider how much time must have been spent, and how much knowledge needed, to find out numbers,
abstract  terms,  aorists  and  all  the  tenses  of  verbs,  particles,  syntax,  the  method  of  connecting
propositions, the forms of reasoning, and all the logic of speech. For myself, I am so aghast at the
increasing difficulties which present themselves, and so well convinced of the almost demonstrable
impossibility that languages should owe their original institution to merely human means, that I leave,
to any one who will undertake it, the discussion of the difficult problem, which was most necessary, the
existence of society to the invention of language, or the invention of language to the establishment of
society. But be the origin of language and society what they may, it may be at least inferred, from the
little care which nature has taken to unite mankind by mutual wants, and to facilitate the use of speech,
that she has contributed little to make them sociable, and has put little of her own into all they have
done to create such bonds of union. It is in fact impossible to conceive why, in a state of nature, one
man should stand more in need of the assistance of another, than a monkey or a wolf of the assistance
of another of its kind: or, granting that he did, what motives could induce that other to assist him; or,
even then, by what means they could agree about the conditions. I know it is incessantly repeated that
man would in such a state have been the most miserable of creatures; and indeed, if it be true, as I think
I have proved, that he must have lived many ages, before he could have either desire or an opportunity
of emerging from it, this would only be an accusation against nature, and not against the being which
she had thus unhappily constituted. But as I understand the word miserable, it either has no meaning at
all, or else signifies only a painful privation of something, or a state of suffering either in body or soul. I
should be glad to have explained to me, what kind of misery a free being, whose heart is at ease and
whose body is in health, can possibly suffer. I would ask also, whether a social or a natural life is most
likely to become insupportable to those who enjoy it. We see around us hardly a creature in civil
society, who does not lament his existence: we even see many deprive themselves of as much of it as
they can, and laws human and divine together can hardly put a stop to the disorder. I ask, if it was ever
known that a savage took it into his head, when at liberty, to complain of life or to make away with
himself. Let us therefore judge, with less vanity, on which side the real misery is found. On the other
hand, nothing could be more unhappy than savage man, dazzled by science, tormented by his passions,
and reasoning about a state different from his own. It appears that Providence most wisely determined
that the faculties, which he potentially possessed, should develop themselves only as occasion offered
to exercise them, in order that they might not be superfluous or perplexing to him, by appearing before
their time, nor slow and useless when the need for them arose. In instinct alone, he had all he required
for living in the state of nature; and with a developed understanding he has only just enough to support
life in society.
  It appears, at first view, that men in a state of nature, having no moral relations or determinate
obligations one with another, could not be either good or bad, virtuous or vicious; unless we take these
terms in a physical sense, and call, in an individual, those qualities vices which may be injurious to his
preservation, and those virtues which contribute to it; in which case, he would have to be accounted
most virtuous, who put least check on the pure impulses of nature. But without deviating from the
ordinary sense of the words, it will be proper to suspend the judgment we might be led to form on such
a state, and be on our guard against our prejudices, till we have weighed the matter in the scales ofimpartiality, and seen whether virtues or vices preponderate among civilised men; and whether their
virtues do them more good than their vices do harm; till we have discovered, whether the progress of
the sciences sufficiently indemnifies them for the mischiefs they do one another, in proportion as they
are better informed of the good they ought to do; or whether they would not be, on the whole, in a
much happier condition if they had nothing to fear or to hope from any one, than as they are, subjected
to universal dependence, and obliged to take everything from those who engage to give them nothing in
return.
  Above all, let us not conclude, with Hobbes, that because man has no idea of goodness, he must be
naturally wicked; that he is vicious because he does not know virtue; that he always refuses to do his
fellow-creatures services which he does not think they have a right to demand; or that by virtue of the
right he truly claims to everything he needs, he foolishly imagines himself the sole proprietor of the
whole universe. Hobbes had seen clearly the defects of all the modern definitions of natural right: but
the consequences which he deduces from his own show that he understands it in an equally false sense.
In reasoning on the principles he lays down, he ought to have said that the state of nature, being that in
which the care for our own preservation is the least prejudicial to that of others, was consequently the
best calculated to promote peace, and the most suitable for mankind. He does say the exact opposite, in
consequence of having improperly admitted, as a part of savage man's care for self-preservation, the
gratification of a multitude of passions which are the work of society, and have made laws necessary. A
bad man, he says, is a robust child. But it remains to be proved whether man in a state of nature is this
robust child: and, should we grant that he is, what would he infer? Why truly, that if this man, when
robust and strong, were dependent on others as he is when feeble, there is no extravagance he would
not be guilty of; that he would beat his mother when she was too slow in giving him her breast; that he
would strangle one of his younger brothers, if he should be troublesome to him, or bite the arm of
another, if he put him to any inconvenience. But that man in the state of nature is both strong and
dependent involves two contrary suppositions. Man is weak when he is dependent, and is his own
master before he comes to be strong. Hobbes did not reflect that the same cause, which prevents a
savage from making use of his reason, as our jurists hold, prevents him also from abusing his faculties,
as Hobbes himself allows: so that it may be justly said that savages are not bad merely because they do
not know what it is to be good: for it is neither the development of the understanding nor the restraint of
law that hinders them from doing ill; but the peacefulness of their passions, and their ignorance of vice:
tanto plus in illis proficit vitiorum ignoratio, quam in his cognitio virtutis.2
  There is another principle which has escaped Hobbes; which, having been bestowed on mankind, to
moderate,  on  certain  occasions,  the  impetuosity  of  egoism,  or,  before  its  birth,  the  desire  of  self-
preservation, tempers the ardour with which he pursues his own welfare, by an innate repugnance at
seeing a fellow-creature suffer.3 I think I need not fear contradiction in holding man to be possessed of
the only natural virtue, which could not be denied him by the most violent detractor of human virtue. I
am speaking of compassion, which is a disposition suitable to creatures so weak and subject to so many
evils as we certainly are: by so much the more universal and useful to mankind, as it comes before any
kind of reflection; and at the same time so natural, that the very brutes themselves sometimes give
evident proofs of it. Not to mention the tenderness of mothers for their offspring and the perils they
encounter to save them from danger, it is well known that horses show a reluctance to trample on living
bodies. One animal never passes by the dead body of another of its species: there are even some which
give  their  fellows  a  sort  of  burial;  while  the  mournful  lowings  of  the  cattle  when  they  enter  the
slaughter-house show the impressions made on them by the horrible spectacle which meets them. We
find, with pleasure, the author of the Fable of the Bees obliged to own that man is a compassionate and
sensible being, and laying aside his cold subtlety of style, in the example he gives, to present us with
the pathetic description of a man who, from a place of confinement, is compelled to behold a wild beast
tear a child from the arms of its mother, grinding its tender limbs with its murderous teeth, and tearing
its palpitating entrails with its claws. What horrid agitation must not the eyewitness of such a scene
experience, although he would not be personally concerned! What anxiety would he not suffer at notbeing able to give any assistance to the fainting mother and the dying infant!
  Such is the pure emotion of nature, prior to all kinds of reflection! Such is the force of natural
compassion, which the greatest depravity of morals has as yet hardly been able to destroy! for we daily
find at our theatres men affected, nay shedding tears at the sufferings of a wretch who, were he in the
tyrant's place, would probably even add to the torments of his enemies; like the bloodthirsty Sulla, who
was so sensitive to ills he had not caused, or that Alexander of Pheros who did not dare to go and see
any tragedy acted, for fear of being seen weeping with Andromache and Priam, though he could listen
without emotion to the cries of all the citizens who were daily strangled at his command.
  Mollissima corda
  Humano generi dare se natura fatetur,
  Quœ lacrimas dedit.
  Juvenal, Satires, xv. 1514
  Mandeville well knew that, in spite of all their morality, men would have never been better than
monsters, had not nature bestowed on them a sense of compassion, to aid their reason: but he did not
see that from this quality alone flow all those social virtues, of which he denied man the possession.
But what is generosity, clemency or humanity but compassion applied to the weak, to the guilty, or to
mankind in general? Even benevolence and friendship are, if we judge rightly, only the effects of
compassion, constantly set upon a particular object: for how is it different to wish that another person
may not suffer pain and uneasiness and to wish him happy? Were it even true that pity is no more than
a feeling, which puts us in the place of the sufferer, a feeling, obscure yet lively in a savage, developed
yet feeble in civilised man; this truth would have no other consequence than to confirm my argument.
Compassion must, in fact, be the stronger, the more the animal beholding any kind of distress identifies
himself with the animal that suffers. Now, it is plain that such identification must have been much more
perfect in a state of nature than it is in a state of reason. It is reason that engenders self-respect, and
reflection that confirms it: it is reason which turns man's mind back upon itself, and divides him from
everything that could disturb or afflict him. It is philosophy that isolates him, and bids him say, at sight
of the misfortunes of others: "Perish if you will, I am secure." Nothing but such general evils as
threaten the whole community can disturb the tranquil sleep of the philosopher, or tear him from his
bed. A murder may with impunity be committed under his window; he has only to put his hands to his
ears and argue a little with himself, to prevent nature, which is shocked within him, from identifying
itself with the unfortunate sufferer. Uncivilised man has not this admirable talent; and for want of
reason  and  wisdom,  is  always  foolishly  ready  to  obey  the  first  promptings  of  humanity.  It  is  the
populace that flocks together at riots and street-brawls, while the wise man prudently makes off. It is
the mob and the market-women, who part the combatants, and hinder gentle-folks from cutting one
another's throats.
  It is then certain that compassion is a natural feeling, which, by moderating the violence of love of
self in each individual, contributes to the preservation of the whole species. It is this compassion that
hurries us without reflection to the relief of those who are in distress: it is this which in a state of nature
supplies the place of laws, morals and virtues, with the advantage that none are tempted to disobey its
gentle voice: it is this which will always prevent a sturdy savage from robbing a weak child or a feeble
old man of the sustenance they may have with pain and difficulty acquired, if he sees a possibility of
providing for himself by other means: it is this which, instead of inculcating that sublime maxim of
rational justice. Do to others as you would have them do unto you, inspires all men with that other
maxim of natural goodness, much less perfect indeed, but perhaps more useful; Do good to yourself
with as little evil as possible to others. In a word, it is rather in this natural feeling than in any subtle
arguments that we must look for the cause of that repugnance, which every man would experience in
doing evil, even independently of the maxims of education. Although it might belong to Socrates and
other minds of the like craft to acquire virtue by reason, the human race would long since have ceased
to be, had its preservation depended only on the reasonings of the individuals composing it.
  With passions so little active, and so good a curb, men, being rather wild than wicked, and moreintent to guard themselves against the mischief that might be done them, than to do mischief to others,
were by no means subject to very perilous dissensions. They maintained no kind of intercourse with
one another, and were consequently strangers to vanity, deference, esteem and contempt; they had not
the least idea of meum and tuum, and no true conception of justice; they looked upon every violence to
which they were subjected, rather as an injury that might easily be repaired than as a crime that ought to
be punished; and they never thought of taking revenge, unless perhaps mechanically and on the spot, as
a dog will sometimes bite the stone which is thrown at him. Their quarrels therefore would seldom have
very bloody consequences; for the subject of them would be merely the question of subsistence. But I
am aware of one greater danger, which remains to be noticed.
  Of the passions that stir the heart of man, there is one which makes the sexes necessary to each
other, and is extremely ardent and impetuous; a terrible passion that braves danger, surmounts all
obstacles, and in its transports seems calculated to bring destruction on the human race which it is
really destined to preserve. What must become of men who are left to this brutal and boundless rage,
without modesty, without shame, and daily upholding their amours at the price of their blood?
  It must, in the first place, be allowed that, the more violent the passions are, the more are laws
necessary to keep them under restraint. But, setting aside the inadequacy of laws to effect this purpose,
which is evident from the crimes and disorders to which these passions daily give rise among us, we
should do well to inquire if these evils did not spring up with the laws themselves; for in this case, even
if the laws were capable of repressing such evils, it is the least that could be expected from them, that
they should check a mischief which would not have arisen without them.
  Let us begin by distinguishing between the physical and moral ingredients in the feeling of love.
The physical part of love is that general desire which urges the sexes to union with each other. The
moral part is that which determines and fixes this desire exclusively upon one particular object; or at
least gives it a greater degree of energy toward the object thus preferred. It is easy to see that the moral
part of love is a factitious feeling, born of social usage, and enhanced by the women with much care
and cleverness, to establish their empire, and put in power the sex which ought to obey. This feeling,
being founded on certain ideas of beauty and merit which a savage is not in a position to acquire, and
on comparisons which he is incapable of making, must be for him almost non-existent; for, as his mind
cannot form abstract ideas of proportion and regularity, so his heart is not susceptible of the feelings of
love and admiration, which are even insensibly produced by the application of these ideas. He follows
solely the character nature has implanted in him, and not tastes which he could never have acquired; so
that every woman equally answers his purpose.
  Men in a state of nature being confined merely to what is physical in love, and fortunate enough to
be ignorant of those excellences, which whet the appetite while they increase the difficulty of gratifying
it, must be subject to fewer and less violent fits of passion, and consequently fall into fewer and less
violent disputes. The imagination, which causes such ravages among us, never speaks to the heart of
savages, who quietly await the impulses of nature, yield to them involuntarily, with more pleasure than
ardour, and, their wants once satisfied, lose the desire. It is therefore incontestable that love, as well as
all other passions, must have acquired in society that glowing impetuosity, which makes it so often fatal
to mankind. And it is the more absurd to represent savages as continually cutting one another's throats
to indulge their brutality, because this opinion is directly contrary to experience; the Caribbeans, who
have as yet least of all deviated from the state of nature, being in fact the most peaceable of people in
their amours, and the least subject to jealousy, though they live in a hot climate which seems always to
inflame the passions.
  With regard to the inferences that might be drawn, in the case of several species of animals, the
males of which fill our poultry-yards with blood and slaughter, or in spring make the forests resound
with their quarrels over their females; we must begin by excluding all those species, in which nature
has plainly established, in the comparative power of the sexes, relations different from those which
exist among us: thus we can base no conclusion about men on the habits of fighting cocks. In those
species where the proportion is better observed, these battles must be entirely due to the scarcity offemales in comparison with males; or, what amounts to the same thing, to the intervals during which
the female constantly refuses the advances of the male: for if each female admits the male but during
two months in the year, it is the same as if the number of females were five-sixths less. Now, neither of
these two cases is applicable to the human species, in which the number of females usually exceeds that
of males, and among whom it has never been observed, even among savages, that the females have,
like those of other animals, their stated times of passion and indifference. Moreover, in several of these
species, the individuals all take fire at once, and there comes a fearful moment of universal passion,
tumult and disorder among them; a scene which is never beheld in the human species, whose love is not
thus seasonal. We must not then conclude from the combats of such animals for the enjoyment of the
females, that the case would be the same with mankind in a state of nature: and, even if we drew such a
conclusion, we see that such contests do not exterminate other kinds of animals, and we have no reason
to think they would be more fatal to ours. It is indeed clear that they would do still less mischief than is
the case in a state of society; especially in those countries in which, morals being still held in some
repute, the jealousy of lovers and the vengeance of husbands are the daily cause of duels, murders, and
even worse crimes; where the obligation of eternal fidelity only occasions adultery, and the very laws
of honour and continence necessarily increase debauchery and lead to the multiplication of abortions.
  Let us conclude then that man in a state of nature, wandering up and down the forests, without
industry, without speech, and without home, an equal stranger to war and to all ties, neither standing in
need of his fellow-creatures nor having any desire to hurt them, and perhaps even not distinguishing
them one from another; let us conclude that, being self-sufficient and subject to so few passions, he
could have no feelings or knowledge but such as befitted his situation; that he felt only his actual
necessities, and disregarded everything he did not think himself immediately concerned to notice, and
that his understanding made no greater progress than his vanity. If by accident he made any discovery,
he was the less able to communicate it to others, as he did not know even his own children. Every art
would necessarily perish with its inventor, where there was no kind of education among men, and
generations succeeded generations without the least advance; when, all setting out from the same point,
centuries must have elapsed in the barbarism of the first ages; when the race was already old, and man
remained a child.
  If I have expatiated at such length on this supposed primitive state, it is because I had so many
ancient errors and inveterate prejudices to eradicate, and therefore thought it incumbent on me to dig
down to their very root, and show, by means of a true picture of the state of nature, how far even the
natural  inequalities  of  mankind  are  from  having  that  reality  and  influence  which  modern  writers
suppose.
  It is in fact easy to see that many of the differences which distinguish men are merely the effect of
habit and the different methods of life men adopt in society. Thus a robust or delicate constitution, and
the strength or weakness attaching to it, are more frequently the effects of a hardy or effeminate method
of education than of the original endowment of the body. It is the same with the powers of the mind; for
education not only makes a difference between such as are cultured and such as are not, but even
increases the differences which exist among the former, in proportion to their respective degrees of
culture: as the distance between a giant and a dwarf on the same road increases with every step they
take. If we compare the prodigious diversity, which obtains in the education and manner of life of the
various orders of men in the state of society, with the uniformity and simplicity of animal and savage
life, in which every one lives on the same kind of food and in exactly the same manner, and does
exactly the same things, it is easy to conceive how much less the difference between man and man must
be in a state of nature than in a state of society, and how greatly the natural inequality of mankind must
be increased by the inequalities of social institutions.
  But even if nature really affected, in the distribution of her gifts, that partiality which is imputed to
her, what advantage would the greatest of her favourites derive from it, to the detriment of others, in a
state  that  admits  of  hardly  any  kind  of  relation  between  them?  Where  there  is  no  love,  of  what
advantage is beauty? Of what use is wit to those who do not converse, or cunning to those who have nobusiness with others? I hear it constantly repeated that, in such a state, the strong would oppress the
weak; but what is here meant by oppression? Some, it is said, would violently domineer over others,
who would groan under a servile submission to their caprices. This indeed is exactly what I observe to
be the case among us; but I do not see how it can be inferred of men in a state of nature, who could not
easily be brought to conceive what we mean by dominion and servitude. One man, it is true, might
seize the fruits which another had gathered, the game he had killed, or the cave he had chosen for
shelter; but how would he ever be able to exact obedience, and what ties of dependence could there be
among men without possessions? If, for instance, I am driven from one tree, I can go to the next; if I am
disturbed in one place, what hinders me from going to another? Again, should I happen to meet with a
man so much stronger than myself, and at the same time so depraved, so indolent, and so barbarous, as
to compel me to provide for his sustenance while he himself remains idle; he must take care not to have
his eyes off me for a single moment; he must bind me fast before he goes to sleep, or I shall certainly
either knock him on the head or make my escape. That is to say, he must in such a case voluntarily
expose himself to much greater trouble than he seeks to avoid, or can give me. After all this, let him be
off his guard ever so little; let him but turn his head aside at any sudden noise, and I shall be instantly
twenty paces off, lost in the forest, and, my fetters burst asunder, he would never see me again.
  Without my expatiating thus uselessly on these details, every one must see that as the bonds of
servitude are formed merely by the mutual dependence of men on one another and the reciprocal needs
that unite them, it is impossible to make any man a slave, unless he be first reduced to a situation in
which he cannot do without the help of others: and, since such a situation does not exist in a state of
nature, every one is there his own master, and the law of the strongest is of no effect.
  Having proved that the inequality of mankind is hardly felt, and that its influence is next to nothing
in a state of nature, I must next show its origin and trace its progress in the successive developments of
the human mind. Having shown that human perfectibility, the social virtues, and the other faculties
which natural man potentially possessed, could never develop of themselves, but must require the
fortuitous concurrence of many foreign causes that might never arise, and without which he would have
remained for ever in his primitive condition, I must now collect and consider the different accidents
which  may  have  improved  the  human  understanding  while  depraving  the  species,  and  made  man
wicked while making him sociable; so as to bring him and the world from that distant period to the
point at which we now behold them.
I confess that, as the events I am going to describe might have happened in various ways, I have
nothing to determine my choice but conjectures: but such conjectures become reasons, when they are
the most probable that can be drawn from the nature of things, and the only means of discovering the
truth. The consequences, however, which I mean to deduce will not be barely conjectural; as, on the
principles just laid down, it would be impossible to form any other theory that would not furnish the
same results, and from which I could not draw the same conclusions.
  This will be a sufficient apology for my not dwelling on the manner in which the lapse of time
compensates for the little probability in the events; on the surprising power of trivial causes, when their
action is constant; on the impossibility, on the one hand, of destroying certain hypotheses, though on
the other we cannot give them the certainty of known matters of fact; on its being within the province
of history, when two facts are given as real, and have to be connected by a series of intermediate facts,
which are unknown or supposed to be so, to supply such facts as may connect them; and on its being in
the province of philosophy when history is silent, to determine similar facts to serve the same end; and
lastly, on the influence of similarity, which, in the case of events, reduces the facts to a much smaller
number of different classes than is commonly imagined. It is enough for me to offer these hints to the
consideration of my judges, and to have so arranged that the general reader has no need to consider
them at all.
 
  THE SECOND PART
  THE first man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, bethought himself of saying This is mine,and found people simple enough to believe him, was the real founder of civil society. From how many
crimes, wars and murders, from how many horrors and misfortunes might not any one have saved
mankind, by pulling up the stakes, or filling up the ditch, and crying to his fellows, "Beware of listening
to this impostor; you are undone if you once forget that the fruits of the earth belong to us all, and the
earth itself to nobody." But there is great probability that things had then already come to such a pitch,
that they could no longer continue as they were; for the idea of property depends on many prior ideas,
which could only be acquired successively, and cannot have been formed all at once in the human
mind. Mankind must have made very considerable progress, and acquired considerable knowledge and
industry which they must also have transmitted and increased from age to age, before they arrived at
this last point of the state of nature. Let us then go farther back, and endeavour to unify under a single
point of view that slow succession of events and discoveries in the most natural order.
  Man's first feeling was that of his own existence, and his first care that of self-preservation. The
produce of the earth furnished him with all he needed, and instinct told him how to use it. Hunger and
other appetites made him at various times experience various modes of existence; and among these was
one which urged him to propagate his species — a blind propensity that, having nothing to do with the
heart, produced a merely animal act. The want once gratified, the two sexes knew each other no more;
and even the offspring was nothing to its mother, as soon as it could do without her.
  Such was the condition of infant man; the life of an animal limited at first to mere sensations, and
hardly profiting by the gifts nature bestowed on him, much less capable of entertaining a thought of
forcing anything from her. But difficulties soon presented themselves, and it became necessary to learn
how to surmount them: the height of the trees, which prevented him from gathering their fruits, the
competition of other animals desirous of the same fruits, and the ferocity of those who needed them for
their own preservation, all obliged him to apply himself to bodily exercises. He had to be active, swift
of foot, and vigorous in fight. Natural weapons, stones and sticks, were easily found: he learnt to
surmount the obstacles of nature, to contend in case of necessity with other animals, and to dispute for
the means of subsistence even with other men, or to indemnify himself for what he was forced to give
up to a stronger.
  In proportion as the human race grew more numerous, men's cares increased. The difference of
soils, climates and seasons, must have introduced some differences into their manner of living. Barren
years, long and sharp winters, scorching summers which parched the fruits of the earth, must have
demanded a new industry. On the seashore and the banks of rivers, they invented the hook and line, and
became fishermen and eaters of fish. In the forests they made bows and arrows, and became huntsmen
and warriors. In cold countries they clothed themselves with the skins of the beasts they had slain. The
lightning, a volcano, or some lucky chance acquainted them with fire, a new resource against the
rigours of winter: they next learned how to preserve this element, then how to reproduce it, and finally
how to prepare with it the flesh of animals which before they had eaten raw.
  This repeated relevance of various beings to himself, and one to another, would naturally give rise
in the human mind to the perceptions of certain relations between them. Thus the relations which we
denote by the terms, great, small, strong, weak, swift, slow, fearful, bold, and the like, almost insensibly
compared at need, must have at length produced in him a kind of reflection, or rather a mechanical
prudence, which would indicate to him the precautions most necessary to his security.
  The new intelligence which resulted from this development increased his superiority over other
animals, by making him sensible of it. He would now endeavour, therefore, to ensnare them, would
play them a thousand tricks, and though many of them might surpass him in swiftness or in strength,
would in time become the master of some and the scourge of others. Thus, the first time he looked into
himself, he felt the first emotion of pride; and, at a time when he scarce knew how to distinguish the
different orders of beings, by looking upon his species as of the highest order, he prepared the way for
assuming pre-eminence as an individual.
  Other  men,  it  is  true,  were  not  then  to  him  what  they  now  are  to  us,  and  he  had  no  greater
intercourse with them than with other animals; yet they were not neglected in his observations. Theconformities, which he would in time discover between them, and between himself and his female, led
him to judge of others which were not then perceptible; and finding that they all behaved as he himself
would have done in like circumstances, he naturally inferred that their manner of thinking and acting
was altogether in conformity with his own. This important truth, once deeply impressed on his mind,
must have induced him, from an intuitive feeling more certain and much more rapid than any kind of
reasoning, to pursue the rules of conduct, which he had best observe towards them, for his own security
and advantage.
  Taught by experience that the love of well-being is the sole motive of human actions, he found
himself in a position to distinguish the few cases, in which mutual interest might justify him in relying
upon the assistance of his fellows; and also the still fewer cases in which a conflict of interests might
give cause to suspect them. In the former case, he joined in the same herd with them, or at most in some
kind of loose association, that laid no restraint on its members, and lasted no longer than the transitory
occasion that formed it. In the latter case, every one sought his own private advantage, either by open
force, if he thought himself strong enough, or by address and cunning, if he felt himself the weaker.
  In this manner, men may have insensibly acquired some gross ideas of mutual undertakings, and of
the  advantages  of  fulfilling  them:  that  is,  just  so  far  as  their  present  and  apparent  interest  was
concerned: for they were perfect strangers to foresight, and were so far from troubling themselves about
the distant future, that they hardly thought of the morrow. If a deer was to be taken, every one saw that,
in order to succeed, he must abide faithfully by his post: but if a hare happened to come within the
reach of any one of them, it is not to be doubted that he pursued it without scruple, and, having seized
his prey, cared very little, if by so doing he caused his companions to miss theirs.
  It is easy to understand that such intercourse would not require a language much more refined than
that of rooks or monkeys, who associate together for much the same purpose. Inarticulate cries, plenty
of gestures and some imitative sounds, must have been for a long time the universal language; and by
the addition, in every country, of some conventional articulate sounds (of which, as I have already
intimated, the first institution is not too easy to explain) particular languages were produced; but these
were rude and imperfect, and nearly such as are now to be found among some savage nations.
  Hurried on by the rapidity of time, by the abundance of things I have to say, and by the almost
insensible progress of things in their beginnings, I pass over in an instant a multitude of ages; for the
slower the events were in their succession, the more rapidly may they be described.
  These first advances enabled men to make others with greater rapidity. In proportion as they grew
enlightened, they grew industrious. They ceased to fall asleep under the first tree, or in the first cave
that afforded them shelter; they invented several kinds of implements of hard and sharp stones, which
they used to dig up the earth, and to cut wood; they then made huts out of branches, and afterwards
learnt  to  plaster  them  over  with  mud  and  clay.  This  was  the  epoch  of  a  first  revolution,  which
established and distinguished families, and introduced a kind of property, in itself the source of a
thousand quarrels and conflicts. As, however, the strongest were probably the first to build themselves
huts which they felt themselves able to defend, it may be concluded that the weak found it much easier
and safer to imitate, than to attempt to dislodge them: and of those who were once provided with huts,
none could have any inducement to appropriate that of his neighbour; not indeed so much because it
did not belong to him, as because it could be of no use, and he could not make himself master of it
without exposing himself to a desperate battle with the family which occupied it.
  The first expansions of the human heart were the effects of a novel situation, which united husbands
and wives, fathers and children, under one roof. The habit of living together soon gave rise to the finest
feelings known to humanity, conjugal love and paternal affection. Every family became a little society,
the more united because liberty and reciprocal attachment were the only bonds of its union. The sexes,
whose manner of life had been hitherto the same, began now to adopt different ways of living. The
women became more sedentary, and accustomed themselves to mind the hut and their children, while
the men went abroad in search of their common subsistence. From living a softer life, both sexes also
began to lose something of their strength and ferocity: but, if individuals became to some extent lessable to encounter wild beasts separately, they found it, on the other hand, easier to assemble and resist
in common.
  The simplicity and solitude of man's life in this new condition, the paucity of his wants, and the
implements he had invented to satisfy them, left him a great deal of leisure, which he employed to
furnish  himself  with  many  conveniences  unknown  to  his  fathers:  and  this  was  the  first  yoke  he
inadvertently imposed on himself, and the first source of the evils he prepared for his descendants. For,
besides continuing thus to enervate both body and mind, these conveniences lost with use almost all
their power to please, and even degenerated into real needs, till the want of them became far more
disagreeable than the possession of them had been pleasant. Men would have been unhappy at the loss
of them, though the possession did not make them happy.
  We can here see a little better how the use of speech became established, and insensibly improved
in each family, and we may form a conjecture also concerning the manner in which various causes may
have extended and accelerated the progress of language, by making it more and more necessary. Floods
or earthquakes surrounded inhabited districts with precipices or waters: revolutions of the globe tore off
portions from the continent, and made them islands. It is readily seen that among men thus collected
and compelled to live together, a common idiom must have arisen much more easily than among those
who still wandered through the forests of the continent. Thus it is very possible that after their first
essays in navigation the islanders brought over the use of speech to the continent: and it is at least very
probable that communities and languages were first established in islands, and even came to perfection
there before they were known on the mainland.
  Everything now begins to change its aspect. Men, who have up to now been roving in the woods,
by taking to a more settled manner of life, come gradually together, form separate bodies, and at length
in every country arises a distinct nation, united in character and manners, not by regulations or laws,
but by uniformity of life and food, and the common influence of climate. Permanent neighbourhood
could not fail to produce, in time, some connection between different families. Among young people of
opposite  sexes,  living  in  neighbouring  huts,  the  transient  commerce  required  by  nature  soon  led,
through mutual intercourse, to another kind not less agreeable, and more permanent. Men began now to
take  the  difference  between  objects  into  account,  and  to  make  comparisons;  they  acquired
imperceptibly  the  ideas  of  beauty  and  merit,  which  soon  gave  rise  to  feelings  of  preference.  In
consequence of seeing each other often, they could not do without seeing each other constantly. A
tender and pleasant feeling insinuated itself into their souls, and the least opposition turned it into an
impetuous fury: with love arose jealousy; discord triumphed, and human blood was sacrificed to the
gentlest of all passions.
  As ideas and feelings succeeded one another, and heart and head were brought into play, men
continued  to  lay  aside  their  original  wildness;  their  private  connections  became  every  day  more
intimate as their limits extended. They accustomed themselves to assemble before their huts round a
large tree; singing and dancing, the true offspring of love and leisure, became the amusement, or rather
the occupation, of men and women thus assembled together with nothing else to do. Each one began to
consider the rest, and to wish to be considered in turn; and thus a value came to be attached to public
esteem. Whoever sang or danced best, whoever was the handsomest, the strongest, the most dexterous,
or the most eloquent, came to be of most consideration; and this was the first step towards inequality,
and at the same time towards vice. From these first distinctions arose on the one side vanity and
contempt and on the other shame and envy: and the fermentation caused by these new leavens ended by
producing combinations fatal to innocence and happiness.
  As soon as men began to value one another, and the idea of consideration had got a footing in the
mind, every one put in his claim to it, and it became impossible to refuse it to any with impunity. Hence
arose the first obligations of civility even among savages; and every intended injury became an affront;
because, besides the hurt which might result from it, the party injured was certain to find in it a
contempt for his person, which was often more insupportable than the hurt itself.
  Thus, as every man punished the contempt shown him by others, in proportion to his opinion ofhimself, revenge became terrible, and men bloody and cruel. This is precisely the state reached by most
of the savage nations known to us: and it is for want of having made a proper distinction in our ideas,
and see how very far they already are from the state of nature, that so many writers have hastily
concluded that man is naturally cruel, and requires civil institutions to make him more mild; whereas
nothing is more gentle than man in his primitive state, as he is placed by nature at an equal distance
from the stupidity of brutes, and the fatal ingenuity of civilised man. Equally confined by instinct and
reason to the sole care of guarding himself against the mischiefs which threaten him, he is restrained by
natural compassion from doing any injury to others, and is not led to do such a thing even in return for
injuries received. For, according to the axiom of the wise Locke, There can be no injury, where there is
no property.
  But it must be remarked that the society thus formed, and the relations thus established among men,
required of them qualities different from those which they possessed from their primitive constitution.
Morality began to appear in human actions, and every one, before the institution of law, was the only
judge and avenger of the injuries done him, so that the goodness which was suitable in the pure state of
nature was no longer proper in the new-born state of society. Punishments had to be made more severe,
as opportunities of offending became more frequent, and the dread of vengeance had to take the place
of the rigour of the law. Thus, though men had become less patient, and their natural compassion had
already suffered some diminution, this period of expansion of the human faculties, keeping a just mean
between the indolence of the primitive state and the petulant activity of our egoism, must have been the
happiest and most stable of epochs. The more we reflect on it, the more we shall find that this state was
the least subject to revolutions, and altogether the very best man could experience; so that he can have
departed from it only through some fatal accident, which, for the public good, should never have
happened. The example of savages, most of whom have been found in this state, seems to prove that
men were meant to remain in it, that it is the real youth of the world, and that all subsequent advances
have been apparently so many steps towards the perfection of the individual, but in reality towards the
decrepitude of the species.
  So long as men remained content with their rustic huts, so long as they were satisfied with clothes
made of the skins of animals and sewn together with thorns and fish-bones, adorned themselves only
with feathers and shells, and continued to paint their bodies different colours, to improve and beautify
their  bows  and  arrows  and  to  make  with  sharp-edged  stones  fishing  boats  or  clumsy  musical
instruments; in a word, so long as they undertook only what a single person could accomplish, and
confined themselves to such arts as did not require the joint labour of several hands, they lived free,
healthy, honest and happy lives, so long as their nature allowed, and as they continued to enjoy the
pleasures of mutual and independent intercourse. But from the moment one man began to stand in need
of the help of another; from the moment it appeared advantageous to any one man to have enough
provisions for two, equality disappeared, property was introduced, work became indispensable, and
vast forests became smiling fields, which man had to water with the sweat of his brow, and where
slavery and misery were soon seen to germinate and grow up with the crops.
  Metallurgy and agriculture were the two arts which produced this great revolution. The poets tell us
it was gold and silver, but, for the philosophers, it was iron and corn, which first civilised men, and
ruined humanity. Thus both were unknown to the savages of America, who for that reason are still
savage: the other nations also seem to have continued in a state of barbarism while they practised only
one of these arts. One of the best reasons, perhaps, why Europe has been, if not longer, at least more
constantly and highly civilised than the rest of the world, is that it is at once the most abundant in iron
and the most fertile in corn.
  It is difficult to conjecture how men first came to know and use iron; for it is impossible to suppose
they would of themselves think of digging the ore out of the mine, and preparing it for smelting, before
they knew what would be the result. On the other hand, we have the less reason to suppose this
discovery the effect of any accidental fire, as mines are only formed in barren places, bare of trees and
plants; so that it looks as if nature had taken pains to keep that fatal secret from us. There remains,therefore,  only  the  extraordinary  accident  of  some  volcano  which,  by  ejecting  metallic  substances
already in fusion, suggested to the spectators the idea of imitating the natural operation. And we must
further conceive them as possessed of uncommon courage and foresight, to undertake so laborious a
work, with so distant a prospect of drawing advantage from it; yet these qualities are united only in
minds more advanced than we can suppose those of these first discoverers to have been.
  With regard to agriculture, the principles of it were known long before they were put in practice;
and it is indeed hardly possible that men, constantly employed in drawing their subsistence from plants
and  trees,  should  not  readily  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  means  made  use  of  by  nature  for  the
propagation of vegetables. It was in all probability very long, however, before their industry took that
turn, either because trees, which together with hunting and fishing afforded them food, did not require
their attention; or because they were ignorant of the use of corn, or without instruments to cultivate it;
or  because  they  lacked  foresight  to  future  needs;  or  lastily,  because  they  were  without  means  of
preventing others from robbing them of the fruit of their labour.
  When they grew more industrious, it is natural to believe that they began, with the help of sharp
stones and pointed sticks, to cultivate a few vegetables or roots around their huts; though it was long
before they knew how to prepare corn, or were provided with the implements necessary for raising it in
any large quantity; not to mention how essential it is, for husbandry, to consent to immediate loss, in
order to reap a future gain — a precaution very foreign to the turn of a savage's mind; for, as I have
said, he hardly foresees in the morning what he will need at night.
  The invention of the other arts must therefore have been necessary to compel mankind to apply
themselves to agriculture. No sooner were artificers wanted to smelt and forge iron, than others were
required to maintain them; the more hands that were employed in manufactures, the fewer were left to
provide for the common subsistence, though the number of mouths to be furnished with food remained
the same: and as some required commodities in exchange for their iron, the rest at length discovered the
method  of  making  iron  serve  for  the  multiplication  of  commodities.  By  this  means  the  arts  of
husbandry  and  agriculture  were  established  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  art  of  working  metals  and
multiplying their uses on the other.
  The  cultivation  of  the  earth  necessarily  brought  about  its  distribution;  and  property,  once
recognised, gave rise to the first rules of justice; for, to secure each man his own, it had to be possible
for each to have something. Besides, as men began to look forward to the future, and all had something
to lose, every one had reason to apprehend that reprisals would follow any injury he might do to
another. This origin is so much the more natural, as it is impossible to conceive how property can come
from anything but manual labour: for what else can a man add to things which he does not originally
create, so as to make them his own property? It is the husbandman's labour alone that, giving him a title
to the produce of the ground he has tilled, gives him a claim also to the land itself, at least till harvest,
and so, from year to year, a constant possession which is easily transformed into property. When the
ancients, says Grotius, gave to Ceres the title of Legislatrix, and to a festival celebrated in her honour
the name of Thesmophoria, they meant by that that the distribution of lands had produced a new kind of
right: that is to say, the right of property, which is different from the right deducible from the law of
nature.
  In this state of affairs, equality might have been sustained, had the talents of individuals been equal,
and had, for example, the use of iron and the consumption of commodities always exactly balanced
each other; but, as there was nothing to preserve this balance, it was soon disturbed; the strongest did
most work; the most skilful turned his labour to best account; the most ingenious devised methods of
diminishing his labour: the husbandman wanted more iron, or the smith more corn, and, while both
laboured equally, the one gained a great deal by his work, while the other could hardly support himself.
Thus natural inequality unfolds itself insensibly with that of combination, and the difference between
men, developed by their different circumstances, becomes more sensible and permanent in its effects,
and begins to have an influence, in the same proportion, over the lot of individuals.
  Matters  once  at  this  pitch,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  the  rest.  I  shall  not  detain  the  reader  with  adescription  of  the  successive  invention  of  other  arts,  the  development  of  language,  the  trial  and
utilisation of talents, the inequality of fortunes, the use and abuse of riches, and all the details connected
with them which the reader can easily supply for himself. I shall confine myself to a glance at mankind
in this new situation.
  Behold then all human faculties developed, memory and imagination in full play, egoism interested,
reason active, and the mind almost at the highest point of its perfection. Behold all the natural qualities
in action, the rank and condition of every man assigned him; not merely his share of property and his
power to serve or injure others, but also his wit, beauty, strength or skill, merit or talents: and these
being the only qualities capable of commanding respect, it soon became necessary to possess or to
affect them.
  It now became the interest of men to appear what they really were not. To be and to seem became
two totally different things; and from this distinction sprang insolent pomp and cheating trickery, with
all the numerous vices that go in their train. On the other hand, free and independent as men were
before, they were now, in consequence of a multiplicity of new wants, brought into subjection, as it
were, to all nature, and particularly to one another; and each became in some degree a slave even in
becoming the master of other men: if rich, they stood in need of the services of others; if poor, of their
assistance; and even a middle condition did not enable them to do without one another. Man must now,
therefore, have been perpetually employed in getting others to interest themselves in his lot, and in
making them, apparently at least, if not really, find their advantage in promoting his own. Thus he must
have been sly and artful in his behaviour to some, and imperious and cruel to others; being under a kind
of necessity to ill-use all the persons of whom he stood in need, when he could not frighten them into
compliance, and did not judge it his interest to be useful to them. Insatiable ambition, the thirst of
raising their respective fortunes, not so much from real want as from the desire to surpass others,
inspired all men with a vile propensity to injure one another, and with a secret jealousy, which is the
more dangerous, as it puts on the mask of benevolence, to carry its point with greater security. In a
word,  there  arose  rivalry  and  competition  on  the  one  hand,  and  conflicting  interests  on  the  other,
together with a secret desire on both of profiting at the expense of others. All these evils were the first
effects of property, and the inseparable attendants of growing inequality.
  Before the invention of signs to represent riches, wealth could hardly consist in anything but lands
and cattle, the only real possessions men can have. But, when inheritances so increased in number and
extent as to occupy the whole of the land, and to border on one another, one man could aggrandise
himself only at the expense of another; at the same time the supernumeraries, who had been too weak
or too indolent to make such acquisitions, and had grown poor without sustaining any loss, because,
while they saw everything change around them, they remained still the same, were obliged to receive
their subsistence, or steal it, from the rich; and this soon bred, according to their different characters,
dominion and slavery, or violence and rapine. The wealthy, on their part, had no sooner begun to taste
the pleasure of command, than they disdained all others, and, using their old slaves to acquire new,
thought of nothing but subduing and enslaving their neighbours; like ravenous wolves, which, having
once tasted human flesh, despise every other food and thenceforth seek only men to devour.
  Thus, as the most powerful or the most miserable considered their might or misery as a kind of right
to the possessions of others, equivalent, in their opinion, to that of property, the destruction of equality
was attended by the most terrible disorders. Usurpations by the rich, robbery by the poor, and the
unbridled passions of both, suppressed the cries of natural compassion and the still feeble voice of
justice, and filled men with avarice, ambition and vice. Between the title of the strongest and that of the
first occupier, there arose perpetual conflicts, which never ended but in battles and bloodshed. The
new-born state of society thus gave rise to a horrible state of war; men thus harassed and depraved were
no longer capable of retracing their steps or renouncing the fatal acquisitions they had made, but,
labouring by the abuse of the faculties which do them honour, merely to their own confusion, brought
themselves to the brink of ruin.
  Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque,  Effugere optat opes; et quæ modo voverat odit.5
  It is impossible that men should not at length have reflected on so wretched a situation, and on the
calamities that overwhelmed them. The rich, in particular, must have felt how much they suffered by a
constant state of war, of which they bore all the expense; and in which, though all risked their lives,
they alone risked their property. Besides, however speciously they might disguise their usurpations,
they knew that they were founded on precarious and false titles; so that, if others took from them by
force what they themselves had gained by force, they would have no reason to complain. Even those
who had been enriched by their own industry, could hardly base their proprietorship on better claims. It
was in vain to repeat, "I built this well; I gained this spot by my industry." Who gave you your
standing, it might be answered, and what right have you to demand payment of us for doing what we
never asked you to do? Do you not know that numbers of your fellow-creatures are starving, for want
of what you have too much of? You ought to have had the express and universal consent of mankind,
before appropriating more of the common subsistence than you needed for your own maintenance.
Destitute of valid reasons to justify and sufficient strength to defend himself, able to crush individuals
with ease, but easily crushed himself by a troop of bandits, one against all, and incapable, on account of
mutual jealousy, of joining with his equals against numerous enemies united by the common hope of
plunder, the rich man, thus urged by necessity, conceived at length the profoundest plan that ever
entered the mind of man: this was to employ in his favour the forces of those who attacked him, to
make allies of his adversaries, to inspire them with different maxims, and to give them other institutions
as favourable to himself as the law of nature was unfavourable.
  With this view, after having represented to his neighbours the horror of a situation which armed
every man against the rest, and made their possessions as burdensome to them as their wants, and in
which no safety could be expected either in riches or in poverty, he readily devised plausible arguments
to make them close with his design. "Let us join," said he, "to guard the weak from oppression, to
restrain the ambitious, and secure to every man the possession of what belongs to him: let us institute
rules of justice and peace, to which all without exception may be obliged to conform; rules that may in
some measure make amends for the caprices of fortune, by subjecting equally the powerful and the
weak to the observance of reciprocal obligations. Let us, in a word, instead of turning our forces against
ourselves, collect them in a supreme power which may govern us by wise laws, protect and defend all
the members of the association, repulse their common enemies, and maintain eternal harmony among
us."
  Far fewer words to this purpose would have been enough to impose on men so barbarous and easily
seduced; especially as they had too many disputes among themselves to do without arbitrators, and too
much ambition and avarice to go long without masters. All ran headlong to their chains, in hopes of
securing their liberty; for they had just wit enough to perceive the advantages of political institutions,
without experience enough to enable them to foresee the dangers. The most capable of foreseeing the
dangers were the very persons who expected to benefit by them; and even the most prudent judged it
not inexpedient to sacrifice one part of their freedom to ensure the rest; as a wounded man has his arm
cut off to save the rest of his body.
  Such was, or may well have been, the origin of society and law, which bound new fetters on the
poor, and gave new powers to the rich; which irretrievably destroyed natural liberty, eternally fixed the
law  of  property  and  inequality,  converted  clever  usurpation  into  unalterable  right,  and,  for  the
advantage  of  a  few  ambitious  individuals,  subjected  all  mankind  to  perpetual  labour,  slavery  and
wretchedness. It is easy to see how the establishment of one community made that of all the rest
necessary, and how, in order to make head against united forces, the rest of mankind had to unite in
turn. Societies soon multiplied and spread over the face of the earth, till hardly a corner of the world
was left in which a man could escape the yoke, and withdraw his head from beneath the sword which
he saw perpetually hanging over him by a thread. Civil right having thus become the common rule
among the members of each community, the law of nature maintained its place only between different
communities,  where,  under  the  name  of  the  right  of  nations,  it  was  qualified  by  certain  tacitconventions, in order to make commerce practicable, and serve as a substitute for natural compassion,
which lost, when applied to societies, almost all the influence it had over individuals, and survived no
longer  except  in  some  great  cosmopolitan  spirits,  who,  breaking  down  the  imaginary  barriers  that
separate different peoples, follow the example of our Sovereign Creator, and include the whole human
race in their benevolence.
  But bodies politic, remaining thus in a state of nature among themselves, presently experienced the
inconveniences which had obliged individuals to forsake it; for this state became still more fatal to
these great bodies than it had been to the individuals of whom they were composed. Hence arose
national wars, battles, murders, and reprisals, which shock nature and outrage reason; together with all
those horrible prejudices which class among the virtues the honour of shedding human blood. The most
distinguished  men  hence  learned  to  consider  cutting  each  other's  throats  a  duty;  at  length  men
massacred their fellow-creatures by thousands without so much as knowing why, and committed more
murders in a single day's fighting, and more violent outrages in the sack of a single town, than were
committed in the state of nature during whole ages over the whole earth. Such were the first effects
which we can see to have followed the division of mankind into different communities. But let us
return to their institutions.
I know that some writers have given other explanations of the origin of political societies, such as
the conquest of the powerful, or the association of the weak. It is, indeed, indifferent to my argument
which of these causes we choose. That which I have just laid down, however, appears to me the most
natural for the following reasons. First: because, in the first case, the right of conquest, being no right in
itself, could not serve as a foundation on which to build any other; the victor and the vanquished people
still remained with respect to each other in the state of war, unless the vanquished, restored to the full
possession of their liberty, voluntarily made choice of the victor for their chief. For till then, whatever
capitulation may have been made being founded on violence, and therefore ipso facto void, there could
not have been on this hypothesis either a real society or body politic, or any law other than that of the
strongest. Secondly: because the words strong and weak are, in the second case, ambiguous; for during
the interval between the establishment of a right of property, or prior occupancy, and that of political
government, the meaning of these words is better expressed by the terms rich and poor: because, in
fact, before the institution of laws, men had no other way of reducing their equals to submission, than
by attacking their goods, or making some of their own over to them. Thirdly: because, as the poor had
nothing but their freedom to lose, it would have been in the highest degree absurd for them to resign
voluntarily the only good they still enjoyed, without getting anything in exchange: whereas the rich
having feelings, if I may so express myself, in every part of their possessions, it was much easier to
harm them, and therefore more necessary for them to take precautions against it; and, in short, because
it is more reasonable to suppose a thing to have been invented by those to whom it would be of service,
than by those whom it must have harmed.
  Government  had,  in  its  infancy,  no  regular  and  constant  form.  The  want  of  experience  and
philosophy prevented men from seeing any but present inconveniences, and they thought of providing
against others only as they presented themselves. In spite of the endeavours of the wisest legislators, the
political state remained imperfect, because it was little more than the work of chance; and, as it had
begun  ill,  though  time  revealed  its  defects  and  suggested  remedies,  the  original  faults  were  never
repaired. It was continually being patched up, when the first task should have been to get the site
cleared and all the old materials removed, as was done by Lycurgus at Sparta, if a stable and lasting
edifice was to be erected. Society consisted at first merely of a few general conventions, which every
member bound himself to observe; and for the performance of covenants the whole body went security
to each individual. Experience only could show the weakness of such a constitution, and how easily it
might be infringed with impunity, from the difficulty of convicting men of faults, where the public
alone was to be witness and judge: the laws could not but be eluded in many ways; disorders and
inconveniences could not but multiply continually, till it became necessary to commit the dangerous
trust of public authority to private persons, and the care of enforcing obedience to the deliberations ofthe people to the magistrate. For to say that chiefs were chosen before the confederacy was formed, and
that the administrators of the laws were there before the laws themselves, is too absurd a supposition to
consider seriously.
  It  would  be  as  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  men  at  first  threw  themselves  irretrievably  and
unconditionally into the arms of an absolute master, and that the first expedient which proud and
unsubdued men hit upon for their common security was to run headlong into slavery. For what reason,
in fact, did they take to themselves superiors, if it was not in order that they might be defended from
oppression, and have protection for their lives, liberties and properties, which are, so to speak, the
constituent elements of their being? Now, in the relations between man and man, the worst that can
happen is for one to find himself at the mercy of another, and it would have been inconsistent with
common-sense to begin by bestowing on a chief the only things they wanted his help to preserve. What
equivalent could he offer them for so great a right? And if he had presumed to exact it under pretext of
defending them, would he not have received the answer recorded in the fable: "What more can the
enemy do to us?" It is therefore beyond dispute, and indeed the fundamental maxim of all political
right, that people have set up chiefs to protect their liberty, and not to enslave them. If we have a prince,
said Pliny to Trajan, it is to save ourselves from having a master.
  Politicians indulge in the same sophistry about the love of liberty as philosophers about the state of
nature. They judge, by what they see, of very different things, which they have not seen; and attribute
to man a natural propensity to servitude, because the slaves within their observation are seen to bear the
yoke with patience; they fail to reflect that it is with liberty as with innocence and virtue; the value is
known only to those who possess them, and the taste for them is forfeited when they are forfeited
themselves. "I know the charms of your country," said Brasidas to a satrap, who was comparing the life
at Sparta with that at Persepolis, "but you cannot know the pleasures of mine."
  An unbroken horse erects his mane, paws the ground and starts back impetuously at the sight of the
bridle; while one which is properly trained suffers patiently even whip and spur: so savage man will not
bend his neck to the yoke to which civilised man submits without a murmur, but prefers the most
turbulent state of liberty to the most peaceful slavery. We cannot therefore, from the servility of nations
already enslaved, judge of the natural disposition of mankind for or against slavery; we should go by
the prodigious efforts of every free people to save itself from oppression. I know that the former are for
ever holding forth in praise of the tranquillity they enjoy in their chains, and that they call a state of
wretched servitude a state of peace: miserrimam servitutem pacem appellant.6 But when I observe the
latter sacrificing pleasure, peace, wealth, power and life itself to the preservation of that one treasure,
which is so disdained by those who have lost it; when I see free-born animals dash their brains out
against the bars of their cage, from an innate impatience of captivity; when I behold numbers of naked
savages, that despise European pleasures, braving hunger, fire, the sword and death, to preserve nothing
but their independence, I feel that it is not for slaves to argue about liberty.
  With regard to paternal authority, from which some writers have derived absolute government and
all society, it is enough, without going back to the contrary arguments of Locke and Sidney, to remark
that nothing on earth can be further from the ferocious spirit of despotism than the mildness of that
authority which looks more to the advantage of him who obeys than to that of him who commands;
that, by the law of nature, the father is the child's master no longer than his help is necessary; that from
that time they are both equal, the son being perfectly independent of the father, and owing him only
respect and not obedience. For gratitude is a duty which ought to be paid, but not a right to be exacted:
instead of saying that civil society is derived from paternal authority, we ought to say rather that the
latter derives its principal force from the former. No individual was ever acknowledged as the father of
many, till his sons and daughters remained settled around him. The goods of the father, of which he is
really the master, are the ties which keep his children in dependence, and he may bestow on them, if he
pleases, no share of his property, unless they merit it by constant deference to his will. But the subjects
of an arbitrary despot are so far from having the like favour to expect from their chief, that they
themselves and everything they possess are his property, or at least are considered by him as such; sothat they are forced to receive, as a favour, the little of their own he is pleased to leave them. When he
despoils them, he does but justice, and mercy in that he permits them to live.
  By proceeding thus to test fact by right, we should discover as little reason as truth in the voluntary
establishment of tyranny. It would also be no easy matter to prove the validity of a contract binding on
only one of the parties, where all the risk is on one side, and none on the other; so that no one could
suffer but he who bound himself. This hateful system is indeed, even in modern times, very far from
being that of wise and good monarchs, and especially of the kings of France; as may be seen from
several passages in their edicts; particularly from the following passage in a celebrated edict published
in 1667 in the name and by order of Louis XIV.
  "Let it not, therefore, be said that the Sovereign is not subject to the laws of his State; since the
contrary is a true proposition of the right of nations, which flattery has sometimes attacked but good
princes have always defended as the tutelary divinity of their dominions. How much more legitimate is
it to say with the wise Plato, that the perfect felicity of a kingdom consists in the obedience of subjects
to their prince, and of the prince to the laws, and in the laws being just and constantly directed to the
public good!"7
I shall not stay here to inquire whether, as liberty is the noblest faculty of man, it is not degrading
our very nature, reducing ourselves to the level of the brutes, which are mere slaves of instinct, and
even an affront to the Author of our being, to renounce without reserve the most precious of all His
gifts, and to bow to the necessity of committing all the crimes He has forbidden, merely to gratify a
mad  or  a  cruel  master;  or  if  this  sublime  craftsman  ought  not  to  be  less  angered  at  seeing  His
workmanship  entirely  destroyed  than  thus  dishonoured.  I  will  waive  (if  my  opponents  please)  the
authority of Barbeyrac, who, following Locke, roundly declares that no man can so far sell his liberty
as to submit to an arbitrary power which may use him as it likes. For, he adds, this would be to sell his
own life, of which he is not master. I shall ask only what right those who were not afraid thus to debase
themselves could have to subject their posterity to the same ignominy, and to renounce for them those
blessings which they do not owe to the liberality of their progenitors, and without which life itself must
be a burden to all who are worthy of it.
  Puffendorf says that we may divest ourselves of our liberty in favour of other men, just as we
transfer our property from one to another by contracts and agreements. But this seems a very weak
argument. For in the first place, the property I alienate becomes quite foreign to me, nor can I suffer
from the abuse of it; but it very nearly concerns me that my liberty should not be abused, and I cannot
without incurring the guilt of the crimes I may be compelled to commit, expose myself to become an
instrument of crime. Besides, the right of property being only a convention of human institution, men
may dispose of what they possess as they please: but this is not the case with the essential gifts of
nature, such as life and liberty, which every man is permitted to enjoy, and of which it is at least
doubtful whether any have a right to divest themselves. By giving up the one, we degrade our being; by
giving up the other, we do our best to annul it; and, as no temporal good can indemnify us for the loss
of  either,  it  would  be  an  offence  against  both  reason  and  nature  to  renounce  them  at  any  price
whatsoever. But, even if we could transfer our liberty, as we do our property, there would be a great
difference with regard to the children, who enjoy the father's substance only by the transmission of his
right; whereas, liberty being a gift which they hold from nature as being men, their parents have no
right whatever to deprive them of it. As then, to establish slavery, it was necessary to do violence to
nature, so, in order to perpetuate such a right, nature would have to be changed. Jurists, who have
gravely determined that the child of a slave comes into the world a slave, have decided, in other words,
that a man shall come into the world not a man.
I regard it then as certain, that government did not begin with arbitrary power, but that this is the
depravation,  the  extreme  term,  of  government,  and  brings  it  back,  finally,  to  just  the  law  of  the
strongest,  which  it  was  originally  designed  to  remedy.  Supposing,  however,  it  had  begun  in  this
manner, such power, being in itself illegitimate, could not have served as a basis for the laws of society,
nor, consequently, for the inequality they instituted.  Without entering at present upon the investigations which still remain to be made into the nature of
the  fundamental  compact  underlying  all  government,  I  content  myself  with  adopting  the  common
opinion concerning it, and regard the establishment of the political body as a real contract between the
people and the chiefs chosen by them: a contract by which both parties bind themselves to observe the
laws therein expressed, which form the ties of their union. The people having in respect of their social
relations concentrated all their wills in one, the several articles, concerning which this will is explained,
become so many fundamental laws, obligatory on all the members of the State without exception, and
one of these articles regulates the choice and power of the magistrates appointed to watch over the
execution of the rest. This power extends to everything which may maintain the constitution, without
going  so  far  as  to  alter  it.  It  is  accompanied  by  honours,  in  order  to  bring  the  laws  and  their
administrators into respect. The ministers are also distinguished by personal prerogatives, in order to
recompense them for the cares and labour which good administration involves. The magistrate, on his
side, binds himself to use the power he is entrusted with only in conformity with the intention of his
constituents, to maintain them all in the peaceable possession of what belongs to them, and to prefer on
every occasion the public interest to his own.
  Before  experience  had  shown,  or  knowledge  of  the  human  heart  enabled  men  to  foresee,  the
unavoidable abuses of such a constitution, it must have appeared so much the more excellent, as those
who were charged with the care of its preservation had themselves most interest in it; for magistracy
and the rights attaching to it being based solely on the fundamental laws, the magistrates would cease to
be legitimate as soon as these ceased to exist; the people would no longer owe them obedience; and as
not the magistrates, but the laws, are essential to the being of a State, the members of it would regain
the right to their natural liberty.
  If we reflect with ever so little attention on this subject, we shall find new arguments to confirm this
truth, and be convinced from the very nature of the contract that it cannot be irrevocable: for, if there
were no superior power capable of ensuring the fidelity of the contracting parties, or compelling them
to perform their reciprocal engagements, the parties would be sole judges in their own cause, and each
would always have a right to renounce the contract, as soon as he found that the other had violated its
terms, or that they no longer suited his convenience. It is upon this principle that the right of abdication
may possibly be founded. Now, if, as here, we consider only what is human in this institution, it is
certain that, if the magistrate, who has all the power in his own hands, and appropriates to himself all
the advantages of the contract, has none the less a right to renounce his authority, the people, who
suffer for all the faults of their chief, must have a much better right to renounce their dependence. But
the terrible and innumerable quarrels and disorders that would necessarily arise from so dangerous a
privilege, show, more than anything else, how much human government stood in need of a more solid
basis than mere reason, and how expedient it was for the public tranquillity that the divine will should
interpose to invest the sovereign authority with a sacred and inviolable character, which might deprive
subjects of the fatal right of disposing of it. If the world had received no other advantages from religion,
this would be enough to impose on men the duty of adopting and cultivating it, abuses and all, since it
has been the means of saving more blood than fanaticism has ever spilt. But let us follow the thread of
our hypothesis.
  The different forms of government owe their origin to the differing degrees of inequality which
existed between individuals at the time of their institution. If there happened to be any one man among
them pre-eminent in power, virtue, riches or personal influence, he became sole magistrate, and the
State assumed the form of monarchy. If several, nearly equal in point of eminence, stood above the rest,
they were elected jointly, and formed an aristocracy. Again, among a people who had deviated less
from a state of nature, and between whose fortune or talents there was less disproportion, the supreme
administration was retained in common, and a democracy was formed. It was discovered in process of
time which of these forms suited men the best. Some peoples remained altogether subject to the laws;
others soon came to obey their magistrates. The citizens laboured to preserve their liberty; the subjects,
irritated at seeing others enjoying a blessing they had lost, thought only of making slaves of theirneighbours. In a word, on the one side arose riches and conquests, and on the other happiness and
virtue.
  In these different governments, all the offices were at first elective; and when the influence of
wealth was out of the question, the preference was given to merit, which gives a natural ascendancy,
and to age, which is experienced in business and deliberate in council. The Elders of the Hebrews, the
Gerontes at Sparta, the Senate at Rome, and the very etymology of our word Seigneur, show how old
age was once held in veneration. But the more often the choice fell upon old men, the more often
elections had to be repeated, and the more they became a nuisance; intrigues set in, factions were
formed, party feeling grew bitter, civil wars broke out; the lives of individuals were sacrificed to the
pretended happiness of the State; and at length men were on the point of relapsing into their primitive
anarchy. Ambitious chiefs profited by these circumstances to perpetuate their offices in their own
families: at the same time the people, already used to dependence, ease, and the conveniences of life,
and already incapable of breaking its fetters, agreed to an increase of its slavery, in order to secure its
tranquillity.  Thus  magistrates,  having  become  hereditary,  contracted  the  habit  of  considering  their
offices as a family estate, and themselves as proprietors of the communities of which they were at first
only the officers, of regarding their fellow-citizens as their slaves, and numbering them, like cattle,
among their belongings, and of calling themselves the equals of the gods and kings of kings.
  If  we  follow  the  progress  of  inequality  in  these  various  revolutions,  we  shall  find  that  the
establishment of laws and of the right of property was its first term, the institution of magistracy the
second, and the conversion of legitimate into arbitrary power the third and last; so that the condition of
rich and poor was authorised by the first period; that of powerful and weak by the second; and only by
the third that of master and slave, which is the last degree of inequality, and the term at which all the
rest  remain,  when  they  have  got  so  far,  till  the  government  is  either  entirely  dissolved  by  new
revolutions, or brought back again to legitimacy.
  To  understand  this  progress  as  necessary  we  must  consider  not  so  much  the  motives  for  the
establishment of the body politic, as the forms it assumes in actuality, and the faults that necessarily
attend it: for the flaws which make social institutions necessary are the same as make the abuse of them
unavoidable.  If  we  except  Sparta,  where  the  laws  were  mainly  concerned  with  the  education  of
children, and where Lycurgus established such morality as practically made laws needles — for laws as
a rule, being weaker than the passions, restrain men without altering them — it would not be difficult to
prove that every government, which scrupulously complied with the ends for which it was instituted,
and guarded carefully against change and corruption, was set up unnecessarily. For a country, in which
no one either evaded the laws or made a bad use of magisterial power, could require neither laws nor
magistrates.
  Political distinctions necessarily produce civil distinctions. The growing equality between the chiefs
and the people is soon felt by individuals, and modified in a thousand ways according to passions,
talents  and  circumstances.  The  magistrate  could  not  usurp  any  illegitimate  power,  without  giving
distinction to the creatures with whom he must share it. Besides, individuals only allow themselves to
be oppressed so far as they are hurried on by blind ambition, and, looking rather below than above
them, come to love authority more than independence, and submit to slavery, that they may in turn
enslave others. It is no easy matter to reduce to obedience a man who has no ambition to command; nor
would the most adroit politician find it possible to enslave a people whose only desire was to be
independent. But inequality easily makes its way among cowardly and ambitious minds, which are ever
ready  to  run  the  risks  of  fortune,  and  almost  indifferent  whether  they  command  or  obey,  as  it  is
favourable  or  adverse.  Thus,  there  must  have  been  a  time,  when  the  eyes  of  the  people  were  so
fascinated, that their rules had only to say to the least of men, "Be great, you and all your posterity," to
make him immediately appear great in the eyes of every one as well as in his own. His descendants
took still more upon them, in proportion to their distance from him; the more obscure and uncertain the
cause, the greater the effect: the greater the number of idlers one could count in a family, the more
illustrious it was held to be.  If this were the place to go into details, I could readily explain how, even without the intervention
of government, inequality of credit and authority became unavoidable among private persons, as soon
as their union in a single society made them compare themselves one with another, and take into
account the differences which they found out from the continual intercourse every man had to have
with his neighbours.8 These differences are of several kinds; but riches, nobility or rank, power and
personal merit being the principal distinctions by which men form an estimate of each other in society,
I could prove that the harmony or conflict of these different forces is the surest indication of the good or
bad constitution of a State. I could show that among these four kinds of inequality, personal qualities
being the origin of all the others, wealth is the one to which they are all reduced in the end; for, as
riches tend most immediately to the prosperity of individuals, and are easiest to communicate, they are
used to purchase every other distinction. By this observation we are enabled to judge pretty exactly
how far a people has departed from its primitive constitution, and of its progress towards the extreme
term  of  corruption.  I  could  explain  how  much  this  universal  desire  for  reputation,  honours  and
advancement, which inflames us all, exercises and holds up to comparison our faculties and powers;
how it excites and multiplies our passions, and, by creating universal competition and rivalry, or rather
enmity, among men, occasions numberless failures, successes and disturbances of all kinds by making
so many aspirants run the same course. I could show that it is to this desire of being talked about, and
this unremitting rage of distinguishing ourselves, that we owe the best and the worst things we possess,
both our virtues and our vices, our science and our errors, our conquerors and our philosophers; that is
to say, a great many bad things, and a very few good ones. In a word, I could prove that, if we have a
few rich and powerful men on the pinnacle of fortune and grandeur, while the crowd grovels in want
and obscurity, it is because the former prize what they enjoy only in so far as others are destitute of it;
and because, without changing their condition, they would cease to be happy the moment the people
ceased to be wretched.
  These  details  alone,  however,  would  furnish  matter  for  a  considerable  work,  in  which  the
advantages and disadvantages of every kind of government might be weighed, as they are related to
man in the state of nature, and at the same time all the different aspects, under which inequality has up
to the present appeared, or may appear in ages yet to come, according to the nature of the several
governments,  and  the  alterations  which  time  must  unavoidably  occasion  in  them,  might  be
demonstrated. We should then see the multitude oppressed from within, in consequence of the very
precautions it had taken to guard against foreign tyranny. We should see oppression continually gain
ground without it being possible for the oppressed to know where it would stop, or what legitimate
means was left them of checking its progress. We should see the rights of citizens, and the freedom of
nations slowly extinguished, and the complaints, protests and appeals of the weak treated as seditious
murmurings. We should see the honour of defending the common cause confined by statecraft to a
mercenary part of the people. We should see taxes made necessary by such means, and the disheartened
husbandman deserting his fields even in the midst of peace, and leaving the plough to gird on the
sword. We should see fatal and capricious codes of honour established; and the champions of their
country sooner or later becoming its enemies, and for ever holding their daggers to the breasts of their
fellow-citizens. The time would come when they would be heard saying to the oppressor of their
country —
  Pectore si fratris gladium juguloque parentis
  Condere me jubeas, gravidœque in viscera partu
  Conjugis, invita peragam tamen omnia dextrâ.
  Lucan, i. 376
  From great inequality of fortunes and conditions, from the vast variety of passions and of talents, of
useless and pernicious arts, of vain sciences, would arise a multitude of prejudices equally contrary to
reason, happiness and virtue. We should see the magistrates fomenting everything that might weaken
men united in society, by promoting dissension among them; everything that might sow in it the seeds
of actual division, while it gave society the air of harmony; everything that might inspire the differentranks of people with mutual hatred and distrust, by setting the rights and interests of one against those
of another, and so strengthen the power which comprehended them all.
  It is from the midst of this disorder and these revolutions, that despotism, gradually raising up its
hideous head and devouring everything that remained sound and untainted in any part of the State,
would  at  length  trample  on  both  the  laws  and  the  people,  and  establish  itself  on  the  ruins  of  the
republic.  The  times  which  immediately  preceded  this  last  change  would  be  times  of  trouble  and
calamity; but at length the monster would swallow up everything, and the people would no longer have
either chiefs or laws, but only tyrants. From this moment there would be no question of virtue or
morality; for despotism cui ex honesto nulla est spes, wherever it prevails, admits no other master; it no
sooner speaks than probity and duty lose their weight and blind obedience is the only virtue which
slaves can still practise.
  This is the last term of inequality, the extreme point that closes the circle, and meets that from
which we set out. Here all private persons return to their first equality, because they are nothing; and,
subjects having no law but the will of their master, and their master no restraint but his passions, all
notions of good and all principles of equity again vanish. There is here a complete return to the law of
the strongest, and so to a new state of nature, differing from that we set out from; for the one was a state
of nature in its first purity, while this is the consequence of excessive corruption. There is so little
difference between the two states in other respects, and the contract of government is so completely
dissolved by despotism, that the despot is master only so long as he remains the strongest; as soon as he
can be expelled, he has no right to complain of violence. The popular insurrection that ends in the death
or deposition of a Sultan is as lawful an act as those by which he disposed, the day before, of the lives
and fortunes of his subjects. As he was maintained by force alone, it is force alone that overthrows him.
Thus everything takes place according to the natural order; and, whatever may be the result of such
frequent and precipitate revolutions, no one man has reason to complain of the injustice of another, but
only of his own ill-fortune or indiscretion.
  If the reader thus discovers and retraces the lost and forgotten road, by which man must have passed
from the state of nature to the state of society; if he carefully restores, along with the intermediate
situations which I have just described, those which want of time has compelled me to suppress, or my
imagination has failed to suggest, he cannot fail to be struck by the vast distance which separates the
two states. It is in tracing this slow succession that he will find the solution of a number of problems of
politics and morals, which philosophers cannot settle. He will feel that, men being different in different
ages, the reason why Diogenes could not find a man was that he sought among his contemporaries a
man of an earlier period. He will see that Cato died with Rome and liberty, because he did not fit the
age in which he lived; the greatest of men served only to astonish a world which he would certainly
have ruled, had he lived five hundred years sooner. In a word, he will explain how the soul and the
passions of men insensibly change their very nature; why our wants and pleasures in the end seek new
objects; and why, the original man having vanished by degrees, society offers to us only an assembly of
artificial men and factitious passions, which are the work of all these new relations, and without any
real foundation in nature. We are taught nothing on this subject, by reflection, that is not entirely
confirmed by observation. The savage and the civilised man differ so much in the bottom of their hearts
and in their inclinations, that what constitutes the supreme happiness of one would reduce the other to
despair. The former breathes only peace and liberty; he desires only to live and be free from labour;
even the ataraxia of the Stoic falls far short of his profound indifference to every other object. Civilised
man, on the other hand, is always moving, sweating, toiling and racking his brains to find still more
laborious occupations: he goes on in drudgery to his last moment, and even seeks death to put himself
in a position to live, or renounces life to acquire immortality. He pays his court to men in power, whom
he hates, and to the wealthy, whom he despises; he stops at nothing to have the honour of serving them;
he is not ashamed to value himself on his own meanness and their protection; and, proud of his slavery,
he  speaks  with  disdain  of  those,  who  have  not  the  honour  of  sharing  it.  What  a  sight  would  the
perplexing and envied labours of a European minister of State present to the eyes of a Caribbean! Howmany cruel deaths would not this indolent savage prefer to the horrors of such a life, which is seldom
even  sweetened  by  the  pleasure  of  doing  good!  But,  for  him  to  see  into  the  motives  of  all  this
solicitude, the words power and reputation, would have to bear some meaning in his mind; he would
have to know that there are men who set a value on the opinion of the rest of the world; who can be
made happy and satisfied with themselves rather on the testimony of other people than on their own. In
reality, the source of all these differences is, that the savage lives within himself, while social man lives
constantly outside himself, and only knows how to live in the opinion of others, so that he seems to
receive the consciousness of his own existence merely from the judgment of others concerning him. It
is not to my present purpose to insist on the indifference to good and evil which arises from this
disposition, in spite of our many fine works on morality, or to show how, everything being reduced to
appearances, there is but art and mummery in even honour, friendship, virtue, and often vice itself, of
which we at length learn the secret of boasting; to show, in short, how, always asking others what we
are, and never daring to ask ourselves, in the midst of so much philosophy, humanity and civilisation,
and of such sublime codes of morality, we have nothing to show for ourselves but a frivolous and
deceitful appearance, honour without virtue, reason without wisdom, and pleasure without happiness. It
is sufficient that I have proved that this is not by any means the original state of man, but that it is
merely the spirit of society, and the inequality which society produces, that thus transform and alter all
our natural inclinations.
I have endeavoured to trace the origin and progress of inequality, and the institution and abuse of
political societies, as far as these are capable of being deduced from the nature of man merely by the
light of reason, and independently of those sacred dogmas which give the sanction of divine right to
sovereign authority. It follows from this survey that, as there is hardly any inequality in the state of
nature, all the inequality which now prevails owes its strength and growth to the development of our
faculties and the advance of the human mind, and becomes at last permanent and legitimate by the
establishment of property and laws. Secondly, it follows that moral inequality, authorised by positive
right  alone,  clashes  with  natural  right,  whenever  it  is  not  proportionate  to  physical  inequality;  a
distinction which sufficiently determines what we ought to think of that species of inequality which
prevails in all civilised, countries; since it is plainly contrary to the law of nature, however defined, that
children  should  command  old  men,  fools  wise  men,  and  that  the  privileged  few  should  gorge
themselves with superfluities, while the starving multitude are in want of the bare necessities of life.
 
 
  APPENDIX
  A FAMOUS author, reckoning up the good and evil of human life, and comparing the aggregates,
finds that our pains greatly exceed our pleasures: so that, all things considered, human life is not at all a
valuable gift. This conclusion does not surprise me; for the writer drew all his arguments from man in
civilisation. Had he gone back to the state of nature, his inquiries would clearly have had a different
result, and man would have been seen to be subject to very few evils not of his own creation. It has
indeed cost us not a little trouble to make ourselves as wretched as we are. When we consider, on the
one hand, the immense labours of mankind, the many sciences brought to perfection, the arts invented,
the powers employed, the deeps filled up, the mountains levelled, the rocks shattered, the rivers made
navigable, the tracts of land cleared, the lakes emptied, the marshes drained, the enormous structures
erected on land, and the teeming vessels that cover the sea; and, on the other hand, estimate with ever
so little thought, the real advantages that have accrued from all these works to mankind, we cannot help
being amazed at the vast disproportion there is between these things, and deploring the infatuation of
man, which, to gratify his silly pride and vain self-admiration, induces him eagerly to pursue all the
miseries he is capable of feeling, though beneficent nature had kindly placed them out of his way.
  That men are actually wicked, a sad and continual experience of them proves beyond doubt: but, all
the same, I think I have shown that man is naturally good. What then can have depraved him to such an
extent, except the changes that have happened in his constitution, the advances he has made, and theknowledge he has acquired? We may admire human society as much as we please; it will be none the
less true that it necessarily leads men to hate each other in proportion as their interests clash, and to do
one another apparent services, while they are really doing every imaginable mischief. What can be
thought of a relation, in which the interest of every individual dictates rules directly opposite to those
the public reason dictates to the community in general — in which every man finds his profit in the
misfortunes of his neighbour? There is not perhaps any man in a comfortable position who has not
greedy heirs, and perhaps even children, secretly wishing for his death; not a ship at sea, of which the
loss would not be good news to some merchant or other; not a house, which some debtor of bad faith
would not be glad to see reduced to ashes with all the papers it contains; not a nation which does not
rejoice at the disasters that befall its neighbours. Thus it is that we find our advantage in the misfortunes
of  our  fellow-creatures,  and  that  the  loss  of  one  man  almost  always  constitutes  the  prosperity  of
another.  But  it  is  still  more  pernicious  that  public  calamities  are  the  objects  of  the  hopes  and
expectations of innumerable individuals. Some desire sickness, some mortality, some war, and some
famine. I have seen men wicked enough to weep for sorrow at the prospect of a plentiful season; and
the great and fatal fire of London, which cost so many unhappy persons their lives or their fortunes,
made  the  fortunes  of  perhaps  ten  thousand  others.  I  know  that  Montaigne  censures  Demades  the
Athenian for having caused to be punished a workman who, by selling his coffins very dear, was a
great  gainer  by  the  deaths  of  his  fellow-citizens;  but,  the  reason  alleged  by  Montaigne  being  that
everybody ought to be punished, my point is clearly confirmed by it. Let us penetrate, therefore, the
superficial appearances of benevolence, and survey what passes in the inmost recesses of the heart. Let
us reflect what must be the state of things, when men are forced to caress and destroy one another at the
same time; when they are born enemies by duty, and knaves by interest. It will perhaps be said that
society is so formed that every man gains by serving the rest. That would be all very well, if he did not
gain  still  more  by  injuring  them.  There  is  no  legitimate  profit  so  great,  that  it  cannot  be  greatly
exceeded by what may be made illegitimately; we always gain more by hurting our neighbours than by
doing them good. Nothing is required but to know how to act with impunity; and to this end the
powerful employ all their strength, and the weak all their cunning.
  Savage  man,  when  he  has  dined,  is  at  peace  with  all  nature,  and  the  friend  of  all  his  fellow-
creatures. If a dispute arises about a meal, he rarely comes to blows, without having first compared the
difficulty of conquering his antagonist with the trouble of finding subsistence elsewhere: and, as pride
does not come in, it all ends in a few blows; the victor eats, and the vanquished seeks provision
somewhere else, and all is at peace. The case is quite different with man in the state of society, for
whom  first  necessaries  have  to  be  provided,  and  then  superfluities;  delicacies  follow  next,  then
immense wealth, then subjects, and then slaves. He enjoys not a moment's relaxation; and what is yet
stranger, the less natural and pressing his wants, the more headstrong are his passions, and, still worse,
the more he has it in his power to gratify them; so that after a long course of prosperity, after having
swallowed up treasures and ruined multitudes, the hero ends up by cutting every throat till he finds
himself, at last, sole master of the world. Such is in miniature the moral picture, if not of human life, at
least of the secret pretensions of the heart of civilised man.
  Compare without partiality the state of the citizen with that of the savage, and trace out, if you can,
how many inlets the former has opened to pain and death, besides those of his vices, his wants and his
misfortunes. If you reflect on the mental afflictions that prey on us, the violent passions that waste and
exhaust us, the excessive labour with which the poor are burdened, the still more dangerous indolence
to which the wealthy give themselves up, so that the poor perish of want, and the rich of surfeit; if you
reflect but a moment on the heterogeneous mixtures and pernicious seasonings of foods; the corrupt
state in which they are frequently eaten; on the adulteration of medicines, the wiles of those who sell
them, the mistakes of those who administer them, and the poisonous vessels in which they are prepared;
on the epidemics bred by foul air in consequence of great numbers of men being crowded together, or
those which are caused by our delicate way of living, by our passing from our houses into the open air
and back again, by the putting on or throwing off our clothes with too little care, and by all theprecautions which sensuality has converted into necessary habits, and the neglect of which sometimes
costs  us  our  life  or  health;  if  you  take  into  account  the  conflagrations  and  earthquakes,  which,
devouring or overwhelming whole cities, destroy the inhabitants by thousands; in a word, if you add
together all the dangers with which these causes are always threatening us, you will see how dearly
nature makes us pay for the contempt with which we have treated her lessons.
I shall not here repeat, what I have elsewhere said of the calamities of war; but wish that those, who
have sufficient knowledge, were willing or bold enough to make public the details of the villainies
committed in armies by the contractors for commissariat and hospitals: we should see plainly that their
monstrous frauds, already none too well concealed, which cripple the finest armies in less than no time,
occasion greater destruction among the soldiers than the swords of the enemy.
  The  number  of  people  who  perish  annually  at  sea,  by  famine,  the  scurvy,  pirates,  fire  and
shipwrecks, affords matter for another shocking calculation. We must also place to the credit of the
establishment of property, and consequently to the institution of society, assassinations, poisonings,
highway robberies, and even the punishments inflicted on the wretches guilty of these crimes; which,
though expedient to prevent greater evils, yet by making the murder of one man cost the lives of two or
more, double the loss to the human race.
  What shameful methods are sometimes practised to prevent the birth of men, and cheat nature;
either by brutal and depraved appetites which insult her most beautiful work-appetites unknown to
savages or mere animals, which can spring only from the corrupt imagination of mankind in civilised
countries; or by secret abortions, the fitting effects of debauchery and vitiated notions of honour; or by
the exposure or murder of multitudes of infants, who fall victims to the poverty of their parents, or the
cruel shame of their mothers; or, finally, by the mutilation of unhappy wretches, part of whose life, with
their hope of posterity, is given up to vain singing, or, still worse, the brutal jealousy of other men: a
mutilation which, in the last case, becomes a double outrage against nature from the treatment of those
who suffer it, and from the use to which they are destined. But is it not a thousand times more common
and more dangerous for paternal rights openly to offend against humanity? How many talents have not
been thrown away, and inclinations forced, by the unwise constraint of fathers? How many men, who
would have distinguished themselves in a fitting estate, have died dishonoured and wretched in another
for which they had no taste! How many happy, but unequal, marriages have been broken or disturbed,
and how many chaste wives have been dishonoured, by an order of things continually in contradiction
with that of nature! How many good and virtuous husbands and wives are reciprocally punished for
having been ill-assorted! How many young and unhappy victims of their parents' avarice plunge into
vice, or pass their melancholy days in tears, groaning in the indissoluble bonds which their hearts
repudiate and gold alone has formed! Fortunate sometimes are those whose courage and virtue remove
them from life before inhuman violence makes them spend it in crime or in despair. Forgive me, father
and mother, whom I shall ever regret: my complaint embitters your griefs; but would they might be an
eternal and terrible example to every one who dares, in the name of nature, to violate her most sacred
right.
  If I have spoken only of those ill-starred unions which are the result of our system, is it to be
thought that those over which love and sympathy preside are free from disadvantages? What if I should
undertake to show humanity attacked in its very source, and even in the most sacred of all ties, in which
fortune  is  consulted  before  nature,  and,  the  disorders  of  society  confounding  all  virtue  and  vice,
continence becomes a criminal precaution, and a refusal to give life to a fellow-creature, an act of
humanity? But, without drawing aside the veil which hides all these horrors, let us content ourselves
with pointing out the evil which others will have to remedy.
  To all this add the multiplicity of unhealthy trades, which shorten men's lives or destroy their
bodies, such as working in the mines, and the preparing of metals and minerals, particularly lead,
copper, mercury, cobalt, and arsenic: add those other dangerous trades which are daily fatal to many
tilers, carpenters, masons and miners: put all these together and we can see, in the establishment and
perfection of societies, the reasons for that diminution of our species, which has been noticed by manyphilosophers.
  Luxury, which cannot be prevented among men who are tenacious of their own convenience and of
the respect paid them by others, soon completes the evil society had begun, and, under the pretence of
giving bread to the poor, whom it should never have made such, impoverishes all the rest, and sooner
or later depopulates the State. Luxury is a remedy much worse than the disease it sets up to cure; or
rather it is in itself the greatest of all evils, for every State, great or small: for, in order to maintain all
the servants and vagabonds it creates, it brings oppression and ruin on the citizen and the labourer; it is
like those scorching winds, which, covering the trees and plants with devouring insects, deprive useful
animals of their subsistence and spread famine and death wherever they blow.
  From society and the luxury to which it gives birth arise the liberal and mechanical arts, commerce,
letters, and all those superfluities which make industry flourish, and enrich and ruin nations. The reason
for such destruction is plain. It is easy to see, from the very nature of agriculture, that it must be the
least lucrative of all the arts; for, its produce being the most universally necessary, the price must be
proportionate to the abilities of the very poorest of mankind.
  From the same principle may be deduced this rule, that the arts in general are more lucrative in
proportion as they are less useful; and that, in the end, the most useful becomes the most neglected.
From this we may learn what to think of the real advantages of industry and the actual effects of its
progress.
  Such are the sensible causes of all the miseries, into which opulence at length plunges the most
celebrated nations. In proportion as arts and industry flourish, the despised husbandman, burdened with
the taxes necessary for the support of luxury, and condemned to pass his days between labour and
hunger, forsakes his native field, to seek in towns the bread he ought to carry thither. The more our
capital cities strike the vulgar eye with admiration, the greater reason is there to lament the sight of the
abandoned countryside, the large tracts of land that lie uncultivated, the roads crowded with unfortunate
citizens turned beggars or highwaymen, and doomed to end their wretched lives either on a dunghill or
on the gallows. Thus the State grows rich on the one hand, and feeble and depopulated on the other; the
mightiest monarchies, after having taken immense pains to enrich and depopulate themselves, fall at
last a prey to some poor nation, which has yielded to the fatal temptation of invading them, and then,
growing opulent and weak in its turn, is itself invaded and ruined by some other.
  Let any one inform us what produced the swarms of barbarians, who overran Europe, Asia and
Africa for so many ages. Was their prodigious increase due to their industry and arts, to the wisdom of
their  laws,  or  to  the  excellence  of  their  political  system?  Let  the  learned  tell  us  why,  instead  of
multiplying to such a degree, these fierce and brutal men, without sense or science, without education,
without restraint, did not destroy each other hourly in quarrelling over the productions of their fields
and woods. Let them tell us how these wretches could have the presumption to oppose such clever
people as we were, so well trained in military discipline, and possessed of such excellent laws and
institutions: and why, since society has been brought to perfection in northern countries, and so much
pains  taken  to  instruct  their  inhabitants  in  their  social  duties  and  in  the  art  of  living  happily  and
peaceably together, we see them no longer produce such numberless hosts as they used once to send
forth to be the plague and terror of other nations. I fear some one may at last answer me by saying, that
all these fine things, arts, sciences and laws, were wisely invented by men, as a salutary plague, to
prevent the too great multiplication of mankind, lest the world, which was given us for a habitation,
should in time be too small for its inhabitants.
  What,  then,  is  to  be  done?  Must  societies  be  totally  abolished?  Must  meum  and  tuum  be
annihilated, and must we return again to the forests to live among bears? This is a deduction in the
manner of my adversaries, which I would as soon anticipate as let them have the shame of drawing. O
you, who have never heard the voice of heaven, who think man destined only to live this little life and
die in peace; you, who can resign in the midst of populous cities your fatal acquisitions, your restless
spirits, your corrupt hearts and endless desires; resume, since it depends entirely on ourselves, your
ancient and primitive innocence: retire to the woods, there to lose the sight and remembrance of thecrimes of your contemporaries; and be not apprehensive of degrading your species, by renouncing its
advances in order to renounce its vices. As for men like me, whose passions have destroyed their
original simplicity, who can no longer subsist on plants or acorns, or live without laws and magistrates;
those who were honoured in their first father with supernatural instructions; those who discover, in the
design of giving human actions at the start a morality which they must otherwise have been so long in
acquiring, the reason for a precept in itself indifferent and inexplicable on every other system; those, in
short, who are persuaded that the Divine Being has called all mankind to be partakers in the happiness
and perfection of celestial intelligences, all these will endeavour to merit the eternal prize they are to
expect from the practice of those virtues, which they make themselves follow in learning to know them.
They will respect the sacred bonds of their respective communities; they will love their fellow-citizens,
and serve them with all their might: they will scrupulously obey the laws, and all those who make or
administer  them;  they  will  particularly  honour  those  wise  and  good  princes,  who  find  means  of
preventing, curing or even palliating all these evils and abuses, by which we are constantly threatened;
they will animate the zeal of their deserving rulers, by showing them, without flattery or fear, the
importance of their office and the severity of their duty. But they will not therefore have less contempt
for a constitution that cannot support itself without the aid of so many splendid characters, much
oftener wished for than found; and from which, notwithstanding all their pains and solicitude, there
always arise more real calamities than even apparent advantages.
 
  NOTES
  1. See Appendix.
  2. Justin, Hist. ii. 2. So much more does the ignorance of vice profit the one sort than the knowledge
of virtue the other.
  3. Egoism must not be confused with self-respect: for they differ both in themselves and in their
effects. Self-respect is a natural feeling which leads every animal to look to its own preservation, and
which, guided in man by reason and modified by compassion, creates humanity and virtue. Egoism is a
purely relative and factitious feeling, which arises in the state of society, leads each individual to make
more of himself than of any other, causes all the mutual damage men inflict one on another, and is the
real source of the "sense of honour." This being understood, I maintain that, in our primitive condition,
in the true state of nature, egoism did not exist; for as each man regarded himself as the only observer
of his actions, the only being in the universe who took any interest in him, and the sole judge of his
deserts, no feeling arising from comparisons he could not be led to make could take root in his soul;
and for the same reason, he could know neither hatred nor the desire for revenge, since these passions
can spring only from a sense of injury: and as it is the contempt or the intention to hurt, and not the
harm done, which constitutes the injury, men who neither valued nor compared themselves could do
one another much violence, when it suited them, without feeling any sense of injury. In a word, each
man, regarding his fellows almost as he regarded animals of different species, might seize the prey of a
weaker or yield up his own to a stronger, and yet consider these acts of violence as mere natural
occurrences, without the slightest emotion of insolence or despite, or any other feeling than the joy or
grief of success or failure.
  4. Nature avows she gave the human race the softest hearts, who gave them tears.
  5. Ovid, Metamorphoses, xi. 127.
  Both rich and poor, shocked at their new-found ills,
  Would fly from wealth, and lose what they had sought.
  6. Tacitus, Hist. iv. 17. The most wretched slavery they call peace.
  7. Of the Rights of the Most Christian Queen over Various States of the Monarchy of Spain, 1667.
  8. Distributive justice would oppose this rigorous equality of the state of nature, even were it
practicable in civil society; as all the members of the State owe it their services in proportion to their
talents and abilities, they ought, on their side, to be distinguished and favoured in proportion to the
services they have actually rendered. It is in this sense we must understand that passage of Isocrates, inwhich he extols the primitive Athenians, for having determined which of the two kinds of equality was
the most useful, viz., that which consists in dividing the same advantages indiscriminately among all
the citizens, or that which consists in distributing them to each according to his deserts. These able
politicians, adds the orator, banishing that unjust inequality which makes no distinction between good
and  bad  men,  adhered  inviolably  to  that  which  rewards  and  punishes  every  man  according  to  his
deserts.
  But in the first place, there never existed a society, however corrupt some may have become, where
no difference was made between the good and the bad; and with regard to morality, where no measures
can be prescribed by law exact enough to serve as a practical rule for a magistrate, it is with great
prudence that, in order not to leave the fortune or quality of the citizens to his discretion, it prohibits
him from passing judgment on persons and confines his judgment to actions. Only morals such as those
of the ancient Romans can bear censors, and such a tribunal among us would throw everything into
confusion. The difference between good and bad men is determined by public esteem; the magistrate
being strictly a judge of right alone; whereas the public is the truest judge of morals, and is of such
integrity and penetration on this head, that although it may be sometimes deceived, it can never be
corrupted. The rank of citizens ought, therefore, to be regulated, not according to their personal merit
— for this would put it in the power of the magistrate to apply the law almost arbitrarily — but
according to the actual services done to the State, which are capable of being more exactly estimated.





    CONSIDERATIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT OF POLAND
  AND ON ITS PROPOSED REFORMATION
  Jean-Jacques Rousseau
 
 
  CHAPTER I
  THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM
  COUNT WIELHORSKI'S1 description of the government of Poland, and the comments he has
added  to  it,  are  instructive  documents  for  anyone  who  wants  to  form  a  regular  plan  for  the
reconstruction of that government. I do not know of anyone better suited than he himself to work out
such a plan, for along with the requisite general knowledge he possesses all that detailed familiarity
with  the  local  situation  which  cannot  possibly  be  gained  from  reading,  and  which  nevertheless  is
indispensable if institutions are to be adapted to the people for whom they are intended. Unless you are
thoroughly familiar with the nation for which you are working, the labour done on its behalf, however
excellent in theory, is bound to prove faulty in practice; especially when the nation in question is one
which is already well-established, and whose tastes, customs, prejudices and vices are too deeply rooted
to be readily crowded out by new plantings. Good institutions for Poland can only be the work of Poles,
or of someone who has made a thorough first-hand study of the Polish nation and its neighbours. A
foreigner can hardly do more than offer some general observations for the enlightenment, but not for
the guidance, of the law-reformer. Even when my mind was at its best I would never have been able to
comprehend  the  problem  in  all  its  ramifications.  Now  that  I  have  nearly  lost  the  capacity  for
consecutive thought, I must confine myself, if I am to obey Count Wielhorski and give evidence of my
zeal  for  his  country,  to  rendering  him  an  account  of  the  impressions  made  upon  me,  and  of  the
comments suggested to me, by the perusal of his work.
  While reading the history of the government of Poland, it is hard to understand how a state so
strangely constituted has been able to survive so long. A large body made up of a large number of dead
members, and of a small number of disunited members whose movements, being virtually independentof one another, are so far from being directed to a common end that they cancel each other out; a body
which exerts itself greatly to accomplish nothing; which is capable of offering no sort of resistance to
anyone who tries to encroach upon it; which falls into dissolution five or six times a century; which
falls into paralysis whenever it tries to make any effort or to satisfy any need; and which, in spite of all
this, lives and maintains its vigour: that, in my opinion, is one of the most singular spectacles ever to
challenge  the  attention  of  a  rational  being.  I  see  all  the  states  of  Europe  rushing  to  their  ruin.
Monarchies, republics, all these nations for all their magnificent institutions, all these fine governments
for all their prudent checks and balances, have grown decrepit and threaten soon to die; while Poland, a
depopulated, devastated and oppressed region, defenceless against her aggressors and at the height of
her misfortunes and anarchy, still shows all the fire of youth; she dares to ask for a government and for
laws, as if she were newly born. She is in chains, and discusses the means of remaining free; she feels
in herself the kind of force that the forces of tyranny cannot overcome. I seem to see Rome, under
siege, tranquilly disposing of the land on which the enemy had just pitched camp. Worthy Poles,
beware! Beware lest, in your eagerness to improve, you may worsen your condition. In thinking of
what you wish to gain, do not forget what you may lose. Correct, if possible, the abuses of your
constitution; but do not despise that constitution which has made you what you are.
  You love liberty; you are worthy of it; you have defended it against a powerful and crafty aggressor
who, under the pretence of offering you the bonds of friendship, was loading you down with the chains
of servitude. Now, wearied by the troubles of your fatherland, you are sighing for tranquillity. That can,
I think, be very easily won; but to preserve it along with liberty, that is what I find difficult It is in the
bosom of the very anarchy you hate that were formed those patriotic souls who have saved you from
the yoke of slavery. They were falling into lethargic sleep; the tempest has reawakened them. Having
broken the chains that were being prepared for them, they feel the heaviness of fatigue. They would like
to  combine  the  peace  of  despotism  with  the  sweets  of  liberty.  I  fear  that  they  may  be  seeking
contradictory things. Repose and liberty seem to me to be incompatible; it is necessary to choose
between them.
I do not say that things must be left in their present state; but I do say that they must be touched
only with extreme circumspection. For the time being you are struck rather by their defects than by
their  advantages.  The  day  will  come,  I  fear,  when  you  will  have  a  better  appreciation  of  those
advantages; and that, unfortunately, will be when they are already lost.
  Although it is easy, if you wish, to make better laws, it is impossible to make them such that the
passions of men will not abuse them as they abused the laws which preceded them. To foresee and
weigh all future abuses is perhaps beyond the powers even of the most consummate statesman. The
subjecting of man to law is a problem in politics which I liken to that of the squaring of the circle in
geometry. Solve this problem well, and the government based on your solution will be good and free
from abuses. But until then you may rest assured that, wherever you think you are establishing the rule
of law, it is men who will do the ruling.
  There will never be a good and solid constitution unless the law reigns over the hearts of the
citizens; as long as the power of legislation is insufficient to accomplish this, laws will always be
evaded. But how can hearts be reached? That is a question to which our law-reformers, who never look
beyond coercion and punishments, pay hardly any attention; and it is a question to the solving of which
material rewards would perhaps be equally ineffective. Even the most upright justice is insufficient; for
justice, like health, is a good which is enjoyed without being felt, which inspires no enthusiasm, and the
value of which is felt only after it has been lost.
  How then is it possible to move the hearts of men, and to make them love the fatherland and its
laws? Dare I say it? Through children's games; through institutions which seem idle and frivolous to
superficial men, but which form cherished habits and invincible attachments. If I seem extravagant on
this point, I am at least whole-hearted; for I admit that my folly appears to me under the guise of perfect
reason.
  CHAPTER II  THE SPIRIT OF THE INSTITUTIONS OF ANTIQUITY
  WHEN reading ancient history, we seem transported to another world with another breed of men.
What do Frenchmen, Englishmen or Russians have in common with the Romans and the Greeks?
Almost nothing but their external appearance. The heroic souls of the ancients seem to us like the
exaggerations of historians. How can we, who feel that we are so small, believe that there were ever
men of such greatness? Such men did exist, however, and they were human beings like ourselves. What
prevents us from being like them? Our prejudices, our base philosophy, and those passions of petty
self-interest which, through inept institutions never dictated by genius, have been concentrated and
combined with egoism in all our hearts.
I look at the nations of modern times. I see in them many lawmakers, but not one legislator. Among
the ancients I see three outstanding men of the latter sort who deserve particular attention: Moses,
Lycurgus and Numa. All three devoted their main efforts to objects which our own men of learning
would consider laughable. All three achieved successes which would be thought impossible if they
were not so well attested.
  The first conceived and executed the astonishing project of creating a nation out of a swarm of
wretched fugitives, without arts, arms, talents, virtues or courage, who were wandering as a horde of
strangers over the face of the earth without a single inch of ground to call their own. Out of this
wandering and servile horde Moses had the audacity to create a body politic, a free people; and while
they were wandering in the desert without a stone on which to lay their heads, he gave them that
durable set of institutions, proof against time, fortune and conquerors, which five thousand years have
not been able to destroy or even to alter, and which even to-day still subsists in all its strength, although
the national body has ceased to exist.
  To prevent his people from melting away among foreign peoples, he gave them customs and usages
incompatible with those of the other nations; he overburdened them with peculiar rites and ceremonies;
he inconvenienced them in a thousand ways in order to keep them constantly on the alert and to make
them forever strangers among other men; and all the fraternal bonds with which he drew together the
members  of  his  republic  were  as  many  barriers  keeping  them  separate  from  their  neighbours  and
preventing them from mingling with them. That is how this peculiar nation, so often subjugated, so
often dispersed and apparently destroyed, but always fanatical in devotion to its Law, has nevertheless
maintained itself down to the present day, scattered among but never intermingled with the rest; and
that is why its customs, laws and rites subsist, and will endure to the end of time, in spite of the hatred
and persecution of the rest of the human race.
  Lycurgus undertook to give institutions to a people already degraded by slavery and by the vices
which follow from it. He imposed on them an iron yoke, the like of which no other people ever bore;
but he attached them to and, so to speak, identified them with this yoke by making it the object of their
constant preoccupation. He kept the fatherland constantly before their eyes in their laws, in their games,
in their homes, in their loves, in their festivals; he never left them an instant for solitary relaxation. And
out of this perpetual constraint, ennobled by its purpose, was born that ardent love of country which
was always the strongest, or rather the sole, passion of the Spartans, and which turned them into beings
above the level of humanity. It is true that Sparta was only a city: but by the mere strength of its
institutions, this city gave laws to the whole of Greece, became its capital, and made the Persian Empire
tremble. Sparta was the centre from which its legislation spread its influence in all directions.
  Those  who  have  seen  in  Numa  only  a  creator  of  religious  rites  and  ceremonies  have  sadly
misjudged this great man. Numa was the true founder of Rome. If Romulus had done no more than to
bring together a band of brigands who could have been scattered by a single set-back, his imperfect
work would not have been able to withstand the ravages of time. It was Numa who made it solid and
enduring by uniting these brigands into an indissoluble body, by transforming them into citizens, doing
this less by means of laws, for which in their state of rustic poverty they still had little need, than by
means of attractive institutions which attached them to one another, and to their common soil; he did
this, in short, by sanctifying their city with those rites, frivolous and superstitious in appearance, theforce and effect of which is so rarely appreciated, and the first foundations of which were nevertheless
laid by Romulus, fierce Romulus himself.
  It was the same spirit that guided all the ancient legislators in their work of creating institutions.
They all sought bonds that might attach citizens to the fatherland and to one another; and they found
them in peculiar usages, in religious ceremonies which by their very nature were always national and
exclusive; in games which kept citizens frequently assembled; in exercises which increased not only
their vigour and strength but also their pride and self-esteem; in spectacles which, by reminding them of
the  history  of  their  ancestors,  their  misfortunes,  their  virtues,  their  victories,  touched  their  hearts,
inflamed them with a lively spirit of emulation, and attached them strongly to that fatherland with
which they were meant to be incessantly preoccupied. It was the poems of Homer recited before the
Greeks in solemn assembly, not on stages in darkened theatres for ticket-holders only, but in the open
air and in the presence of the whole body of the nation; it was the tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles
and  Euripides,  which  were  often  performed  before  them;  it  was  the  prizes  with  which,  to  the
acclamations of all Greece, they crowned the victors in their games; all this, by continually surrounding
them with an atmosphere of emulation and glory, raised their courage and their virtues to that degree of
energy  for  which  there  is  no  modern  parallel,  and  in  which  we  moderns  are  not  even  capable  of
believing. If we have laws, it is solely for the purpose of teaching us to obey our masters well, to keep
our hands out of other people's pockets, and to give a great deal of money to public scoundrels. If we
have social usages, it is in order that we may know how to amuse the idleness of light women, and to
display our own with grace. If we assemble, it is in the temples of a cult which is in no sense national,
and which does nothing to remind us of the fatherland; it is in tightly closed halls, and for money, to see
playactors declaim and prostitutes simper on effeminate and dissolute stages where love is the only
theme, and where we go to learn those lessons in corruption which, of all the lessons they pretend to
teach, are the only ones from which we profit; it is in festivals where the common people, for ever
scorned, are always without influence, where public blame and approbation are inconsequential; it is in
licentious throngs, where we go to form secret liaisons and to seek those pleasures which do most to
separate, to isolate men, and to corrupt their hearts. Are these stimulants to patriotism? Is it surprising
that ways of life so different should be so unlike in their effects, and that we moderns can no longer
find in ourselves anything of that spiritual vigour which was inspired in the ancients by everything they
did? Pray forgive these digressions from one whose dying embers you yourself have rekindled. I shall
return with pleasure to a consideration of that people which, of all those now living, least separates me
from those ancients of whom I have just been speaking.
  CHAPTER III
  APPLICATION
  POLAND is a large state surrounded by even more considerable states which, by reason of their
despotism and military discipline, have great offensive power. Herself weakened by anarchy, she is, in
spite of Polish valour, exposed to all their insults. She has no strongholds to stop their incursions. Her
depopulation makes her almost entirely defenceless. No economic organisation; few or no troops; no
military discipline, no order, no subordination; ever divided within, ever menaced from without, she
has no intrinsic stability, and depends on the caprice of her neighbours. In the present state of affairs, I
can see only one way to give her the stability she lacks: it is to infuse, so to speak, the spirit of the
Confederation2 throughout the nation; it is to establish the Republic so firmly in the hearts of the Poles
that she will maintain her existence there in spite of all the efforts of her oppressors. There, it seems to
me, is the only sanctuary where force can neither reach nor destroy her. An ever-memorable proof of
this has just been given; Poland was in the bonds of Russia, but the Poles have remained free. A great
example, which shows you how to set at defiance the power and ambition of your neighbours. You may
not prevent them from swallowing you up; see to it at least that they will not be able to digest you. No
matter what is done, before Poland has been placed in a position to resist her enemies, she will be
overwhelmed by them a hundred times. The virtue of her citizens, their patriotic zeal, the particular way
in which national institutions may be able to form their souls, this is the only rampart which will alwaysstand ready to defend her, and which no army will ever be able to breach. If you see to it that no Pole
can ever become a Russian, I guarantee that Russia will not subjugate Poland.
  It is national institutions which shape the genius, the character, the tastes and the manners of a
people; which give it an individuality of its own; which inspire it with that ardent love of country,
based  on  ineradicable  habits,  which  make  its  members,  while  living  among  other  peoples,  die  of
boredom, though surrounded by delights denied them in their own land. Remember the Spartan who,
gorged with the pleasures of the Great King's court, was reproached for missing his black broth. 'Ah,'
he said to the satrap with a sigh, 'I know your pleasures, but you do not know ours!'
  Today, no matter what people may say, there are no longer any Frenchmen, Germans, Spaniards, or
even Englishmen; there are only Europeans. All have the same tastes, the same passions, the same
manners, for no one has been shaped along national lines by peculiar institutions. All, in the same
circumstances, will do the same things; all will call themselves unselfish, and be rascals; all will talk of
the public welfare, and think only of themselves; all will praise moderation, and wish to be as rich as
Croesus. They have no ambition but for luxury, they have no passion but for gold; sure that money will
buy them all their hearts desire, they all are ready to sell themselves to the first bidder. What do they
care what master they obey, under the laws of what state they live? Provided they can find money to
steal and women to corrupt, they feel at home in any country.
  Incline the passions of the Poles in a different direction, and you will give their souls a national
physiognomy which will distinguish them from other peoples, which will prevent them from mixing,
from feeling at ease with those peoples, from allying themselves with them; you will give them a
vigour  which  will  supplant  the  abusive  operation  of  vain  precepts,  and  which  will  make  them  do
through preference and passion that which is never done sufficiently well when done only for duty or
interest. These are the souls on which appropriate legislation will take hold. They will obey the laws
without evasion because those laws suit them and rest on the inward assent of their will. Loving the
fatherland, they will serve it zealously and with all their hearts. Given this sentiment alone, legislation,
even if it were bad, would make good citizens; and it is always good citizens alone that constitute the
power and prosperity of the state.
I shall expound hereafter the system of government which, with little fundamental change in your
laws, seems to me to be capable of bringing patriotism and its attendant virtues to the highest possible
degree of intensity. But whether or not you adopt this system, begin in any case by giving the Poles a
great opinion of themselves and of their fatherland: given the qualities they have just been displaying,
this opinion will not be false. The circumstances of the present moment must be used to elevate souls to
the level of the souls of the ancients. It is certain that the Confederation of Bar has saved the dying
fatherland. This great epoch must be engraved in sacred letters on every Polish heart. I should like to
see a monument erected in its memory; let there be placed upon it the names of all the confederates,
even of those who may thereafter have betrayed the common cause. So great an action ought to wipe
out the faults of a whole lifetime. Let a decennial solemnity be instituted to celebrate it with a pomp not
brilliant and frivolous, but simple, proud and republican; there let eulogy be given, worthily but without
exaggeration, to those virtuous citizens who have had the honour to suffer for the fatherland in the
chains of the enemy; let their families even be granted some honorific privilege which will constantly
recall this great memory before the eyes of the public. I should not wish, however, that any invectives
against the Russians, or even any mention of them, be permitted at these solemnities; it would be doing
them too much honour. This silence, the memory of their barbarity, and the eulogy of those who
resisted them, will say all that needs to be said about them: you must despise them too much to hate
them.
I should wish that, by honours and public rewards, all the patriotic virtues should be glorified, that
citizens should constantly be kept occupied with the fatherland, that it should be made their principal
business, that it should be kept continuously before their eyes. In this way, I confess, they would have
less time and opportunity to grow rich; but they would also have less desire and need to do so. Their
hearts would learn to know other pleasures than those of wealth. This is the art of ennobling souls andof turning them into an instrument more powerful than gold.
  The brief description of Polish manners so kindly forwarded to me by M. de Wielhorski does not
suffice to familiarise me with their civil and domestic usages. But a great nation which has never
mingled too much with its neighbours must have many such which are peculiar to itself, and which
perhaps are daily being bastardised by the general European tendency to adopt the tastes and manners
of the French. It is necessary to maintain, to re-establish these ancient usages, and to introduce other
appropriate ones which will be peculiar to the Poles. These usages, even though they may be indifferent
or even in some respects bad, provided that the vice be not radical, will always have the advantage of
making Poles love their country, and of giving them a natural repugnance to mingling with foreigners. I
consider it fortunate that they have a peculiar mode of dress. Preserve this advantage carefully: do
exactly the opposite of what was done by that highly-touted Czar.3 Let neither the king nor the senators
nor any public figure wear anything but the national costume, and let no Pole venture to appear at court
dressed in the French fashion.
  Have many public games, where the good mother country is pleased to see her children at play! Let
her pay frequent attention to them, that they may pay constant attention to her. In order to set a good
example, it is necessary to abolish, even at court, the ordinary amusements of courts, gambling, drama,
comedy, opera; all that makes men effeminate; all that distracts them, isolates them, makes them forget
their fatherland and their duty; all that makes it possible for them to be happy anywhere as long as they
are entertained. You must invent games, festivals and solemnities so peculiar to this particular court
that they will be encountered in no other. People in Poland must be entertained even more than in other
countries, but not in the same manner. In a word, the execrable proverb must be reversed, and every
Pole made to say from the bottom of his heart: Ubi patria, ibi bene.
  Nothing, if possible, exclusively for the rich and powerful! Have many open-air spectacles, where
the various ranks of society will be carefully distinguished, but where the whole people will participate
equally,  as  among  the  ancients,  and  where,  on  certain  occasions,  young  noblemen  will  test  their
strength and skill! Bullfighting has contributed no little to the maintenance of a certain vigour within
the Spanish nation. Those amphitheatres in which the youth of Poland formerly took their exercise
ought to be carefully re-established; they ought to be made theatres of honour and emulation for these
young people. Nothing could be easier than to replace the earlier combats with less cruel exercises in
which strength and skill would nevertheless still play a part, and in which the victors would continue to
win honours and rewards. Horsemanship, for example, is a highly suitable exercise for Poles, and
readily lends itself to brilliant public spectacles.
  The heroes of Homer were all distinguished by their strength and skill, and thereby demonstrated in
the eyes of the people that they were fit to lead them. I The tournaments of the paladins made men not
only brave and courageous, but also eager for honour and glory, and ripe for every virtue. The use of
firearms, by making the bodily faculties less useful in war, has caused them to fall into discredit. From
this it follows that, apart from qualities of the spirit, which are often equivocal and misplaced, on which
there are a thousand ways of being deceived, and of which the people are poor judges, a man with the
advantage of good birth has nothing to distinguish him from anyone else, to justify his fortune, to
demonstrate in his person a natural right to superiority; and the more these exterior signs are neglected,
the easier it is for those who govern us to grow corrupt and effeminate with impunity. It is important,
however, and even more important than we imagine, that those who are one day to command others
should from their youth show themselves to be superior in all respects, or at least that they should try to
do  so.  It  is  good,  moreover,  that  the  people  should  be  together  with  their  leaders  on  pleasurable
occasions, that they should know them, that they should be accustomed to seeing them, and that they
should often share their pleasures. Provided that subordination is always preserved, and that distinctions
of rank are not lost sight of, this is the way to make them love their leaders, and to combine respect
with affection. Finally, a taste for physical exercise diverts people from dangerous idleness, effeminate
pleasures, and frivolous wit. It is above all for the sake of the soul that the body should be exercised: a
fact which our petty sages are far from recognising.  Be sure not to neglect the need for a certain amount of public display; let it be noble, imposing,
with a magnificence which resides rather in men than in things. It is hard to believe to what an extent
the heart of the people follows its eyes, and how much it is impressed by majestic ceremonial. This
lends authority an air of law and order which inspires confidence, and divorces it from the ideas of
caprice and whimsicality associated with arbitrary power. In preparing these solemnities, however, you
must avoid the frippery, the garishness and the luxurious decorations usually found in the courts of
kings. The festivals of a free people should always breathe an air of gravity and decorum, and objects
worthy of esteem should alone be offered for popular admiration. The Romans, in their triumphs,
displayed enormous luxury, but it was the luxury of the vanquished; the more it shone, the less did it
seduce; its very brilliance was an excellent lesson for the Romans. The captive kings were bound with
chains of gold and precious stones. That is a proper understanding of luxury. Often it is possible to
reach the same goal by two opposite routes. The two woolsacks placed before the seat of the Chancellor
in the British House of Lords strike me as a touching and sublime decoration. Two sheaves of wheat
similarly placed in the Polish Senate would produce an effect no less pleasing to my taste.
  The immense disparities of fortune which divide the magnates from the lesser nobility constitute a
great obstacle to the reforms needed to make love of country the dominant passion. As long as luxury
reigns among the great, cupidity will reign in all hearts. The object of public admiration and the desires
of private individuals will always be the same; and if one must be rich in order to shine, to be rich will
always be the dominant passion. This is a great source of corruption, which must be diminished as
much as possible. If other attractive objects, if signs of rank, distinguished men in official position,
those who were merely rich would be deprived of them; hidden ambitions would naturally seek out
these honourable distinctions, that is to say, distinctions of merit and virtue, if they were the only road
to success. The consuls of Rome were often very poor, but they had their lictors; the distinction of
having lictors was coveted by the people, and the plebeians attained the consulship.
  Where inequality reigns, I must confess, it is very hard to eliminate all luxury. But would it not be
possible to change the objects of this luxury and thus make its example less pernicious? For instance,
the impoverished nobility of Poland formerly attached themselves to the magnates, who gave them
education and subsistence as retainers. There you see a truly great and noble form of luxury, the
inconveniences of which I fully recognise, but which, far from debasing souls, elevates them, gives
them sensibility and resilience; among the Romans, a similar custom led to no abuses as long as the
Republic endured. I have read that the Duc d'Épernon, encountering one day the Duc de Sully, wanted
to pick a quarrel with him; but that, having only six hundred gentlemen in his entourage, he did not
dare attack Sully, who had eight hundred. I doubt that luxury of this sort leaves much room for baubles;
and the example it gives will at least not serve to seduce the poor. Bring back the magnates of Poland to
the point of desiring no other form of luxury; the result may be divisions, parties, quarrels; but the
nation will not be corrupted. In addition, let us tolerate military luxury, the luxury of arms and horses;
but  let  all  effeminate  adornments  be  held  in  contempt;  and  if  the  women  cannot  be  persuaded  to
abandon them, let them at least learn to disdain and disapprove of them in men.
  Furthermore, it is not by sumptuary laws that luxury can be successfully extirpated; it is from the
depth of the heart itself that you must uproot it by impressing men with healthier and nobler tastes. To
forbid things is an inept and vain expedient, unless you begin by making them scorned and hated; and
the  disapprobation  of  the  law  is  efficacious  only  when  it  reinforces  that  of  the  public.  Whoever
concerns himself with the problem of creating institutions for a people ought to know how to direct
opinion, and thus to govern the passions of men. This is true above all in the matter of which I am now
speaking.  Sumptuary  laws  serve  rather  to  stimulate  desire  by  constraint  than  to  extinguish  it  by
punishment. Simplicity of manners and adornment is the fruit not so much of law as of education.
  CHAPTER IV
  EDUCATION
  THIS is the important question. It is education that must give souls a national formation, and direct
their  opinions  and  tastes  in  such  a  way  that  they  will  be  patriotic  by  inclination,  by  passion,  bynecessity. When first he opens his eyes, an infant ought to see the fatherland, and up to the day of his
death he ought never to see anything else. Every true republican has drunk in love of country, that is to
say love of law and liberty, along with his mother's milk. This love is his whole existence; he sees
nothing but the fatherland, he lives for it alone; when he is solitary, he is nothing; when he has ceased
to have a fatherland, he no longer exists; and if he is not dead, he is worse than dead.
  National education is proper only to free men; it is they only who enjoy a collective existence and
are  truly  bound  by  law.  A  Frenchman,  an  Englishman,  a  Spaniard,  an  Italian,  a  Russian  are  all
practically the same man; each leaves school already fully prepared for license, that is to say, for
slavery. At twenty, a Pole ought not to be a man of any other sort; he ought to be a Pole. I wish that,
when he learns to read, he should read about his own land; that at the age of ten he should be familiar
with all its products, at twelve with all its provinces, highways, and towns; that at fifteen he should
know its whole history, at sixteen all its laws; that in all Poland there should be no great action or
famous man of which his heart and memory are not full, and of which he cannot give an account at a
moment's notice. From this you can see that it is not studies of the usual sort, directed by foreigners and
priests, that I would like to have children pursue. The law ought to regulate the content, the order and
the form of their studies. They ought to have only Poles for teachers: Poles who are all, if possible,
married; who are all distinguished by moral character, probity, good sense and attainments; and who
are  all  destined,  after  the  successful  performance  of  this  task  for  a  certain  number  of  years,  for
employments which, although they are not more important or honourable, for that is impossible, are
less arduous and more brilliant. Beware above all of turning teaching into a profession. No public man
in Poland should have any other permanent rank than that of citizen. All the positions he fills, and
above all those which are as important as this, should be regarded only as testing-places, and as steps in
the ladder of advancement by merit. I exhort the Polish people to pay attention to this maxim, on which
I shall often insist: I consider it one of the key-points in the organisation of the state. We shall see
below how, in my opinion, it is possible to give it universal application.
I do not like those distinctions between schools and academies which result in giving different and
separate education to the richer and to the poorer nobility. All, being equal under the constitution of the
state, ought to be educated together and in the same fashion; and if it is impossible to set up an
absolutely free system of public education, the cost must at least be set at a level the poor can afford to
pay. Would it not be possible to provide in each school a certain number of free scholarships, that is to
say, supported at state expense, of the sort known in France as bursaries? These scholarships, given to
the children of poor gentlemen who have deserved well of the country, given not as an act of charity
but as a reward for the merit of the father, would thus become honourable, and might produce a double
advantage well worth considering. To accomplish this, nominations should not be arbitrary, but made
by a form of selection of which I shall speak hereafter. Those who have been chosen would be called
children of the state, and distinguished by some honorific insignia which would give them precedence
over other children of their own age, including even the children of magnates.
  In every school a gymnasium, or place for physical exercise, should be established for the children.
This much-neglected provision is, in my opinion, the most important part of education, not only for the
purpose of forming robust and healthy physiques, but even more for moral purposes, which are either
neglected or else sought only through a mass of vain and pedantic precepts which are simply a waste of
breath. I can never sufficiently repeat that good education ought to be negative. Prevent vices from
arising, and you will have done enough for virtue. In a good system of public education, the way to
accomplish this is simplicity itself: it is to keep children always on the alert, not by boring studies of
which they understand nothing and which they hate simply because they are forced to sit still; but by
exercises which give them pleasure by satisfying the need of their growing bodies for movement, and
which in other ways will be enjoyable.
  They should not be allowed to play alone as their fancy dictates, but all together and in public, so
that  there  will  always  be  a  common  goal  toward  which  they  all  aspire,  and  which  will  excite
competition and emulation. Parents who prefer domestic education, and have their children brought upunder their own eyes, ought nevertheless to send them to these exercises. Their instruction may be
domestic and private, but their games ought always to be public and common to all; for here it is not
only a question of keeping them busy, of giving them a robust constitution, of making them agile and
muscular,  but  also  of  accustoming  them  at  an  early  age  to  rules,  to  equality,  to  fraternity,  to
competition,  to  living  under  the  eyes  of  their  fellow-citizens  and  to  desiring  public  approbation.
Therefore the prizes and rewards of the victors should not be distributed arbitrarily by the games-
coaches or by the school-officials, but by the acclamation and judgment of the spectators; and you can
be sure that these judgments will always be just, above all if care is taken to make the games attractive
to the public, by presenting them with some ceremony and with an eye to spectacular effect. Then we
may assume that all worthy people and all good patriots will consider it a duty and a pleasure to attend.
  At Berne there is a most unusual exercise for the young patricians who are graduating from school.
It is called the Mock State. It is a copy in miniature of everything that goes to make up the political life
of the Republic: a senate, chief magistrates, officers, bailiffs, orators, lawsuits, judgments, solemnities.
The Mock State has even a small government and a certain income; and this institution, authorised and
sponsored by the sovereign, is the nursery of the statesmen who will one day direct public affairs in the
same employments which at first they exercised only in play.
  No matter what form is given to public education, into the details of which I will not enter here, it is
proper to set up a college of magistrates of the first rank who will have supreme authority to administer
it, and who will name, dismiss and change at their discretion not only the principals and heads of
schools, who themselves, as I have already said, will be candidates for the upper magistracies, but also
the games-coaches, whose zeal and vigilance will be carefully stimulated by the promise of higher
positions which will be opened or closed to them according to the manner in which they performed
these earlier functions. Since it is on these institutions that the hope of the Republic, the glory and fate
of the nation depend, I find in them, I must confess, an importance which, I am much surprised to
discover, no one has ever thought of attributing to them. For the sake of humanity I am grieved that so
many  ideas  which  impress  me  as  being  good  and  useful  are  always,  in  spite  of  their  eminent
practicality, so far removed from anything that is actually done.
  However, my purpose here is only to give a few general suggestions; but that is enough for those I
am addressing. These poorly developed ideas give a distant view of the paths, unknown to the moderns,
by which the ancients led men to that vigour of soul, to that patriotic zeal, to that esteem for truly
personal and properly human qualities, which are without precedent among us; but the leaven exists in
the hearts of all men and is ready to ferment if only it is stimulated by suitable institutions. Direct in
this sense the usages, the customs, the manners of the Poles; in them you will develop that leaven the
very existence of which has not yet been so much as suspected by our corrupt maxims, our outworn
institutions, our egoistical philosophy which preaches and kills. The nation will date her second birth
from the terrible crisis from which she is emerging; and seeing what her still undisciplined members
have accomplished, she will expect and obtain still more from a well-balanced set of institutions, she
will respect and cherish laws which flatter her noble pride, which will make and keep her happy and
free; plucking from her heart the passions which lead to the evasion of those laws, she will nourish
those which cause them to be loved; finally, by renewing herself, so to speak, she will recover in this
new age all the vigour of a nation in process of birth. But, without these precautions, expect nothing
from your laws. However wise, however far-seeing they may be, they will be evaded and made useless;
and you will only have corrected some few abuses that are wounding you, in order to introduce others
which you will not have foreseen. So much for the preliminaries which I have thought indispensable.
Let us now cast our eyes upon the constitution itself.
  CHAPTER V
  THE RADICAL DEFECT
  IF possible, let us from the beginning avoid wandering off into chimerical projects. What is the
enterprise, gentlemen, that concerns you at the moment? That of reforming the government of Poland:
that is to say, of giving the constitution of a great kingdom the vigour and stability of that of a smallrepublic. Before working toward the execution of this project, we must ask first of all whether it is
capable of realisation. The size of nations, the extent of states: this is the first and principal source of
the misfortunes of the human race, and above all of the innumerable calamities that sap and destroy
civilised  peoples.  Practically  all  small  states,  no  matter  whether  they  are  republics  or  monarchies,
prosper merely by reason of the fact that they are small; that all the citizens know and watch over one
another; that the leaders can see for themselves the evil that is being done, the good they have to do;
and that their orders are carried out before their eyes. All great peoples, crushed by their own mass,
suffer either from anarchy, like you, or from subordinate oppressors through whom, by the necessities
of devolution, the king is obliged to rule. Only God can govern the world; and it would require more
than human capacities to govern great nations. It is surprising, it is prodigious, that the vast extent of
Poland has not already resulted a hundred times in the conversion of the government into a despotism,
that it has not bastardised the souls of the Poles and corrupted the mass of the nation. It is an example
unique in history that after the lapse of centuries such a state should even now be merely in a condition
of anarchy. The slowness of this progression is due to advantages inseparable from the inconveniences
from which you wish to deliver yourselves. Ah! I cannot repeat it often enough; think well before you
lay hands on your laws, and above all on those that have made you what you are. The first reform you
need is a change in the extent of your country. Your vast provinces will never permit you to enjoy the
strict administration of small republics. Begin by contracting your boundaries, if you wish to reform
your government. Perhaps your neighbours are thinking of doing you this service. It would no doubt be
a great misfortune for the dismembered parts; but it would be a great boon to the body of the nation.
  If these retrenchments do not take place, I can see only one means that might perhaps accomplish
the same result; and this means, fortunately, is already in harmony with the spirit of your institutions.
Let the separation of the two Polands be as complete as that of Lithuania is from them; have three states
united in one. If possible, I should like you to have as many states as you now have palatinates.
Subdivide each of these in turn into an equal number of particular administrations. Perfect the form of
the dietines,4 extend their authority within their respective palatinates; but define their limits carefully,
and be sure that nothing can break the bond of common legislation which unites them, or disturb their
common subordination to the body of the republic. In a word, devote yourselves to extending and
perfecting the system of federal government: the only one which combines the advantages of large and
small states, and thus the only one that can answer your purposes. If you neglect this advice, I doubt
whether your work will ever be successful.
  CHAPTER VI
  THE QUESTION OF THE THREE ORDERS
I HARDLY ever hear people discussing government without finding an appeal to principles which
strike me as being false or ambiguous. The Republic of Poland, it has often been repeated, is composed
of three orders:
  the equestrian order,5 the senate and the king. I should prefer to say that the Polish nation is
composed of three orders: the nobles, who are everything; the burghers, who are nothing; and the
peasants, who are less than nothing. If the senate is to be counted as an order in the state, why not also
count the chamber of deputies, which is no less distinct, and has no less authority?
  More important still: this division, in the very sense in which it is given, is obviously incomplete;
for it would be necessary to add the ministers, who are neither kings, nor senators, nor deputies, and
who, in their extreme independence, are equally to be accounted as depositaries of the whole executive
power. Can you ever explain to me how the part, which exists only in relation to the whole, can
nevertheless form an order independent of that whole? The English peerage, being hereditary, does
form, I will admit, an independent order. But in Poland, if you eliminate the equestrian order, there is
no longer a senate; for no one can be a senator unless he is already a Polish nobleman. Similarly, there
is no king; for it is the equestrian order that elects him, and the king can do nothing without it. But
remove the senate and the king: the equestrian order and, through it, the state and the sovereign will
remain entire; and the very next day, if the nobles so desire, they will have a senate and a king asbefore.
  Because the senate does not constitute an order within the state, it does not follow, however, that it
is  of  no  importance  to  it;  and  if  it  were  not  the  collective  depositary  of  the  laws,  its  members,
independent of its collective authority, would nevertheless be depositaries of the legislative power; and
to prevent them from voting in plenary sessions of the diet whenever it is a question of enacting or
repealing laws would be to deprive them of their birthright; but then they are no longer voting in their
capacity as senators, but simply as private citizens. As soon as the legislative power speaks, all return to
a position of equality; all other authorities are silent in its presence; its voice is the voice of God on
earth. Even the king, when presiding over the diet, has no right to vote, in my opinion, unless he is a
Polish nobleman.
  It will be said, no doubt, that I am now proving too much, and that if the senators as such have no
votes  in  the  diet,  they  ought  not  to  have  them  as  private  citizens  either;  for  the  members  of  the
equestrian order do not there vote in person, but solely through their representatives, among whom the
senators are not to be reckoned. And why should they vote in the diet as individuals, when no other
nobleman, unless he is a deputy, can do so? This objection strikes me as being valid under the existing
state of affairs; but when the proposed changes are effected, it will be valid no longer, since then the
senators themselves will be perpetual representatives of the nation, but will not be able to act on
legislative matters without the concurrence of their colleagues.
  It should not be said, therefore, that the concurrence of the king, the senate and the equestrian order
is necessary to make a law. This right belongs solely to the equestrian order, of which the senators like
the deputies are members, but in which the senate does not enter at all in its corporate capacity. Such is,
or ought to be, the law of the state in Poland. But the law of nature, that holy and imprescriptible law,
which speaks to the heart and reason of man, does not permit legislative authority to be thus restricted,
nor does it allow laws to be binding on anyone who has not voted for them in person, like the deputies,
or at least through representatives, like the body of the nobility. This sacred law cannot be violated with
impunity; and the state of weakness to which so great a nation now finds itself reduced is the fruit of
that feudal barbarism which serves to cut off from the body of the state that part of the nation which is
the most numerous, and oftentimes the most wholesome.
  God forbid that I should think it necessary at this point to prove something that a little good sense
and compassion will suffice to make everyone feel! And whence does Poland expect to recruit the
strength and force that she arbitrarily stifles in her bosom? Noblemen of Poland, be something more: be
men. Then only will you be happy and free. But never flatter yourselves that you will be so, as long as
you hold your brothers in chains.
I sense the difficulty of the project of freeing your common people. I am afraid not merely of the
badly  understood  self-interest,  the  self-conceit,  and  the  prejudices  of  the  masters;  if  these  were
surmounted, I should also fear the vices and the cowardice of the serfs. Liberty is a food easy to eat, but
hard to digest; it takes very strong stomachs to stand it. I laugh at those debased peoples who, allowing
themselves to be stirred up by rebels, dare to speak of liberty without having the slightest idea of its
meaning, and who, with their hearts full of all the servile vices, imagine that, in order to be free, it is
enough to be insubordinate. O proud and holy liberty! if those poor people could only know thee, if
they realised at what a price thou art won and preserved; if they felt how much more austere are thy
laws than the yoke of tyrants is heavy: their feeble souls, enslaved by passions that would have to be
suppressed, would fear thee a hundred times more than slavery; they would flee from thee in terror, as
from a burden threatening to crush them.
  To free the common people of Poland would be a great and worthy enterprise, but bold, perilous,
and not to be attempted lightly. Among the precautions to be taken, there is one which is indispensable
and requires time; it is, before everything else, to make the serfs who are to be freed worthy of liberty
and capable of enduring it. I shall explain hereafter one of the means that can be employed to that end.
It would be foolhardy of me to guarantee its success, though I myself do not doubt it. If there is any
better method, let it be adopted. But whatever happens, remember that your serfs are men like you, thatthey have in themselves the capacity to become all that you are. Work first of all to develop that
capacity, and do not free their bodies until after you have freed their souls. Without this preliminary,
you may be sure that your enterprise will fail.
  CHAPTER VII
  MEANS OF MAINTAINING THE CONSTITUTION
  THE laws of Poland, like those of all the rest of Europe, were made by successive bits and pieces.
Whenever an abuse was noticed, a law was made to remedy it. From this law arose further abuses,
which had in turn to be corrected. This way of acting is endless, and leads to the most terrible of all
abuses, which is to deprive all laws of their force by dint of multiplying their number.
  The enfeeblement of law occurred in Poland in a way which is most peculiar, and possibly unique,
for it lost its force without having been subjugated by the executive power. Even now the legislative
power still retains its full authority; it is inactive, but without recognising anything higher than itself.
The diet is no less sovereign than it was at the time of its establishment. Nevertheless it is powerless;
nothing dominates it, but neither does anything obey it. This state of affairs is remarkable, and deserves
consideration.
  What  has  preserved  the  law  thus  far?  It  is  the  continuous  presence  of  the  legislator.  It  is  the
frequency of the diets, it is the frequent re-election of the deputies, that has maintained the Republic.
England,  which  enjoys  the  first  of  these  advantages,  has  lost  her  liberty  for  having  neglected  the
second. A single parliament lasts so long that the court, which would go bankrupt buying it annually,
finds it profitable to buy it for seven years, and does not fail to do so. This is your first lesson.
  A second means whereby the legislative power has been preserved in Poland is, in the first place,
division of the executive power, which has prevented its depositaries from taking concerted action
against the legislative, and, in the second place, the frequent transfer of this same executive power from
hand to hand, which has prevented any consecutive system of usurpation. In the course of his reign
each king took some steps toward arbitrary power. But the election of his successor forced the latter to
retract instead of pressing forward; the kings, at the beginning of each reign, were all forced by the
pacta conventa6 to start from the same point. Thus, in spite of the habitual tendency to despotism, there
was no real progress in that direction.
  The same was true of the ministers and great officials. All, being independent both of the senate and
of one another, had unlimited authority in their respective departments; but these offices, quite apart
from the fact that they balanced one another, were not perpetuated in the same families, hence brought
them no absolute power; and all power, even when usurped, always returned to its source. The situation
would have been different if the whole executive power had been vested either in a single corporate
group, like the senate, or in a single family, through inheritance of the crown. This family or corporate
group probably would have oppressed the legislative power sooner or later, and would thereby have
placed the Poles under the yoke all other nations bear, and from which they alone are still exempt; for
by now I would no longer count Sweden as an exception. This is your second lesson.
  Such  is  the  advantage  of  your  situation;  it  is  undoubtedly  great.  But  the  following  is  the
disadvantage,  which  is  hardly  less  great.  The  executive  power,  being  divided  between  several
individuals, lacks inner harmony, and gives rise to a perpetual wrangling which is incompatible with
good order. Each depositary of a portion of this power sets himself, by virtue of that portion, wholly
above the magistrates and the law. He does, indeed, recognise the authority of the diet; but since that is
the  only  authority  he  does  recognise,  when  the  diet  is  dissolved  he  no  longer  recognises  any;  he
despises the courts of law and flouts their judgments. Each is a petty despot who, without exactly
usurping the sovereign authority, constantly oppresses the citizens in specific cases, and sets a fatal and
too frequently imitated example of unscrupulous and fearless violation of the rights and liberties of
individuals.
I believe that this is the first and principal cause of the anarchy which reigns in the state. I can see
only one way of removing this cause; you should not arm the various law-courts with public power to
repress these petty tyrants, for this power, sometimes badly administered and sometimes overwhelmedby superior power, might stir up troubles and disorders which could lead by degrees to civil war; but
you should arm with full executive power a respectable and permanent body, such as the senate, which
by its firmness and authority would be capable of holding to the line of duty those magnates who are
tempted to depart from it. This method strikes me as efficacious, and would surely prove to be so; but
the resulting danger would be terrible and very hard to avoid. For as we have shown in the Social
Contract,  any  corporation  which  serves  as  depositary  of  the  executive  power  tends  strongly  and
continuously to subjugate the legislative power, and succeeds sooner or later.
  To  meet  this  difficulty  it  has  been  suggested  that  you  ought  to  divide  the  senate  into  several
councils or departments, each under the presidency of the minister in charge of that department; which
minister, together with the members of each council, would change at the end of a fixed period, and
would rotate with those of the other departments. This idea may be a good one; it was that of the Abbé
de Saint-Pierre, and he has well developed it in his Polysynodie. If the executive power is thus divided
and temporary, it will be more subordinate to the legislative, and the various parts of the administration
will be better and more thoroughly handled for being separate. Do not, however, count too much on this
device; if the parts remain separate, they will lack integration, and soon, by mutual opposition, will
exhaust  practically  all  their  energies  against  each  other,  until  one  has  gained  the  ascendant  and
dominates the rest; or else, if they do agree and act together, they will in reality constitute but a single
body with a single spirit, like the houses of a parliament. And in any case, I consider it impossible for
independence and equilibrium to be maintained so well between them that there will not always emerge
some centre or focal point of administration in which all private and particular forces will ever unite to
oppress the sovereign. In almost all our republics, the councils are thus divided into departments which
originally were independent of one another, and which soon ceased to be so.
  This division into chambers or departments is a modern invention. The ancients, who knew better
than we how to preserve freedom, were wholly unacquainted with this expedient. The Roman senate
ruled half the known world, and did not even think of such divisions. This senate never succeeded,
however, in oppressing the legislative power, although the senators held office for life. But the laws had
censors, the people had tribunes, and the senate did not elect the consuls.
  If  the  administration  is  to  be  strong  and  good,  and  accomplish  its  purposes  well,  the  whole
executive power should be vested in the same hands. But it is not enough for these hands to change; if
possible they should act only under the eyes of the legislator, and with its guidance. That is the real
secret of preventing them from usurping its authority.
  As long as the estates meet and the deputies change frequently, it will be hard for the senate or for
the king to oppress or usurp the legislative authority. It is remarkable that the kings so far have not tried
to make the diets more infrequent, although they were not forced, like the kings of England, to convene
them often on pain of running short of money. It must be either that affairs were always in a state of
crisis which made the royal authority insufficient to deal with them; or that the kings made sure, by
their intrigues in the dietines, of having a majority of deputies always at their disposal; or that, by virtue
of the liberum veto,7 they were always certain of being able to cut off deliberations which might
displease them, and to dissolve the diets at will. When all these motives cease to exist, it is to be
expected that the king, or the senate, or both together, will make great efforts to rid themselves of the
diets and to make them as infrequent as possible.
  That above all is the thing to be forestalled and prevented. The method I propose is the only one; it
is simple and cannot fail to be effective. It is most remarkable that before I set it forth in the Social
Contract, no one had ever thought of it.
  One of the greatest disadvantages of large states, the one which above all makes liberty most
difficult to preserve in them, is that the legislative power cannot manifest itself directly, and can act
only by delegation. That has its good and its evil side; but the evil outweighs the good. A legislature
made up of the whole citizen body is impossible to corrupt, but easy to deceive. Representatives of the
people are hard to deceive, but easy to corrupt; and it rarely happens that they are not so corrupted. You
have before you the example of the English Parliament and, through the liberum veto, that of your ownnation. Now, it is possible to enlighten someone who is mistaken; but how can you restrain someone
who is for sale? Without being well versed in Polish affairs, I would wager anything in the world that
there is more talent in the diet, and more virtue in the dietines.
I see two means of preventing this terrible evil of corruption, which turns the organ of freedom into
the instrument of slavery.
  The first, as I have already said, is to have the diets elected frequently, for if the representatives are
often changed it is more costly and difficult to seduce them. On this point your constitution is better
than that of Great Britain; and when you have abolished or modified the liberum veto, I can see no
other changes to be made in it, unless it would be to add certain obstacles to the sending of the same
deputies to two successive diets, and to prevent them from being elected a great many times. I shall
return to this point later on.
  The second means is to bind the representatives to follow their instructions exactly, and to make
them render their constituents a strict account of their conduct in the diet. In this respect I can only
marvel at the negligence, the carelessness and, I would even venture to say, the stupidity of the English
nation, which, after having armed its deputies with supreme power, has added no brake to regulate the
use they may make of that power throughout the seven years of their mandate.
I observe that the Poles are not sufficiently aware of the importance of their dietines, of all they owe
to them, nor of all they might get from them by extending their authority and by regularising their form.
I myself am convinced that, if the confederations have saved the fatherland, it is the dietines that have
preserved it, and that they are the true palladium of liberty.
  The instructions of the deputies should be drawn up with great care, not only on the subjects listed
in the royal agenda, but also on the other current needs of the state or province; and this should be done
by a committee presided over, if you will, by the marshal of the dietine, but otherwise composed of
members chosen by majority vote; and the nobility should not disperse until these instructions have
been read, debated and approved in plenary session. In addition to the original text of these instructions,
handed to the deputies together with their patents of election, a copy signed by them should remain in
the archives of the dietine. It is on the basis of these instructions that they ought, on their return, to
report on their actions at a session of the dietine convened expressly for that purpose, a custom which
must absolutely be revived; and it is on the basis of this report that they should either be excluded from
all  subsequent  candidacy  for  the  deputyship,  or  else  declared  eligible,  if  they  have  followed  their
instructions to the satisfaction of their constituents. This examination is of the utmost importance; it
would be impossible to pay too much attention to it, or to observe its results too carefully. With each
word the deputy speaks in the diet, and with every move he makes, he must already see himself under
the  eyes  of  his  constituents,  and  feel  the  future  influence  of  their  judgment  both  on  his  hopes  of
advancement, and on that good opinion of his compatriots which is indispensable to the realisation of
those hopes; for, after all, it is not to express their own private sentiments, but to declare the will of the
nation, that the nation sends deputies to the diet. This brake is absolutely necessary to hold them to their
duty, and to prevent any sort of corruption from any source. Whatever may be said, I cannot see any
disadvantage in this limitation, for the chamber of deputies, which does not, or should not, participate
in the details of administration, can never have to deal with any unexpected matter; but if such a matter
did arise, and a deputy did nothing contrary to the express will of his constituents, they would not
blame him for having expressed his opinion, like a good citizen, on a matter they had not foreseen, and
on which they had reached no decision. I will add, in conclusion, that if there were actually some
disadvantage  in  holding  the  deputies  thus  bound  by  their  instructions,  it  could  not  outweigh  the
immense advantage of preventing the law from ever being anything but the real expression of the will
of the nation.
  Once  these  precautions  have  been  taken,  furthermore,  there  should  never  be  a  conflict  of
jurisdiction between the diet and the dietines; and when a law has been passed in the plenary diet, I
would not even grant the dietines the right to protest. Let them punish their deputies; let them even, if
necessary, cut off their heads, if they have prevaricated; but let them obey fully, continuously, withoutexception and without protest; let them bear the just penalty of their bad choice; except that, at the next
diet, they may, if they think proper, make as vigorous representations as they like.
  The diets, being frequent, have less need to be long, and six weeks' duration seems to me quite
enough to meet the ordinary needs of the state. But it is inconsistent for the sovereign authority to set
limits on itself, especially when it is directly in the hands of the nation. Let the duration of ordinary
diets continue to be set at six weeks, right enough; but it will always rest with the assembly to prolong
this term by an express decision, when the matters in hand require it. For, after all, if the diet, which by
its very nature is above the law, says 'I want to continue,' who is there to tell it 'I do not want you to?' It
is only in case a diet wanted to last more than two years that it could not do so; its powers would then
terminate,  and  those  of  another  diet  would  begin,  with  the  third  year.  The  diet,  which  can  do
everything, can undoubtedly prescribe a longer interval between diets; but this new law could only
affect subsequent diets, and the one enacting it cannot profit by it. The principle from which these rules
are deduced is demonstrated in the Social Contract.
  So far as extraordinary diets are concerned, good order does indeed require that they should be
infrequent, and convened only in cases of urgent necessity. When the king judges that one is necessary,
he ought, I would agree, to be believed; but cases of necessity might arise without his admitting it;
should the senate then be the judge? In a free state, everything capable of attacking liberty ought to be
foreseen. If the confederations continue they can in certain cases take the place of extraordinary diets;
but if you abolish the confederations, you must necessarily make provision for such diets.
I  consider  it  impossible  for  the  law  to  determine  in  any  reasonable  way  the  duration  of
extraordinary diets, since this depends entirely on the circumstances which cause them to assemble.
Ordinarily, speed is necessary in such cases; but since speed is relative to the business at hand, and that
business itself is extraordinary, it is impossible to regulate it in advance by legislation; and conditions
might arise in which it would be important for the diet to remain assembled until those conditions had
changed, or until the term of the ordinary diets had caused its powers to lapse.
  To save precious time in the diets, you should try to rid these assemblies of useless discussions
which are merely time-consuming. In them there must be, of course, not only rule and order, but also
ceremony and majesty. I should even like you to take particular pains in this regard, making people
feel, for example, the barbarity and horrible impropriety of seeing the panoply of arms profane the
sanctuary of law. Men of Poland, are you more warlike than the Romans? And yet, in the most troubled
days of their republic, the sight of a blade never sullied the assemblies or the senate. But I should also
wish that, while clinging to important and necessary things, you would avoid doing anything in the diet
that could equally well be done elsewhere. The examination of the credentials of the deputies (rugi) is a
waste of time in the diet; not because this examination is not an important thing in itself, but because it
can be done as well or better in the very place where the deputies were elected, where they are best
known, and where all their competitors are to be found. It is in their own palatinate, it is in the dietine
they represent, that the validity of their election can best and most quickly be determined, as is the
present practice with regard to the members of your highest financial and judicial bodies. This done, the
diet should admit them without question on the credentials (laudum) in their possession, not only to
prevent possible obstacles to the prompt election of the marshal,8 but above all to prevent intrigues
whereby the senate or king might interfere with the elections and defraud subjects of whom they
disapproved. The recent events in London are a lesson for the Poles. I am well aware of the fact that
Wilkes is only a muddlehead; but the precedent of his rejection has smoothed the way, and from now
on only those subjects who suit the court will be admitted to the House of Commons.
  You should begin by paying more attention to the choice of the members who vote in the dietines.
This would make it easier to identify those who are eligible to serve as deputies. The Golden Book of
Venice is a model to follow, because of the facilities it oners. It would be very convenient and easy to
keep in each election district (grod) an accurate register of all the nobles who, under the specified
conditions, would be eligible to appear and vote in the dietines; they would be enrolled in the register
of their district upon reaching the age prescribed by law; and those who ought to be excluded would bestruck off as the case arose, with a statement of the grounds for their exclusion. By these registers, the
authenticity  of  which  should  be  well  safeguarded,  you  would  easily  identify  both  the  legitimate
members of the dietines and the subjects eligible to become deputies; and the length of debates on this
topic would be much reduced.
  A better system of discipline in the diets and dietines would surely be most useful; but I can never
repeat too often that you must not seek two contradictory things at the same time. Discipline is good,
but liberty is better; and the more you hedge in liberty with formalities, the more means of usurpation
will these formalities furnish. All the measures you adopt to prevent licence in the legislative order,
though good in themselves, will sooner or later be used to oppress it. Long and useless harangues,
which waste so much precious time, are a great evil; but it is an even greater evil for a good citizen not
to dare speak when he has something useful to say. When it reaches the point where certain mouths
only are opened in the diets, and even those are forbidden to speak freely, they soon will say nothing
but what is apt to please the powerful.
  After necessary changes have been made in the appointment of officials and in the distribution of
favours, there will probably be fewer vain harangues, and also fewer flatteries addressed in this form to
the king. In order to prune away some of the farragoes of rhetorical nonsense you might, however,
require each orator to announce at the beginning of his discourse the proposition he wants to establish
and, after presenting his arguments, to summarise his conclusions, as lawyers do in court. If that did not
make speeches shorter, it would at least restrain those who merely want to talk for the sake of talking,
and waste time to no purpose.
I am none too clear about the forms now prescribed in the diets for the enactment of laws; but I
know that, for the reasons already given, these forms should not be the same as those used in the
parliament  of  Great  Britain;  that  the  senate  of  Poland  ought  to  have  administrative  rather  than
legislative authority; and that, in all legislative matters, the senators should vote solely as members of
the diet, not as members of the senate, and that the individual votes ought to be counted in both
chambers alike. Perhaps the custom of the liberum veto has prevented this distinction from being made;
but it will be very necessary when the liberum veto has been abolished; all the more so since this will
deprive the chamber of deputies of an immense advantage, for I do not suppose that the senators, far
less the ministers, ever shared in this right. The veto of the Polish deputies is like that of the tribunes of
the people in Rome; the latter did not exercise this right as citizens, but as representatives of the Roman
people. Thus the loss of the liberum veto affects only the chamber of deputies; and the senate, which
loses nothing thereby, will gain in consequence.
  Granted this, I see a defect to be corrected in the diet, namely that, since the number of senators is
almost equal to the number of deputies, the senate has too much influence in the deliberations of the
diet and, by reason of its prestige in the equestrian order, can easily win over the small number of votes
it needs to make it constantly preponderant.
I say that this is a defect; for the senate, as a particular corporate group within the state, necessarily
has corporate interests which are different from those of the nation, and which may even, in certain
respects, be contrary to them. But the law, which is only the expression of the general will, is properly a
resultant  of  all  the  particular  interests  combined  and  balanced  in  proportion  to  their  number;  but
corporate interests, because of their too great weight, would upset the balance, and ought not, in their
collective capacity, to be included in it. Each individual should have a vote; no corporate group of any
kind should have one. But if the senate had too much weight in the diet, it would not only bring its
interests to bear upon it, but would make them preponderant.
  A natural remedy for this defect suggests itself, namely to increase the number of deputies; but I
would fear that this might make too much commotion in the state and approach too near to democratic
tumult. If it were absolutely necessary to change the proportion, I would rather decrease the number of
senators than increase the number of deputies. And, after all, I cannot really see why, with a palatine at
the head of each province, you also need grand castellans. But we should never lose sight of the
important principle of making no unnecessary changes, whether by subtraction or by addition.  It is better, in my opinion, to have a less numerous council, and give its members greater freedom,
than to increase its size and hamper its freedom of deliberation, as one is always forced to do when the
numbers become excessive. To which I will add, if I may be permitted to foresee good as well as evil,
that you must avoid bringing the diet up to its maximum possible size in order not to exclude the
possibility later on of readily admitting new deputies, in case you ever come to the point of ennobling
cities and enfranchising serfs, as is desirable for the power and happiness of the nation.
  Let us then look for means of remedying this defect in another way, and with the smallest possible
amount of change.
  All senators are appointed by the king, and thus are his creatures; what is more, they hold office for
life, and for that reason constitute a corporate group which is independent both of the king and of the
equestrian order, a corporate group which, as I have said, has separate interests of its own and must
tend to usurpation. And here you must not accuse me of inconsistency in admitting the senate as a
separate corporation within the republic, while refusing to admit it as a component part of the republic;
for this is a very different matter.
  First of all, the king must be deprived of the right of appointment to the senate, not so much
because of the power he thus retains over the senators, which may not be great, but. because of the
power it gives him over all those who aspire to that dignity, and through them over the entire body of
the nation. Apart from the effect of this change upon the constitution, it would also have the invaluable
advantage of killing the spirit of obsequiousness among the nobility, and replacing it with the spirit of
patriotism. I can see no disadvantage in having senators appointed by the diet, and I can see many
benefits too obvious to be worth describing in detail. Such appointments can be made either by the diet
itself,  or  else  on  the  prior  initiative  of  the  dietines,  which  would  nominate  a  certain  number  of
candidates  for  each  vacancy  in  their  respective  palatinates.  The  diet  would  choose  between  these
nominees, or perhaps might eliminate some of them and leave the king with the right to choose from
the  remainder.  But,  proceeding  immediately  to  the  simplest  solution  of  all,  why  should  not  each
palatine be elected directly by the dietine of his own province? What difficulties have been seen to
result from the use of this method in the election of the palatines of Polock and Witebsk, and of the
starosta9 of Samogitia? And what harm would it do to make the privilege of these three provinces the
common right of all? Let us not forget how important it is for Poland to turn its constitution in the
direction of federalism, in order to avoid as far as possible the evils that accompany the size, or rather
the extensive-ness, of the state.
  In the second place, if you deprive the senators of life tenure, you will weaken considerably their
corporate interest, which tends to usurpation. But this change involves certain difficulties; first, because
it is hard for men accustomed to the conduct of public affairs to see themselves suddenly reduced to
private life without any fault of their own; second, because senatorial positions are joined with the titles
of palatine and castellan and with the local authority attached to them, which means that disorder and
discontent would result from the perpetual transfer of those titles and that authority from one individual
to another. Finally, this insecurity of tenure cannot be extended to bishops, and perhaps ought not to be
extended to ministers, whose positions call for special talents and therefore are not always easy to fill
satisfactorily. If the bishops alone held office for life, the authority of the clergy, already excessive,
would be considerably increased; and it is important that this authority should be counterbalanced by
senators who, like the bishops, enjoy life tenure, and have no more fear than they of being removed.
  The following is the remedy I would devise to meet these various difficulties. I should like the
positions of first-class senators to continue to be held for life. This would include, in addition to the
bishops and the palatines, all the first-class castellans, making eighty-nine irremovable senators.
  As to the second-class castellans, I should like to have them serve for a fixed term, perhaps two
years, with a new election at each diet, perhaps for a longer period if it were thought proper; but in any
case they would leave office at the end of each term, except for those whom the diet might wish to
continue in office; and I would place a fixed limit on the number of permissible re-elections, according
to a plan which will be described hereafter.  The question of titles would be no great obstacle, since these titles would confer hardly any other
function than that of sitting in the senate, and could therefore be eliminated without difficulty; instead
of bearing the title of senatorial castellans they could simply be called elective senators. Since, under
our reforms, the senate would be vested with the executive power, a part of its membership would
remain  in  permanent  session,  and  a  certain  proportion  of  elective  senators  would  consequently  be
required to attend in rotation. But this is no place to consider details of this sort.
  By this scarcely perceptible change, these castellans or elective senators would really become as
many representatives of the diet, which would form a counterweight to the body of the senate, and
would strengthen the equestrian order in the assemblies of the nation;
  with the result that the life senators, though strengthened both by the abolition of the veto and by
the reduction of the power of king and ministers, and partly merged with the rest of the senate, would
be unable to dominate the group consciousness of that body; and the senate, now composed half of life
members and half of members for a term, would be as well as possible constituted to serve as an
intermediary power between the chamber of deputies and the king, being firm enough to control the
administration, and at the same time sufficiently dependent to be subject to law. This arrangement
strikes me as a good one, for it is simple and at the same time highly effective.
I shall not pause at this point to consider voting methods. They are not difficult to arrange in an
assembly composed of some three hundred members.
  In London it is managed successfully in a much larger parliament; in Geneva, where the general
council is larger still, and riddled by mutual suspicions; and even in Venice, in a grand council of some
twelve  hundred  noblemen,  where  vice  and  rascality  are  rampant.  I  have,  moreover,  discussed  this
subject in the Social Contract; and for anyone who has any regard for my opinions, that is the work to
consult.
  To moderate the abuses of the veto, it is suggested that the deputies should no longer be counted
individually, but by palatinates. Although this reform has some advantages, and is favourable to the
growth  of  federalism,  you  should  think  it  over  most  carefully  before  adopting  it.  Votes  taken
collectively and in the mass always proceed less directly toward the common interest than do those
which are taken individually and separately. It will very often happen that, among the deputies of a
palatinate, there is one who, in their private deliberations, will acquire an ascendancy over the others,
and will convert to his way of thinking a majority which would have thought otherwise if each had
voted independently. Under these conditions, corruptionists will have less to do, and will have a better
idea of the men with whom they ought to make contact. Furthermore it is better for each deputy to have
to answer individually to the dietine, in order that no one may be able to hide behind others, that the
innocent and the guilty may not be confused, and that distributive justice may be better done. There are
many arguments to be raised against this arrangement, which would greatly loosen the common bond,
and might well expose the state to division at every diet. By making the deputies more dependent on
their  constituents  and  their  instructions,  you  will  secure  almost  the  same  advantages  with  no
disadvantages. This assumes, to be sure, that votes are not to be cast secretly but in public, so that the
acts and opinions of each deputy in the diet will be known, and that he may answer for them personally
and in his own name. But since this question of voting is among those I have most carefully discussed
in the Social Contract, it is superfluous to repeat myself here.
  With regard to elections, it may perhaps be difficult at first to appoint so many elective senators all
at once in each diet; and in general it may be hard to select a large number out of a still larger number,
as my constitutional proposals occasionally require. But if, for this purpose, you resorted to balloting,
you would easily avoid these difficulties by distributing to the electors, on the eve of election, printed
and numbered ballots with the names of all eligible candidates. The next day the electors would come
in turn to cast them in the ballot-box, after having marked them, according to the instructions printed
thereon, with the names of those chosen and rejected. The counting of these ballots would be done
immediately, in the presence of the assembly, by the secretary of the diet, with the assistance of two
additional secretaries ad actum, to be named forthwith by the marshal from among the deputies present.In this way the operation would become so short and simple that, without clamour or discussion, the
whole senate could easily be filled at a single sitting. It is true that further rules will also be needed to
determine the list of candidates; but this subject will be remembered and dealt with hereafter.
  It remains to speak of the king, who presides over the diet, and who ought, by right of his office, to
be the supreme administrator of the laws.
  CHAPTER VIII
  THE KING
  IT is a great misfortune for the head of a nation to be the enemy of freedom, whose defender he
should be. This misfortune, in my opinion, is not inherent in the office to such an extent that it cannot
be separated from it, or at least considerably diminished. Temptation cannot live without hope. Make
your kings incapable of usurpation, and you will prevent them from dreaming of it; and they will apply
to the task of governing and defending you well all the energies they now devote to your enslavement.
The founders of Poland, as Count Wielhorski has observed, were careful to deny its kings all the
instruments of malice, but not those of corruption; and the favours at their disposal are ample for the
purpose. The difficulty is that if you deny them the right to grant favours, you would seem to deny
them everything. This, however, is precisely the thing to be avoided; for it would be the same thing as
saying you did not want a king; and I do not believe that a state as large as Poland could possibly get
along without one, that is to say, without a chief of state holding office for life. But unless the leader of
a nation is to be a mere cipher, and therefore useless, he must be able to do something; and however
little he may be able to do, it must be done either for good or ill.
  At the present time the senate is appointed by the king, which is too much. If he has no hand in
these appointments, it is not enough. Although the peerage in England is also appointed by the king, it
is less dependent on him, since these peerages, once granted, are hereditary; whereas the bishoprics,
palatinates and castellanships, being for life only, revert on the death of each holder to the gift of the
king.
I have said how, in my opinion, these appointments should be made, namely that the palatines and
grand castellans should be named for life by their respective dietines, and the second-class castellans
for a specific term by the diet. With regard to the bishops, it seems to me that it would be hard to
deprive the king of the right of appointment, unless provision were made to have them elected by their
chapters; and I think that this power can well be left to him, except in the case of the archbishop of
Gniezno,  whose  appointment  lies  naturally  within  the  province  of  the  diet,  unless  the  office  be
separated from the primacy, which should be at the disposal of the diet only.
  As for the ministers, above all the commanders-in-chief and grand treasurers, although their power,
which serves as a counter-weight to that of the king, should be diminished in proportion to his own, I
do not think it prudent to leave the king with the right to fill these positions with his creatures; and I
should like at least to restrict his choice to a small number of nominees presented by the diet. I admit
that, since he cannot withdraw these offices after having granted them, he cannot absolutely count on
the office-holders. But the power this gives him over office-seekers is sufficient, if not to enable him to
change the complexion of the government, at least to give him the hope of doing so; and this is the very
hope of which he must be deprived at all costs.
  The grand chancellor ought, I think, to be appointed by the king. Kings are the born judges of their
people; it was for this office, although they have all abandoned it, that they were first created; it cannot
be denied them; and if they do not wish to exercise it themselves, the appointment of proxies for this
function is theirs by right, since they will always have to answer for the judgments of those who speak
in their name. The nation can, to be sure, give them associate justices, and ought to do so when kings
themselves do not give judgment; thus the crown court, which is presided over not by the king but by
the grand chancellor, is under the supervision of the nation; and it is right that the dietines should
appoint the other members. If the king gave justice in person, I think that he would have the right to be
sole judge. In any case, it would always be in his interest to be just; and iniquitous judgments were
never a good highway to usurpation.  With regard to other dignities, royal or palatine, which are merely honorific titles, and bring more
glitter than credit, you could do no better than to leave them at the full disposal of the king. Let him
honour merit and flatter vanity, but do not let him confer power.
  The majesty of the throne should be maintained with splendour; but it is important that the king
should be left with the smallest possible control over the expenditure necessary for this purpose. It
would be desirable for all royal officials to be paid by the Republic, rather than by him, and for the
royal revenues to be proportionately reduced, in order to minimise, as far as possible, the handling of
money by the king.
  It has been suggested that the crown should be made hereditary. I assure you that, at the moment
when this law is adopted, Poland can say good-bye for ever to her freedom. You think you can meet the
situation by limiting the royal power. You do not realise that these legal limitations will be broken
down in the course of time by gradual usurpations, and that a policy adopted and followed without
interruption by a royal family is bound in the long run to win out over laws which, by their very nature,
tend constantly to relax. If the king cannot corrupt the magnates by favours, he can always corrupt them
by promises guaranteed by his successors; and since the plans of the royal family are perpetuated
together with the family itself, these obligations will be taken much more seriously, and their fulfilment
will be much more relied on, than when an elective crown shows that the plans of the monarch will end
with  his  own  life.  Poland  is  free  because  each  reign  is  preceded  by  an  interval  when  the  nation,
renewing all its rights and regaining new vigour, cuts off the progress of abuses and usurpations, when
the law revives and recovers its original power. What will become of the pacta conventa, the aegis of
Poland, if a family, established on the throne in perpetuity, occupies it without interruption, leaving the
nation, between the death of the father and the coronation of the son, no more than a vain shadow of
ineffective liberty, which soon will nullify the farcical oath sworn by all kings at their coronation, and
the moment after forgotten by all forever? You have seen Denmark, you see England, you are about to
see Sweden. Profit by these examples to learn once and for all that, no matter how many safeguards
may be accumulated, heredity in the crown and freedom in the nation will always be incompatible.
  The Poles have always had a tendency to transmit the throne from father to son, or to the nearest
heir, though always by election. This inclination, if they continue to follow it, will lead them sooner or
later to the misfortune of rendering the throne hereditary; and along these lines they cannot hope to put
up as long a struggle against the royal power as have the members of the Holy Roman Empire against
the power of the emperor; for Poland does not contain within herself any counterweight which would
suffice to keep a hereditary monarch subordinate to law. Despite the power of several members of the
Empire, if it had not been for the chance election of Charles VII, the imperial capitulations would
already be no more than an empty formality, as they were at the beginning of the century; and the pacta
conventa will become even more futile when the royal family has had time to establish itself and
subordinate all the rest. To summarise my feelings on this subject, I think that it would actually be
better for Poland to have an elective crown whose powers were absolute than a hereditary crown whose
powers were practically nil.
  In place of this disastrous law which would make the crown hereditary, I would suggest a quite
different one which, if accepted, would preserve the liberty of Poland; this would be to prescribe by
constitutional law that the crown should never pass from father to son, and that every son of a Polish
king  should  forever  be  excluded  from  the  throne.  I  say  that  I  would  propose  this  law  if  it  were
necessary; but I have in mind another plan which would produce the same effect, and I shall defer until
the proper time my explanation of it; but assuming that my plan has the effect of excluding sons from
the throne of their father, at least in direct succession, I believe that the ensurance of liberty will not be
the only advantage resulting from this exclusion. It will give rise to another even greater benefit; which
is that, by depriving kings of all hope of usurping arbitrary power and passing it on to their children, it
will direct all their energies toward the glory and prosperity of the state, the sole remaining outlet for
their ambitions. It is thus that the ruler of the nation, ceasing to be its hereditary enemy, will become its
first citizen; it is thus that he will make it his great concern to render his reign illustrious by usefulworks, which will endear him to his people, win him the esteem of his neighbours, and make men bless
his memory after him; and it is thus that, apart from the means of coercion and seduction, which should
never be left in his hands, it will be proper to increase his power in all that pertains to the public
welfare.  He  himself  will  have  little  direct  and  immediate  power  of  action;  but  he  will  have  great
authority, and great powers of supervision and control, to hold each man to his duty, and to guide the
government towards its true goal. To preside over the diet, the senate and all corporate groups, to
examine  strictly  the  conduct  of  all  office-holders,  to  take  great  pains  to  maintain  justice  and  the
integrity of all the law courts, to preserve order and tranquillity in the state, to maintain its position
abroad, to command its armies in time of war, to inaugurate useful works in time of peace, these are the
duties which particularly pertain to his royal office, and which will give him enough to do if he tries to
discharge them in person. For, considering that the details of administration are entrusted to officials
created for that purpose, it should be a criminal offence for a king of Poland to entrust any part of his
own administrative authority to favourites. Let him ply his trade in person, or abandon it; this is an
important point, on which the nation ought never to yield.
  Similar principles should be followed in establishing a proper balance and proportion between the
legislative and administrative powers. In order to achieve the best possible balance, the power of any
given depositary of these powers should be in direct proportion to the number of those who share it,
and in inverse proportion to the length of their tenure. The component parts of the diet will come rather
close to this ideal relationship. The chamber of deputies, which is the more numerous body, will also be
the  more  powerful;  but  its  entire  membership  will  change  frequently.  The  senate,  which  is  less
numerous, will have a smaller share in legislation, but a greater share in the executive power; and its
members, standing half-way between the two extremes, will be partly for life and partly for a fixed
term, as is appropriate to an intermediary body. The king, who presides over the whole, will continue to
hold office for life; and his power, while remaining very great for purposes of supervision, will be
limited, with regard to legislation, by the chamber of deputies and with regard to administration by the
senate. But in order to maintain equality, the underlying principle of the constitution, nothing therein
should  be  hereditary  except  the  nobility.  If  the  crown  were  hereditary,  it  would  be  necessary  to
counterbalance it by making the peerage or senatorial order likewise hereditary, as in England. In that
case the degraded equestrian order would lose its power, for the chamber of deputies, unlike the house
of commons, does not have the annual right of opening or closing the public purse; and the Polish
constitution would be overthrown from top to bottom.
  CHAPTER IX
  SPECIFIC CAUSES OF ANARCHY
  IF the diet is thus well balanced and proportioned in all its parts, it will produce good laws and a
good government. But this requires that its orders should be respected and obeyed. The anarchy and the
contempt for law under which Poland has lived up to now are the result of clearly visible causes. I have
already identified the principal one, and indicated the means of curing it. The other contributing causes
are (1) the liberum veto, (2) the confederations, and (3) the wrongful use by private citizens of the right
to employ armed followers.
  The last abuse is such that, if it is not eliminated from the start, all other reforms will be useless. As
long as private citizens have the power to resist the force of the executive, they will think they have the
right to do so; and as long as they wage petty wars against each other, how can the state live in peace? I
admit that fortresses require guardians; but why should there be fortresses which are strong only against
citizens, and weak against the enemy? I fear that this reform may encounter difficulties; I do not,
however, consider them insuperable, and if a powerful citizen is but reasonable, he will not mind giving
up his own armed retainers, provided that all the rest do likewise.
I shall speak hereafter of the military establishment; I shall therefore postpone until then things that
might well have been said at this point.
  The liberum veto is not in itself a pernicious right, but when it oversteps its limits it immediately
becomes the most dangerous of abuses. Once it was the guarantor of public freedom; now it is only aninstrument of oppression. To eliminate this fatal abuse, it is necessary merely to eliminate the cause.
But the heart of man is such that he clings to personal privileges rather than to greater and more general
advantages. Only patriotism, enlightened by experience, can learn to sacrifice in the interest of greater
goods a spectacular right grown evil by abuse, and henceforth inseparable from that abuse, All Poles
should be keenly aware of the evils this unfortunate right has made them suffer. If they love peace and
order, they cannot make either prevail among them as long as they allow this right to continue; for
although this right was good when the body politic
  was being formed, or remained in full perfection, it becomes absurd and disastrous as soon as
change becomes necessary. And change will always be necessary, above all in a large state surrounded
by powerful and ambitious neighbours.
  The liberum veto would be less absurd if it applied only to the basic principles of the constitution;
but that it should be used indiscriminately in all proceedings of the diet is absolutely inadmissible. One
of the defects of the Polish constitution is that it fails to make a sufficiently clear distinction between
legislation and administration; and that the diet, when it exercises legislative power, combines it with
administrative measures, indiscriminately performing acts of sovereignty and acts of government, often
actually in the form of mixed actions, in which the members serve simultaneously as magistrates and as
legislators.
  Our proposed reforms tend to distinguish more clearly between the two powers, and thus to define
more accurately the limits of the liberum veto. For I do not believe that anyone ever took it into his
head to extend it to questions of pure administration, for that would mean abolishing civil authority and
all government.
  Under the natural law of societies, unanimity was requisite to the formation of the body politic and
of the fundamental laws necessary to its existence; such, for example, were the first (as amended), the
fifth,  the  ninth,  and  the  eleventh  statutes  enacted  by  the  pseudo-diet  of  1768.  But  the  unanimity
required for the adoption of these laws should equally be required for their abrogation. These, then, are
the  matters  on  which  the  liberum  veto  can  continue  to  operate.  And  since  it  is  not  a  question  of
destroying this right entirely, the Poles who, without too much grumbling, saw it restricted by the diet
of 1768, ought easily to see it reduced and limited by a freer and more lawful diet.
  The basic points to be established as fundamental laws should be carefully weighed and considered;
and these points only should be subject to the liberum veto. This will make the constitution as firm and
the laws as irrevocable as possible. For it is contrary to the nature of the body politic to be subject to
irrevocable laws; but it is contrary neither to nature nor to reason to require that they should be revoked
only with the same formalities that brought them into being. That is the only chain with which we can
bind the future. This will suffice both to strengthen the constitution, and to satisfy the Poles in their
love of the liberum veto, without exposing them to the evil consequences to which it has given rise.
  As to the multitude of provisions which have been absurdly counted as fundamental articles, and
which are nothing more than ordinary acts of legislation, and with regard also to those subsumed under
the term questions of state, these are subject, in the natural course of events, to necessary alterations
which make it impossible to demand that they be passed unanimously. Furthermore it is absurd that, on
each and every question, a single member of the diet should be able to prevent all action, or that the
resignation or protest of one or more deputies should be able to dissolve the assembly, and thus cashier
the sovereign authority. This barbarous right must be abolished, and the capital penalty decreed against
anyone who might be tempted to use it. If there were occasion for protest against the diet, which cannot
happen as long as it is free and plenary, it is on the palatinates and dietines that this right might be
conferred; but never on the deputies who, as members of the diet, should never have any measure of
authority over it, nor any right to challenge its decisions.
  Between  the  veto,  which  is  the  greatest  power  individually  exercisable  by  members  of  the
sovereign, and ought never to occur except in the case of truly fundamental laws, and a bare majority,
which is the minimum, and has reference to mere acts of administration, there are various intermediary
cases in which the extent of agreement should be in proportion to the importance of the matter. Forinstance, when it is a question of legislation, three-quarters at least of the votes may be required, two-
thirds in questions of state, and no more than a bare majority for elections and for other matters of
current and temporary interest. I give this only as an illustration of my ideas, and not as a set of figures
by which I would be willing to stand.
  In a state like Poland, where there is still a great deal of spiritual vitality, it might have been
possible to preserve the admirable right of the liberum veto in its entirety without much danger, and
perhaps even with profit, if the use of that right had been made dangerous and attended by serious
consequences for the user. For surely it is inconceivable for anyone who thus prevents the diet from
acting, and leaves the state without means of action, to go quietly home and enjoy with impunity the
public desolation he has caused.
  In the case of a nearly unanimous resolution, therefore, if a single opponent retained the right of
veto, I should want him to answer for it with his life, not only to his constituents in the subsequent
dietine, but thereafter to the whole of the nation whose misfortune he had been. I should like the law to
prescribe that, six months after his negative vote, he should be solemnly tried by an extraordinary court
expressly constituted to consider the case, made up of the wisest, most respectable and most illustrious
men of the nation; and this court would not be allowed merely to declare him guilty or not guilty, but
would have either to condemn him to death without hope of pardon, or to award him compensation and
public honours for life, without ever being able to adopt any mean between these two extremes.
  Institutions of this sort, favourable as they are to vigorous courage and to the love of liberty, are too
far removed from the modern spirit to have any hope of being either adopted or admired. But they were
not unknown to the ancients; and that is how the founders of their constitutions were able to uplift the
souls of men and inflame them, when necessary, with a truly heroic ardour. In republics where even
harsher laws were in force, unselfish citizens were known to dedicate themselves to death when the
fatherland was in danger, by offering advice calculated to save it. A veto entailing the same danger may
occasionally save the republic, and will never cause it much uneasiness.
  Dare I speak of the confederations, and go counter to the opinion of the experts? The latter see only
the evils they have caused; the evils they prevent should also be recognised. Undoubtedly confederation
is a time of violence in the republic; but there are extreme evils which call for violent remedies, and
which  we  must  try  to  cure  at  any  price.  Confederation  is  to  Poland  what  dictatorship  was  to  the
Romans. Both cause the laws to be silent in time of pressing danger; but with this great difference, that
dictatorship, being directly contrary to the laws of Rome and to the spirit of the Roman government,
ended by destroying it, whereas the confederations, being only a very energetic means of confirming
and re-establishing the hard-pressed constitution, is capable of tightening and re-enforcing the relaxed
vigour of the state, without ever being able to break it. This federative form of action, although it may
have arisen by accident, strikes me as a political masterpiece. Wherever liberty reigns it is constantly
under attack, and very often in danger. Every free state in which no provision has been made for great
crises is in danger of perishing with every storm. Only the Poles have been able to convert their very
crises  into  a  new  means  of  safeguarding  their  constitution.  Without  the  confederations  the  Polish
republic would long since have ceased to exist, and I am afraid that it will not long survive if you
decide  to  abolish  them.  Consider  for  a  moment  the  events  that  have  just  occurred.  Without  the
confederations the state would have been subjugated, and freedom destroyed forever. Do you want to
deprive the republic of the resource that has just preserved it?
  And do not suppose that if the liberum veto is abolished and majority rule re-established, the
confederations would be useless, as if majority rule were their only value. Confederation and majority
rule are by no means identical. The executive power implicit in confederations will always give them,
in times of extreme need, a degree of vigour, activity and speed impossible in the diet, which is forced
to proceed by slower and more formal steps, and which cannot make a single irregular move without
overthrowing the constitution.
  No, the confederations are the shield, the refuge, the sanctuary of this constitution. As long as they
endure, I cannot see how it can be destroyed. They must be left in existence, but also regulated. If allabuses were eliminated, the confederations would become practically unnecessary. The reform of your
government should accomplish this result. Violent undertakings alone should then force you to have
recourse to them; but such undertakings are among the things for which provision ought to be made.
Instead, therefore, of abolishing the confederations, determine the conditions under which they may
legitimately occur; and then regulate their composition and powers, so as to give them legal sanction, as
far as possible, without hampering their creation or operation. There may even be cases where the facts
themselves will call for the immediate confederation of the whole of Poland, as when, for example, on
some pretext or other and without open warfare, foreign troops set foot within the state; for after all,
whatever the excuse for their entry, and even if the government itself consented to it, confederation at
home does not mean enmity abroad. When the diet is prevented, by any obstacle whatsoever, from
meeting at the time prescribed by law; when men at arms, at the instigation of no matter whom, are
made to appear at the time and place of meeting; if its form is changed, or its activity suspended, or its
freedom  interfered  with  in  any  way;  in  all  such  cases  a  general  confederation  ought  to  occur
automatically. Meetings and signatures of private citizens are merely offshoots of such a confederation;
and all its marshals should accept the commands of whomever it names as leader.
  CHAPTER X
    ADMINISTRATION
  WITHOUT entering into the details of administration, on which I am lacking equally in knowledge
and in ideas, I shall venture simply to express certain views on the two subjects of war and finance,
views which I feel I ought to express, because I think them good, although I am practically certain that
they will not be relished. But first of all I shall make an observation on the administration of justice
which is not quite so alien to the spirit of the Polish government.
  Our distinction between the legal and the military castes was unknown to the ancients. Citizens
were neither lawyers nor soldiers nor priests by profession; they performed all these functions as a
matter of duty. That is the real secret of making everything proceed toward the common goal, and of
preventing the spirit of faction from taking root at the expense of patriotism, so that the hydra of
chicanery will not devour a nation. The office of judge, both in the highest and in the local courts,
should be a temporary employment by which the nation may test and evaluate the merit and probity of
a citizen, in order to raise him thereafter to those more important positions of which he has been found
capable. This way of looking at themselves cannot fail to make judges very careful to place themselves
absolutely above reproach, and in general to give them all the attentiveness and integrity their office
demands. Thus it was, when Rome was at its best, that people passed through the praetorship in order
to reach the consulate. In this way it is possible, with a few clear and simple laws, and even with few
judges, to have justice well administered, leaving the judges with power to interpret the laws, and when
necessary to supplement them in the light of natural justice and common sense. Nothing could be more
puerile than the precautions taken on this point by the English. To eliminate arbitrary judgments, they
have subjected themselves to a thousand judgments which are iniquitous and even absurd. Hordes of
lawyers devour them, endless lawsuits consume them; and with the mad idea of trying to provide for
every eventuality, they have turned their laws into an immense labyrinth where memory and reason
alike are lost.
  You must have three codes, covering constitutional, civil and criminal law respectively; all three as
clear, short and precise as possible. These codes will be taught not only in the universities but also in all
the secondary schools; and you will need no other body of law. All the rules of natural law are better
graven in the hearts of men than in all the rubbish of Justinian. Just make men honest and virtuous, and
I assure you that their knowledge of law will be sufficient. But it is necessary for all citizens, and
particularly for public figures, to be taught the positive laws of their own country, and the particular
rules by which they are governed. They will find them in the codes they are to study; and all noblemen,
before being enrolled in the golden book which is to qualify them for admission to a dietine, must pass
on the subject of these codes, especially the first, an examination which is no mere formality, and if
their knowledge proves not to be sufficient, they will be sent back until it is. As far as Rome andcustomary law is concerned, all that, if it exists, should be eliminated from the schools and law courts.
No other authority than the laws of the state should be recognised; these laws should be uniform in all
the provinces, thus drying up one source of litigation; and questions left unanswered by these laws must
be settled by the common sense and integrity of the judges. You may be sure that, when the judicial
office is nothing more, for those who occupy it, than a place to test their capacity for higher things, they
will not abuse their authority as much as you might fear; or that, if there are abuses, they will always be
less than those which arise from a mass of laws which are often in conflict, which by their proliferation
cause lawsuits to drag on endlessly, and by their contradictions lead also to arbitrary judgments.
  What I have been saying of judges should apply a fortiori to lawyers. This calling, intrinsically so
respectable, grows vile and degrading as soon as it becomes a trade. The lawyer should be the first and
severest judge of his client; his job should be, as it was in Rome and still is in Geneva, the first step
toward public office; and in Geneva lawyers are in fact highly respected, and deserve to be. They are
candidates for the council, and are very careful to do nothing that will bring them public disapproval. I
should like every public function to serve in this way as a stepping-stone to another, so that no one, in
the expectation of staying in any one office, will turn it into a lucrative profession, and place himself
above the judgment of men. This arrangement would conform perfectly with my desire to have the
children of rich citizens pass through the legal calling, now rendered both honorific and temporary. I
shall develop this idea further in a moment.
  At this point I should say in passing, since it occurs to me, that it is contrary to the principle of
equality within the equestrian order for its members to entail their property in any way. Legislation
must always tend to diminish those great inequalities of fortune and power which set too great a
distance  between  magnates  and  simple  noblemen,  and  which  always  have  a  natural  tendency  to
increase. With regard to property qualifications, which would determine the amount of land a nobleman
would have to own in order to be admitted to the dietines, I can see that there is something to be said
both for and against the proposal, and since my knowledge of the country is insufficient to enable me to
estimate the consequences, it would be utterly foolhardy for me to reach any conclusion on the matter.
  Undoubtedly it would be desirable for a citizen voting in a palatinate to own some land therein, but
I should not be too happy to see any fixed quantity prescribed. Granted that possessions are important,
are men to count for nothing? What? Does a gentleman, because he has little or no land, cease thereby
to be free and noble? And is his poverty alone a crime so grave as to make him forfeit his rights as a
citizen?
  One final observation: no law should ever be allowed to fall into disuse. Be it bad or indifferent, it
should either be formally repealed, or else rigorously enforced. This principle, which is fundamental,
will make it necessary to pass all old laws in review, to repeal many of them, and to support with the
severest sanctions those you decide to keep. Turning a blind eye toward many things is regarded in
France as a basic principle of government; that is what despotism always forces us to do. But in a free
government it is a sure means of enfeebling the laws and shaking the constitution. We want few laws,
but those well classified, and above all well enforced. All abuses which are not forbidden remain
inconsequential; but anyone who utters the word 'law ' in a free state is invoking that before which
every citizen, including first of all the king, should tremble. In short, suffer anything to happen rather
than to weaken the force of law; for once its power has been exhausted, the state is lost beyond
redemption.
  CHAPTER XI
  THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM
  THE choice of an economic system to be adopted by Poland depends on the purposes she has in
view in reforming her constitution. If your only wish is to become noisy, brilliant and fearsome, and to
influence the other peoples of Europe, their example lies before you; devote yourselves to following it.
Cultivate the arts and sciences, commerce and industry; have professional soldiers, fortresses, and
academies; above all have a good system of public finance which will make money circulate rapidly,
and thereby multiply its effectiveness to your great profit; try to make money very necessary, in orderto keep the people in a condition of great dependence; and with that end in view, encourage material
luxury, and the luxury of spirit which is inseparable from it. In this way you will create a scheming,
ardent, avid, ambitious, servile and knavish people, like all the rest; one given to the two extremes of
opulence and misery, of licence and slavery, with nothing in between. But you will be counted as one
of the great powers of Europe; you will be included in all diplomatic combinations; in all negotiations
your alliance will be courted; you will be bound by treaties; and there will be no war in Europe into
which you will not have the honour of being plunged. If you are lucky, you will be able to recover your
ancient possessions, perhaps to conquer new ones, and you will be able to say, like Pyrrhus or the
Russians — in other words, like children — 'When the whole world is mine, I shall eat a lot of candy.'
  But if, by chance, you would prefer to create a free, wise and peaceful nation, one which has no fear
or need of anyone, but is self-sufficient and happy, then you must adopt wholly different methods; you
must preserve and revive among your people simple customs and wholesome tastes, and a warlike spirit
devoid of ambition; you must create courageous and unselfish souls; devote your people to agriculture
and to the most necessary arts and crafts; you must make money contemptible and, if possible, useless,
seeking and finding more powerful and reliable motives for the accomplishment of great deeds. I admit
that,  in  following  this  path,  you  will  not  fill  the  news-sheets  with  the  noise  of  your  celebrations,
negotiations, and exploits; the philosophers will burn you no incense, poets will not sing your praises,
and you will not be much talked about in Europe; people may even pretend to hold you in contempt.
But you will live in true prosperity, justice and liberty; no one will try to pick a quarrel with you;
people will fear you without admitting it; and I guarantee that neither the Russians nor anyone else will
ever again come to rule over you, or that if, to their own misfortune, they do come, they will leave even
more  hurriedly.  Above  all,  beware  of  trying  to  combine  these  two  objectives,  for  they  are  too
incompatible;  and  if  you  try  to  divide  your  forces  and  march  toward  both,  you  are  condemning
yourselves to a double failure. Choose then; and if you prefer the first, stop reading me. For all my
remaining proposals are directed exclusively to the second.
  Excellent economic ideas are undoubtedly to be found in the various papers that have been sent to
me. The fault I find with them is that they are more favourable to wealth than to prosperity. In creating
new institutions, you must not be content with seeing the immediate effects; you must also correctly
foresee the distant but inevitable consequences. The proposal that has been made, for example, for the
sale of starosties and for the use of the resulting revenues, strikes me as perfectly normal and feasible
under the prevailing European system of using money to accomplish everything. But is this system
good in itself, and does it really achieve its purposes? Is it true that money is the sinew of war? Rich
peoples  have  always  been  beaten  and  conquered  by  poor  peoples.  Is  it  true  that  money  is  the
mainspring of good government? Financial systems are modern. I cannot see that anything good or
great has come of them. The governments of antiquity did not even know the meaning of the word
finance, and what they accomplished with men is prodigious. Money at best is a supplement to men,
and the supplement is never worth as much as the thing itself. Men of Poland, leave all this money, I
pray you, to other peoples; or content yourselves with what they will have to give you, since they have
more need of your wheat than you of their gold. Believe me, it is better to live in plenty than in
opulence; be more than pecunious, be rich. Cultivate your fields well, and have no other care; soon you
will be harvesting gold, more than enough to buy the oil and wine you need, for Poland abounds, or can
abound, in almost everything else. If you want to keep yourselves free and happy, heads, hearts and
arms are what you want; it is they that constitute the power of a state and the prosperity of a people.
Financial systems make venal souls; and when profit is the only goal, it is always more profitable to be
a rascal than to be an honest man. The use of money is devious and secret; it is destined for one thing
and used for another. Those who handle it soon learn how to deflect it from its course; and are the
overseers appointed to control it anything more than another set of rascals sent to share the spoils? If
public and visible riches were the only form of wealth, if the passage of gold left clear traces and could
not be concealed, you could ask for no better means of buying services, courage, fidelity and virtue.
But since the circulation of money is secret, it is a still better means of making pilferers and traitors,and of putting freedom and the public good upon the auction block. In short, of all the incentives
known to me, money is at once the weakest and most useless for the purpose of driving the political
mechanism toward its goal, and the strongest and most reliable for the purpose of deflecting it from its
course.
I know that men can only be made to act in terms of their own interests; but pecuniary interest is the
worst, the basest and the most corrupting of all, and even, as I confidently repeat and shall always
maintain, the least and weakest in the eyes of those who really know the human heart. In all hearts there
is naturally a reserve of grand passions; when greed for gold alone remains, it is because all the rest,
which should have been stimulated and developed, have been enervated and stifled. The miser has no
truly dominant passion; he aspires to money only as a matter of foresight, in order to be able to satisfy
such passions as may thereafter come to him. Learn how to foment and satisfy them directly, without
the use of money, and money will soon lose all its value.
I also admit that public expenditures are inevitable; effect them with anything rather than with
money. Even today, in Switzerland, you see officers, magistrates and other public stipendiaries being
paid in kind. They receive tithes of wine and wood; these are useful and honorific rights. The whole
public service is performed by corvées; the state pays for almost nothing in money. You will say that
money is necessary for the payment of soldiers. We shall consider this point in a moment. Payment in
kind is not without its disadvantages; there is loss and waste; the administration of this form of wealth
is comparatively inconvenient; it is especially irksome to those who are in charge of it, since it gives
them fewer opportunities for profit. All that is true; but the evil is slight in comparison with the host of
evils it prevents! A man would like to commit malversation, but he cannot do so without being found
out. The example of the bailiffs of the Canton of Berne will be cited against me; but why are they
vexatious?  Because  of  the  money  fines  they  levy.  These  arbitrary  fines  are  in  themselves  most
objectionable; if they could, however, be paid in kind rather than in money, the evil would be almost
negligible. Extorted money can be easily hidden; warehouses would be less easy to conceal. Ten times
more  money  is  handled  in  the  single  canton  of  Berne  than  in  all  the  rest  of  Switzerland,  and  its
administration is iniquitous in the same proportion. Look at every country, every government, every
part  of  the  world;  nowhere  will  you  find  a  great  evil  in  morals  and  politics  where  money  is  not
involved.
  You  will  say  that  the  equality  of  fortunes  which  reigns  in  Switzerland  makes  it  easy  for  the
administration to be economical; whereas the great families and magnates of Poland require great
expenditures, and great financial resources to meet them. Not at all. These magnates are rich in their
own right; and their expenditures will diminish when luxury ceases to be esteemed in the state, without
distinguishing them any the less from men of inferior fortune, whose expenditures will diminish in the
same  proportion.  Pay  for  their  services  with  authority,  honours  and  exalted  positions.  In  Poland,
inequality of rank is compensated by the privilege of noble birth, which makes office-holders jealous
rather of honour than of profit. The republic, by appropriately gradating and distributing these purely
honorific rewards, will husband a treasure which will never ruin it, and which will give it heroes for
citizens. The treasure of honours is an inexhaustible resource for a people which has a sense of honour;
and would to God that Poland could hope to exhaust it! How happy the nation which cannot possibly
find in its bosom any further distinctions for virtue!
  Pecuniary compensation has the defect not only of being an unworthy reward for virtue, but also of
being insufficiently public, of failing to make a continuous impression on the minds and hearts of men,
of  disappearing  as  soon  as  it  is  awarded,  and  of  leaving  no  visible  trace  to  excite  emulation  by
perpetuating  the  honour  which  should  accompany  it.  I  should  like  to  have  all  ranks,  offices,  and
honorific awards distinguished by external signs, so that no public figure would ever be allowed to go
incognito, but would be followed everywhere by the marks of his rank or dignity; this would make
people respect him at all times, and at all times make him keep his own self-respect; it would enable
him to dominate over opulence; for a man who was rich and nothing more would constantly find
himself cast in the shade by poor but titled citizens, and would find no pleasure or esteem in his owncountry; this would force him to serve his country in order to cut a figure in it, to be a man of integrity
for reasons of ambition, and to aspire, in spite of his wealth, to ranks attainable only through public
approbation, and liable at all times to be lost through disapproval. That is the way to sap the strength of
wealth, and to create men who are not for sale. I lay great emphasis on this point, for I am sure that
your neighbours, particularly the Russians, will spare no efforts to corrupt your officials, and that the
great problem of your government is to strive to make them incorruptible.
  If it should be said I am trying to turn Poland into a nation of mendicant friars I should first retort
that this is only a Frenchman's sort of argument, and that a witticism is not a rational proof. I should
also reply that my maxims ought not to be stretched beyond the limits either of my own intentions, or
of reason; that my object is not to prevent the circulation of specie, but merely to slow it down, and
above all to show how important it is for a good economic system not to be a system of money and
public finance. To eradicate cupidity in Sparta, Lycurgus did not abolish money, but had it made of
iron. I myself have no intention of banning gold or silver, but merely of making them less necessary,
and of arranging things so that a man who has none can be poor without being a beggar. Basically,
money is not wealth, but only a token thereof; it is not the token but the thing it represents that ought to
be multiplied. I have seen, in spite of travellers' tales, that the English, in the midst of all their gold, are
individually no less needy than other peoples. And what does it matter to me, after all, to have a
hundred guineas instead of ten, if the hundred do not bring me a more comfortable living? Pecuniary
wealth is only relative; and as relations change through the operation of a thousand possible causes, you
may find yourself successively rich and poor with the same sum of money; but this is not true of natural
goods; for they, being immediately useful to man, always have an absolute value which in no way
depends on the operations of trade. I will grant you that the English people is richer than the others; but
it does not follow that a citizen of London lives more comfortably than a citizen of Paris. As between
peoples, the advantage rests with the one which has the more money. But that has nothing to do with
the lot of private individuals; and the prosperity of a nation does not lie therein.
  Encourage agriculture and the useful arts, not by enriching the farmers, which would only incite
them to leave their calling, but by making that calling pleasant and honourable. Establish the most
necessary manufactures; multiply your wheat and men unceasingly, and do not worry about the rest.
The surplus produce of your soil, produce which, as a result of increasing monopolies, will be lacking
in the rest of Europe, will necessarily bring you more money than you need. Apart from this necessary
and certain produce, you will be poor as long as you want more; and as soon as you learn how to get
along without more, you will be rich. The prevailing spirit of your economic system, if I had my way,
would be as follows: pay little attention to foreign countries, give little heed to commerce; but multiply
as far as possible your domestic production and consumption of foodstuffs. The inevitable and natural
result of a free and just government is increased population. The more you perfect your government,
therefore, the more will you multiply your people even without intending to do so. You will thus have
neither beggars nor millionaires. Luxury and indigence together will insensibly disappear; and the
citizens, cured of the frivolous tastes created by opulence, and of the vices associated with poverty, will
devote their best efforts to serving the country, and will find their glory and happiness in doing their
duty.
I should like you always to lay heavier charges on the personal services than on the purses of men,
using corvées and not money payments to provide roads, bridges, public buildings, and the service of
prince and state. This sort of tax is basically the least onerous, and above all it is the one least subject to
abuse. For money disappears when it leaves the hands of those who are paying; but everyone can see
what work men are doing, and they cannot be overburdened to no purpose. I know that this method is
impractical where luxury, commerce and the arts are in the ascendant; but nothing is easier among a
simple and virtuous people, and nothing is more useful in keeping them so. This is yet another reason
for preferring it.
I will return now to the question of starosties; and once again I admit that the idea of selling them
for the benefit of the public treasury is good and natural so far as the economic aspect is concerned. Butin its political and moral aspects, this idea is so little to my taste that, if the starosties were sold, I
should want you to buy them back and use them to endow the salaries and rewards of those who might
serve or deserve well of the fatherland. In short I should like, if it were possible, for there to be no
public treasury, and for the exchequer to know nothing of money payments. I feel that this can never be
strictly realised; but the spirit of the government should always tend in that direction; and nothing could
be more contrary to this spirit than the sale of offices now under discussion. It would make the republic
richer, to be sure; but the vigour of the government would be correspondingly weakened.
I admit that the administration of public property would become more difficult, and above all less
agreeable for the administrators, if all this property were in kind rather than in money; but in that case
you must make this administration, and its superintendence, an occasion to test the common sense, the
vigilance and above all the integrity of those who aspire to more eminent positions. In this respect you
will  simply  be  imitating  the  municipal  administration  of  Lyons,  where  men  must  begin  as
administrators of the charity hospital before proceeding to positions of civic trust; and it is by the way
they acquit themselves in the former position that their worthiness for the latter is judged. The integrity
of the quaestors of the Roman army was unsurpassed, for the quaestorship was the first step towards the
curule offices. In positions which may tempt cupidity, things must be so arranged that ambition this
repress it. The greatest good which results from will lies not in saving funds from rascals, but in making
unselfishness appear honourable, and rendering poverty respectable when it is the fruit of integrity.
  The revenues of the republic do not meet its expenses. I can well believe it; the citizens do not want
to pay anything at all. But men who want to be free should not be the slaves of their purses; and where
is the state where liberty does not have to be paid for, often very dearly? You will cite Switzerland; but,
as I have already said, in Switzerland the citizens themselves perform the functions which people
everywhere else prefer to pay for, and have others perform. They are soldiers, officers, magistrates,
labourers, anything in the service of the state, and since they are always ready to pay with their persons,
it is not necessary for them also to pay with their purses. If the Poles want to do likewise, they will have
no more need of money than the Swiss. But if a great state refuses to conduct itself on the principles of
a small republic, it must not look for the same benefits, nor should it reject the cause while desiring the
consequence. If Poland were, as I should like it to be, a confederation of thirty-three small states, it
would combine the power of a great monarchy with the freedom of a small republic; but this would
mean renouncing ostentation, and I am afraid that this would be the hardest thing of all.
  Of all the bases on which to levy a tax, the easiest and least expensive is undoubtedly capitation;
but it is also the most forced and arbitrary; and that no doubt is why Montesquieu considers it servile,
although it was the only form of taxation practised by the Romans, and still exists at the present time in
several republics; under other names, it is true, as in the case of Geneva, where it is called 'paying the
guards,' and is paid only by citizens and burghers, while the inhabitants and natives pay other taxes. All
this is exactly opposite to Montesquieu's idea.
  But since it is unjust and unreasonable to tax people who have nothing, taxes on property are
always better than taxes on persons. You must simply avoid those which are difficult and costly to levy,
and above all those which can be avoided by smuggling, for this is unproductive, fills the state with
defrauders  and  brigands,  and  corrupts  the  fidelity  of  the  citizens.  Assessments  should  be  so  well
apportioned that the difficulties of fraud will be greater than its benefits. There should never be a tax,
therefore, on anything that can be hidden easily, like lace and jewels; it is better to forbid the wearing of
them than to ban their importation. In France the temptation to smuggle is wantonly encouraged; and
this makes me believe that the tax administration derives a profit from the existence of smugglers. This
system is abominable, and wholly contrary to common sense. Experience shows that stamp taxes are
particularly hard on the poor, and burdensome to commerce; that they greatly increase chicanery, and
cause the people to cry out wherever they are established. I should not advise you to consider them.
Taxes on animals strike me as being much better, provided that fraud is avoided, for every possible
fraud is always a source of evils. But in so far as the payments must be made in money, they may be
burdensome  to  the  taxpayers;  and  the  proceeds  of  this  sort  of  tax  are  unduly  subject  tomisappropriation.
  In my opinion the best and most natural tax, and one which is in no way open to fraud, is a
proportional tax on land, on all land without exception, as was suggested by Marshal de Vauban and
the Abbé de Saint-Pierre; for after all, it is that which produces that ought to pay. All lands, whether
owned  by  the  king,  noblemen,  ecclesiastics  or  commoners,  should  pay  equally,  that  is  to  say  in
proportion to their extent and productivity, no matter who the proprietor may be. This levy would seem
to require a preliminary operation, namely a general land census, which would be long and costly. But
this expense can be avoided easily, and even advantageously, by levying the tax not on the land directly
but on its products, which would be even fairer; this could be done by establishing a tithe, as large or
small as seemed proper, which would be levied on the harvest in kind, like the ecclesiastical tithe. And
to avoid the difficulties of administration and storage, you would farm out these tithes, as the curates
do, to the highest bidder; with the result that private individuals would have to pay the tithe out of their
harvest only, and would not pay it out of their purses unless they preferred to do so, at a tariff fixed by
the  government.  The  accumulated  receipts  could  be  made  an  object  of  commerce  by  selling  the
foodstuff's thus collected, which could be sent abroad by way of Riga or Danzig. In this way you would
also eliminate all the expenses of collection and administration, and all those swarms of clerks and
employees who are so odious to the people and troublesome to the public; and most important of all,
the republic would have money without the citizens being obliged to give any. For I shall never tire of
repeating that what makes tallages and imposts burdensome to the farmer is the fact that they are
pecuniary, and that he is first obliged to sell in order to be able to pay them.
  CHAPTER XII
  THE MILITARY SYSTEM
  OF all the expenses of the republic, the maintenance of the royal army is the most considerable; and
the services this army renders are certainly not in proportion to the cost. You will immediately say,
however, that troops are necessary to defend the state. I would agree, if these troops actually defended
it; but I cannot see that this army ever guaranteed it against any invasion, and I am afraid that it will do
no better in the future.
  Poland  is  surrounded  by  warlike  powers  which  constantly  maintain  large  standing  armies  of
perfectly disciplined soldiers, armies which she herself could never match without soon exhausting
herself, particularly in the deplorable condition in which she will be left by the brigands who are now
ravaging her. Furthermore, she would not be allowed to rearm; and if, with the resources of a most
vigorous administration, she attempted to raise a respectable army, her neighbours, alert to prevent it,
would quickly crush her before she had been able to carry out the plan. No, if she seeks merely to
imitate them, she will never resist them.
  The Polish nation is different by nature, government, customs and language, not only from her
neighbours, but also from all the rest of Europe. I should like her also to be different in her military
organisation, tactics and discipline, being always herself, not someone else. Only then will she be all
she is capable of becoming, and draw forth from her bosom all the resources she is capable of having.
  The most inviolable law of nature is the law of the strongest. No laws, no constitution can be
exempted  from  this  law.  If  you  look  for  means  of  guaranteeing  yourselves  against  invasion  by  a
neighbour stronger than you, you are chasing a will-o'-the-wisp. It would be even more absurd for you
to want to make conquests and to acquire offensive power; this is incompatible with the form of your
government. Anyone who wants to be free ought not to want to be a conqueror. The Romans were such
by necessity and, you might say, in spite of themselves. War was a necessary remedy for the defect of
their constitution. Constantly attacked and constantly victorious, they were the only disciplined people
in a sea of barbarians, and became the masters of the world by constantly defending themselves. Your
position is so unlike theirs that there is no one against whose attacks you would even be able to defend
yourselves. You will never have offensive power; it will be a long time before you have defensive
power.  But  you  will  soon,  or  more  accurately  speaking,  you  already  have  the  power  of  self-
preservation, which will guarantee you, even though subjected, against destruction, and will preserveyour government and your liberty in its one true sanctuary, the heart of the Polish people.
  Regular troops, the plague and depopulators of Europe, are good for two purposes only, to attack
and conquer neighbours, or to bind and enslave citizens. Both of these ends are equally foreign to you;
renounce,  then,  the  means  which  lead  to  them.  I  know  that  the  state  should  not  remain  without
defenders; but its true defenders are its members. Each citizen should be a soldier by duty, none by
profession. Such was the military system of the Romans; such is that of the Swiss today; such ought to
be that of every free state, and particularly of Poland. In no position to hire an army sufficient for her
defence, she must find that army, when necessary, in her inhabitants. A good militia, a genuine, well-
drilled militia, is alone capable of satisfying this need. This militia will cost the republic little, will
always be ready to serve it, and will serve it well, for after all, we always defend our own goods better
than the goods of others.
  Count Wielhorski suggests that a regiment should be raised by each palatinate, and kept constantly
on  an  active  footing.  This  supposes  that  the  royal  army,  or  at  least  the  royal  infantry,  would  be
disbanded; for I believe that the maintenance of these thirty-three regiments would unduly overburden
the republic if it had, in addition, the royal army to pay for. This change would not be without value,
and strikes me as being easy to effect; but it can also become burdensome, and its abuses will be
difficult to forestall. I should not advise scattering the soldiers as a police force in the towns and
villages; that would be bad for discipline. Soldiers, above all professional ones, ought never to be left
without a check on their conduct; still less should they be entrusted with any sort of control over
citizens.  They  ought  always  to  march  and  live  together  as  a  body;  constantly  subordinated  and
supervised, they should be nothing but blind instruments in the hands of their officers. If they were
entrusted with any sort of control, however small, innumerable acts of violence, vexations and abuses
without number, would ensue; the soldiers and the inhabitants would become mutual enemies. This is a
misfortune that occurs wherever regular troops are found; the proposed regiments, being on continuous
service, would acquire the spirit of regular troops, and this spirit is never favourable to freedom. The
Roman republic was destroyed by its legions, when the remoteness of its conquests forced it to keep
some on continuous service. Once again, the Poles ought not to look about them for things to imitate,
not even when those things are good. This goodness, being relative to wholly different constitutions,
would be an evil in their own. They should look exclusively to what is suitable to them, not to what
others do.
  Why not, then, instead of regular troops, a hundred times more burdensome than useful to any
people uninterested in conquests, establish a genuine militia in Poland exactly as in Switzerland, where
every inhabitant is a soldier, but only when necessary? The institution of serfdom in Poland makes it
impossible, I admit, for the peasants to be armed immediately; arms in servile hands will always be
more dangerous than useful to the state. Pending the happy moment of emancipation, however, Poland
teems with cities, and their inhabitants, if conscripted, could in time of need furnish numerous troops
whose upkeep, except during the period of that same need, would cost the state nothing. The majority
of these inhabitants, having no land, would thus pay their taxes in service; and this service could easily
be distributed in such a way as not to be at all burdensome to them, even though they were sufficiently
drilled.
  In Switzerland every individual who marries must be furnished with a uniform, which becomes his
festive dress, with a rifle, and with all the equipment of a foot-soldier; he is enrolled in the company of
his district. During the summer, on Sundays and holidays, these militias are drilled by formations, first
by squads, next by companies, then by regiments; until finally, when their turn has come, they assemble
in  the  country,  and  in  succession  form  small  encampments,  in  which  they  are  drilled  in  all  the
manoeuvres appropriate to infantry. As long as they do not leave their place of residence, and thus are
little or not at all interrupted in their work, they receive no pay; but as soon as they go out into the
country they receive rations and are paid by the state; and no one is allowed to send another in his
place, in order that each may receive training and that all may see service. In a state like Poland, with
its vast provinces, it is easy to find the wherewithal to replace the royal army with a sufficient numberof militiamen, who would be kept constantly mobilised, but changed once a year at least, and drawn in
small detachments from all the corps, which would not be seriously burdensome to the individuals,
whose turn would come hardly more often than once in twelve or fifteen years. In this way, the whole
nation would be given military training, a good and numerous army would always be ready when
needed, and it would cost far less, especially in peacetime, than the royal army costs to-day.
  To make a real success of this operation, however, it would be necessary to begin by changing
public opinion regarding a vocation which will in fact be wholly altered, and to make the Polish people
look on the soldier no longer as a bandit who, in order to live, sells himself for five cents a day, but as a
citizen who is doing his duty in the service of his country. This vocation must be restored to the honour
which it formerly enjoyed, and which it still enjoys in Switzerland and in Geneva, where the best
citizens are as proud of being in their corps and under arms as in the town hall and in the sovereign
council. To accomplish this, it is important that, in the choice of officers, consideration should be given
not at all to rank, credit and fortune, but solely to experience and talent. Nothing is easier than to make
skill in the use of arms a point of honour, which will make everyone drill zealously for the service of
his country before the eyes of his family and his people; a zeal which cannot be awakened to the same
extent in a mob of riffraff which has been enlisted by chance, and is conscious only of the hardships of
drill. I can remember the time when the citizens of Geneva manoeuvred much better than regular
troops; but the magistrates, finding that this inspired the citizen body with a martial spirit alien to their
own purposes, have taken care to suppress this sort of emulation, and have succeeded only too well.
  In the execution of this plan, you could, with perfect safety, restore to the king the military authority
which naturally belongs to his office; for it is inconceivable that the nation could be used to oppress
itself, at least when all those who comprise it are given a share of freedom. It is only with regular and
standing  armies  that  the  executive  power  can  ever  enslave  a  state.  The  great  Roman  armies  were
unabusive as long as they changed with each consul; and down to the time of Marius, it did not so
much as enter the head of any consul that he might use them in any way to enslave the republic. It was
not until the great remoteness of their conquests forced the Romans to keep the same armies mobilised
for a long time, to man them with ruffianly recruits, and to perpetuate command over them by the
proconsuls, that the latter began to feel their independence and to want to use it to establish their own
power.  The  armies  of  Sulla,  Pompey  and  Caesar  became  true  regular  forces,  which  replaced  the
republican spirit with the spirit of military government; and this to such an extent that the soldiers of
Caesar considered themselves grossly insulted when, in a moment of mutual friction, he called them
citizens, quirites. In the plan I envisage, and shall soon have finished outlining, all Poland will become
warlike in defence of her liberty against the undertakings no less of the prince than of her neighbours;
and I will venture to say that, once this plan has been well executed, the office of commander-in-chief
could be abolished and its functions reunited with the crown, without placing liberty in the slightest
danger, unless the nation should allow itself to be beguiled by plans of conquest; in which case I would
no longer answer for anything. Whoever wants to deprive others of their freedom almost always ends
by losing his own; this is true even of kings, and very much more true of peoples.
  Why should not the equestrian order, in which the republic really resides, itself follow a plan like
that here suggested for the infantry? Establish in all the palatinates cavalry corps in which the whole
nobility  will  be  enrolled,  each  with  its  own  officers,  general  staff,  banners,  its  own  designated
emergency quarters, and its fixed annual times of meeting. Let these brave noblemen learn how to drill
in formation, to perform all sorts of movements and evolutions, to give order and precision to their
manoeuvres, to recognise military discipline. I should not want them to imitate slavishly the tactics of
the other nations. I should like them to evolve tactics of their own, tactics which would develop and
perfect their own natural and national dispositions; I should like them above all to practice for lightness
and speed, learning how to break off, disperse and regroup without difficulty or confusion; to excel in
what is called guerilla warfare, in all the manoeuvres appropriate to light troops, in the art of inundating
a country like a torrent, of striking everywhere without ever being struck, of continuing to act in concert
though  separated,  of  cutting  communications,  of  intercepting  convoys,  of  charging  rear-guards,  ofcapturing  vanguards,  of  surprising  detachments,  of  harassing  large  bodies  of  troops  marching  and
camping together; I should like them to adopt the methods of the ancient Parthians, whose valour they
already possess, and learn like them to conquer and destroy the best disciplined armies without ever
joining battle and without leaving them a moment's respite. In short, have infantry, since it is necessary,
but rely only on your cavalry, and leave no stone unturned in devising a system which will place the
entire outcome of the war in its hands. A free people is not well advised to have fortresses; they are not
at all suited to the Polish genius, and sooner or later they everywhere become nests for tyrants, The
places you think you are fortifying against the Russians you will inevitably be fortifying for them; and
for you they will become shackles from which you will never deliver yourselves. Neglect even the
advantages of fortified outposts, and do not bankrupt yourselves for artillery; such things are not what
you need. A sudden invasion is a great misfortune, no doubt; but permanent enslavement is a far greater
one. You will never be able to make it difficult for your neighbours to enter your territory; but you can
make it difficult for them to withdraw with impunity; and that should be your sole concern. Antony and
Crassus invaded the territory of the Parthians easily, but to their own misfortune. A land as vast as
yours always offers its inhabitants places of refuge and great resources for eluding its aggressors. No
human art could prevent sudden action by the strong against the weak; but the weak can provide
themselves with means of retaliation; and when experience teaches how hard it is to retire from your
country, people will be in less of a hurry to enter it. Leave your country wide open, then, like Sparta,
but build, like her, strong citadels in the hearts of the citizens; and just as Themistocles carried Athens
away in her fleet, carry off your cities, when need be, on your horses. The spirit of imitation seldom
produces anything good, and never anything great. Each country has advantages which are peculiar to
itself, and which should be extended and fostered by its constitution. Husband and cultivate those of
Poland, and she will have few other nations to envy.
  A single thing suffices to make it impossible to conquer her, namely love of country and of liberty,
animated by the virtues inseparable from that love. You have just given an ever-memorable example of
it. As long as this love burns in your hearts, it may not ensure you against a temporary yoke; but sooner
or later it will burst forth, shake off the yoke, and set you free. Work, therefore, without pause or
relaxation, to bring patriotism to the highest pitch in every Polish heart. I have already indicated some
of the means appropriate to that end. At this point it remains only for me to discuss the one which I
believe to be the strongest, the most powerful of all, one which is even infallible in its effects if
properly executed; this is to arrange things so that every citizen will feel himself to be constantly under
the public eye; that no one will advance or succeed save by the favour of the public; that no office or
position shall be filled save by the will of the nation; and finally that, from the lowliest nobleman, even
from the lowliest peasant, up to the king, if possible, all shall be so dependent on public esteem that
nothing can be done, nothing acquired, no success obtained without it. Out of the effervescence excited
by  this  mutual  emulation  will  arise  that  patriotic  intoxication  which  alone  can  raise  men  above
themselves, and without which liberty is but an empty word, and laws but a chimera.
  In the equestrian order this system is easy to establish, if you are careful throughout to make it
follow a fixed sequence of official promotions, admitting no one to the honours and dignities of the
state  unless  he  has  previously  passed  through  the  inferior  grades,  which  will  serve  both  as  a
qualification  and  as  a  test  for  those  seeking  a  higher  degree  of  eminence.  Since  equality  among
noblemen is a fundamental law of Poland, the career of public service in that country ought always to
begin with subordinate positions; that is the spirit of the constitution. These positions should be open to
every  citizen  who  is  zealous  enough  to  seek  them,  and  who  believes  himself  able  to  fill  them
successfully; but they should be the indispensable first step for anyone, great or small, who wishes to
advance in this career. Each is free to present himself or not; but once he has done so, he must, unless
he retires voluntarily, either advance or be rebuffed with disapprobation. All his conduct must be seen
and judged by his fellow-citizens; he must know that his every step is being watched, that all his acts
are being weighed, that a faithful account is being kept of all his good and evil deeds, and that this
account will influence the whole subsequent course of his life.  CHAPTER XIII
  PLAN FOR A SEQUENCE OF OFFICIAL PROMOTIONS EMBRACING ALL MEMBERS OF
THE GOVERNMENT
  THE following is a plan for the establishment of such a sequence of official promotions, a plan
which  I  have  tried  to  adapt  as  far  as  possible  to  the  existing  form  of  government,  with  the  sole
exception of the nomination of senators, which is reformed in the manner and for the reasons already
given.
  All active members of the republic, by which I mean those who participate in the administration,
shall be divided into three classes, each distinguished by visible insignia to be worn on the person of its
members. The orders of knighthood, which formerly were proofs of virtue, are now no more than signs
of royal favour. The ribbons and jewels which distinguish them have an air of frippery and of feminine
adornment which must be avoided in our reforms. I should like the insignia of my proposed three
orders  to  consist  of  plaques  of  various  metals,  the  material  value  of  which  should  be  inversely
proportional to the rank of the wearer.
  Before entering upon an official career, young men shall pass through a preliminary trial period as
lawyers, assessors and even as judges in the lower courts, as managers of some part of the public funds,
and in general in all those inferior posts which give the holders a chance to show their merit, their
capacity, their thoroughness, and above all their integrity. This trial period should continue for at least
three years, at the end of which time, armed with certificates from their superiors and with evidence of
public  approbation,  they  shall  present  themselves  to  the  dietine  of  their  province,  where,  after  a
rigorous examination of their conduct, those who are found worthy shall be honoured with a plaque of
gold  inscribed  with  their  name,  province  and  date  of  reception,  and  bearing  underneath  in  larger
characters the inscription Spes patriae. Those who have received this plaque shall wear it constantly on
their right arms or over their hearts; they shall be called servants of the state; and they alone, of all the
equestrian order, shall be qualified for election as deputy to the diet, as associate justice, or treasury
commissioner, or entrusted with any public function which appertains to sovereignty.
  To reach the second grade it will be necessary to have been elected three times as deputy to the diet,
and to have obtained each time, in the immediately subsequent dietine, the approval of the constituents;
and no one may be elected deputy a second or third time unless he has a certificate to this effect with
regard to his preceding deputyship. Service as associate justice or as treasury commissioner shall be
equivalent to a deputyship; and it will suffice to have sat three times in any of these bodies, but always
with  approbation,  in  order  to  have  the  right  to  enter  the  second  grade.  Upon  presenting  his  three
certificates to the diet, therefore, the servant of the state who has obtained them will be honoured with
the second plaque and with the title of which it is the token.
  This plaque shall be of silver, of the same size and shape as the preceding one; it shall bear the same
inscriptions, except that the words Spes patriae shall be replaced by Civis electus. Those who wear
these plaques shall be called citizens elect, or simply electees, and are no longer eligible to serve as
simple  deputies,  associate  justices  or  treasury  commissioners;  but  they  shall  all  be  candidates  for
senatorships. No one may enter the senate until he has entered the second grade and wears its insignia;
and all the elective senators who, according to our plan, will be drawn immediately from this group,
shall continue to wear the same insignia until they reach the third grade.
  It is from the members of the second category that I should like to have chosen the principals of
secondary schools and the inspectors of primary education. They might be required to fill these posts
for a certain time before being admitted to the senate, and to present the diet a certificate of approval
from the college of administrators of education; without forgetting that this certificate, like all the rest,
must always be confirmed by the voice of the public, which may be consulted in a thousand different
ways.
  The choice of elective senators shall be made in the chamber of deputies at each ordinary session of
the diet, so that their term shall be for two years only; but they may be continued in office, or re-elected
after an interval, for two additional terms, provided that, at the expiration of each term, they have firstobtained from the aforesaid chamber a certificate of approval similar to that required from the dietines
for re-election to a second or third deputyship. For unless a like certificate is obtained for each mandate,
it will be impossible to proceed to further office; and in order not to be excluded from the government,
the only recourse will be to go back and begin again in the lower grades, a recourse which should be
permitted in order not to deprive a zealous citizen, no matter what faults he may have committed, of all
hope  of  erasing  them  and  achieving  success.  Furthermore,  no  special  committee  should  ever  be
entrusted with the giving or withholding of these certificates or acts of approbation; these judgments
must always be made by the whole chamber. This will be done without difficulty or loss of time if, in
judging outgoing elective senators, you follow the same method of balloting that I have suggested for
their election.
  At this point you will say, perhaps, that all these acts of approbation, given first by particular
bodies, then by the dietines, and finally by the diet, will be not so much accorded to merit, justice and
truth, as extorted by intrigue and credit. To that I have but one answer to make. I thought I was
speaking  to  a  people  which,  without  being  wholly  free  from  vices,  still  had  a  certain  amount  of
resilience and virtue; and on that supposition, my plan is good. But if Poland has already reached the
point where everything is radically venal and corrupt, it is vain for her to try to reform her laws and
preserve her freedom; she must abandon such hopes, and bow her neck to the yoke. But let us return to
the matter in hand.
  Each elective senator who has held office three times with approbation shall pass by right into the
third grade, the highest in the state; and its insignia shall be conferred on him by the king on the
nomination of the diet. This shall take the form of a plaque of blue steel similar to the preceding ones,
and shall bear the following inscription: Custos legum. Those who have received it shall wear it all the
rest of their lives, no matter how eminent the positions they may subsequently attain, and even on the
throne itself, if they succeed in ascending it.
  The palatines and grand castellans can be drawn only from the body of the law guardians, and in the
same way that the latter were chosen from the citizens elect, that is, by the choice of the diet. And since
these palatines occupy the most eminent positions in the republic, and hold them for life, in order that
their spirit of emulation may not slumber in offices where they no longer see anything above them save
the throne, access to the latter shall be open to them, but in such a way that here again they shall be able
to advance only on the strength of virtue, and by the voice of the people.
  Let us observe in passing that the career I am laying down for citizens to follow, in rising by
successive stages to the head of the republic, seems quite well proportioned to the stages of human life,
so that those who hold the reins of government, although past the first flush of youth, nevertheless may
still be in the prime of life, and so that, after fifteen or twenty years of continuous testing under the eyes
of  the  public,  they  will  still  have  a  sufficiently  large  number  of  years  during  which  to  give  the
fatherland the benefit of their talents, experience and virtues, and themselves to enjoy, in the leading
positions of the state, the respect and honours they have so well deserved. Assuming that a man begins
his public career at twenty, it is possible for him to become a palatine by thirty-five; but since it is very
hard, and not even suitable, for this sequence of offices to be accomplished so quickly, this eminent
post will seldom be reached before the forties; and this, in my opinion, is the age most likely to
combine all the qualities desirable in a statesman. At this point we may also observe that this sequence
of offices also seems, as far as possible, to be appropriate to the needs of the government. In calculating
the probabilities, I would estimate that every two years there would be at least fifty new citizens elect
and twenty law guardians; and these numbers are more than sufficient to recruit the two parts of the
senate to which these grades respectively lead. For it is easy to see that although the first rank of the
senate is the more numerous, the fact that it is held for life means that it will need fewer replacements
than the second, which, under my plan, is renewed at each ordinary diet.
  You have already seen, and soon will see again, that I do not leave the supernumerary citizens elect
to stand idle while waiting to enter the senate as elective senators. In order that the law guardians also
shall not be left idle while waiting for new service as palatines and castellans, it is from this body that Iwould form the college of the administrators of education, of which I have already spoken. This college
could be placed under the presidency of the primate or another bishop, with the proviso that no other
ecclesiastic, whether bishop or senator, could be admitted to it.
  The  sequence  of  promotions  strikes  me  as  being  adequate  to  the  needs  of  the  essential  and
intermediary part of the state, namely, the nobility and the magistrates. But we have not yet provided
for the two extremes, namely the common people and the king. Let us begin with the former, which so
far has been accounted nothing, but which in the end must count for something if you want to give a
certain power and solidity to Poland. Nothing could be more delicate than the operation of which we
are now speaking; for although everyone feels how unfortunate it is for the republic that the nation
should be in a sense confined to the equestrian order, and that all the rest, peasants and burghers, should
be nil, both in the government and in legislation, such, after all, is the ancient constitution. At the
present moment it would be neither prudent nor possible to change it all at once. But it may be prudent
and possible to effect this change by degrees, and make the more numerous part of the nation, without
any perceptible revolution, attach its affections to the fatherland and even to the government. This will
be effected by two methods, the first being to administer justice scrupulously, so that the serf and
commoner, never having to fear unjust vexation by the nobleman, will be cured of the aversion in
which they must naturally hold him. This calls for a great reformation of the courts of law, and for
particular care in the formation of the corps of advocates.
  The second method, without which the first is useless, is to open the way to the serfs to become
free, and to the burghers to become noblemen. Even if the thing were in fact impracticable, it would be
necessary at least for it to be seen as a possibility. But it seems to me that more can be done, and
without running the slightest risk. The following, for example, is a means which seems to me to lead
safely to the proposed end.
  Every other year, in the interval between diets, an appropriate time and place would be set in each
province for a meeting of all the citizens elect of that province who were not yet elective senators. They
would meet, under the presidency of a law guardian who was not yet a life senator, in a censorial or
benevolent committee, to which would be invited not all the curates, but only those deemed most
worthy of the honour. I even think that this distinction, by constituting a tacit judgment in the eyes of
the people, might also arouse a certain spirit of emulation among the village curates, and preserve a
large number of them from that dissolute way of life to which they are all too prone.
  The business of this assembly, to which old men and notables from all walks of life could also be
invited, would be to examine proposals for innovations useful to the province; reports would be heard
from the curates on the condition of their own and neighbouring parishes, and from the notables on the
condition of agriculture and of the families of their canton. These reports would be carefully verified;
each member of the committee would add his own observations to them; and a faithful record would be
kept of the whole, from which would be drawn succinct memorials to be addressed to the dietines.
  The needs of hard-pressed families, of the disabled, of widows and orphans, would be considered in
detail, and would be proportionately met from a fund formed by voluntary contributions from the well-
to-do people of the province. These contributions would be the less burdensome inasmuch as they
would become the only charitable assessment, for beggars and poorhouses ought not to be tolerated
anywhere in Poland. The priests will no doubt raise a great outcry for the preservation of poorhouses;
and this outcry is simply one more reason for destroying these institutions.
  In this same committee, which would never concern itself with reprimands and penalties, but solely
with  benefits,  praise  and  encouragement,  accurate  lists  would  be  made,  on  the  basis  of  reliable
information, of individuals in all walks of life whose conduct was worthy of honour and recompense.10
These lists would be forwarded to the senate and king, to be considered on the appropriate occasion,
and to help them make their choices and preferences wisely; and it is on the evidence supplied by these
same assemblies that the free secondary-school scholarships already mentioned would be awarded by
the administrators of education.
  But the principal and most important function of this committee would be to draw up, on reliabledepositions and on the well-verified report of public opinion, a roster of those peasants who were
distinguished for good conduct, education and morals, for their devotion to their families and for the
proper fulfilment of all the duties of their station. This roster would then be presented to the dietine,
which would elect therefrom a legally prescribed number for manumission, and would provide, by
agreed means, for the compensation of their owners by granting them exemptions, prerogatives, and
other advantages proportionate to the number of their peasants who had been found worthy of freedom.
For it is absolutely necessary to arrange things so that, instead of being burdensome to the master, the
manumission of the serf should bring him honour and profit; with the understanding that, to avoid
abuses,  these  manumissions  should  be  made  not  by  the  master,  but  in  the  dietines,  by  a  formal
judgment, and in no more than the numbers prescribed by the law.
  When a certain number of families in a canton had been successively freed you could proceed to
free  whole  villages,  to  unite  them  gradually  into  communes,  to  assign  them  a  certain  amount  of
communal property, like the communal lands in Switzerland, and to give them communal officers; and
when  you  had  gradually  brought  things  to  the  point  where,  without  perceptible  revolution,  it  was
possible to complete the operation on a large scale, you would finally be able to give them back their
natural right to participate in the administration of their country by sending deputies to the dietines.
  All this having been done, you would arm all these peasants, now converted into free men and
citizens; you would enrol them in the army, you would drill them; and you would end up with a truly
excellent militia, more than sufficient for the defence of the state.
  A similar method could be followed for the ennoblement of a certain number of burghers and, even
without ennobling them, for the awarding to them of certain outstanding positions which they alone
could fill, to the exclusion of the nobles; and this would be following the example of the Venetians,
who, for all their jealous insistence on noble privileges, always give a commoner, in addition to other
subordinate positions, the second office in the state, that of grand chancellor, to which no nobleman can
ever aspire. In this way, by opening to the burghers the road to nobility and honours, you would attach
their affections to the fatherland and to the maintenance of the constitution. You might also, without
ennobling individuals, ennoble certain towns collectively, with preference to those where commerce,
industry and the arts were most flourishing, and where the municipal administration was consequently
the best. These ennobled cities could, like the free cities of the Empire, send deputies to the diet; and
their example would not fail to excite in all the rest a keen desire to obtain the same honour.
  The censorial committees entrusted with this work of beneficence, a work which, to the shame of
kings and peoples, has never yet existed anywhere, would be composed, without being elective, in the
manner most suited to the zealous and honest performance of their functions; for their members, as
aspirants to the senatorial positions open to their respective grades, would be very careful to deserve by
public approbation the suffrage of the diet. And this work would be sufficient to keep these aspirants on
their mettle and to hold them in the public eye during the intervals which might occur between their
successive elections. Observe, however, that this would be done without raising them, during these
intervals, above the rank of private citizens of a particular grade; for this type of tribunal, useful and
respectable as it is, would never have any other task than to confer benefits, and hence would be vested
with no coercive power whatsoever. Thus I am not at this point increasing the number of magistracies;
but I am making use of the passage from one magistracy to another to enlist the temporary services of
those who are to become magistrates.
  In  executing  this  plan  of  official  promotions  by  successive  stages,  a  process  which  could  be
accelerated, decelerated, or even halted according to its good or ill success, you would proceed just as
you  saw  fit,  guided  by  experience;  you  would  enkindle  in  all  the  lower  orders  an  ardent  zeal  to
contribute to the public welfare; you would finally succeed in animating all parts of Poland, and in
binding  them  together  in  such  a  way  that  they  would  no  longer  be  anything  more  than  a  single
corporate group, whose vigour and strength would be at least ten times greater than is now possible;
and this with the inestimable advantage of having avoided all abrupt and rapid changes, and the danger
of revolution.  You have a fine opportunity to begin this operation in a striking and noble fashion, one which
should produce the greatest effect. In the misfortunes Poland has just been undergoing, it is not possible
that the confederates should have failed to receive aid, and tokens of attachment, from certain burghers,
and even from some peasants. Imitate the magnanimity of the Romans, who were so careful, after the
great calamities of their republic, to shower evidences of their gratitude upon foreigners, subjects,
slaves and even animals who, during their misfortunes, had rendered them some signal services. What a
fine beginning, in my opinion, it would be solemnly to confer nobility on these burghers, and freedom
on these peasants; and this with all the pomp and circumstance needed to make the ceremony august,
touching and memorable! And do not stop with this beginning. The men thus distinguished should ever
remain  the  favourite  children  of  the  fatherland.  They  must  be  watched  over,  protected,  aided  and
sustained, even if they are bad characters. At all costs they must be made to prosper all their lives, in
order that, by giving this example to the public view, Poland may show all Europe what, in her time of
victory, may be expected by anyone who dares aid her in her distress.
  This gives a rough idea, intended merely as an illustration, of the way to proceed in order that
everyone may see the road to any attainment open before him; to make all, while serving the country
well, move by degrees toward the most honourable ranks; and to enable virtue to open all the doors that
fortune is pleased to shut.
  But all is not yet done; and the part of this plan that still remains to be described is undoubtedly the
most  embarrassing  and  difficult.  It  attempts  to  surmount  obstacles  against  which  the  wisdom  and
experience of the most consummate statesmen have always failed. Nevertheless it seems to me that, if
my plan were adopted, the very simple method I am about to suggest would remove all difficulties,
prevent all abuses, and would in practice turn what seems to be a new obstacle into an actual advantage.
  CHAPTER XIV
  THE ELECTION OF KINGS
  ALL these difficulties come down to the single one of giving the state a ruler whose selection will
not cause trouble, and who will make no attempts against liberty. What makes this difficulty all the
worse is that the ruler himself should be endowed with those great qualities needed by anyone who
ventures  to  govern  free  men.  An  hereditary  crown  avoids  trouble,  but  leads  to  slavery;  election
preserves freedom, but shakes the state with each new reign. This alternative is unfortunate; but before
I speak of the means of avoiding it, allow me to reflect for a moment on the way in which the Poles
ordinarily dispose of their crown.
I ask, first of all, why must they give themselves foreign kings? What singular blindness has led
them thus to adopt the surest means of enslaving their nation, of abolishing their customs, of making
themselves the playthings of foreign courts, and of wantonly increasing the tumult of interregnums?
What an injustice to themselves, what an affront to their fatherland! As if, despairing of finding among
their own a man worthy to command them, they were forced to seek him from afar! How have they
failed to sense, how have they failed to see, that this was entirely contrary to fact? Open the annals of
your nation, and you will never see it illustrious and victorious save under Polish kings; you will almost
always see it oppressed and debased under foreigners. Let experience finally come in support of reason!
See what ills you are bringing on yourselves, and what benefits you are losing!
  For how does it happen, I ask again, that the Polish nation, having taken such trouble to make its
crown elective, has not thought to make use of this law to throw the members of the administration into
a competition of zeal and glory which by itself would have been able to do more for the good of the
country than all the rest of the laws put together? What a powerful inspiration to great and ambitious
spirits this crown would have been if it had been destined for the worthiest, and held prospectively
before the eyes of every citizen capable of deserving public esteem! What virtues, what noble efforts
ought not the hope of acquiring its highest prize inspire within the nation! What a ferment of patriotism
in every heart, if it were well known that patriotism alone was the means of obtaining this position, now
become the secret ambition of every private citizen, and if it only depended on himself, on the strength
of merit and services, to approach ever nearer to it and, with good luck, to obtain it in fact! Let us seekthe best means of putting into operation this great motive, so powerful and hitherto so much neglected
in the Republic. You will say that restricting the crown to Poles alone will not suffice to eliminate all
the difficulties involved; we shall consider this point in a few moments, after I have proposed my
solution. This plan is simple; but when I say that it consists of introducing the drawing of lots into the
election of kings, it would seem at first glance that it fails to meet the purpose I myself have just been
prescribing. I beg that you will be good enough to give me time to explain myself, or at least to re-read
attentively what I have already written.
  For if you say, 'What assurance is there that a king chosen by lot will have the qualities needed to
fill the office worthily?' you are raising an objection I have already met; since it is sufficient for this
purpose to provide that the king can only be drawn from the life senators. For, considering that they
themselves will be drawn from the order of law guardians, and will have passed with honour through
all the grades of the republic, the evidence of their whole lives, and the public approbation they have
received in all the positions they have filled, will be sufficient guarantee of the merit and virtue of every
one of them.
I do not intend, however, that even as between life senators the lot alone should determine the
preference; this would still fail in part to achieve the great purpose which ought to be kept in mind. It is
necessary that the lot should do something, and that choice should do a great deal, in order, on the one
hand, to frustrate the intrigues and manoeuvres of foreign powers and, on the other hand, to give all the
palatines this very great motive not to allow their conduct to grow slack, but to continue serving their
country zealously, that they may deserve the preference over their competitors.
I admit that the class of competitors strikes me as being rather large, if you include the grand
castellans who, under the present constitution, are almost equal in rank to the palatines. But I cannot see
what disadvantage there would be in restricting immediate access to the throne to the palatines alone.
This would create within the same order yet another rank, through which the grand castellans would
have to pass before becoming palatines, and thus yet another means of keeping the senate dependent on
the legislator. You have already seen that I consider the grand castellans a superfluous part of the
constitution. If you decide, nevertheless, in order to avoid all great changes, to leave them their offices
and senatorial rank, I approve of the decision. But in the sequence I am suggesting, nothing requires
them to be placed on the same level as the palatines; and since nothing prevents it, either, you will be
able without untoward consequences to decide the matter whichever way you think best. I shall assume
here that the decision will be to reserve immediate access to the throne exclusively to the palatines.
  Immediately after the death of the king, therefore, that is to say within the shortest possible interval,
as determined by law, the election diet shall be solemnly convened; the names of all the palatines shall
be placed in competition; and of these, three shall be drawn by lot, with all possible precautions to
prevent any sort of fraud from affecting the result. These three names shall be declared aloud to the
assembly which, at the same sitting and by majority vote, shall choose the one it prefers; and he shall
be proclaimed king that very day.
  You will find, I admit, that this form of election has one great disadvantage, namely that the nation
cannot choose freely that one of the whole body of palatines whom she most honours and cherishes,
and whom she judges worthiest of the kingship. But this disadvantage is not new to Poland, where it
has been seen in several elections, and above all in the last, that without regard for those whom the
nation favours, she has been forced to choose the one she would have rejected. But in return for this
advantage, which she no longer has and now sacrifices, how many more important ones does she gain
by this form of election!
  In the first place, the use of the lot immediately frustrates the factions and intrigues of foreign
nations, which cannot influence this election, being too uncertain of success to devote much effort to it,
since even fraud would be insufficient to favour a subject whom the nation can always reject. The
greatness of this advantage alone is such that it ensures the peace of Poland, stifles venality in the
republic, and leaves the election with almost all the tranquillity of hereditary succession.
  The same advantage also operates against intrigue by the candidates themselves. For who amongthem would want to put himself to any expense to ensure himself a preference which does not depend
on men, and sacrifice his fortune for an event which involves so many unfavourable chances as against
a single chance of success? And we may add that those whom fortune has favoured will no longer have
time to bribe the electors, since the election must take place at the same session.
  The free choice of the nation between three candidates saves it from the disadvantages of the lot,
which might conceivably light on an unworthy person. For if this should happen, the nation will be
careful not to choose him; and among thirty-three illustrious men, the elite of the nation, among whom
it  is  inconceivable  that  there  should  be  even  one  unworthy  person,  it  is  impossible  that  the  three
favoured by the lot should all be unworthy.
  By this form of selection, therefore, and this is a very important consideration, we shall combine all
the advantages of election and inheritance.
  For in the first place, since the crown does not pass from father to son, there will never be any
continuous and systematic attempt to enslave the republic. In the second place, the lot itself, in this
form,  is  the  instrument  of  an  informed  and  voluntary  election.  From  the  estimable  corps  of  law
guardians, and among the palatines who are selected from it, no choice whatsoever can be made that
has not already been made by the nation.
  But observe what a spirit of emulation this prospect must introduce into the corps of palatines and
grand castellans, who otherwise, as holders of life offices, might grow slack in the assurance of being
no longer removable. They can no longer be constrained by fear; but the hope of occupying a throne,
which each of them sees to be so near to him, is a fresh spur to keep them constantly at watch over
themselves. They know that the lot would favour them in vain if they were refused election, and that
the  only  way  to  be  chosen  is  to  deserve  it.  This  advantage  is  too  great,  too  obvious,  to  require
elaboration.
  Let us assume for a moment, taking the darkest possible view, that it is impossible to prevent fraud
in the drawing of lots, and that one of the candidates has succeeded in outwitting the vigilance of all the
rest, despite their interest in the matter. This fraud would be a misfortune for the excluded candidates.
But the effect on the republic would be the same as if the results of the lottery had been honest; for the
advantages of election would nevertheless remain, and the disturbances of an interregnum and the
dangers of inheritance would still be avoided; the candidate whose ambition had tempted him to the
point of resorting to this fraud would still be, in addition, a man of merit, capable in the judgment of the
nation of wearing the crown with honour; and finally, even after this fraud, he would still, in order to
profit by it, have to depend on the subsequent and formal choice of the republic.
  By  this  plan,  adopted  in  its  entirety,  the  whole  state  is  knit  together;  and  from  the  lowliest
individual to the premier palatine, there is no one who can see any other way of advancing than by the
road of duty and public approval. The king alone, once elected, sees nothing above him but the law, and
has no other curb to restrain him; and since he has no further need of public approval, he can safely
dispense with it if his plans so require. I can hardly see more than one means of remedying this, and
this one means is unthinkable; it would be to make the crown in some way revocable, and to require the
kings to be confirmed in office at fixed intervals. But, I repeat, this expedient cannot be suggested; by
keeping  the  throne  and  the  state  in  a  condition  of  continuous  turmoil,  it  would  never  leave  the
administration in a sufficiently strong position to be able to devote itself solely and effectively to the
public welfare.
  The ancients had a custom which has never been practised save by a single people, but the success
of which was such that it is astonishing no other has been tempted to imitate it. It is true that it is hardly
appropriate to any but an elective monarchy, although it was invented and practised in a hereditary
kingdom. I am referring to the trial of Egyptian kings after their death, and to the judgment which
granted or refused them burial and royal honours, according as they had governed the state well or ill
during their lives. The indifference of the moderns to all moral objects, and to everything capable of
strengthening the soul, will no doubt make them think it madness to consider reviving this custom for
the kings of Poland; and I should not dream of trying to persuade Frenchmen, particularly philosophers,to adopt it; but I think it can be suggested to Poles. I even venture to maintain that this institution would
bring them great advantages obtainable in no other way, and not one disadvantage. With regard to our
present problem, it is impossible, except for a base soul insensible of posthumous reputation, that the
justice of an inevitable judgment should not impress the king, and impose on his passions a curb which
will, I admit, vary in strength, but which will always be capable of restraining them up to a point; above
all when it also involves the interests of his children, whose lot will be determined by the judgment
passed on the memory of the father.
  After the death of each king, therefore, I should like to have his body deposited in a suitable place,
until the verdict on his memory had been pronounced; the tribunal authorised to determine and decree
his burial should be convened as rapidly as possible; his life and reign should be rigorously examined
by that tribunal; and after hearing evidence, in which every citizen would be allowed both to accuse and
to defend, the trial should, on the basis of this evidence, be followed by a judgment handed down with
the greatest possible solemnity.
  As a consequence of this judgment, if favourable, the late king would be declared a good and just
prince, his name inscribed with honour in the list of the kings of Poland, his body ceremoniously
interred in their burial-place, the epithet of glorious memory added to his name in all public acts and
speeches,  and  a  dowry  assigned  to  his  widow;  and  his  children,  declared  royal  princes,  would  be
honoured for the rest of their lives with all the advantages associated with that title.
  But if, on the contrary, he was found guilty of injustice, violence, malversation and above all of
having made attempts against the public liberty, his memory would be condemned and stigmatised; his
body, denied royal burial, would be interred without honour, like that of a private citizen, and his name
stricken from the public register of kings; and his children, deprived of the title and prerogatives of
royal  princes,  would  return  to  the  class  of  private  citizens,  without  honorific  or  stigmatising
distinctions.
I should like this judgment to be made with the greatest possible formality, but also, if possible, to
be handed down before the election of a successor, in order that the influence of the latter might not
affect the sentence, the severity of which he would have a personal interest in mitigating. I know that it
would be desirable to have more time to uncover hidden truths thoroughly, and to place more evidence
before the court. But if it were delayed until after the election, I should be afraid that this important act
might soon become no more than an empty ceremony and, as would infallibly happen in a hereditary
kingdom,  a  funeral  oration  for  the  deceased  king  rather  than  a  just  and  rigorous  judgment  of  his
conduct. It is preferable on this occasion to give greater scope to public opinion, and lose some scraps
of evidence, in order to preserve the integrity and austerity of a judgment which would otherwise
become futile.
  With regard to the tribunal which would pass this sentence, I should like it to be neither the senate,
nor the diet, nor any body vested with any sort of governmental authority, but an entire order of
citizens, which cannot easily be either deceived or corrupted. It seems to me that the citizens elect,
better informed and more experienced than the servants of the state, and less prejudiced than the law
guardians, who are already too close to the throne, would be just the intermediary body in which you
would find the largest amount both of intelligence and of integrity, which would be most likely to give
none but reliable judgments, and which would therefore be preferable to the other two on this occasion.
Even if it should happen that this body was not large enough to render a judgment of such importance, I
should prefer to see it supplemented by members drawn from the servants of the state rather than from
the law guardians. Finally, I should not like the presiding officer of this tribunal to be an office-holder,
but a marshal chosen from their own number, and elected by themselves, like the presiding officers of
the diets and confederations; so important is it to prevent any particular interest from influencing this
act, which can become very august or very ridiculous according to the manner in which it is carried out.
  In concluding this subject of the election and judgment of kings, I should here speak of one of your
customs  which  has  struck  me  as  being  most  shocking,  and  quite  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  your
constitution, namely the way in which that constitution is seen to be virtually overthrown and annulledat the death of the king, to the point even of suspending and closing all the courts of law; as if this
constitution were so dependent on the prince that the death of the one was the destruction of the other.
Great heavens! Precisely the reverse should be true. With the death of the king, everything should
proceed as if he were still alive; you should hardly be able to perceive that a piece of the machine is
missing, that piece being so little essential to its solidity. Fortunately this inconsistency is an isolated
thing. You have only to declare that it no longer exists, and nothing else need be changed. But this
strange contradiction must not be allowed to continue; for if it is already inconsistent with the present
constitution, it will be still more so after the constitution has been reformed.
  CHAPTER XV
  CONCLUSION
  MY plan has now been sufficiently outlined. I shall stop. No matter what plan is adopted, you
should not forget what I have said in the Social Contract regarding the state of weakness and anarchy in
which a nation finds itself as soon as it establishes or reforms its constitution. In this moment of
disorder and effervescence, it is incapable of putting up any sort of resistance, and the slightest shock is
capable of upsetting everything. It is important, therefore, to arrange at all costs for an interval of
tranquillity, during which you may be able without risk to work upon yourselves and rejuvenate your
constitution. Although the changes to be made in yours are not fundamental, and do not seem very
great, they are sufficient to require this precaution; and a certain length of time will inevitably be
needed before the effects even of the best reforms can be felt, and the firmness which should result
from them can be acquired.
  It  is  only  on  the  assumption  that  your  success  will  be  proportionate  to  the  courage  of  the
confederates and to the justice of their cause that you can dream of undertaking such an enterprise. You
will never be free as long as a single Russian soldier remains in Poland; and you will always be in
danger of losing your freedom as long as Russia interferes in your affairs. But if you succeed in forcing
her to deal with you as one power with another, and no longer as protector and protectorate, then profit
by the exhaustion into which the Turkish war will have thrown her to accomplish your task before she
is able to disturb it. Although I set no store by the security to be gained by foreign treaties, this unique
circumstance may perhaps force you to lean, as far as possible, on this support, if only for the purpose
of learning the present disposition of those who will treat with you. But with this one exception, and
perhaps a few trade treaties later on, do not waste your energies in vain negotiations; do not bankrupt
yourselves on ambassadors and ministers to foreign courts; and do not account alliances and treaties as
things of any moment. All this is useless with the Christian powers, who recognise no other bonds than
those of self-interest. When they find it advantageous to fulfil their obligations, they will fulfil them;
when they find it advantageous to break them, they will do so; such promises might as well not be
made at all. Furthermore, if this self-interest were always real, knowledge of what it would profit them
to do would make it possible to predict what they would do. But it is almost never reason of state that
guides them; it is the momentary interest of a minister, of a mistress, of a favourite; it is the motive no
human wisdom has been able to predict which determines them, sometimes for, sometimes against their
true interests. What assurance can you have in dealing with people who have no fixed system, and who
are led only by chance impulses? Nothing could be more frivolous than the political science of courts.
Since it has no certain principles, no certain conclusions can be drawn from them; and all this fine
theorising about the interest of princes is a child's game which makes sensible men laugh.
  Do not rely with confidence, therefore, either on your allies or on your neighbours. There is only
one of them on whom you can count in some small measure, namely the Sultan of Turkey, and you
should spare no efforts to gain his support. Not that his statecraft is much more reliable than that of the
other powers; with him, too, everything depends on a vizier, a favourite, a harem intrigue. But the
interest of the Porte is clear and simple; it is a matter of life and death to it; and although the Porte has
much less enlightenment and finesse, it generally shows more honesty and common sense. With it, as
contrasted with the Christian powers, you at least have the added advantage that it likes to fulfil its
obligations and ordinarily respects treaties. You should try to make a treaty with it for twenty years, asclear and strong a one as possible. As long as another power conceals its plans, this treaty will be the
best, perhaps the only guarantee available to you; and in the condition in which Russia will probably be
left by the present war, I think that it may be enough to enable you to undertake your work in safety;
the more so since the common interest of the powers of Europe, and above all of your other neighbours,
is to leave you to continue as a barrier between themselves and the Russians; and by dint of changing
follies they must, at least now and then, be wise.
  One  thing  makes  me  believe  that,  in  general,  they  will  watch  without  jealousy  your  work  of
constitutional  reform:  the  fact  that  this  work  tends  only  to  increase  the  power  of  legislation,  and
consequently of liberty; and that this liberty is regarded in all the courts as a visionary madness which
tends rather to weaken than to strengthen a state. That is why France has always favoured the liberties
of Germany and Holland; and that is why Russia now favours the present government of Sweden, and
blocks the projects of the king with all her strength. All these great ministers, who judge mankind in
general by themselves and their entourage, and thus think that they know men, are very far from
imagining the vigour which love of country and the impulse of virtue can impart to free souls. It makes
no difference that they are the gulls of their own low opinion of republics, and that the latter show in all
their enterprises an unexpected power of resistance; these men will never abandon a prejudice founded
on the contempt they feel that they themselves deserve, and in terms of which they appraise the human
race. In spite of the rather striking experience the Russians have just had in Poland, nothing will make
them change their minds. They will always regard free men as they themselves must be regarded,
namely as human ciphers moved only by the twin instruments of money and the knout. If they see,
therefore, that the republic of Poland, instead of trying to fill its coffers, to increase its revenues and to
raise large forces of regular troops, is thinking, on the contrary, of disbanding its army and dispensing
with money, they will believe that she is striving to weaken herself; and in the belief that, in order to
conquer her, they will have only to appear whenever they like, they will let her reform herself at leisure,
laughing the meanwhile among themselves at her labours. And it must be admitted that a state of liberty
deprives a people of offensive power, and that in following my plan you should renounce all hope of
conquest. But twenty years from now, when your work has been done, if the Russians try to overrun
you, they will learn what sort of soldiers in defence of their hearths are these men of peace who do not
know how to attack the hearths of others, and who have forgotten the value of money.
  For the rest, when you are rid of these cruel guests, take care not to make any sort of compromise
with  the  king  they  tried  to  give  you.  You  must  either  cut  off  his  head,  as  he  deserves,  or  else,
disregarding his first election, which is absolutely void, you must elect him afresh with new pacta
conventa, in which you will make him renounce the right of appointment to high official positions. The
second alternative is not only the more humane, but also the wiser; I even find in it a certain generous
pride which will perhaps mortify the court of St Petersburg much more than as if you elected someone
else. Poniatowski was very wicked, without doubt; now, perhaps, he is no longer anything more than
unfortunate; for in the present situation, at least, he seems to me to be behaving very much as he ought,
by taking no part in anything at all. Naturally, at the bottom of his heart, he must fervently desire the
expulsion of his hard masters. It would, perhaps, have been an act of patriotic heroism for him to have
joined  the  confederates  to  expel  the  Russians;  but  it  is  well  known  that  Poniatowski  is  no  hero.
Furthermore, quite apart from the fact that he would not have been allowed to do so, and that, as a man
who owes everything to the Russians, he is constantly watched, apart from all this, I frankly declare
that, if I were in his place, I should not want, for anything in the world, to be capable of that kind of
heroism.
I realise that he is not the king you will need when your reforms have been completed; but he may
be the one you need to effect them peaceably. If he lives but eight or ten years more, and if your system
has then begun to operate, and several palatinates are already filled with law guardians, you need not be
afraid of giving him a successor like himself; but I myself am afraid that, if you simply dispossess him,
you will not know what to do with him, and will expose yourselves to new troubles.
  Nevertheless, no matter what difficulties are to be avoided by electing him freely, you must notdream of doing so until you have made very sure of his real intentions, and unless you find that he still
retains some common sense, some feeling of honour, some love of country, some knowledge of his real
interests, and some desire to pursue them. For at all times, and above all in the sad situation in which
Poland will be left by her misfortunes, there would be nothing more fatal for her than to have a traitor at
the head of the government.
  As for the manner of broaching the work in question, I have no taste at all for the subtle schemes
that have been suggested to you for the purpose of surprising and, in a sense, deceiving the nation with
regard to the changes to be introduced into its laws. I should only advise that, while revealing your plan
in its full extent, you should not abruptly begin putting it into operation in such a way as to fill the
republic with malcontents; that you should leave most office-holders in possession; that you shall fill
posts under the new dispensation only as they fall vacant. Never shake the machine too brusquely. I
have no doubt that a good plan, once adopted, will change the spirit even of those who played a part in
government under another system. Since new citizens cannot be created all at once, you must begin by
making use of those who exist, and to offer a new road for their ambition is the way to make them want
to follow it.
  If, in spite of the courage and constancy of the confederates, and in spite of the justice of their
cause, fortune and all the powers abandon them, and deliver the fatherland to its oppressors .... But I
have not the honour of being a Pole, and in a situation like that in which you find yourselves it is not
permissible to give advice otherwise than by example.
I have now finished, within the limits of my powers, and would to God that it were with as much
success as ardour, the task set me by Count Wielhorski. Perhaps all this is only a lot of nonsense; but
these are my ideas. It is not my fault if they bear so little resemblance to those of other men; and it has
not lain within my power to organise my mind in another fashion. I even admit that, singular as these
ideas may be considered, I myself cannot see anything in them that is not good, well adapted to the
human heart, and practicable, above all in Poland; I have tried to make my views follow the spirit of
this republic, and to propose only the minimum of changes needed to correct its faults. It seems to me
that a government based on such motives ought to proceed to its true goal as directly, as surely and as
long as possible; without forgetting, however, that all the works of men are as imperfect, transitory and
perishable as man himself.
I have purposely omitted several very important topics on which I did not feel myself qualified to
express an opinion. I shall leave this task to men wiser and more enlightened than I; and I shall end this
long rigmarole by making my apologies to Count Wielhorski for having taken up so much of his time
with it. Although I think differently from other men, I do not flatter myself that I am wiser than they,
nor that he will find anything in my reveries that can really be useful to his country. But my wishes for
her prosperity are too real, pure and disinterested to make it possible for my zeal to be increased by the
pride of contributing to her cause. May she triumph over her enemies, become and remain peaceful,
happy and free, may she serve as a great example to the universe and, profiting by the patriotic labours
of Count Wielhorski, may she find and form in her bosom many citizens who resemble him!
  1. [See Editorial Note, above, p. xxxvi. — TR.]
  2. [i.e. the Confederation of Bar. See Editorial Note, above, p. xxxvi. — TR.]
  3. [Peter the Great. — TR.]
  4. [The diet of a province or palatinate, which elected deputies to the national diet. — TR.]
  5. [i.e. the nobility. — TR.]
  6. [The Polish coronation oath. — TR.]
  7. [The right of each individual deputy to veto acts of the Diet. — TR.]
  8. [Presiding Officer. — TR ]
  9. [The holder of a castle and domain bestowed by the Crown. — TR.]
  10. In making these judgments much more attention should be paid to persons than to isolated
actions. True goodness acts with little fanfare. It is by uniform and sustained conduct, by private and
domestic virtues, by the proper fulfilment of all the duties of one's station, by actions, in short, whichflow from character and principles, that a man can merit honours, rather than by a few great, theatrical
gestures which are already sufficiently rewarded by the admiration of the public. The ostentation of
philosophers is very fond of dazzling actions. But a man who performs five or six actions of this sort,
brilliant, noisy and well-advertised, has no other purpose than to accumulate credit to his account, so
that he can with impunity be hard and unjust all his life. 'Give us the small change of great deeds.' This
quip, first uttered by a woman, is very wise.





    CONSTITUTIONAL PROJECT FOR CORSICA
  Jean-Jacques Rousseau
 
 
 
  FOREWORD
  You ask for a plan of government suitable for Corsica. It is asking for more than you think. There
are peoples who, do what you may, are incapable of being well governed, for the law has no hold over
them, and a government without laws cannot be a good government. I do not say that the Corsican
people is in that condition; on the contrary, no people impresses me as being so fortunately disposed by
nature to receive a good administration. But even this is not enough, for all things lead to abuses, which
are often inevitable; and the abuse of political institutions follows so closely upon their establishment
that it is hardly worth while to set them up, only to see them degenerate so rapidly.
  Attempts  are  made  to  overcome  this  difficulty  by  mechanical  devices  designed  to  keep  the
government in its original condition; it is bound with a thousand chains and fetters to prevent it from
declining, and is hampered to such an extent that, dragged down by the weight of its irons, it remains
inactive and motionless and, if it does not go downhill, neither does it advance toward its goal.
  All this is the consequence of an undue separation of two inseparable things, the body which
governs and the body which is governed. In the original constitution of government, these two bodies
are but one; they become separate only through the abuse of that constitution.
  Really shrewd men, in such cases, follow the line of expediency, and shape the government to fit
the nation. There is, however, something far better to be done, namely to shape the nation to fit the
government. In the first case, to the extent that the government declines while the nation remains
unchanged,  expediency  vanishes.  But  in  the  second  case,  everything  changes  simultaneously;  the
nation, carrying the government with it, supports it while it itself remains stable, and causes it to
decline when it itself declines. Both remain at all times suited to each other.
  The Corsican people are in that fortunate condition which makes possible the establishment of a
good constitution; they can begin at the beginning, and take steps to prevent degeneration. Full of
health and vigour, they can give themselves a government which will keep them healthy and vigorous.
But even now the establishment of such a government will have certain obstacles to overcome. The
Corsicans  have  not  yet  adopted  the  vices  of  other  nations,  but  they  have  already  adopted  their
prejudices; these prejudices are what will have to be combated and destroyed in order to create good
institutions.
  PART I
  THE  advantageous  location  of  the  island  of  Corsica,  and  the  fortunate  natural  qualities  of  its
inhabitants, seem to offer them a reasonable hope of being able to become a flourishing people and to
make their mark in Europe if, in the constitution they are thinking of adopting, they turn their sights in
that  direction.  But  the  extreme  exhaustion  into  which  they  have  been  plunged  by  forty  years  of
uninterrupted warfare, the existing poverty of the island, and the state of depopulation and devastationin  which  it  finds  itself,  will  not  allow  them  immediately  to  provide  for  an  expensive  form  of
administration,  such  as  would  be  needed  if  they  were  to  organise  with  such  an  end  in  view.
Furthermore, a thousand insuperable obstacles would stand in the way of the execution of such a plan.
Genoa, still mistress of a part of the seacoast and of almost all the seaports, would repeatedly crush
their rising merchant marine, constantly exposed as it is to the double danger of the Genoese and of the
Barbary pirates. The Corsicans would be able to control the seas only with the aid of warships, which
would cost them ten times more than they could earn by trade. Exposed on land and sea, forced to
defend themselves on all sides, what would become of them? At the mercy of everyone, unable in their
weakness  to  make  a  single  advantageous  trade  treaty,  they  would  be  dictated  to  by  one  and  all;
surrounded by so many risks, they would earn only such profits as others would not deign to take,
profits  which  would  always  shrink  to  nothing.  And  if,  by  incredible  good  fortune,  they  were  to
overcome all these difficulties, their very prosperity, by attracting the attention of their neighbours,
would be a new source of danger to their ill-established freedom. A constant object of covetousness to
fee great powers and of jealousy to the small, their island would never for a moment cease to be
threatened with a new enslavement from which it could never again be extricated.
  No matter what object the Corsican nation may have in view in forming a constitution, the first
thing it has to do is to give itself, by its own efforts, all the stability of which it is capable. No one who
depends on others, and lacks resources of his own, can ever be free. Alliances, treaties, gentlemen's
agreements, such things may bind the weak to the strong, but never the strong to the weak.
  Leave negotiations, then, to the powers, and depend on yourselves only. Worthy Corsicans, who
knows better than you how much can be done alone? Without friends, without support, without money,
without armies, enslaved by formidable masters, single-handed you have thrown off the yoke. You
have seen them ally against you, one by one, the most redoubtable potentates of Europe, and flood your
island with foreign armies; all this you have surmounted. Your fortitude alone has accomplished what
money could never have done; if you had sought to preserve your wealth, you would have lost your
liberty. Do not draw conclusions about your own nation from the experience of others; rules drawn
from your own experience are the best by which to govern yourselves.
  It is not so much a question of becoming different as of knowing how to stay as you are. The
Corsicans have improved greatly since becoming free; they have added prudence to courage, they have
learned to obey their equals, they have acquired virtue and morality, and all this without the use of
laws; if they could continue thus, I would see little need to do more. But when the danger that has
united them grows distant, the factions which are now repressed will revive among them; and instead of
joining forces for the maintenance of their independence, they will wear out those forces against one
another, and will have none left for self-defence if the attack upon them is renewed. That even now is
what you must forestall. The divisions of the Corsicans have ever been a trick of their masters to make
them  weak  and  dependent;  but  this  trick,  incessantly  used,  has  finally  resulted  in  a  propensity  to
dissension, and has made them naturally restless, turbulent and hard to govern, even by their own
leaders. Good laws and a new constitution are needed to re-establish that concord the very desire for
which has hitherto been destroyed by tyranny. Corsica, when subject to foreign masters whose hard
yoke was never patiently borne, was in. constant turmoil. Her people must now reconsider its position,
and look in freedom for peace.
  The following, then, are the principles which ought, in my opinion, to serve as the basis for their
laws: to make use of their own people and their own country as far as possible; to cultivate and regroup
their own forces; to depend on those forces only; and to pay no more attention to foreign powers than
as if they did not exist.
  Let us proceed on this basis to establish the fundamental rules of our new constitution.
  The island of Corsica, being incapable of growing rich in money, should try to grow rich in men.
The power derived from population is more real than that derived from finance, and is more certain in
its effects. Since the use of manpower cannot be concealed from view, it always reaches its public
objective. It is not thus with the use of money, which flows off and is lost in private destinations; it iscollected for one purpose and spent for another; the people pay for protection, and their payments are
used to oppress them. That is why a state rich in money is always weak, and a state rich in men is
always strong.1
  To multiply men it is necessary to multiply their means of subsistence; hence agriculture. By this I
do not mean the art of theorising on agriculture, of setting up academies to talk about it, or of writing
books on the subject. I mean a constitution which will lead a people to spread out over the whole extent
of its territory, to settle there, and to cultivate it throughout; this will make it love country life and
labour, finding them so replete with the necessaries and pleasures of life that it will have no wish to
leave them.
  A  taste  for  agriculture  promotes  population  not  only  by  multiplying  the  means  of  human
subsistence, but also by giving the body of the nation a temperament and a way of life conducive to an
increased birth-rate. In all countries, the inhabitants of the countryside have more children than city-
dwellers, partly as a result of the simplicity of rural life, which creates healthier bodies, and partly as a
result of its severe working-conditions, which prevent disorder and vice. For, other things being equal,
those women who are most chaste, and whose senses have been least inflamed by habits of pleasure,
produce more children than others; and it is no less certain that men enervated by debauchery, the
inevitable fruit of idleness, are less fit for generation than those who have been made more temperate
by an industrious way of life.
  Peasants are much more attached to their soil than are townsmen to their cities. The equality and
simplicity of rural life have, for those acquainted with no other mode of existence, an attraction which
leaves them with no desire to change it. Hence that satisfaction with his own way of life which makes a
man peaceful; hence that love of country which attaches him to its constitution.
  Tilling the soil makes men patient and robust, which is what is needed to make good soldiers.
Those recruited from the cities are flabby and mutinous; they cannot bear the fatigues of war; they
break down under the strain of marching; they are consumed by illnesses; they fight among themselves
and fly before the enemy. Trained militias are the best and most reliable troops; the true education of a
soldier is to work on a farm.
  Agriculture is the only means of maintaining the external independence of a state. With all the
wealth in the world, if you lack food you will be dependent on others; your neighbours can set any
value they like on your money, since they can afford to wait. But the bread we need has an indisputable
value for us; and in every kind of commerce, it is always the less eager party who dictates to the other. I
admit  that  in  a  system  based  on  financial  power,  it  would  be  necessary  to  operate  on  different
principles;  it  all  depends  on  the  final  goal  you  have  in  view.  Commerce  produces  wealth,  but
agriculture ensures freedom.
  You may say that it would be better to have both; but they are incompatible, as we shall show
presently.
  In all countries, it will be added, the land is cultivated. True, just as there is more or less trade and
commerce in all countries; but that is not to say that agriculture and commerce flourish everywhere. I
am not concerned here with the consequences which flow from natural necessities, but with those
which result from the nature of the government and general spirit of the nation.
  Although the form of government adopted by a people is more often the work of chance and fortune
than of its own choice, there are nevertheless certain qualities in the nature and soil of each country
which make one government more appropriate to it than another; and each form of government has a
particular force which leads people toward a particular occupation.
  The form of government we choose must be, on the one hand, the least expensive, since Corsica is
poor; and it must be, on the other hand, the most favourable to agriculture, since agriculture is, at the
present time, the only occupation which can preserve to the Corsican people the freedom it has won,
and give it the firmness it requires.
  The least costly administration is that which has the shortest chain of command, and requires the
smallest number of official categories. It is in general the republican, and in particular the democraticstate.
  The  administration  most  favourable  to  agriculture  is  the  one  where  power,  not  being  entirely
concentrated at any one point, does not carry with it an unequal distribution of population, but leaves
people dispersed equally throughout the territory: such is democracy.
  Switzerland illustrates these principles in a most striking fashion. Switzerland is, for the most part, a
poor and sterile country. Her government is everywhere republican. But in those cantons, like Berne,
Solothurn, and Freiburg, which are more fertile than the rest, the government is aristocratic. In the
poorest, where agriculture is less productive and requires more effort, the government is democratic.
Even under the simplest administration, the state has no more than it needs to subsist. Under any other
it would exhaust itself and die.
  You may say that Corsica, being more fertile and having a milder climate, can support a more
onerous form of government. In other times that would be true; but now, crushed by long years of
slavery, and devastated by long wars, the nation first of all must recover its health. When it has put its
fertile  soil  into  production,  it  can  dream  of  becoming  rich  and  of  adopting  a  more  brilliant
administration. Indeed, if the constitution we are about to establish is successful, further constitutional
change will become necessary. Cultivation of the land cultivates the spirit; all agricultural peoples
multiply; they multiply in proportion to the product of their soil; and when that soil is fertile, they
finally multiply to such an extent that it no longer suffices to support them; then they are forced either
to found colonies or to change their form of government.
  When  the  country  is  saturated  with  inhabitants,  the  surplus  can  no  longer  be  employed  in
agriculture, but must be used in industry, commerce, or the arts; and this new system demands a
different type of administration. Let us hope that the institutions Corsica is about to establish will soon
require her to make such changes! But as long as she has no more men than she can use in agriculture,
as long as an inch of fallow land remains on the island, she should cleave to the rural system, and
change it only when the island no longer suffices.
  The rural system, as I have said, involves a democratic state; we have therefore no choice as to the
form of government to be adopted. It is true that this form must be somewhat modified in practice by
reason of the size of the island, for a purely democratic government is suitable rather to a small town
than to a nation. It would be impossible to bring together the whole people of an island like those of a
city; and when the supreme authority is entrusted to delegates, the government changes and becomes
aristocratic. What Corsica needs is a mixed government, where the people assemble by sections rather
than as a whole, and where the repositories of its power are changed at frequent intervals. This was well
understood by the author of the Vescovado Report of 1764, an excellent report, to be consulted with
confidence on all matters which have been omitted from the present discussion.
  The firm establishment of this form of government will produce two great advantages. First, by
confining the work of administration to a small number only, it will permit the choice of enlightened
men. Secondly, by requiring the concurrence of all members of the state in the exercise of the supreme
authority, it will place all on a plane of perfect equality, thus permitting them to spread throughout the
whole extent of the island and to populate it uniformly. This is the fundamental principle of our new
constitution. If we make it such that it will keep the population everywhere in equilibrium, we shall by
that fact alone have made it as perfect as possible. If this principle is correct, our regulations become
clear, and our work is simplified to an astonishing degree.
  A part of this work has already been done. We have fewer institutions than prejudices to destroy;
the task is not so much to alter as to perfect the existing state of affairs. The Genoese themselves have
prepared the way for your new constitution; and, with a care worthy of Providence, they have laid the
foundations of freedom while trying to consolidate tyranny. They have deprived you of practically all
commerce; and now is not in fact the time for you to engage in it. If foreign trade existed, it would be
necessary to prohibit it until your constitution had become firmly established, and domestic production
was supplying all it could. They have hindered the export of your agricultural produce; your interest is
not that it should be exported, but that enough men should be born upon the island to consume it.  The counties and regions they have formed or initiated to facilitate the collection of taxes are the
only possible means of establishing democracy among a people which cannot assemble all together at
any one time and place. They are also the sole means of keeping the country independent of the cities,
which can thus more easily be held in subjection. The Genoese have also applied themselves to the task
of destroying your nobility, of taking away its dignities and titles, and of extinguishing the great fiefs.
You are fortunate that they have taken upon themselves the odium of this enterprise, which you might
not have been able to do if they had not done it before you. Have no hesitation in completing their
work; when they thought they were labouring for themselves they were labouring for you. Only the
purpose is different; for the Genoese were interested in the operation for its own sake, while you are
interested in its results. They sought only to degrade the nobility, while you seek to ennoble the nation.
This is a point on which I can see that the ideas of the Corsicans are not yet sound. In all their official
protests, such as the Remonstrance of Aix-la-Chapelle, they have complained that Genoa has repressed,
or rather destroyed, their nobility. It was a grievance, no doubt, but it was not a misfortune; on the
contrary, it is an advantage without which it would be impossible for the Corsicans to remain free.
  It is confusing shadow with substance to identify the dignity of a state with the titles of some of its
members. When the kingdom of Corsica belonged to Genoa, it may have been useful for it to have had
marquesses, counts and other titled noblemen to serve, so to speak, as mediators between the Corsican
people  and  the  Republic.  But  against  whom  would  the  Corsicans  now  require  such  protectors,
protectors less apt to guarantee them against tyranny than themselves to usurp it; protectors who would
afflict them with their own vexations and disputes until one of them, victorious over the others, had
turned all his fellow-citizens into subjects?
  We must distinguish between two types of nobility: feudal nobility, which appertains to monarchy,
and political nobility, which appertains to aristocracy. The first has several orders or degrees, titled and
untitled, from the great vassals down to simple gentlemen; its rights, though hereditary, are in a manner
of  speaking  individual,  remaining  attached  to  each  individual  family;  and,  since  they  are  wholly
independent of each other, they are also independent of the constitution and sovereignty of the state.
The second, on the contrary, being united in a single indivisible body, whose rights all reside in the
body rather than in the members, constitutes so essential a part of the body politic that neither one can
subsist without the other; and all the individuals who compose it, equal by birth in titles, privileges and
authority, are known without distinction as patricians.
  It is clear from the titles of the ancient Corsican nobility, and from the fiefs it possessed, with rights
approaching those of sovereignty itself, that it belonged to the first of these two types, and owed its
origin either to Moorish or French conquerors, or to the princes in whom the popes had vested the
island of Corsica. Now this sort of nobility, far from being capable of participating in a democratic or
mixed republic, is not even capable of participating in an aristocracy; for aristocracy admits only of
corporate, and not of individual rights. Apart from virtue, democracy recognises no other nobility than
that of freedom; and aristocracy likewise recognises no other nobility than that of authority. Everything
foreign to the constitution should be carefully banished from the body politic. Leave then to other states
all such titles as count and marquess, titles which degrade ordinary citizens. The fundamental law of
your new constitution must be equality. Everything must be related to it, including even authority,
which is established only to defend it. All should be equal by right of birth; the state should grant no
distinctions  save  for  merit,  virtue  and  patriotic  service;  and  these  distinctions  should  be  no  more
hereditary than are the qualities on which they are based. We shall soon see how it is possible to
establish different gradations of rank among a people without letting birth or nobility enter into the
question at all. All fiefs, allegiances, quit-rents and feudal rights hitherto abolished shall therefore
remain abolished forever; and the state shall repurchase those which still remain, in order that all titles
and seigneurial rights may continue extinguished and suppressed throughout the island.
  In order that all parts of the state may retain between themselves, as far as possible, the same
equality we are trying to establish between individuals, the boundaries of the districts, counties and
regions shall be regulated in such a way as to diminish the extreme inequalities that now exist betweenthem. The province of Bastia and Nebbio alone contains as many inhabitants as the seven provinces of
Capo Corso, Aleria, Porto-Vecchio, Sartene, Vico, Calvi and Algagliola. That of Ajaccio contains more
than  the  four  neighbouring  provinces.  Without  removing  all  existing  boundaries  and  upsetting  all
established  relationships,  it  is  possible  with  a  few  slight  changes  to  modify  these  enormous
discrepancies. For example, the abolition of fiefs makes it easy to unite the fiefs of Canari, Brando and
Nonza to form a new region which, with the addition of the county of Pietrabugno, will nearly equal the
region of Capo Corso. The fief of Istria, joined to the province of Sartene, will still not make it equal to
the province of Corte; and that of Bastia and Nebbio, although reduced by a county, can be divided at
the line of the Guolo and still form two very populous regions. This is meant simply as an example to
illustrate my meaning; for I do not know the local situation well enough to reach any final conclusions.
  By these slight changes, the island of Corsica, which I assume to have been wholly liberated, would
be divided into twelve regions which would not be entirely disproportionate to one another; especially
after the municipal rights of the cities, as is proper, had been reduced, thus leaving them with less
weight in their respective regions.
  Cities are useful in a country in so far as they foster commerce and manufacture; but they are
harmful under the system we have adopted. Their inhabitants are either idlers or agriculturists. But
tillage is always better performed by countrymen than by city-dwellers; and idleness is the source of all
the vices which have thus far ravaged Corsica. The stupid pride of the burghers serves only to debase
and discourage the farmworker. A prey to indolence and its attendant passions, they plunge themselves
into debauchery and sell themselves for pleasure. Selfishness makes them servile, and idleness makes
them restless; they are either slaves or mutineers, never free men. This difference has been clearly felt
throughout the present war, ever since the nation has broken its fetters. It is the vigour of your counties
that made the revolution; it is their firmness that has sustained it; your unshakable courage, proof
against all reverses, comes from them. Cities, inhabited by mercenary men, have sold their nation to
preserve some petty privileges for themselves, privileges by which the Genoese have well known how
to profit; and these cities, justly punished for their baseness, still remain the strongholds of tyranny,
while the Corsican people already rejoices gloriously in the freedom it has gained at the price of its
blood.
  An agricultural people must not look on life in the city as a thing to be coveted, or envy the lot of
the idlers who dwell therein; consequently city-dwelling must not be favoured with advantages harmful
to the population at large or to the freedom of the nation. An agriculturist must not be inferior by birth
to anyone; let him see above him laws and magistrates only; and let him become a magistrate himself if
his talents and probity make him worthy of it. In short, cities and their inhabitants should not, any more
than fiefs and their possessors, retain exclusive privileges of any sort. The whole island should enjoy
equal rights, bear equal burdens, and become in equal measure what, in local parlance, is known as
Terra di commune.
  But if cities are harmful, capital cities are still more so; a capital is an abyss in which virtually the
whole nation loses its morals, its laws, its courage and its freedom. It is imagined that large cities are
favourable to agriculture because they consume much farm produce; but they consume even more
farmers, partly through the attraction of the idea of finding a better job, and partly because the natural
race-suicide of city populations necessitates constant recruitment from the country. The environs of
capital cities have an air of vitality; but the farther they are left behind, the more desolate everything
becomes. The capital breathes forth a constant pestilence which finally saps and destroys the nation.
  Nevertheless, the government needs a centre, a meeting-place to which everything will be referred;
to make the central administration itinerant would be unduly inconvenient. In order to have it rotate
from  province  to  province,  it  would  be  necessary  to  divide  the  island  into  a  number  of  small
confederated  states,  each  of  which  would  assume  the  presidency  in  turn;  but  this  system  would
complicate the operation of the machine, and its parts would be less closely knit.
  Although the island is not large enough to require any such division, it is too large to be able to
dispense with a capital. But this capital must provide a means of communication between the variousregions without attracting their inhabitants; all should communicate with it, but stay where they are. In
short, the seat of the central government should be more like a county-town than a capital.
  In this connexion, pure necessity has already led the choice of the nation to the same conclusion
that reason herself would have reached. By keeping their mastery of the seaports, the Genoese have left
you with only one city, Corte, which is no less fortunately located for the Corsican administration than
Bastia was for the Genoese. Corte, located in the middle of the island, is almost equidistant from all its
coasts. It is precisely on the dividing line between the two great regions di quà and di là de' monti, and
equally accessible to all. It is far from the sea, which will keep the morality, simplicity, uprightness and
national character of its inhabitants intact longer than if it were subject to foreign influences. It is in the
highest part of the island, with a very healthy climate, but with soil of low fertility; and the fact that it is
located near the source of its rivers, by making difficult the importation of foodstuffs, will serve to
prevent it from growing over-large. If you take the still further precaution of making none of the great
offices of state hereditary, or even tenable for life, it may be assumed that public men, being no more
than transient residents of the capital, will not soon give it that fatal splendour which is the ornament
and ruin of states.
  These are the first reflexions suggested to me by a rapid survey of local conditions on the island.
Before going on to discuss the government in greater detail, we must first see what that government
ought to do, and on what principles it ought to be conducted. On this must rest our final decision as to
the form of government; for each form has a spirit which is natural and peculiar to it, and from which it
will never depart.
  We have already done our best to level the site of the future nation; let us now try to sketch upon
this site a plan of the building to be erected. The first rule to be followed is the principle of national
character; for each people has, or ought to have, a national character; if It did not, we should have to
start by giving it one. Islanders above all, being less mixed, less merged with other peoples, ordinarily
have one that is especially marked. The Corsicans in particular are naturally endowed with very distinct
characteristics; and if this character, disfigured by slavery and tyranny, has become hard to recognise, it
is also, on the other hand, because of their isolated position, easy to re-establish and preserve.
  The island of Corsica, says Diodorus, is mountainous, well-wooded, and watered by large rivers. Its
inhabitants live on meat, milk and honey, with which their country supplies them in abundance; in their
relations with one another they observe the rules of justice and humanity with greater strictness than do
other barbarians; the first to find honey in the mountains and in the hollow trunks of trees is assured
that no one will challenge his possession. They are always sure of recovering their sheep, each of which
is marked by the owner, and then allowed to graze unguarded over the countryside. This same spirit of
equity seems to guide them in all the circumstances of life.
  Great historians, in the simplest narratives and without introducing explanations of their own, know
how to make the reader aware of the causes of each fact they report.
  When a country is not peopled by colonists, it is the nature of the soil that gives rise to the original
character of the inhabitants. A terrain that is rough, broken, and hard to cultivate is bound to provide
more nourishment for animals than for men; fields are necessarily rare, and pastures abundant. Hence
pastoral  life,  and  the  multiplication  of  cattle.  The  herds  of  individual  owners,  wandering  in  the
mountains, will be mixed and intermingled. Honey can be distinguished in no other way than by the
mark of the first occupier; ownership of it can neither be created nor preserved save through public
good faith; and it is necessary for everyone to be just, for otherwise no one would have anything, and
the nation would perish.
  Mountains,  woods,  rivers,  pastures;  would  you  not  think  you  were  reading  a  description  of
Switzerland? And in the past the same character ascribed by Diodorus to the Corsicans was also to be
found in Switzerland: equity, humanity, good faith. The only difference was that, dwelling in a more
severe climate, they were more industrious; buried in snow for half the year, they were forced to make
provision for the winter; sparsely scattered over their rocky land, they cultivated it with an effort that
made  them  robust;  continuous  labour  left  them  no  time  to  become  acquainted  with  the  passions;communications were always difficult, and when snow and ice closed them altogether, each in his own
hut was forced to be sufficient unto himself and his family, which led to crude but happy industry. Each
in his own household practised all the necessary arts and crafts; all were masons, carpenters, cabinet
makers, wheelwrights. The rivers and torrents that divided them from one another gave each, by way of
compensation, the means of getting along without his neighbours; saws, forges, and mills multiplied;
they learned to regulate the flow of the waters, both for the purpose of turning wheels and of improving
irrigation. Thus it is that, in the midst of their precipices and valleys, each, living on his own land,
succeeded in making it satisfy all his needs; being well off on what he had, he desired nothing further.
Since needs and interests did not conflict, and no one depended on anyone else, their only relations
with  one  another  were  those  of  benevolence  and  friendship;  peace  and  concord  reigned  in  their
numerous families. Marriages were almost the only subjects of negotiation between them, and here
inclination  alone  was  consulted,  no  marriage  ever  being  contracted  for  reasons  of  ambition,  or
prevented on grounds of interest and inequality.
  This people, poor but not needy, and enjoying the most perfect independence, thus multiplied in
unshakable unity; they had no virtues, since, having no vices to overcome, it cost them nothing to do
good; and they were good and just without ever knowing what justice and virtue were. This hard-
working and independent life attached the Swiss to their fatherland with a strength which gave them
two great means of defending it, namely, harmony in council and courage in battle. When you consider
the constant unity that prevailed among men who had no masters and practically no laws, and whom
the neighbouring princes tried to divide with all the strategems known to politics; when you see the
unshakable firmness, the constancy, the very fury with which these fearsome men fought their battles,
resolved to conquer or die, and not even conceiving of the idea of disjoining their life from their liberty,
it is no longer difficult to understand the prodigies they performed in defence of their country and
independence; it is no longer surprising to see the three greatest powers and the most warlike troops of
Europe fail successively in their designs against this heroic nation, whose simplicity could no more be
overcome by trickery than their courage by valour. Corsicans, this is the model you should follow in
order to return to your original estate.
  But these rustic men, whose knowledge at first did not extend beyond themselves, their mountains
and their huts, learned to know other nations by defending themselves against them; their victories
opened  the  neighbouring  frontiers  to  them;  their  reputation  for  bravery  gave  princes  the  idea  of
employing them. They began to pay the troops they had been unable to conquer; these worthy men,
who had so well defended their own liberty, became the oppressors of the liberty of others.
  It was surprising to see them bring to the service of princes the same valour they had devoted to
resisting them, the same fidelity they had shown toward their own fatherland; to see them sell for
money those virtues which can least be bought and which money most quickly corrupts. But in this
early period they brought to the service of princes the same pride they had taken in resisting them; they
looked upon themselves less as their satellites than as their defenders, and believed that they had sold
not so much their services as their protection.
  Imperceptibly they were debased, and were no longer anything more than mercenaries; a taste for
money made them feel poor; contempt for their way of life gradually destroyed the virtues that same
life had engendered, and the Swiss became hirelings, like the French, though asking a penny more.
Another less obvious cause also corrupted this vigorous nation. Their isolated and simple life made
them independent as well as robust; each recognised no other master than himself; but all, having the
same tastes and interests, found it easy to unite in pursuit of the same objects; the uniformity of their
life served them in place of law. But when association with other peoples had made them love what
they should have feared, and admire what they should have scorned, the ambition of their leading men
made them change their principles; they felt that, the better to rule the people, they would have to give
them less independent tastes. Hence the introduction of commerce, industry and luxury which, by tying
the occupations and needs of private citizens to public authority, made them far more dependent on
their rulers than they had been in the original state.  Poverty did not make itself felt in Switzerland until money began to circulate there; money created
inequalities both in resources and in fortunes; it became a great instrument of acquisition which was
inaccessible to those who had nothing. Commercial and manufacturing establishments were multiplied;
the  arts  and  crafts  diverted  a  multitude  of  hands  from  agriculture.  Men  multiplied  and,  no  longer
distributed evenly throughout the country, concentrated in regions whose location was comparatively
favourable  and  whose  resources  were  comparatively  rich.  Some  deserted  their  fatherland;  others
became parasites upon it, consuming without producing anything; large numbers of children became a
burden. The rate of population growth declined appreciably; and while the cities grew, the increasing
neglect of agriculture and the rising cost of living had the effect of making imported foodstuffs ever
more necessary, thus placing the country in a position of increasing dependence on its neighbours. Idle
habits introduced corruption and multiplied the number of pensioners dependent on foreign powers;
love of country, extinguished in all hearts, was replaced by an exclusive love of money; all those
sentiments which give strength to the soul having been stifled, firmness was no longer to be seen in
conduct, nor vigour in council. Formerly an impoverished Switzerland laid down the law to France;
now a rich Switzerland trembles at the frown of a French minister.
  These are important lessons for the Corsican people; let us see how it ought to apply them to its
own case. The Corsican people retains many of its original virtues, which will greatly facilitate the
establishment of our constitution. In servitude it has contracted many vices which will have to be
corrected. Of these vices, some will disappear together with the cause that engendered them; others will
require a contrary cause to uproot the passion which is responsible for their existence.2
  In the first category I would place that indomitable and ferocious temper with which the Corsicans
are credited. They are accused of being mutinous; who can tell, considering that they have never been
justly governed? Those who constantly incited them against one another ought to have foreseen that
this animosity would often be turned against its makers.
  In the second category I would place that inclination to theft and murder which has made them
odious. The source of these two vices is idleness and impunity. This is self-evident with regard to the
former, and easily demonstrable with regard to the latter, for family feuds and schemes of vengeance,
with  the  satisfaction  of  which  the  Corsicans  were  constantly  occupied,  are  the  product  of  idle
encounters, and reinforced by gloomy meditation, and are made easy of execution through assurance of
impunity.
  Who could fail to be struck with horror at a barbarous government which, in order to see these
luckless people cut each other's throats, spared no pains to incite them to it? Murder was not punished;
nay, rather, it was rewarded; blood-money was one of the revenues of the Republic. The unhappy
Corsicans were forced, in order to avoid total destruction, to pay tribute for the privilege of being
disarmed.
  May the Corsicans, once again restored to an industrious mode of life, lose the habit of wandering
over the island as bandits; may their regular and simple occupations, by keeping them in the bosom of
their own families, leave them few issues to settle between them! May their labour provide them easily
with  the  means  of  subsistence  for  themselves  and  their  families!  May  those  who  have  all  the
necessaries of life be not also obliged to have cash, either to pay taxes and other assessments, or to
satisfy the requirements of a capricious luxury which, without contributing to the well-being of him
who flaunts it, serves merely to excite the envy and hatred of others!
  It is easy to see how these advantages are brought about by the system for which we have expressed
our preference; but that is not enough. It is a question of causing the people to adopt these practices, to
love the way of life we want to give them, to make it the centre of their pleasures, desires and tastes,
and in general to render it their only happiness in life, and the only goal of their ambitions.
  The Genoese boasted of having fostered agriculture on the island; the Corsicans seem to agree. I do
not share their opinion; for the ill-success of the Genoese proves that their methods were ill-chosen. In
this enterprise, the Republic did not seek to multiply the inhabitants of the island, since she so openly
favoured murder; nor to make them prosperous, since she ruined them by her exactions; nor even tofacilitate the collection of taxes, since she burdened the sale and transport of various farm products with
customs  duties  and  forbade  their  exportation.  Her  object  was,  on  the  contrary,  to  make  more
burdensome the very taxes she did not dare to increase; to keep the Corsicans perpetually degraded, by
attaching  them,  in  a  manner  of  speaking,  to  the  soil,  by  turning  them  away  from  commerce,
manufacture and all the lucrative professions, and by preventing them from improving, educating or
enriching  themselves.  Her  object  was  to  secure  all  their  produce  at  a  low  price  through  official
monopolies. She used every means to drain the island of money, to make the island need money, and at
the same time to prevent money from returning to it. Tyranny could not have used a more subtle
device; for by appearing to favour agriculture, she succeeded in crushing the nation; she wished to
reduce it to a mass of degraded peasants living in the most deplorable poverty.
  What was the consequence? The Corsicans were discouraged and gave up work, since work held no
hope  for  them;  they  preferred  to  do  nothing  rather  than  weary  themselves  to  no  purpose.  Their
industrious and simple life gave way to idleness, laziness and every sort of vice; thievery procured them
the money they needed to pay their taxes, money that their farm produce could never have brought
them; they left their fields to work on the highways.
I can see no quicker or surer means of remedying this situation than the two following: the first is to
attach men to the land, in a manner of speaking, by making it the basis of their status and rights; the
second is to reinforce this bond with family ties, by making land a necessary condition of paternity.
  With this in mind, it has seemed to me that it would be possible, basing constitutional law on
distinctions drawn from the nature of the case, to divide the whole Corsican nation into three classes;
the resulting inequalities, being wholly personal, would be a fortunate substitute for the hereditary or
local inequalities created by the system of municipal feudalism we are abolishing. The first class will be
that of the citizens, and the second that of the patriots, the third that of the aspirants. We shall consider
later the conditions of enrolment in each of these classes, and the privileges to be enjoyed by each.
  This class division should not be effected by a census or enumeration at the outset of the new
constitution, but should be established gradually and automatically through the simple operation of the
passage of time.
  The first act in the establishment of the projected system should be a solemn oath sworn by all
Corsicans twenty years old or older; and all those who swear it should without distinction be enrolled
as citizens. It is quite proper that all these brave men, who have delivered their nation at the price of
their blood, should enter in possession of all these advantages, and in the foremost rank enjoy the
freedom they have won her.
  But once the union has been formed and the oath solemnly taken, all those who, although born on
the island, have not yet come of age will remain in the class of aspirants until they are able, on the
following conditions, to rise into the two higher classes.
  Every legally married aspirant who has some property of his own, apart from his wife's dowry, shall
be enrolled in the class of patriots.
  Every patriot, married or widowed, who has two living children, a house of his own, and land
enough to live on, shall be enrolled in the class of citizens.
  This first step, though sufficient to make land honourable, is not enough to ensure its cultivation,
unless  we  eliminate  that  dependence  on  money  which  caused  the  poverty  of  the  island  under  the
Genoese government. We must set it down as a safe rule that wherever money is a prime necessity, the
nation will abandon agriculture to throw itself into more lucrative professions; the farmworker's way of
life is then either an article of commerce and a species of manufacture for the powerful farmer, or else
the last resource of poverty for the mass of the peasantry. Those who grow rich in commerce and
industry invest their money, when they have made enough, in landed properties which others cultivate
for them; thus the whole nation finds itself divided into rich idlers, who own the land, and wretched
peasants, who starve while tilling it.
  The  more  necessary  money  is  to  private  citizens,  the  more  necessary  is  it  to  the  government;
whence it follows that the more commerce flourishes, the higher the taxes; and in order to pay thesetaxes, the peasant must sell the produce of the land if he is to get any good out of tilling it. It is no use
for him to have wheat, wine, oil, he absolutely must have money; he must carry his produce here and
there in the cities; he must turn himself into a petty trader, petty salesman, petty rascal. His children,
brought up in the debauching atmosphere of trade grow attached to the cities and lose all taste for their
calling; they become soldiers or sailors rather than follow in the footsteps of their fathers. Soon the
country is deserted, and the city teems with vagrants; there is a gradually increasing shortage of bread;
the poverty of the general public increases along with the opulence of private individuals; and both of
these lead in conjunction to all those vices which cause the ultimate ruin of a nation.
I am so fully convinced that any system of commerce is destructive to agriculture that I do not even
make an exception for trade in agricultural products. If agriculture were to maintain itself under this
system, the profits would have to be shared equally between the merchant and the tiller of the soil. But
that is the very thing that cannot be; for the bargaining of the one being always free, and that of the
other always forced, the former will always dictate to the latter, a relationship which, by destroying the
balance, cannot lead to a solid and permanent state of affairs.
  It should not be imagined that the island will be the richer for having a great deal of money. This
will be true in relation to other peoples and in matters of foreign trade; but in itself a nation is neither
richer nor poorer for having more or less money; or, which comes to the same thing, for having the
same quantity of money circulate with greater or lesser velocity. It is not only that money is a token, but
also that it is a relative token, in practice effective merely by reason of its unequal distribution. For
whether we assume that each individual on the island of Corsica has ten crowns only, or that each has a
hundred thousand, the relative condition of all in both cases is absolutely the same; no one is either
poorer or richer in relation to his fellows; and the only difference is that on the second hypothesis
trading  becomes  more  cumbersome.  If  Corsica  needed  the  services  of  foreigners,  she  would  need
money; but since she is capable of self-sufficiency, she does not need it; and since it is useful only as a
token of inequality, the less it circulates within the island, the greater its real prosperity will be. We
must  see  whether  the  things  done  with  money  cannot  be  done  without  it;  and  if  they  can,  these
alternative methods must be compared with reference to our purposes.
  Facts prove that the island of Corsica, even in its present fallow and exhausted state, is sufficient to
support its inhabitants, for even during thirty-six years of war, when their hands have been more often
put to arms than to the plough, not a single shipload of provisions or foodstuffs of any kind has been
landed for their use; and even apart from foodstuffs, the island has everything it needs to keep the
population in a nourishing condition without borrowing anything from abroad. It has wool for textiles,
hemp and flax for rope and canvas, leather for shoes, timber for ships, iron for its forges, copper for
utensils and small change. It has salt enough for home consumption; it will have a surplus by restoring
the salt works of Aleria, which the Genoese went to so much trouble and expense to destroy, and which
still yield salt in spite of them. Even if they wanted to, the Corsicans could not carry on foreign trade in
kind without buying superfluities; even in this case, therefore, money would not be necessary to their
commerce, since money is the sole commodity they would be seeking. From this it follows that, in her
relations with other nations, Corsica has no need for money.
  The island itself is fairly large and divided by mountains; its great and numerous rivers are largely
unnavigable;  there  is  no  natural  communication  between  its  several  parts;  but  the  variety  of  their
products keeps these parts in mutual dependence by making each necessary to the others. The province
of Capo Corso, which produces almost nothing but wine, needs the wheat and oil supplied to it by
Balagna. Similarly Corte, on its heights, produces grain, and lacks all else; Bonifazio, on the outskirts
of the marshes at the other extremity of the island, needs everything and supplies nothing. Thus the
project of equalising the population calls for a circulation of agricultural produce, for the facilitation of
payments from region to region, and thus for internal trade.
  On this point, however, I have two comments to make: first, that this trade can, with government
assistance,  be  effected  largely  by  barter;  second,  that  with  this  same  assistance,  and  as  a  natural
consequence of our new arrangements, this trade and barter ought steadily to diminish, and in the endto be reduced to very little.
  You know that, in the state of exhaustion to which the Genoese had reduced Corsica, money was
constantly flowing out and never returning, and thus became at last so rare that, in some cantons of the
island, it was no longer known, and no buying or selling was done except by barter.
  In their official protests the Corsicans have cited this fact as one of their grievances; they were
right, for these poor people needed money to pay their taxes, and when they no longer had any they
were seized and distrained in their homes, and saw themselves stripped of their most necessary utensils,
their furniture, their poultry, their rags, all of which had then to be transported from place to place and
sold at less than a tenth of the true value; with the result that, for lack of money, they paid the tax
tenfold.
  But since, under our system, no one will be forced to pay taxes in specie, lack of money will not be
a token of poverty and will not serve to increase it; exchange can thus be effected in kind, without
intermediary assets, and it will be possible to live in abundance without ever handling a penny.
I  see  that  under  the  Genoese  governors,  who  banned  and  in  a  thousand  ways  harassed  the
movement of produce from province to province, the communes set up warehouses to store wheat,
wine and oil until the moment when trade would be both favourable and licit, and that these warehouses
served  the  Genoese  officials  as  pretext  for  a  thousand  odious  monopolies.  Since  the  idea  of  such
warehouses is not new, it would be all the easier to put it into execution, and it would provide a means
of exchange which would be simple and convenient both for the nation and for private individuals,
without the danger of disadvantages which would make it burdensome to the people.
  Even without having recourse to actual warehouses and depots, it would be possible in each county
town to set up a public double-entry register, where private individuals each year would have recorded,
on one side, the nature and quantity of their surplus products, and on the other side those they lacked.
By balancing and comparing these registers from province to province, the price of produce and the
volume of trade could be so regulated that each county would dispose of its surplus and satisfy its needs
without deficiency or excess, and almost as conveniently as if the harvest were measured to its needs.
  These operations can be performed with the greatest nicety and without the use of real money;
either by way of direct exchange, or with the aid of a purely imaginary monetary unit which could
serve as a term of comparison, as pistoles are used in France; or else by using as money some concrete
form of denumerable property, like oxen among the Greeks and sheep among the Romans, and by
reckoning it at its average value. For then an actual ox may be worth more or less than an ox, and a
sheep more or less than a sheep, an anomaly which makes the imaginary unit preferable, since the latter
is conceived only as an abstract number and is therefore always accurate.
  As  long  as  you  confine  yourselves  to  this,  trade  will  remain  in  balance;  and  exchange,  being
regulated solely according to the relative abundance or scarcity of produce, and the greater or lesser
facility of transport, will everywhere and at all times remain on a basis of proportionate equality; and
all the products of the island, being equally distributed, will adjust themselves automatically to the level
of the population. I will add that the public administration will be able without difficulty to preside over
these transactions and exchanges, to keep account of them, to regulate their volume and to effect their
distribution; for in so far as transactions are in kind, public officials will not be able, and will not even
feel any temptation, to abuse them. Whereas the conversion of produce into money opens the way to all
those exactions, monopolies and rascalities which in such cases are typical of office-holders.
  Many difficulties are to be expected at the beginning; but these difficulties are inevitable in any
system  which  is  new  and  runs  counter  to  established  usage.  I  may  add  that  this  system  of
administration, once established, will become easier every year, not only as a result of experience and
practice, but also by reason of the progressive diminution of trade which must necessarily follow, until
it has been reduced of its own accord to the smallest possible volume, which is the final goal we ought
to envisage.
  Everyone should make a living, and no one should grow rich; that is the fundamental principle of
the prosperity of the nation; and the system I propose, so far as in it lies, proceeds as directly aspossible toward that goal. Since superfluous produce is not an article of commerce, and is not retailed
for money, it will be cultivated only to the extent that necessaries are needed; and anyone who can
procure directly the things he lacks will take no interest in having a surplus.
  As soon as the products of the earth cease to be merchandise, their cultivation will gradually be
proportioned in each province, and even on each farm, to the general requirements of the province and
the particular requirements of the farmer. Each will try to have everything he needs by producing it
directly on his own land, rather than by exchange, which will always be less convenient and less
certain, however greatly it may be facilitated.
  It cannot be denied that it is advantageous to have each sort of land produce the things for which it
is best suited; by this arrangement you get more out of a country, and with less effort, than in any other
way. But this consideration, for all its importance, is only secondary. It is better for the land to produce
a little less and for the inhabitants to lead better-regulated lives. With any movement of trade and
commerce it is impossible to prevent destructive vices from creeping into a nation. The lack of certain
advantages in the choice of land can be compensated by labour; and it is better to make bad use of
fields than to make bad use of men. Furthermore, each farmer can and should have this in mind in
selecting his own land, and each parish or commune in selecting its community property, as we shall
see hereafter.
  It may be feared that this economic system would produce an effect contrary to my expectations;
that it would tend to discourage rather than to encourage agriculture; that the farmers, deriving no profit
from their produce, would neglect their work, that they would confine themselves to mere subsistence
farming, and that, without seeking prosperity and content with raising an absolute minimum for their
own use, they would let the remainder of their land lie fallow. This is apparently confirmed by the
experience of the Genoese government, under which the ban on the exportation of agricultural produce
had precisely this effect.
  But it must be remembered that, under this administration, money was the prime necessity, and thus
the immediate object of labour; and that in consequence all labour incapable of earning money was
necessarily neglected; that the farmer, overwhelmed by contempt, vexations and poverty, regarded his
calling as the worst of misfortunes; and that, seeing he could not grow rich following it, he either went
looking for another or else grew discouraged. But the whole basic tendency of our new constitution is
to  make  this  calling  happy  in  its  mediocrity,  and  respectable  in  its  simplicity.  Providing  all  the
necessaries of life, all the means of acquiring social recognition and of discharging public obligations,
and all this without sale or traffic, it will leave men incapable even of imagining a better or nobler way
of life. Those who succeed in it, seeing nothing above them, will glory in it, and on making their way to
the highest offices, will fill them as successfully as the early Romans. Being unable to leave this way of
life, they will want to distinguish themselves in it, outdoing the rest by harvesting larger crops, by
supplying the state with a stronger military contingent, by earning popular votes in the elections. Large
families, well nourished and well clad, will bring honour to their fathers; and real abundance being the
only known form of luxury, each will want to distinguish himself by luxury of this sort. As long as the
human heart remains as it is, such institutions will not breed idleness.
  What local magistrates and heads of families should do in each region, parish and household to
make themselves independent of the rest, the central government of the island should do to make itself
independent of neighbouring peoples.
  An exact tabulation of the goods imported into the island during a certain number of years will give
a good and reliable list of things that cannot be dispensed with; for the present situation is not one in
which luxury and superfluity can occur. By careful observation of what the island both does and can
produce, you will find that necessary foreign imports amount to very little; and this is fully confirmed
by the facts; for in the years 1735 and 1736, when the island, under blockade by the Genoese navy, had
no communication with the mainland, there was not only no lack of anything in the way of foodstuffs,
but  there  were  no  unbearable  shortages  of  any  sort.  The  most  appreciable  deficiencies  were  in
munitions of war, in leather, and in cotton for candle-wicks; and a substitute for the last was found inthe pith of certain reeds.
  From this small number of necessary imports must also be subtracted everything the island does not
now provide, but could provide if it were better cultivated and more vigorously industrialised. Although
we must be careful to reject the idle arts, the arts of pleasure and luxury, we must be equally careful to
favour those which are useful to agriculture and advantageous to human life. We have no need for
wood-carvers and goldsmiths, but we do need carpenters and blacksmiths; we need weavers, good
workers in woollens, not embroiderers or drawers of gold thread.
  We shall begin by making sure of having the most necessary raw materials, namely wood, iron,
wool, leather, hemp and flax. The island abounds in wood both for construction and for fuel; but we
must not rely on this abundance to abandon the use and cutting of forests to the sole discretion of the
proprietors. As the population of the island increases and new land is brought under cultivation, the
woods will suffer a rapid deterioration which can only be repaired very slowly.
  Switzerland was formerly covered with woods so abundant that they were an encumbrance; but as a
result both of the multiplication of pasturage and of the establishment of manufactures, they were cut
without rule or measure; now these immense forests have nothing to show but nearly naked rock.
Fortunately the Swiss, warned by the example of France, have seen the danger, and have brought it
under control to the best of their abilities. It remains to be seen whether their precautions are not too
late; for if, in spite of these precautions, their woods diminish daily, it is clear that they must end in
destruction.
  Corsica, by starting earlier, would not have the same danger to fear; a strict system of forest control
must be set up in good season, and cutting so regulated that production equals consumption. It should
not be done as in France, where the water and forest wardens receive a fee for cutting rights, and have
therefore an interest in destroying everything; a task they fulfil to the best of their abilities. The future
must be provided for long in advance; and so, although now may not be the right moment to establish a
navy, the time will come when it will be necessary to do so; and then you will appreciate the advantage
of not having handed over to foreign navies the fine forests which lie by the sea. Old and no longer
profitable woods should be exploited or sold; but those which are vigorous should be left standing; they
will be used when their time has come.
  It is said that a copper mine has been found on the island; that is good; but iron mines are worth still
more. There must surely be some on the island; the location, the mountains, the nature of the terrain,
the thermal springs found in the province of Capo Corso and elsewhere, all this makes me believe that
many such mines will be found if you look carefully with the aid of competent experts. Assuming this
to be so, you will not allow them to be exploited indifferently; but in setting up forges you will choose
those sites which are most favourable, most accessible to woods and rivers, and most capable of being
opened to convenient lines of transport.
  The  same  attention  will  be  paid  to  manufactures  of  all  sorts,  each  with  reference  to  its  own
particular needs, in order to facilitate labour and distribution as far as possible. Care will be taken,
however, not to set up establishments of this sort in the most populous and fertile sections of the island.
On the contrary, other things being equal, you will choose the most arid sites, sites which, unless they
were peopled by industry, would remain desert. This will cause some difficulties in the matter of
supplying  necessary  provisions;  but  the  advantages  gained  and  the  disadvantages  avoided  ought
infinitely to outweigh this consideration.
  In this way, above all, we are following our great and primary principle, which is not only to extend
and multiply the population, but to equalise it as far as possible throughout the island. For if the sterile
places were not peopled by industry, they would remain desert; and so much would be lost for the
possible increase of the nation.
  If you were to found such establishments in fertile places, the abundance of provisions and the
profits of labour, profits necessarily greater in the arts and crafts than in agriculture, would divert
farmers or their families from rural cares, and would gradually depopulate the countryside, making it
necessary to attract new settlers from afar to cultivate it. Thus, by overloading some points of territorywith inhabitants, we should depopulate others, and in thus destroying the balance we should be going
directly counter to the spirit of our new constitution.
  The transportation of foodstuffs, by rendering them more costly in the factories, will diminish the
profit of the workers and, by keeping their condition closer to that of the farmers, will better maintain
the balance between them. This balance can never be such, however, that the advantage will not still lie
with industry, partly because it attracts a larger share of the money circulating in the state, partly
because wealth provides opportunities for the effects of power and inequality to be felt, and partly
because increased strength accrues to large numbers of men gathered together in one place, a strength
which the ambitious know how to combine to their own advantage. It is, therefore, important that this
too-favoured part should remain dependent for its livelihood on the rest of the nation; in the case of
internal conflict, it is in the nature of our new constitution that the farmer should be the one to lay down
the law to the worker.
  With these precautions, there will be no danger in favouring the establishment of useful arts and
crafts upon the island; and I suspect that these establishments, if well managed, will be able to ensure
all the necessaries without requiring any foreign imports at all, with the possible exception of some
trifles for the sake of which a proportionate export will be permitted, the balance being at all times
carefully maintained by the administration.
  So far, I have shown how the Corsican people could subsist in ease and independence with very
little trade; how of the little that is necessary the greater part can easily be effected by barter; and how
the need for imports from outside the island can be reduced to practically nothing. Thus we have seen
that if the use of money and currency cannot be absolutely destroyed in private transactions, it can at
least be reduced to so small a matter that it will be hard for it to give rise to abuses; that no fortunes will
be made in this way; and that if they could be made, they would become practically useless and would
give their possessors little advantage.
  But the question of public finance remains; how shall we regulate it? What revenues shall we assign
to the administration? Shall its officials be paid or unpaid? How shall we arrange for its upkeep? That is
the next point to be considered.
  Systems of public finance are a modern invention; the word finance was no more known to the
ancients than the words tithe and capitation. The word vectigal was used in a different sense, as we
shall explain hereafter. The sovereign laid imposts on conquered or vanquished peoples, never on its
own immediate subjects; this was especially true of republics. The people of Athens, far from being
taxed, was paid by the government; and Rome, whose wars must have cost her so much, often made
distribution of wheat, and even of land, to the people. The state none the less subsisted, and maintained
large armed forces on land and sea, and constructed considerable public works which were at least as
expensive, proportionately, as those of modern states. How was this done?
  Two periods are to be distinguished in the life of states, the period of origins, and the period of
growth. In the beginning, a state had no other revenue than the public domain, and this domain was
considerable. Romulus reserved for it one third of all the land; he assigned the second third for the
maintenance of priests and holy things; the third only was divided among the citizens. It was little, but
this little was free. Do you think that a French farmer would not willingly reduce himself to a third of
the land he now cultivates, on condition that this third be held free of all tallages, corvées and tithes,
and that no taxes of any kind be levied on it?
  Thus the public revenue in Rome was collected not in money, but in foodstuffs and other products.
Expenditures were of the same nature as receipts. Magistrates and soldiers were not paid, but fed and
clothed; and in cases of urgent need, the extraordinary levies imposed on the people were corvées, not
money taxes. Its onerous public works cost the state practically nothing; they were the labour of those
redoubtable legions which worked as they fought, and were made up not of riff-raff but of citizens.
  When  the  Romans  began  to  expand  and  turned  into  conquerors,  they  placed  the  burden  of
maintaining their troops upon the conquered peoples; when soldiers were paid, it was the subjects,
never the Romans, who were taxed. In moments of pressing danger the senate assessed itself; it raisedloans which were faithfully repaid; and during the whole life of the Republic, I do not know of the
Roman people ever paying money taxes, either on real estate or by capitation.
  Corsicans, this is a fine model! Be not surprised that there were more virtues among the Romans
than elsewhere; money was less necessary to them; the state had small revenues and did great things. Its
treasure was in the strength of its citizens. I would say that owing to the situation of Corsica and the
form of its government, no administration in the world will be less costly; for, being an island and a
republic, it will have no need of standing armies; and the chiefs of state, since all return to the equality
of private life, will be unable to withdraw anything from the common mass that will not very soon
return to it.
  But it is not thus that I envisage the sinews of public power. On the contrary, I want to see a great
deal spent on state service; my only quarrel, strictly speaking, is with the choice of means. I regard
finance  as  the  fat  of  the  body  politic,  fat  which,  when  clogged  up  in  certain  muscular  tissues,
overburdens the body with useless obesity, and makes it heavy rather than strong. I want to nourish the
state on a more salutary food, which will add to its substance; food capable of turning into fibre and
muscle without clogging the vessels; which will give vigour rather than grossness to the members, and
strengthen the body without making it heavy.
  Far from wanting the state to be poor, I should like, on the contrary, for it to own everything, and
for  each  individual  to  share  in  the  common  property  only  in  proportion  to  his  services.  Joseph's
acquisition, on behalf of the king, of all the property of the Egyptians, would have been a good thing if
he had not done too much or too little. But, without entering into speculations which would take me too
far afield, it is sufficient here to explain my idea, which is not to destroy private property absolutely,
since that is impossible, but to confine it within the narrowest possible limits; to give it a measure, a
rule, a rein which will contain, direct, and subjugate it, and keep it ever subordinate to the public good.
In short, I want the property of the state to be as large and strong, that of the citizens as small and weak,
as possible. That is why I avoid embodying it in things over which the private possessor has too much
control; such as money and currency, which can be readily hidden from public inspection.
  The setting up of a public domain is not, I admit, as easy to do in present-day Corsica, which is
already divided among its inhabitants, as it was at the birth of Rome, when its conquered territory did
not as yet belong to anyone. However, I know that there is a large quantity of excellent land still lying
fallow on the island, land of which the government could easily make use, either by alienating it for a
certain number of years to those who will put it under cultivation, or by having it brought under the
plough by corvées in the several communities. It would be necessary to have been on the spot to judge
regarding the possible distribution of these lands, and the possible use to be made of them; but I have
no doubt that by means of a few exchanges and by certain fairly easy adjustments it will be possible in
each region, and even in each parish, to procure community property which can even be augmented in a
few years by the system of which we shall speak in dealing with the law of succession.
  Another method which is even simpler, and which should provide clearer, more certain and much
more considerable revenues, is to follow an example which I find close at hand in the Protestant
cantons of Switzerland. At the time of the Reformation these cantons seized the ecclesiastical tithes;
and these tithes, on which they worthily support their clergy, have constituted the main revenue of the
state. I do not say that the Corsicans ought to touch the revenues of the church, God forbid! But I think
that the people will not be greatly vexed if the state demands as much of them as do the clergy, who are
already  sufficiently  endowed  with  real  estate.  The  levying  of  this  tax  will  be  carried  out  without
difficulty and inconvenience, and almost without cost, since it will only be necessary to double the
ecclesiastical tithe and then take half of it.
I derive a third sort of revenue, the best and surest of all, from men themselves, using their labour,
their arms and their hearts, rather than their purses, in the service of the fatherland, both for its defence,
in the militia, and for its utility, in corvées on public works.
  Do not let the word corvee frighten republicans! I know that it is held in abomination in France; but
is it so held in Switzerland? The roads there are also built by corvées, and no one complains. Theapparent  convenience  of  money  payment  can  delude  none  but  superficial  minds;  and  it  is  a  sure
principle that the fewer the intermediaries between need and service, the less onerous the service should
be.
  Without venturing to express my thoughts in their entirety, without arguing here that corvées and all
other forms of personal service by citizens are an absolute good, I would agree, if you wish, that it
would be better to have all that done on a paid basis, if the means of payment did not introduce an
infinity of measureless abuses and of evils greater and more unlimited than those which can result from
this form of constraint; especially when this constraint is imposed by one whose walk of life is the same
as that of those on whom he imposes it.
  Finally, in order that the contribution should be shared equally, it is just that those who, having no
lands, cannot pay a tithe of their produce, should pay with their own labour; thus the corvées ought to
fall especially on the order of aspirants. But citizens and patriots ought to lead them to the work and set
them  an  example.  Let  everything  done  for  the  public  good  be  at  all  times  honourable!  Let  the
magistrate himself, though occupied with other cares, show that the rest are not beneath him, like those
Roman  consuls  who,  to  set  an  example  to  their  troops,  were  the  first  to  put  their  hands  to  the
construction of field-works.
  With regard to fines and confiscations, which constitute a fourth type of revenue in republics, I
hope that our new constitution will render such revenue practically non-existent among us; I therefore
shall not take it into account.
  All these public revenues, being in kind rather than in money, would seem hard to collect, to store,
and to use; and this is true in part. But we are less concerned here with ease than with soundness of
administration; and it is better for it to be a bit more troublesome if it engenders fewer abuses. The best
economic system for Corsica and for a republic is certainly not the best for a monarchy and for a large
state.  The  one  I  suggest  would  certainly  not  work  in  France  or  England,  and  could  not  even  be
established there; but it is most successful in Switzerland, where it has been established for centuries,
and it is the only one that country could have endured.
  In Switzerland, taxes in each district are farmed out; they are collected either in kind or in money,
as the contributors may elect; magistrates and officials everywhere are likewise paid for the most part
in  wheat,  wine,  fodder,  wood.  In  this  way  collection  is  neither  embarrassing  to  the  public  nor
burdensome to private citizens; but the disadvantage of the system, as I see it, is that there are men
whose profession it is to cheat the prince and vex the subjects.
  It is most important not to allow any professional tax-farmers in the Republic, not so much because
of their dishonest profits as because of the fatal example they set; an example which, all too promptly
diffused throughout the nation, destroys all worthy feelings by making illicit wealth and its advantages
respectable, and by casting unselfishness, simplicity, morality and all the virtues under a cloud of scorn
and opprobrium.
  Let us beware of increasing our pecuniary at the expense of our moral treasure; it is the latter that
puts us truly in possession of men and of all their power, whereas the former gives only the appearance
of service, since the will cannot be bought. It is better that the administration of the public treasury
should be like that of the father of family, and lose something, than for it to gain more and be like that
of a usurer.
  Let us, then, leave tax collections in the hands of the state, even though it may bring in much less.
Let  us  even  avoid  making  tax-collecting  a  profession,  for  this  would  lead  to  nearly  the  same
disadvantages as tax-farming. What is most pernicious in a system of public finance is the employment
of professional tax-gatherers. At any price we must avoid having a single publican in the state. Instead
of making the collection of taxes and public revenues a lucrative career, we must make it, on the
contrary,  a  test  of  ability  and  integrity  for  the  younger  citizens;  we  must  make  this  branch  of
administration the novitiate, so to speak, for public employment, and the first step toward the winning
of magistracies. This idea was suggested to me by a comparison of the administration of the Charity
Hospital of Paris, whose depredations and robberies are notorious, with that of the Charity Hospital ofLyons, which is a model of unselfishness and good management possibly unequalled anywhere on
earth. Whence comes this difference? Are the people of Lyons intrinsically better than Parisians? No.
But in Lyons the office of hospital administrator is temporary. You must begin by properly discharging
the duties of this office in order to become a municipal magistrate and a merchant provost; whereas in
Paris the administrators serve for life; they manage to derive the greatest possible advantage from an
office  which  for  them  is  not  a  proving-ground,  but  a  profession,  a  reward,  a  privileged  position
attached, so to speak, to other privileges. There are certain offices where it is agreed that the income
should be augmented by the right to rob the poor.
  Nor should it be thought that this work requires more experience and training than young people are
able to have; it simply demands a kind of activity for which they are peculiarly suited; and since they
are  ordinarily  less  avaricious,  less  hard-hearted  in  their  exactions  than  their  elders,  since  they  are
sensitive, on the one hand, to the sufferings of the poor, and strongly interested, on the other hand, in
discharging well the duties of an office in which they are being tested, they will conduct themselves in
that office exactly as the situation requires.
  The collector of each parish shall render his accounts to the county, that of each county to its
region, that of each region to the chamber of accounts, which will be composed of a certain number of
councillors of state. The public treasure will thus consist, for the most part, of agricultural produce and
other products, scattered in small warehouses throughout the republic, and in part of money which will
be remitted to the general treasury, after the deduction of such minor disbursements as have to be made
locally.
  Since private citizens will always be at liberty to pay their assessments in money or in kind, at a rate
to  be  established  annually  in  each  region,  the  government,  once  it  has  calculated  the  optimum
proportion to be maintained between these two types of contribution, will be in a position to perceive
immediately any change in this proportion as soon as it occurs, and to look for its cause and cure.
  This is the keystone of our political system, the only point that requires skill, calculation, and
thought. That is why the chamber of accounts, which everywhere else is only a very minor tribunal,
will be for us the centre of affairs, the motive power behind the whole administration, and will be
composed of the leading persons in the state.
  When collections in kind exceed their due proportion, and those in money are deficient, it will be a
sign that agriculture and population are doing well, but that useful industries are being neglected; it will
be proper to re-animate them somewhat, lest the private citizens, by becoming too isolated, wild and
independent, no longer place sufficient value on the government.
  But  this  defect,  an  infallible  sign  of  prosperity,  will  always  be  little  to  be  feared  and  easily
remedied. It will not be the same with the opposite defect, which, as soon as it becomes perceptible, is
already a matter of the highest consequence, and cannot be too quickly corrected. For when the tax-
payers supply more money than agricultural produce, it is a sure sign that too much is being exported
abroad; that trade is becoming too easy, that lucrative arts and crafts are growing on the island at the
expense of agriculture, and consequently that simplicity and all its attendant virtues are beginning to
degenerate. The abuses this alteration produces indicate the remedies to be brought to bear upon them.
But these remedies call for great wisdom in their manner of application, for in this matter it is much
easier to forestall the evil than to eradicate it.
  If you did no more than to impose taxes on objects of luxury, close the ports to foreign commerce,
suppress manufactures, and halt the circulation of specie, you would simply plunge the people into
idleness,  poverty  and  discouragement.  You  would  make  money  disappear  without  increasing
agricultural production; you would eliminate the resources of wealth without reestablishing those of
labour. Changing the value of money is also a bad policy in a republic: first because then it is the public
which robs itself, which is absolutely meaningless; secondly, because there is between the quantity of
tokens and the quantity of things a proportion which always regulates their respective values in the
same way, with the result that, when the sovereign tries to change the tokens, he does no more than
change the names, since the value of things then necessarily changes in the same proportion. Withkings it is a different matter; and when the sovereign inflates the currency, he derives therefrom the real
advantage of robbing his creditors. But if ever this operation is repeated, this advantage is compensated
and wiped out by the loss of public credit.
  Enact sumptuary laws, therefore, but make them always more severe for the leaders of the state, and
more lenient for the lower orders; make simplicity a point of vanity, and arrange things so that a rich
man will not know how to derive honour from his money. These are not impractical speculations; thus
do the Venetians reserve for their noblemen the right to wear the plain, rough, black cloth of Padua, so
that the best citizens consider it an honour to receive the like permission.
  When manners are simple, agrarian laws are necessary, for then the rich, being unable to invest
their wealth in anything else, accumulate real estate. But neither agrarian laws, nor any other law, can
ever  be  retroactive;  and  no  lands  legitimately  acquired,  no  matter  how  great  the  quantity,  can  be
confiscated by virtue of a subsequent law forbidding the ownership of so much. No law can despoil any
private citizen of any part of his property; the law can merely prevent him from acquiring more. Then,
if he breaks the law, he deserves punishment; and the illegitimately acquired surplus can and ought to
be confiscated. The Romans saw the necessity of agrarian laws when the time to enact them had
already passed; and through their failure to make the distinction just stated, they finally destroyed the
Republic by a means which ought to have preserved it. The Greeks wanted to deprive their patricians of
their lands; they should have prevented them from acquiring them. It is very true that, later on, these
same patricians acquired still more, in defiance of the law; but that was because the evil was already
inveterate when the law was passed, and there was no longer time to cure it.
  Fear and hope are the two great instruments for the governance of men; but instead of using both
indiscriminately, you must use each according to its own nature. Fear does not stimulate, it restrains;
and its use in penal laws is not to make men do good, but to prevent them from doing evil. We do not
even find that fear of poverty makes idlers industrious. To excite men to vie with one another in labour,
therefore, you should present it to them not as a means of avoiding hunger, but as a means of advancing
toward well-being. Let us take it, then, as a general rule that no one should be punished for having
failed to act, but only for having acted.
  To stimulate the activity of a nation, therefore, you must offer it great hopes, great desires, great
motives for positive action. The great springs of human conduct come down, on close examination, to
two, pleasure and vanity; and what is more, if you subtract from the first all that appertains to the
second, you will find in the last analysis that everything comes down to practically pure vanity. It is
easy to see that all public voluptuaries are merely vain; their pretended pleasure is pure ostentation, and
consists  rather  in  showing  or  describing  pleasure  than  in  enjoying  it.  True  pleasure  is  simple  and
peaceable, it loves silence and meditation; he who enjoys it is entirely absorbed in the thing itself, and
finds no amusement in saying 'I am enjoying myself.' But vanity is the fruit of opinion; it arises from it
and feeds upon it. Whence it follows that the arbiters of a people's opinion are also arbiters of its
actions. It seeks things in proportion to the value it places upon them; to show it what it ought to
respect is to tell it what it ought to do. This word vanity is not well chosen, since vanity is only one of
the  two  branches  of  self-esteem.  I  must  explain  my  meaning.  Opinion  which  lays  great  store  by
frivolous objects produces vanity; but that which lights on objects intrinsically great and beautiful
produces pride. You can thus render a people either proud or vain, depending on the choice of the
objects to which you direct its judgments.
  Pride is more natural than vanity, since it consists in deriving self-esteem from truly estimable
goods; whereas vanity, by giving value to that which is valueless, is the work of prejudices which are
slow to arise. It takes time to bedazzle the eyes of a nation. Since there is nothing more truly beautiful
than power and independence, every people in process of formation begins by being proud. But no new
people was ever vain; for vanity, by its very nature, is individual; it cannot be the instrument of so great
an enterprise as the creation of a national body.
  Two contrary conditions plunge men into the torpor of idleness: the first is that peace of soul which
makes men content with what they possess; the second is an unlimited covetousness which makes themsee the impossibility of satisfying their desires. He who lives without desire, and he who knows he
cannot obtain what he desires, remain equally in a state of inaction. To act you must both aspire to
something and be able to have hopes of achieving it. Any government which tries to stimulate activity
among the people must first take care to place within its reach objects capable of tempting it. Arrange
things so that work will offer citizens great advantages, not only in your own estimation, but also in
theirs; infallibly you will make them industrious. Among these advantages, it is true not only that
wealth is not always the most attractive, but that it may even be the least attractive of all, as long as it
does not serve as a means to the attainment of those which are desired.
  The most general and certain of all possible means to the satisfaction of your desires, whatever they
may be, is power. Thus, to whatever passions a man or a people inclines, if those passions are vigorous
they will vigorously aspire to power, either as an end, if they are proud or vain, or as a means, if they
are vindictive or pleasure-loving.
  It  is,  therefore,  in  the  skilful  and  economical  management  of  civil  power  that  the  great  art  of
government consists; not only to preserve the government itself, but also to diffuse life and activity
throughout the state, and to render the people active and industrious.
  Civil power is exercised in two ways: the first legitimate, by authority; the second abusive, by
wealth. Wherever wealth dominates, power and authority are ordinarily separate; for the means of
acquiring wealth and the means of attaining authority are not the same, and thus are rarely employed by
the same people. Apparent power, in these cases, is in the hands of the magistrates, and real power in
those of the rich. In such a government everything proceeds in response to the passions of men; nothing
aims toward the goal set by the original constitution.
  Under these conditions the goal of ambition becomes twofold: some aspire to authority in order to
sell the use thereof to the rich and thus themselves grow rich; the rest, the majority, go directly after
wealth, with which they are sure one day of having power, either by buying authority for themselves, or
by buying those who are its depositaries.
  Let us assume that, in a state so constituted, honours and authority, on the one hand, are hereditary;
and that, on the other hand, the means of acquiring wealth, being beyond the reach of all but a minority,
depend on credit, favour, friends; it is then impossible, while a few adventurers go on to fortune and
thence, by easy stages, to public office, for universal discouragement not to overcome the bulk of the
nation and to plunge it into a state of listlessness.
  Generally speaking, therefore, the government of all rich nations is weak, and I apply this term
indiscriminately both to one which always acts weakly and, which comes to the same thing, to one
which must use violent means to maintain itself.
I can explain my meaning in no better way than by the example of Carthage and Rome. The first
massacred and crucified its generals, its magistrates and its citizens, and was only a feeble government,
frightened of everything and increasingly unstable. The second deprived no one of his life, and did not
even confiscate his property; an accused criminal could depart in peace, and that was the end of the
proceedings.  The  vigour  of  this  admirable  government  had  no  need  of  cruelty;  the  greatest  of
misfortunes was to be excluded from its membership.
  * * *
  3 Peoples will be industrious when work is honoured; and it always depends on the government to
make it so. When esteem and authority are within the reach of the citizens, they will try to attain them;
but  if  they  see  that  they  are  too  far  removed,  they  will  not  stir  a  step.  What  plunges  them  into
discouragement is not the greatness of the work, but its futility.
  * * *
  You will ask if it is by tilling a field that one acquires the talents needed for governing. I answer
yes, in a government as simple and upright as ours. Great talents are a substitute for patriotic zeal; they
are necessary to lead a people which does not love its country and does not honour its leaders. But
make the people love the commonwealth, seek virtue, and do not concern yourself with great talents;
they would do more harm than good. The best motive force for a government is love of country, andthis love is cultivated together with the land. Common sense suffices to govern a well-constituted state;
and common sense develops quite as much in the heart as in the head, since men who are not blinded
by their passions always behave well.
  * * *
  Men are naturally lazy: but ardour in labour is the first-fruit of a well-regulated society; and when a
people relapses into laziness and discouragement, it is always a result of the abuse of that same society,
which no longer gives labour the reward it has a right to expect.
  * * *
  Wherever money reigns, the money the people gives to maintain its liberty is always the instrument
of its enslavement; and what it pays voluntarily today is used tomorrow to compel it to pay.
  * * *
  When a country becomes overpopulated, it will be necessary to employ the excess population in
industry and the arts in order to draw from abroad those things that so numerous a people requires for
its subsistence. Then, little by little, the vices inseparable from these establishments will also arise and,
gradually corrupting the nation in its tastes and principles, will alter and at last destroy the government.
This evil is inevitable; and since it is necessary that all human things should come to an end, it is well
that a state, after a long and vigorous existence, should end by excess of population.
  * * *
  Printed in Great Britain at the Press of the Publishers Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd, Edinburgh
  1. Most usurpers have used one of the following two methods to consolidate their power: the first is
to  impoverish  and  barbarise  the  conquered  peoples;  the  second  is,  on  the  contrary,  to  make  them
effeminate under the pretext of educating and enriching them. The first of these means has always
defeated its own purpose; it has always led, on the part of the oppressed peoples, to acts of vigour,
revolutions, republics. The second means has always been successful; and the peoples, grown soft,
corrupt, feeble and disputatious, making fine speeches on liberty in the depths of slavery, have all been
crushed by their masters, then destroyed by conquerors.
  2.  There  is  in  all  states  a  progression,  a  natural  and  necessary  development,  from  birth  to
destruction. To make their life as long and excellent as possible, it is better to emphasise the period
before rather than the period after they have attained maximum vigour. It is not desirable for Corsica all
at once to be all that she is capable of becoming; it is better for her to ascend toward this point than to
reach it immediately, and then do nothing but decline; her state of decay is such that if her state of
maximum vigour occurred now it would be a very feeble state; whereas placing her in a position to
reach it in the future will make it very good when it arrives.
  3. [The following are disconnected fragments. — TR.]